MAINLINE 
CHRISTIANS AND 
U.S. PUBLIC POLICY

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Abortion in the United States, Dorothy E. McBride
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conﬂ icts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series 
will ﬁ nd the information they need in order to have a better 
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and 
economic issues facing the world today.


MAINLINE 
CHRISTIANS AND 
U.S. PUBLIC POLICY
A Reference Handbook
Glenn H. Utter
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright 2007 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Utter, Glenn H.
 Mainline Christians and U.S. public policy : a reference handbook / 
Glenn H. Utter.
  p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-000-1 (hard copy : alk. paper)
 ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-001-8 (ebook)
 1. Christianity—United States. 2. Christianity and politics—United 
States. I. Title.
 BR515.U88 2007
 261.80973—dc22
 
2007014509
12 11 10 09 08 07  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. Visit 
www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper ∞
Manufactured in the United States of America

vii
Contents
Preface, xi
1 Background and History, 1
 
Mainline Denominations, 2
Episcopal Church, 3
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) (PCUSA), 5
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA), 8
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) (CCDC), 11
American Baptist Churches in the USA (ABC), 13
United Church of Christ (UCC), 15
Reformed Church in America (RCA), 17
United Methodist Church (UMC), 19
Catholic Church, 22
National Council of Churches of Christ in the USA 
(NCC), 25
 
Renewal Movements, 26
 
Mainline Christian Denominations and Public Policy, 30
2 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 35
 
Sexuality Issues within Denominations, 37
 
Capital Punishment, 44
 
Embryonic Stem-Cell Research, 45
 
End-of-Life Decisions and the Right to Die, 48
 
Faith-Based Initiative, 52
 
Immigration, 55
 
Iraq War, 59
 
Abortion, 62
 
Values and Public Policy, 66

3 Worldwide Perspective, 73
 
England, 76
 
France, 83
 
Germany, 87
 
Italy, 90
 
Poland, 95
 
Sweden, 98
 
Conclusion, 104
4 Chronology, 109
5 Biographical Sketches, 147
 
Daniel Berrigan, 147
 
Joan Chittister, 149
 
William Sloane Cofﬁ n, Jr., 151
 
John Claggett Danforth, 152
 
Dorothy Day, 155
 
Robert (Bob) W. Edgar, 156
 
James A. Forbes, Jr., 157
 
Harry Emerson Fosdick, 159
 
Wesley Granberg-Michaelson, 160
 
Wilton D. Gregory, 161
 
Frank T. Griswold, 163
 
Mark S. Hanson, 164
 
Katharine Jefferts Schori, 166
 
Elizabeth A. Johnson, 167
 
Barry W. Lynn, 169
 
Roger Michael Mahoney, 171
 
Martin E. Marty, 172
 
A. Roy Medley, 174
 
Reinhold Niebuhr, 176
 
Sean Patrick O’Malley, 178
 
Norman Vincent Peale, 180
 
George F. Regas, 182
 
Robert H. Schuller, 183
 
Fulton J. Sheen, 185
 
John Shelby Spong, 187
 
John H. Thomas, 189
 
Sharon E. Watkins, 190
viii Contents

6 Data and Documents, 193
 
Data Overview of the Mainline Denominations, 194
 
Religious Beliefs and Policy Preferences, 196
 
Documents and Quotations, 202
Equality and Poverty, 202
Public Schools, 203
Mainline Political Engagement, 205
Sexuality Issues, 206
Immigration, 208
Faith-Based Initiative, 210
Iraq War, 211
Science, 213
Abortion, 214
Embryonic Stem-Cell Research, 216
End-of-Life Decisions, the Right to Die, and 
 Euthanasia, 217
Environment, 218
Death Penalty, 219
7 Directory of Organizations, 223
8 Resources, 253
 
Books, 253
 
Periodicals, 297
 
Audiotapes, Videotapes, CDs, and DVDs, 302
 
Internet Sources, 311
Glossary, 317
Index, 327
About the Author, 337
Contents ix


xi
Preface
T
his reference work offers an overview of eight major mainline 
Protestant denominations along with the Catholic Church in 
the United States and the value positions they promote in the 
public arena, emphasizing the differences as well as similarities 
among them. The book presents these churches’ historical devel-
opment from colonial times to the present; the dominant values 
held by the leadership, clergy, and lay members; their social mis-
sions; and their efforts to inﬂ uence public opinion and public 
policy on several social, economic, and political issues. An exami-
nation of the conversations, disagreements, and interest conﬂ icts 
within each denomination provides insight into how value posi-
tions and the relationship between the denominations and the 
larger world have developed.
 
The ﬁ rst chapter offers a brief historical sketch of each 
denomination as well as a description of its organizational struc-
ture. Of particular interest is how members of the church may 
voice their views. In these religious groups, members’ views often 
are strongly held and frequently relate to deep matters of faith in 
God, assumptions about the purpose of human life, and intensely 
held moral convictions about acceptable behavior. Therefore, not 
surprisingly, religious denominations historically have experi-
enced divisions as well as strenuous efforts to bring about col-
laboration and union among groups that share common beliefs 
and concerns. As with any organization, Robert Michels’s “iron 
law of oligarchy”—any organization, no matter how democrati-
cally structured, tends to be governed by a relatively small elite; 
the law is exempliﬁ ed by the quote, “Who says organization says 
oligarchy”—confronts those in the mainline denominations who 
wish to express their concerns to the overall church. However, 

in recent decades an interesting phenomenon within mainline 
denominations has occurred that at least partially moderates the 
effects of Michels’s law: dissident members have formed so-called 
renewal movements in order to create an effective voice in discus-
sions of Christian doctrine, traditions, and policy.
 
Chapter 2 examines in greater detail various public policy 
questions on which the nine denominations treated here have taken 
public stands. The dominant value concerns of these churches 
become clearer as they are expressed in concrete issues such as 
capital punishment, embryonic stem-cell research, the war in Iraq, 
and abortion. There tends to be overall agreement among the 
denominations on many of these issues, but at times interesting 
distinctions become evident. Often European countries are con-
trasted with the United States regarding the level of religious 
belief and commitment among citizens. Chapter 3 provides a brief 
examination of the historical development of religious institu-
tions and their present status in six European countries: England, 
France, Germany, Italy, Poland, and Sweden. With the exception of 
Poland, these countries, from which many U.S. mainline churches 
originated, have far lower rates of religious participation than the 
United States.
 
Chapter 4 presents a chronology of events related to the nine 
U.S. mainline denominations, beginning with the colonial period 
and ending with the most recent events affecting the status of 
these churches. Such historical events as the American Civil War, 
the two world wars, the Great Depression, and the Vietnam con-
ﬂ ict often initiated debates and inﬂ uenced the activities of the 
denominations. Chapter 5 offers biographical sketches of indi-
viduals associated with the mainline denominations, including 
historical ﬁ gures such as Reinhold Niebuhr and Harry Emerson 
Fosdick, who contributed signiﬁ cantly to developing the charac-
ter and values of mainline Christianity, and recent denomination 
leaders as well as more controversial persons, such as Daniel Ber-
rigan, John Shelby Spong, and Joan Chittister, who have urged 
their denominations and the general public to take ever-greater 
steps toward modiﬁ cation of traditionally held values.
 
Chapter 6 presents data derived from recent studies of reli-
gious behavior in the United States, including membership trends 
and the attitudes of mainline clergy toward various types of polit-
ical behavior. Importantly, all the mainline denominations treated 
here, with the exception of the Catholic Church, have experienced 
xii Preface

declining membership in recent decades. In addition to data sum-
maries, the chapter provides selected documents that pre sent 
the positions denominational and ecumenical organizations and 
members have taken on public policy questions. They defend 
their views in the context of often passionate expressions of value 
convictions. Chapter 7 lists selected organizations associated with 
mainline denominations. These organizations either operate in 
close concert with the denominations to further the goals of the 
church in the wider society, or strive to alter the doctrinal direc-
tion and policy stances of the denomination. Finally, Chapter 8 
includes an annotated bibliography of selected print and nonprint 
resources that the reader may consult for further investigation 
of these institutions that have played, and continue to play, an 
important role in American social and political systems.
 
I wish to thank the Reverend Gerald Haglund, a Conserva-
tive Congregational Christian Conference chaplain, and my col-
leagues at Lamar University, John W. Storey, chair of the history 
department and James L. True, Jack Brooks chair of government 
and public service in the political science department, all of whom 
are good friends, for the stimulating conversations that helped 
me to understand more clearly the place of religion in public life. 
In addition, I want to express my sincere appreciation to Brenda 
Nichols, dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Cruse Melvin, 
associate dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, and Stephen 
Doblin, provost and vice president for academic affairs at Lamar 
University, for the generous support they provided in helping me 
complete this writing project. Of course I accept full responsibility 
for any errors of fact or judgment.
Preface xiii


1
1
Background and History
A
lthough there are a multitude of Christian denominations 
in the United States, this study concentrates on the larger 
groups that are commonly categorized as mainline. Mainline 
denominations generally include those churches that can trace 
their history back several generations, usually at least to the nine-
teenth century. They can be distinguished from those Christian 
groups that tend to hold conservative or fundamentalist beliefs 
and associated values, which are usually referred to as evangeli-
cal. Evangelicals or fundamentalists tend to accept the inerrancy 
of the Bible. The scriptures are considered a correct and complete 
guide to living as a Christian because its authors received inspira-
tion directly from God and therefore at least the original writings 
contain no errors of history, science, or rules of conduct. 
In contrast, the mainline denominations accept the Bible as 
divinely inspired, but do not necessarily regard scripture as devoid 
of error or cultural inﬂ uence. Therefore, mainline denominations 
more willingly debate contemporary issues such as evolution, 
same-gender marriage, and the ordination of homosexuals. Main-
line denominations traditionally have placed greater emphasis 
on the “social gospel,” holding that Christians have the respon-
sibility of improving the physical condition of human beings 
in addition to concerning themselves with the status of others’ 
souls. Mainline denominations may be less emphatic regarding 
other Christian beliefs, such as the deity, virgin birth, the bodily 
resurrection of Jesus, and the second coming of Jesus as proph-
esied in the Book of Revelation. Nonetheless, as the preamble to 

2 Background and History
the National Council of Churches of Christ in the USA states, the 
member denominations—including all of the mainline Protestant 
churches that are treated in this book—“in response to the gospel 
as revealed in the Scriptures, confess Jesus Christ, the incarnate 
Word of God, as Savior and Lord” (NCC 1996).
Mainline Denominations
This volume will focus on nine mainline denominations: the Epis-
copal Church, Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America, Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), Ameri-
can Baptist Churches in the USA, United Church of Christ, Reformed 
Church in America, United Methodist Church, and Catholic Church. 
With the exception of the Catholic Church, these denominations, 
in contrast to what can be categorized as fundamentalist, or evan-
gelical, denominations, have all experienced a decline in member-
ship over at least the last decade. While the Catholic Church has 
increased the numbers of members, from 46.6 million in 1965 to 
65.3 million in 2002, its proportion of the U.S. population has actu-
ally decreased slightly, from 24 percent in 1965 to 23 percent in 
2002 (Steinfels 2004, 29). The increased membership in the Catholic 
Church has been attributed to a great extent to the arrival of large 
numbers of immigrants from countries in which a substantial pro-
portion of the population are Catholic adherents.
 
Although much discussion has occurred in recent years 
regarding the increased participation of evangelical denomina-
tions in politics, the mainline churches have a long tradition of 
involvement in various public policy issues and have attempted 
to achieve objectives closely associated with their values, which 
are in turn related to the basic religious beliefs of the organiza-
tions. These churches have acted on the conviction that their mem-
bers have a basic responsibility for caring for their fellow human 
beings, that there exists a fundamental brotherhood and sisterhood 
(or at least neighborhood) of humankind. They have established 
extensive bureaucratic organizations to carry out these responsi-
bilities, and many have founded ofﬁ ces in Washington DC to have 
some inﬂ uence on national policy. For instance, the national ofﬁ ce 
of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops is located in 
the nation’s capital. In 1948 eight Lutheran bodies established the 
Lutheran Council to represent them in Washington. In 1946 the 

northern Presbyterians established a part-time representative in 
the capital. The National Council of Churches, an organization of 
which several of the mainline denominations are members, estab-
lished a Washington ofﬁ ce in the early 1950s and took part in the 
political effort to gain passage of the Civil Right Act of 1964.
The following sections present introductory proﬁ les of the 
nine denominations, each of which has a unique historical devel-
opment and an organizational structure that resulted from the 
union of differing factions within the same tradition of beliefs and 
values.
The Episcopal Church
The word “episcopal” derives from the Greek episcopos, which 
means overseer, or bishop, and hence the Episcopal Church spe-
ciﬁ cally acknowledges the importance and authority of bishops 
within the organizational structure (Wall 2000, 48). The church 
believes that a continuous line of church leaders, called the apos-
tolic succession, exists from Jesus’s original apostles to the pres-
ent. Apostolic succession is represented in rites of ordination and 
consecration of bishops, priests, and deacons by the laying on 
of hands by a bishop (ibid., 10). Konolige and Konolige (1978, 5) 
refer to Episcopalians as “Episcocrats”—the traditional aristocrats 
of the United States. The Episcopal Church has its beginnings in 
the colonial era as the Church of England’s (Anglican) represen-
tative in the New World. The Puritans in Massachusetts had left 
England for the New World in part to separate themselves from 
the Church of England, so the Anglican Church did not have a 
great presence in New England. Its greatest support developed 
in the royal colonies of Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and 
South Carolina (Konolige and Konolige 1978, 43). Only with the 
presence of royal authority did the church extend its presence in 
the colonies. Konolige and Konolige (1978, 50) note that Anglican-
ism appealed to those who preferred to have religion play a less 
dominant and burdensome role in their lives. Unlike the Puritans 
and other Christian groups, Anglicans were more tolerant of such 
behavior as drinking alcohol, dancing, and various other social 
practices that Puritans considered to be vices.
 
With the American Revolution, Anglican adherents faced 
the decision of whether to remain loyal to Great Britain and the 
Church of England or to support a break not only with England 
Mainline Denominations 3

but also with its church. Many Anglican priests left their parishes 
under coercion, and as many as 70,000 church members left the 
colonies during or immediately following the conﬂ ict (ibid., 55). 
The outcome of the revolution necessitated such a break with the 
formal structure of the Church of England, and hence the Protes-
tant Episcopal Church in America was born. In subsequent gen-
erations, Episcopalians came to prominence in American society, 
politics, and ﬁ nance, and many of the more distinguished Ameri-
can citizens were members of the Episcopal Church. Four of the 
ﬁ rst ﬁ ve presidents were at least nominally associated with the 
Episcopal Church, which is not surprising because these four pres-
idents (George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, 
and James Monroe) were from Virginia, the state with the great-
est allegiance to the Anglican tradition. From the time of Wash-
ington to the present, eleven presidents have been afﬁ liated with 
the Episcopal Church, the greatest number of any denomination. 
Many other noted Americans were associated with the Episco-
pal Church. As Konolige and Konolige (1978, 41) state, “Episco-
palianism was a large part of the bond that pulled together the 
great capitalists of the age—the Morgans, Harrimans, Whitneys, 
Astors, Vanderbilts, Stillmans, Fricks, and the thousands of lesser 
lights—into a social, political, and business aristocracy that ran 
America in, and like, their private clubs.”
 
The Episcopal Church membership tended to be conservative 
in personal conduct and in politics, but theologically more liberal, 
with less emphasis placed on doctrinal purity and virtuous con-
duct. In more recent years Episcopalians tended to display greater 
tolerance toward modes of behavior traditionally condemned by 
Christians. Presaging the 2003 selection of V. Gene Robinson, an 
actively gay priest, as a bishop, in 1997 New York Bishop Paul 
Moore, Jr., ordained a lesbian woman, Ellen Marie Barrett, as a 
priest, an action that at the time precipitated a great deal of con-
troversy within the church. Some of the Episcopal clergy, bish-
ops James Pike and John Shelby Spong prominent among them, 
added to the dissension within the church by questioning some of 
the foundational beliefs of Christians, including the virgin birth, 
the resurrection of Jesus, and the notion of original sin (see, for 
instance, Spong 2005).
 
Within the contemporary Episcopal Church, the principal 
governing body, the General Convention, meets every three years. 
The ﬁ rst General Convention met in 1785 in Philadelphia, and the 
4 Background and History

seventy-ﬁ fth General Convention met in Columbus, Ohio, in the 
summer of 2006. The church has established a bicameral conven-
tion, composed of a House of Bishops and a House of Deputies. 
In the House of Bishops, approximately 300 bishops, active and 
retired, with at least one bishop from each diocese, meet to consider 
proposed resolutions and legislation. The presiding bishop, selected 
by  the House of Bishops for a nine-year term, chairs the House of 
Bishops. Each of the dioceses, foreign and domestic, select eight 
deputies (four laypersons and four others who can be a combina-
tion of priests and deacons) as members of the House of Deputies. 
The House of Deputies considers and votes on legislation inde-
pendently of the House of Bishops. The president of the House of 
Deputies, elected by the General Convention, chairs that chamber. 
The presiding bishop and the president of the House of Deputies 
establish a number of committees that consider and revise legisla-
tive items for presentation to the convention. Similar to the U.S. 
Congress, legislation must pass both houses in identical language 
(Straub 2006). The General Convention elects twenty members to 
the Executive Council—four bishops, four priests or deacons, and 
twelve laypersons—and the provincial synods elect eighteen addi-
tional members. Between meetings of the General Convention, the 
Executive Council meets once in each of the church’s nine provinces 
to implement the policies adopted by the General Convention.
 
In addition to the more than 7,200 local parishes, dioceses, 
and the General Convention, the Episcopal Church is composed of 
many groups and organizations that engage in the mission of the 
church, including organizations involved in communication, news 
publication, and education (eleven seminaries, eight colleges, one 
university, and over a thousand schools and early childhood edu-
cation programs). Individual dioceses support social service and 
health organizations, including homes for the elderly and youth, 
hospitals, and centers for the homeless (Mead, Hill, and Atwood 
2005, 108). The church also supports groups concerned with mul-
ticultural programs, racial relations, the environment, economic 
matters, and the promotion and maintenance of peace.
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) 
(PCUSA)
As with the Episcopal Church, one measure of the political inﬂ u-
ence of the Presbyterians is the number of presidents who have 
Mainline Denominations 5

6 Background and History
been afﬁ liated with the denomination: ten presidents have been 
members of the church. The process of establishing the current 
Presbyterian organization, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), 
which took place from 1983 to1987, represented the most recent 
uniﬁ cation in a general trend of factional divisions and reuniﬁ ca-
tions within the Presbyterian denomination in the United States. 
The PCUSA resulted from the union of the United Presbyterian 
Church in the United States (UPCUSA) and the Presbyterian 
Church in the United States (PCUS). The denomination has a cur-
rent membership of nearly 3.5 million. 
Presbyterianism began in North America in the ﬁ rst decade 
of the eighteenth century with the establishment of the ﬁ rst pres-
bytery—a court composed of ministers and lay elders—in 1706 
(Hart and Noll 1999, 197). The presbytery formed a synod in 1716. 
In 1788 the church established the Presbyterian General Assem-
bly, which remains the major decision-making body within the 
denomination. The church leadership tended to oppose the Sec-
ond Great Awakening, a general religious revival in the United 
States that occurred from 1800 to 1803, because of the high emo-
tionalism of the revival as well as the lack of emphasis on theo-
logical correctness. Many lay members left the church, joining in 
the creation of the Disciples of Christ and other groups, including 
the Cumberland Presbyterian Church. In the 1830s the denomina-
tion divided over such issues as theology and slavery, forming 
Old School and New School assemblies. In 1857, as the Civil War 
approached, New School Presbyterians divided into northern and 
southern groups, and the Old School followed suit with the seces-
sion of the southern states from the union. The southern branch of 
the Old School became the Presbyterian Church in the Confeder-
ate States of America, and following the war the northern wing 
took the name Presbyterian Church in the United States. In 1870 
the northern old and new groups rejoined forces to become the 
Presbyterian Church in the United States of America (ibid., 197).
 
Various pressures on organized religious belief in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, including urbanization, 
industrialization, scientiﬁ c developments such as Darwinian evolu-
tion, and a general secularization in society, encouraged additional 
divisions among Presbyterians. Many within the denomination 
attempted to accommodate traditional religious beliefs with these 
various modernizing currents. Called liberals or modernists, these 
members supported higher criticism of scripture, regarding the 

Bible not as the revealed and inerrant word of God but as a text  to 
be examined using objective scientiﬁ c and historical methods. The 
modernists accepted the compatibility of evolutionary theory and 
religious belief and associated God’s revelations with a progres-
sive view of history (ibid., 103). They viewed historical events as a 
progression toward the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth. 
The church was to be a guide to ethical action and the improve-
ment of humankind, which amounted to advocacy of the social 
gospel, the belief that the Christian’s duty involved ameliorating 
the social evils attributed to industrialization and urbanization.
 
More conservative Presbyterians expressed an alternative 
worldview to that of the liberals, claiming that instead of offer-
ing opportunities for progress, the future would bring moral and 
spiritual decline that would result in the horrible events of the end 
times prophesied in the Book of Revelation, ultimately ending in 
Christ’s millennial reign on earth. Conservatives in the PCUSA 
insisted on adherence to traditional Christian doctrine, including 
the inerrancy of scripture, the virgin birth, and the substitution-
ary atonement and bodily resurrection of Jesus as the measure 
of a true Christian. However, the liberals succeeded in making 
tolerance of opposing views the standard to be followed. In 1936, 
after the general assembly of the PCUSA suspended J. Gresham 
Machen from the ministry for establishing the Independent Board 
for Presbyterian Foreign Missions, Machen founded the Presbyte-
rian Church of America, later renamed the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church (OPC). Shortly thereafter, Carl McIntire, a former stu-
dent of Machen’s, left the OPC to establish the Bible Presbyterian 
Church.
 
In 1958 the PCUSA and the United Presbyterian Church of 
North America joined to form the United Presbyterian Church in 
the United States of America (UPCUSA). Although the Presby-
terian Church in the United States, also known as the Southern 
Presbyterian Church, refused at the time to join the new organiza-
tion, in 1973 conservative members of the PCUS left the denomi-
nation to form the Presbyterian Church in America, thus leading 
to the union of the UPCUSA and the PCUS to form the Presbyte-
rian Church (U.S.A.) in 1983 (ibid., 198).
 
The PCUSA organizational structure includes the General 
Assembly, which meets yearly and acts as the ﬁ nal authority in 
the church. However, any amendment to the church’s constitution 
requires ratiﬁ cation by the presbyteries, which are the regional 
Mainline Denominations 7

8 Background and History
church organizations. The stated clerk, elected by the General 
Assembly, acts as the chief executive ofﬁ cer of the church. Each 
year the General Assembly selects a moderator to preside over 
meetings of the group. The moderator also serves as the represen-
tative of the church between meetings of the General Assembly. 
In 1988 the PCUSA established its national headquarters in Louis-
ville, Kentucky. The church’s publishing house, Westminster John 
Knox Press, is also located in Louisville. Sixty-eight colleges main-
tain relations with the PCUSA, and the church maintains eleven 
seminaries and six secondary schools (Mead, Hill, and Atwood 
2005, 143).
 
The PCUSA conducts mission activities in several areas. The 
church supports the Worldwide Ministries Division as well as 
International Health Ministries, Presbyterian Disaster Assistance, 
and Interfaith Relations. Within the United States, the church 
has the National Ministries Division, Multicultural Ministries, 
Racial Ethnic Ministries, and Presbyterian Border Ministry. The 
PCUSA focuses on advocacy in several areas, including criminal 
justice, environmental justice, social witness, women’s advocacy, 
and U.S. foreign policy. The church maintains formal relations 
with the United Nations and has an ofﬁ ce in Washington DC 
(PCUSA 2006).
Evangelical Lutheran Church in 
America (ELCA)
The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) is the larg-
est Lutheran denomination in the United States, with just under 
5 million members reported in 2006 (Houston Chronicle 2006, 
F3). Although various smaller Lutheran groups make up less 
than 2 percent of the total number of Lutherans (Noll 2003, 3), 
the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS) constitutes the 
next largest alternative Lutheran body, which, along with the 
Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod, constitutes approxi-
mately 38 percent of Lutherans in the United States (ibid., 4). The 
ELCA membership thus represents approximately 60 percent of 
all Lutherans in the United States. However, like other mainline 
denominations, the ELCA has experienced declining membership 
in recent years (down just over 2 percent from 1990 to 2000), and 
the organization achieved its majority status among Lutheran 

churches not from attracting new members but from the union of 
various smaller Lutheran bodies. Presiding Bishop Mark Hanson 
in late 2006 acknowledged that the ELCA had lost 80,000 baptized 
members in 2005 and 275,000 in the last ﬁ ve years. Hanson advised 
church members to resist explaining away such declines in terms 
of demographic trends and instead emphasize the mission of the 
church to spread the Christian message (Hanson 2007).
 
Lutherans ﬁ rst gained a presence in North America in the 
early seventeenth century, when Scandinavian, Dutch, and Ger-
man settlers came to the New World. They tended to congregate 
in the Hudson River region, an area that ultimately became the 
states of New York and New Jersey (ELCA 2006). In the decade 
following the ratiﬁ cation of the U.S. Constitution, there were 
approximately 250 Lutheran congregations in Pennsylvania and 
smaller numbers of Lutherans in other states (Noll 2003, 5). In the 
next seventy years, the number of congregations grew to more 
than 2,000 (ibid., 9). Immigrant Lutherans continued to look to 
their home countries as a major source of pastors, and they often 
conducted church services in their native language. 
 
As Lutheran groups from different European countries became 
more integrated into American society, they began the process of 
merging with one another. The ﬁ rst such signiﬁ cant merger 
occurred in 1917 when three Norwegian synods combined to 
establish the Norwegian Lutheran Church of America, and in 
1918 three German synods formed the United Lutheran Church 
in America (ULCA). World War I became a signiﬁ cant spur to 
cooperation among Lutheran groups who joined forces to pro-
vide assistance to U.S. military personnel. In 1917 the National 
Lutheran Commission (NLC) was established for that purpose. An 
estimated 60,000 Lutherans became involved in this effort, form-
ing the Lutheran Brotherhood as a separate organization to assist 
the commission (ELCA 2006, 2). Until 1930 the NLC concentrated 
it efforts on providing assistance outside the United States, but 
in that year the organization initiated domestic programs. Also 
in 1930, three German Lutheran groups combined to form the 
American Lutheran Church (ALC). After the Second World War, 
the efforts at uniﬁ cation continued. In 1960 the ALC, an essentially 
German group, merged with Danish and Norwegian Lutheran 
groups, maintaining the name American Lutheran Church, and in 
1962 the ULCA, German, Slovak, Icelandic, Swedish, Finnish, and 
Mainline Denominations 9

10 Background and History
Danish groups joined together as the Lutheran Church in America 
(LCA) (ELCA 2006).
 
In 1976 more moderate LCMS members, including 300 congre-
gations and 110,000 lay members, joined to form the Association 
of Evangelical Lutheran Churches (AELC). In 1979 representatives 
from the ALC, LCA, and AELC met to form the Committee on 
Lutheran Unity, and in September 1982 all three Lutheran groups 
held simultaneous conventions, voting to move toward uniﬁ ca-
tion. The conventions approved a proposal to establish the Com-
mission for a New Lutheran Church to deal with the details of the 
merger. In August 1986 all three groups again met simultaneously 
and voted to accept the new constitution for a uniﬁ ed Lutheran 
church, the ELCA, which became the fourth largest Protestant 
group in the United States.
 
The Churchwide Assembly, which meets once every four 
years, acts as the central decision-making body of the ELCA. 
Approximately 600 lay members, including equal numbers of men 
and women, and 400 clergy have voting rights at the assembly. The 
assembly elects a presiding bishop—who serves as the denomi-
nation’s chief pastor and chief executive ofﬁ cer—and a secretary. 
It also elects a thirty-seven-member church council, which consti-
tutes a board of directors and serves as the organization’s legisla-
tive authority between meetings of the assembly (Mead, Hill, and 
Atwood 2005, 120). The geographical organization of the ELCA 
includes sixty-ﬁ ve synods in the United States and the Caribbean 
area. A bishop, elected by the voting members of the synod assem-
bly for a six-year renewable term, governs each synod. Units of the 
denomination include evangelical outreach and congregational 
mission; global mission, including missionaries and relief and 
development; multicultural ministries, including antiracism train-
ing; higher education and schools; and Women of the ELCA (ELCA 
2005). The publishing outlet for the ELCA is Augsburg Fortress, 
headquartered in Minneapolis. The ELCA publishes The Lutheran, 
a monthly magazine containing church news and articles about 
current issues within and outside the denomination. The Depart-
ment for Ecumenical Affairs engages in interfaith communications 
and the pursuit of communion with other Christian denomina-
tions. The ELCA maintains relations with the Lutheran World Fed-
eration, the World Council of Churches, and the National Council 
of Churches of Christ in the USA.

Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) 
(CCDC)
The Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) (CCDC) grew out of 
the Second Great Awakening in the ﬁ rst decade of the nineteenth 
century and a distinctly American aversion to extra-biblical creeds 
and the hierarchical structure of many existing denominations. 
When Barton W. Stone, a Presbyterian minister in Kentucky, held 
a revival meeting at Cane Ridge in 1801, Presbyterian authori-
ties, disturbed by the indifference toward church doctrine and the 
emotional behavior of the participants, criticized the event. Stone 
and ﬁ ve colleagues at ﬁ rst organized a separate presbytery, but 
in 1804 they disbanded the new organization and established the 
foundation of what would ultimately become the CCDC on the 
principles of the Bible as the sole source of authority, the recogni-
tion of no organization above the congregation, and the goal of 
ultimately uniting all Christian believers (Cummins 2003, 3). A 
contemporary of Stone, Thomas Campbell, immigrated to North 
America from Ireland in 1807. Originally a Presbyterian minister, 
Campbell objected to the authority of the Presbyterian establish-
ment and organized the Christian Association of Washington, 
Pennsylvania. In 1809 Campbell issued his Declaration and Address, 
which contained two basic messages: the essential principles of 
the New Testament and the objective of Christian unity (ibid., 4). 
Thomas Campbell’s son Alexander also immigrated to the United 
States and joined his father in the new religious movement. In 
1811 the Christian Association became the Brush Run Church, 
which joined the Redstone Association of Baptists. However, by 
1816 Campbell’s declarations of grace over law and the New Tes-
tament over the Old Testament led to the organization’s ouster 
from the Baptist alliance. Campbell’s group joined with another 
Baptist organization, the Mahoning Baptist Association (ibid., 5), 
but when the Baptist association dissolved in 1830, the Brush Run 
Church became an independent organization of Disciples.
 
In the 1830s Christians and Disciples gradually uniﬁ ed 
into one movement, and by 1860 the organization had spread 
widely throughout the United States, with 2,100 congregations 
and a mem bership of 200,000 (ibid., 7). Unlike the Presbyterians, 
who fragmented their organization over the issue of slavery, the 
Campbell-Stone movement sought to avoid division by declaring 
Mainline Denominations 11

12 Background and History
the issue to be a matter of opinion rather than of faith (ibid., 8). 
From the end of the Civil War to the First World War, the move-
ment concentrated on publishing journals, engaging in mission-
ary work, establishing educational institutions, and cooperating 
with other Christian organizations (for instance, the Disciples 
became charter members of the Federal Council of Churches in 
1908). Following the First World War, controversy erupted among 
the Disciples over the appropriate interpretation of the Bible, 
which resulted in the dominance of a theological approach that 
emphasized more historical investigation of the scriptures and 
sensitivity to current cultural changes.
 
Following the Second World War, the Disciples struggled 
with questions about the overall organizational structure of the 
group. In the late 1950s the denomination commissioned a panel 
of scholars to examine organizational guidelines, and in 1960 the 
church’s International Convention established the Commission 
on Brotherhood Restructure to create a more effective organiza-
tional plan to combine the various groups within the Disciples. In 
1968 an organization assembly approved the Provisional Design 
for the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), transforming the 
group into an ofﬁ cial denomination. In 1997 the groups removed 
the word “provisional” from the organizational document, but the 
denomination chose not to prepare a formal constitution (ibid., 
15). The CCDC has a current membership of less than one million. 
Like other mainline denominations, the CCDC lost membership 
in the 1990s (approximately a 20 percent decline). The CCDC has 
had inﬂ uence in government on the federal level, with three of its 
members being elected president (James A. Garﬁ eld, Lyndon B. 
Johnson, and Ronald Reagan).
 
Congregations of the CCDC are divided into thirty-ﬁ ve 
regions. Each region provides various services to the members and 
ministers of local congregations. The General Assembly, the cen-
tral representative body, meets once every two years. The Admin-
istrative Committee, composed of forty-four voting members, 
meets twice each year. The general minister and president serves 
as the general pastor of the denomination, is the chief executive 
ofﬁ cer responsible for administering the various activities of the 
church, and is the principal representative of the denomination in 
ecumenical discussions (CCDC 2006a). The CCDC’s publishing 
outlet, Christian Board of Publication, has its headquarters in St. 
Louis. The CCDC supports twenty-one colleges and universities, 

and the National Benevolent Association manages eighty-three 
operations (Mead, Hill, and Atwood 2005, 251–252). The CCDC’s 
Division of Overseas Ministries supports more than 200 mission-
aries and others serving in ﬁ fty countries. They provide such 
services as education, health care, refugee assistance, and com-
munity development (CCDC 2006b).
American Baptist Churches 
in the USA (ABC)
Unlike the more conservative and fundamentalist Southern Bap-
tist Convention (SBC), which is the largest Protestant denomina-
tion in the United States with more than 16 million members, the 
American Baptist Churches in the USA (ABC) has a membership 
of just under 2 million. The denomination’s membership declined 
more than 5 percent between 1990 and 2000. The ABC is a mem-
ber of the National Council of Churches and generally takes more 
liberal stands on social issues than does the SBC. The two denomi-
nations are alike in their adherence to “believers’ baptism,” which 
involves the rejection of infant baptism in favor of limiting this 
sacrament to those mature enough to express their belief, accep-
tance of the individual’s direct relationship with God, and prefer-
ence for autonomous local congregations.
 
The Baptist movement originated in English Congregational-
ism, which rejected the tradition of individuals entering the Chris-
tian church through baptism as children. Rather, membership in 
the church should be a voluntary individual decision (ABC 2006). 
The ﬁ rst Baptist churches formed among English-speaking people 
in Holland because authorities in that country were more tolerant 
of alternative Christian beliefs than the authorities in England. 
In 1612 Thomas Helwys, a leader in the movement, returned to 
England to begin the ﬁ rst Baptist church. Baptists gained a foot-
hold in North America when Roger Williams, then an orthodox 
Puritan, arrived in Massachusetts in 1631 and soon alienated the 
Puritan establishment when he claimed that the civil authority 
should not require residents to adhere to those elements of the 
Ten Commandments relevant to the relationship between human 
beings and God (Reichley 2002, 65). In 1636 Williams and a group 
of followers left the Bay Colony, ultimately settling what would 
become Rhode Island. The colony allowed freedom of worship, 
inviting other groups, including Baptists, to settle there. The ﬁ rst 
Mainline Denominations 13

14 Background and History
Baptist church in North America was established in Providence. 
Williams himself became a Baptist but soon left because he dis-
agreed with the radical individualism of the movement.
 
The Baptist movement continued to expand during the sev-
enteenth century, and in 1707 adherents established the Philadel-
phia Baptist Association, which included ﬁ ve congregations in 
Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Baptist groups continued to form 
and grow throughout the eighteenth century, and by 1790 there 
were approximately 60,000 members and 560 ministers in 750 
churches (ABC 2006). The Second Great Awakening of the ﬁ rst 
decade of the nineteenth century added greatly to the member-
ship of Baptist churches, and by 1850 they had become the second-
largest Protestant denomination in the United States, second only 
to the Methodists. Reichley (2002, 171) notes that politically, Bap-
tists and many of their leaders in the early nineteenth century, 
due to their socioeconomic position and support for egalitarian 
values, tended to support the Jeffersonian Democratic-Republic 
Party. Baptists also supported a strict separation of church and 
state. Following the 1787 Constitutional Convention, John Leland, 
a Virginia Baptist pastor, intended to oppose the new Constitu-
tion but withdrew his opposition when James Madison assured 
him that religious liberty would be guaranteed through ratiﬁ ca-
tion of a constitutional amendment. Therefore, present-day Bap-
tists assert that their denomination exercised signiﬁ cant inﬂ uence 
on the adoption of the First Amendment guaranteeing religious 
liberty. The Baptist movement divided in 1845 when the Bap-
tist Home Mission Society rejected a Georgia Baptist afﬁ liate’s 
nomination of a slaveholding minister to become a missionary. In 
response, Baptists in nine southern states established the South-
ern Baptist Convention (Reichley 2002, 181–182). The northern 
Baptists organized as the American Baptist Missionary Union, 
and in 1907 they established the Northern Baptist Convention. In 
1950 the Northern Baptist Convention reorganized, becoming the 
American Baptist Convention. In 1972 the organization assumed 
its present name, the American Baptist Churches in the USA.
 
At the 1972 convention, members restructured the denomi-
nation to increase the representation of member groups, establish-
ing a 200-member general board. The effort to provide for greater 
coordination notwithstanding, the ABC remains committed to the 
primacy of the local churches in pursuing the Christian mission 
(ABC 1974). Under the leadership of the general secretary, various 

ABC bodies, including the general council of chief executives, the 
staff of the national program boards, and the chief executives of the 
thirty-four ABC regions, coordinate the activities of the denomi-
nation (Mead, Hill, and Atwood 2005, 189). Each region provides 
support for individual congregations, including Christian educa-
tion resources, leadership development, camping programs, and 
educational opportunities for pastors. The ABC operates twenty 
children’s homes, seventy-seven retirement homes and communi-
ties, twenty-seven hospitals and nursing homes, nine theological 
seminaries, and sixteen colleges and universities. Judson Press 
serves as the denomination’s publishing outlet (ibid., 189).
United Church of Christ (UCC)
In 1957 the uniﬁ cation of four denominations—the Congrega-
tional Churches, the Christian Church, the Evangelical Synod, and 
the Reformed Church in the U.S.—resulted in the United Church 
of Christ (UCC). The Congregational churches and the Christian 
Church had merged in 1931 to form Congregational Christian 
Churches, and the Evangelical Synod and the Reformed Church 
combined in 1934 to form the Evangelical and Reformed Church. 
The uniﬁ cation notwithstanding, the four denominations continue 
to maintain their separate identities (Mead, Hill, and Atwood 
2005, 146). The UCC has a membership of approximately 1.7 mil-
lion; the denomination lost nearly 15 percent of its membership 
from 1990 to 2000.
 
The Congregational Churches traditionally have opposed 
centralized institutional authority. However, throughout the nine-
teenth century Congregationalists recognized the necessity of 
some organizational structure. In 1808 the Congregational Ando-
ver Theological Seminary was established. Congregational clergy 
in New England voted to denounce the War of 1812, and ministers 
presented antiwar sermons. In 1852 the Congregational Churches 
formed a national organization. In 1853 the Congregational Church 
in Butler, New York, demonstrating a progressive bent, ordained 
and called to ministry a woman, Antoinette Brown. In 1867 the 
Christian Church began to ordain women, becoming the ﬁ rst 
denomination to do so (UCC 2006a). In 1869 the German Reformed 
Church, which had taken its name in 1793, abandoned the word 
German and became the Reformed Church in the United States 
(Mead, Hill, and Atwood 2005, 128). James O’Kelley, a Methodist 
Mainline Denominations 15

16 Background and History
who believed that Methodism had become too hierarchical, began 
the Christian Church in Virginia in the late eighteenth century. 
At the same time, in Vermont, Abner Jones, a Baptist, established 
the First Free Christian Church. As other churches were founded, 
the minimally organized group of organizations became known 
as the Christian Connection. Other organizers, including Barton 
W. Stone and Alexander Campbell, hailed as the original founders 
of the present Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), contributed 
to the establishment of the Christian movement. In 1844 Christian 
congregations in the South established a separate Southern Chris-
tian Association when the New England Convention of Chris-
tians approved a resolution condemning slavery. The two groups 
did not reunite until 1890 when a new General Convention was 
established. The Evangelical Synod was formed out of the vari-
ous groups of Germans, adherents of the Lutheran and Reformed 
traditions, who came to the United States in the 1830s and 1840s. 
Several Evangelical groups merged during the second half of 
the nineteenth century. In 1872 three denominations united to 
establish what would come to be called the Evangelical Synod of 
North America. Two prominent theologians, brothers H. Richard 
Niebuhr and Reinhold Niebuhr, were associated with the Evan-
gelical Synod (UCC 2006b). The General Synod of the Reformed 
Church approved uniﬁ cation in 1932, and the Evangelical Synod 
General Convention did so one year later.
 
In 1937 a study group composed of representatives from the 
Congregational Christian and Evangelical and Reformed churches 
began to investigate the feasibility of union. In 1942 the General 
Synod of the Evangelical and Reformed Church and the General 
Council of the Congregational Christian Churches registered their 
support for a uniﬁ cation proposal. However, ﬁ nal merger would 
take several more years because some members of the Congre-
gational Christian Churches opposed union (UCC 2006c). In 
1954 a joint meeting of the Congregational Christian Executive 
Committee and the Evangelical and Reformed General Council 
approved a uniﬁ cation plan, the Basis of Union, and in 1957 both 
groups met at a General Synod in Cleveland, Ohio, to approve the 
ﬁ nal uniﬁ cation as the United Church of Christ. Those who still 
opposed the union organized as the National Association of Con-
gregational Christian Churches, which has a current membership 
of 70,000, and the Conservative Congregational Christian Confer-
ence, which has a membership of 40,000.

 
The UCC has a highly decentralized organizational struc-
ture. Its constitution states that “The autonomy of the local church 
is inherent and modiﬁ able only by its own action” (Mead, Hill, 
and Atwood 2005, 147). Local churches are grouped geographi-
cally into associations. The associations assume the responsibili-
ties of ordaining and installing clergy, assisting churches in need, 
and accepting new churches into the denomination. Ministers 
and elected lay delegates compose each association. Associations 
within a larger geographical area compose a conference, which 
coordinates the activities of local churches and associations within 
the conference and the work of any organizations that may have 
been established. The General Synod meets once every two years. 
Members include delegates from the conferences, the denomi-
nation’s Convenanted Ministries, and other groups within the 
denomination. As John Thomas, general minister and president, 
has emphasized, “The General Synod speaks to and not for our 
local churches” (Smallwood 2005). The General Synod elects an 
Executive Council, which acts for the synod between the bien-
nial meetings. The General Synod also elects the general minister 
and president, who serves a four-year term and may be reelected 
for two additional terms (ibid.). Other elected ofﬁ ces include the 
executive ministers of Local Church Ministries, Wider Church 
Ministries, and Justice and Witness Ministries. Among its func-
tions, the Executive Council makes recommendations for action 
to the General Synod. In the area of education, the UCC is associ-
ated with twenty-nine colleges and universities (Mead, Hill, and 
Atwood 2005, 147–148).
Reformed Church in America (RCA)
Members of the Reformed Church in America (RCA) can trace 
their denomination’s origin back to 1628 and the arrival of an 
ordained minister from the Netherlands in the Dutch settlement 
of New Amsterdam. Although the English acquired the settle-
ment in 1664, renaming it New York, several Dutch Reformed 
congregations had been established and ultimately (in 1764) 
adopted the English language. The original Reformed congrega-
tion established in 1628, now the Collegiate Reformed Church, 
continues as an active congregation in New York City. During the 
Revolutionary War church members were divided between loy-
alists and supporters of independence. Following the war some 
Mainline Denominations 17

18 Background and History
members split from the church and others moved to Canada and 
joined the Presbyterian Church of Canada (RCA 2006). In 1819 the 
church incorporated as the Reformed Protestant Dutch Church, 
but in 1867 the denomination changed its name to the Reformed 
Church in America. In the early years of the United States the 
RCA cooperated with other denominations to become involved in 
missionary work, both in other nations, such as China and India, 
and among Native Americans. In 1857 the RCA reorganized its 
Board of Foreign Missions, becoming independent of other reli-
gious groups. During the mid-nineteenth century the RCA con-
tinued to grow, prompted by continued immigration from the 
Netherlands. The Reformed Dutch Church, like other Protestant 
denominations, continued to experience divisions over issues of 
doctrine and church authority, and in 1857 some members left 
to form the Christian Reformed Church (CRC), a denomination 
that currently has a membership of approximately 195,000 (Mead, 
Hill, and Atwood 2005, 133). In 1882, others left the church to join 
the CRC. These defections notwithstanding, the RCA continued 
to grow, moving westward and gaining adherents among Dutch 
settlers.
 
After the Second World War the RCA assisted Dutch immi-
grants who left Europe to settle in Canada. In the United States, 
in the ﬁ rst decade after the war, the RCA devoted resources to 
establishing 120 new congregations to adjust to the shift in popu-
lation toward urban and suburban areas. Many of these new con-
gregations were for the ﬁ rst time composed of largely non-Dutch 
people who did not originate in the Dutch Reformed tradition. In 
the 1970s the organization worked to form congregations among 
Asians, Hispanics, Native Americans, and African Americans. In 
1972 the RCA approved the ordination of women as elders and 
deacons, and in 1973 the denomination ordained the ﬁ rst woman 
minister (RCA 2006).
 
The RCA organizational structure at the local level consists 
of individual church congregations. Churches in a geographical 
area are then grouped into a classis. Above the forty-six classes 
(plural for classis) the church is organized into eight regional syn-
ods, each composed of equal numbers of ministers and elders, 
which meet once or twice each year. The central representative 
group is the General Synod, which meets annually to consider 
denominational policy. Between meetings of the General Synod, 
the General Synod Council fulﬁ lls the policies the synod has 

enacted. Among its duties, the council oversees the overall opera-
tion of the RCA and its congregations and associated institutions. 
The denomination, presently composed of approximately 290,000 
members, has its greatest presence in New York, Michigan, New 
Jersey, Iowa, Illinois, and California. Robert H. Schuller’s Crystal 
Cathedral in Garden Grove, California, is afﬁ liated with the RCA. 
The denomination has taken part in the ecumenical movement 
and has entered into full communion with the other mainline 
churches, including the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Amer-
ica, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), and the United Church of 
Christ. The RCA is a member of the World Alliance of Reformed 
Churches, the World Council of Churches, and the National Coun-
cil of Churches of Christ and has also joined the newly established 
Christian Churches Together.
United Methodist Church (UMC)
As with other Protestant denominations, the United Methodist 
Church (UMC) evolved through mergers of several church groups. 
In 1939 the Methodist Episcopal Church; the Methodist Episco-
pal Church, South; and the Methodist Protestant Church united 
to form the Methodist Church. In 1968 the Methodist Church 
merged with the Evangelical United Brethren to form the present 
United Methodist Church. Methodism began with two brothers, 
John and Charles Wesley, who initiated careers as missionaries for 
the Church of England. After having brief and unsuccessful stays 
in North America in the 1830s, each returned to England, had 
life-changing religious experiences, and led a renewal movement 
within the Church of England. John Wesley sent other preachers to 
America—most notably Francis Asbury—to facilitate the growth 
of Methodism. In 1773 ten preachers held the ﬁ rst Methodist con-
ference in the colonies. Still associated with the Anglican Church, 
they emphasized strong discipline in the organization. During the 
American Revolution, Methodist leaders tended to side with the 
loyalists, and John Wesley himself publicized his opposition to 
the revolutionary movement. Following independence the Meth-
odists in the United States moved toward independence from the 
Anglican Church.
 
In 1784 Methodist preachers met in Baltimore to form the 
Methodist Episcopal Church in America. In subsequent years 
the group established a General Conference to meet every fourth 
Mainline Denominations 19

20 Background and History
year (the ﬁ rst was held in 1792), wrote a constitution, and in 1789 
established a publishing operation, the Methodist Book Concern 
(UMC 2004a). In 1800 followers of Philip William Otterbein and 
Martin Boehm established the Church of the United Brethren, 
the members of which were almost exclusively German speak-
ing. In 1803 Jacob Albright established the Evangelical Associa-
tion, another German-speaking church. The Methodist churches 
greatly increased their membership during the Second Great 
Awakening of the ﬁ rst decade of the nineteenth century. From 
1773 to 1816 Methodist churches had increased from 1,160 to more 
than 214,000 members (Allen 1998, 30). The Methodist Episcopal 
Church experienced defections during the early years. African 
Americans, experiencing discrimination, left to form separate 
organizations. In 1816 disaffected African Americans established 
the African Methodist Episcopal Church, and in 1821 another 
group of African Americans formed the African Methodist Epis-
copal Zion Church. In 1830 a group of 5,000 ministers and laypeo-
ple, dissatisﬁ ed with the lack of lay representation and the refusal 
of the organization to provide for the election of district super-
intendents, formed the Methodist Protestant Church. Anticipat-
ing the breakup of the Union, the greatest split in the Methodist 
movement occurred when the 1844 General Conference voted to 
suspend a Southern bishop and slaveholder for refusing to free 
his slaves. Southern representatives quickly devised a plan of 
separation that led to the formation of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church, South. During the half-century following the end of the 
Civil War, Methodist churches, including the Methodist Episcopal 
Church; the Methodist Episcopal Church, South; the United Breth-
ren; and the Evangelicals experienced large membership growth. 
The Methodist Episcopal Church achieved a 400 percent increase 
in membership. Clergy and lay members debated various issues 
within the churches in the late nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies, including the granting of representation to women and the 
ordination of women, and experienced the general rise to promi-
nence of liberal theology and the Social Gospel movement.
 
After the First World War a movement began toward uniﬁ -
cation of the Methodist denominations. The Evangelical Associa-
tion, which in 1894 had split into two groups, reunited in 1922 as 
the Evangelical Church. In 1939 the Methodist Episcopal Church; 
the Methodist Episcopal Church, South; and the Methodist Prot-
estant Church united as the Methodist Church, thus forming a 

denomination of 7.7 million members (UMC 2004b). In 1946, after 
twenty years of planning, the Evangelical Church and the United 
Brethren Church merged to form the Evangelical United Brethren 
Church. The ﬁ nal move toward union occurred in 1968 when the 
Methodist Church and the Evangelical United Brethren, them-
selves the product of past unions, merged to establish the UMC.
 
The basic organizational structure of the UMC includes six 
types of conferences. The General Conference, which meets once 
every four years, acts as the central policy-making body of the 
denomination. It is composed of approximately 900 delegates, half 
lay members and half clergy. The second type of conference, the 
Jurisdictional Conference, also meets once every four years. There 
are ﬁ ve jurisdictional conferences (Northeastern, Southeastern, 
North Central, South Central, and Western). An equal number of 
clergy and laypersons serve as delegates (Allen 1998, 63). Each 
jurisdictional conference elects and assigns bishops, draws epis-
copal area boundaries, and implements General Conference poli-
cies. The Annual Conference, composed of clergy and laypersons 
representing congregations, votes on constitutional amendments 
and elects delegates to the General and Jurisdictional conferences. 
The bishop of the episcopal area presides during the conference. 
Each geographical district of the denomination may hold a Dis-
trict Conference, composed of members selected at the Annual 
Conference. This conference administers the various programs 
and ministries of the district. The ﬁ fth type of conference is the 
Charge Conference, composed of the council members of one 
or more local churches. Usually meeting annually, this confer-
ence supervises the activities of the local church. Finally, all local 
members may attend the Church Conference, which is held by 
individual congregations and deals with subjects relevant to each 
local church. In addition to these six types of conferences, regions 
outside the United States hold Central conferences, which have 
bishops and administrative ofﬁ cers of their own (ibid., 64).
 
Members of the Council of Bishops serve as the administra-
tive leaders of the UMC. Members include ﬁ fty active bishops in 
the United States; eighteen bishops from Europe, Asia, and Africa; 
and more than ninety retired bishops. The president of the council, 
elected by the bishops, serves a two-year term and presides over 
meetings but does not exercise any additional authority within 
the council. An executive secretary serves as the chief operating 
ofﬁ cer for the council (UMC 2006a). Council members attend the 
Mainline Denominations 21

22 Background and History
General Conference but are not voting delegates (UMC 2006b). 
The Judicial Council, composed of ﬁ ve clergy and four laypersons, 
receives appeals of decisions made by the General Conference or 
any District, Annual, Central, or Jurisdictional Conference, or a 
bishop.
 
The UMC engages in various social service activities, support-
ing, directing, or operating 225 retirement homes and extended 
care establishments, 70 hospital and health-care facilities, 50 child-
care institutions, and 30 operations for those with disabilities. The 
UMC engages in various educational ministries, including sup-
port for eight two-year colleges, eighty-two four-year colleges, 
ten universities, and thirteen schools of theology (Mead, Hill, and 
Atwood 2005, 233). The denomination’s Board of Global Minis-
tries supports, directly or through cooperation with other denom-
inations, mission work in thirty-eight countries in Africa; twenty 
countries in Asia; seven countries in the Middle East; thirty-two 
countries in Europe; twenty countries in the Caribbean; seven 
countries in the Paciﬁ c; and eighteen countries in North, South, 
and Central America (Allen 1998, 68–71).
Catholic Church
Like the mainline Protestant churches, the Catholic Church in 
recent years has experienced dissent within the denomination, 
especially since the Second Vatican Council. Pope John XXIII 
called this council, which met in Rome three months each year 
from 1962 to 1965. The council addressed the general concern for 
the church’s stance toward the modern world. Among the issues 
confronted were the ordination of women as priests, birth con-
trol, whether to allow priests to marry, and the status of divorced 
church members. Such issues have divided more liberal and more 
conservative clergy and laypeople (Szasz 2004, 60). In addition 
to substantive issues, the Second Vatican Council provided for 
certain democratizing elements within an otherwise hierarchical 
organizational structure, including the establishment of regional 
and national episcopal conferences. In the United States, bishops 
established what came to be called the United States Conference 
of Catholic Bishops (USCCB), which became an outspoken advo-
cate for reform and social action on such issues as the U.S. econ-
omy, nuclear weapons, and AIDS (Varacalli 2006, 12). In addition 
to conferences of bishops, the actions of the Second Vatican Coun-

cil also gave rise to the formation of priests’ senates to represent 
clergy before their bishops, sisters’ councils to represent sisters 
and nuns, and parish pastoral councils to voice the sentiments of 
church members before the local priest. How these new organi-
zations ultimately would affect the hierarchical authority struc-
ture was unclear: whether restructuring would result in a more 
congregational type of authority in which local parishes make 
decisions for themselves, or a more modest sharing of authority 
between the clergy and laity on the one hand and the higher levels 
of the hierarchy on the other (ibid., 13).
 
The Catholic Church, with a membership of approximately 
65 million, is the single largest religious denomination in the 
United States (Mead, Hill, and Atwood 2005, 94). Unlike the 
mainline Protestant denominations, the Catholic Church from 
1990 to 2000 experienced steady growth, increasing adherents by 
approximately 16 percent. Researchers have attributed this mem-
bership increase largely to the immigration of great numbers of 
people from Catholic countries. Despite the increase in member-
ship, church attendance among Catholics fell in recent decades. In 
2000 an estimated 40 percent of Catholics attended mass at least 
weekly, a much lower ﬁ gure from ﬁ fty years before (Reichley 
2002, 322).
 
At the same time membership increased, the number of 
priests and nuns declined. Reichley (2002, 321) reports that the 
number of Catholic priests fell from 58,600 in 1966 to 45,200 in 
2001, and the number of nuns declined from 180,000 in 1965 to 
79,400 in 1999. In the late 1990s the number of men studying for 
the priesthood had fallen to less than 15 percent of the 1960 num-
ber. Reichley also notes that by 1999 the median age of nuns had 
increased to 69 and that just 6 percent of nuns were less than ﬁ fty 
years of age (ibid.). The decline in the number of priests and nuns 
has led to what Steinfels (2004, 11) terms a crucial transforma-
tion within the Catholic Church: the passage of leadership from 
the clergy to laypeople, a shift that conﬂ icts with the traditional 
emphasis on maintaining a system of centralized authority. The 
Catholic Church in the United States, as of 2004, had 11 cardinals, 
45 archbishops (including 7 cardinals), 336 bishops, and approxi-
mately 46,000 priests. The church is organized into 34 archdio-
ceses and 151 dioceses (Mead, Hill, and Atwood 2005, 95). Within 
the dioceses are approximately 18,500 parishes (Steinfels 2004, 4). 
Bishops oversee the dioceses and archbishops govern the larger 
Mainline Denominations 23

24 Background and History
dioceses, or archdioceses. The Catholic Church is unique among 
the mainline denominations in that the worldwide organizational 
structure has situated at its peak one person, the pope, the Bishop 
of Rome, also known as the vicar of Christ, who is acknowledged 
as Christ’s major representative on earth and hence has authority 
over all bishops, priests, and lay members of the church.
 
From the early days of colonization, many non-Catholic set-
tlers objected to the presence of Catholics in the New World. For 
instance, Massachusetts Bay passed so-called anti-priest laws, 
making the church illegal in the colony. Any priest, missionary, or 
other person associated with the Catholic Church was to be consid-
ered a threat to the peace (O’Toole 2004, 41). During the ﬁ rst half of 
the eighteenth century, anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant themes 
tended to dominate in the nativist movement, represented by the 
Know-Nothing group. The associated American party, begun in 
the 1850s, entered electoral politics, nominating former presi-
dent Millard Filmore as its presidential candidate in 1856. Anti-
Catholic sentiment notwithstanding, the number of Catholics in the 
United States continued to increase, assisted by immigration from 
countries such as Ireland where the Catholic faith predominated. 
O’Toole (ibid., 43) notes that immigration through the port of Bos-
ton increased from 2,000 in 1820 to 120,000 in 1850, with nearly 
half of the new arrivals coming from Ireland. One measure of the 
concern that non-Catholics had regarding the Catholic Church is 
that just one Catholic has been elected president. When John Ken-
nedy campaigned for the presidency in 1960, he understood that it 
was necessary to assure voters that he would make decisions inde-
pendent of the Catholic hierarchy. Speaking to the Greater Hous-
ton Ministerial Association, he stated that “I believe in an America 
where the separation of church and state is absolute—where no 
Catholic prelate would tell the president (should he be Catholic) 
how to act. I do not speak for my church on public matters—and 
the church does not speak for me” (Dionne 2006, B11).
 
Although the hierarchy of the Catholic Church in the United 
States has changed considerably since the Second Vatican Council, 
the top of the leadership structure—the bishops—remains solidly 
within the tradition of the church. The pope in Rome appoints 
each of the bishops independently of any ofﬁ cial input from the 
local church leaders or laypersons, and they serve until they are 
seventy-ﬁ ve years old. Steinfels (2004, 307) notes that this method 
of selection can leave the bishops separated from the overall 

changes that are occurring in the denomination, and they may 
fail to represent adequately the views of laypeople and priests. 
Of the more than 45,000 priests, approximately 30,000 serve in 
dioceses and 15,000 are afﬁ liated with speciﬁ c orders, such as the 
Benedictines, Dominicans, Franciscans, and Jesuits (Archdiocesan 
Archives 2006). There are more than 13,000 permanent deacons, 
men who have been ordained for ministry but who are not priests. 
The bishops have the authority to designate those in the church 
administration below them, and they appoint priests. Given the 
declining number of priests, the recruitment of pastors to serve 
parishes has become especially difﬁ cult.
 
The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, which 
resulted from a combination in 2001 of the National Conference of 
Catholic Bishops and the United States Catholic Conference, over-
sees the administration of the Catholic Church and often takes 
public stands on various economic and social issues. The confer-
ence is incorporated in Washington DC. Ofﬁ ces associated with 
the USCCB include the Catholic Campaign for Human Devel-
opment, Catholic News Service, Ecumenical and Interreligious 
Affairs, Government Liaison, Hispanic Affairs, Pro-Life Activi-
ties, and Social Development and World Peace (USCCB 2006).
 
The Catholic Church maintains approximately 7,000 elemen-
tary schools, 1,300 high schools, and 238 colleges and universi-
ties and employs 175,000 educators, out of which 164,000 are lay 
teachers (Archdiocesan Archives 2006). The church supports 597 
hospitals and 483 health-care centers, and Catholic social service 
agencies help those in need with food, clothing, housing, and 
disaster assistance. Social service agencies provide a variety of 
other assistance, including adoption services, foster care, preg-
nancy care, and programs to prevent and treat drug and alcohol 
abuse.
National Council of Churches 
of Christ in the USA (NCC)
All eight of the mainline Protestant denominations discussed 
previously have joined with the National Council of Churches 
(NCC) in the effort to develop ecumenical cooperation among 
varied Christian churches and organizations. The preamble to the 
organization’s constitution states that member groups “confess 
Jesus Christ, the incarnate Word of God, as Savior and Lord” and 
Mainline Denominations 25

26 Background and History
“covenant with one another to manifest ever more fully the unity 
of the Church” (NCC 1996). Member denominations include Prot-
estant, Anglican, Orthodox, Evangelical, and African American 
churches representing 100,000 local congregations and 45 million 
people (NCC 2006). The General Assembly serves as the major 
policy-making body of the organization. Between the annual 
meetings of the General Assembly, the governing board meets 
frequently to execute policies determined by the assembly. The 
organization’s ofﬁ cers include a president, a general secretary, 
and four vice presidents, all of whom are elected by the General 
Assembly. Established in 1950, the NCC replaced several ecumen-
ical organizations, including the Federal Council of Churches, 
which had served as the major U.S. ecumenical organization since 
1908. The NCC maintains ﬁ ve program commissions: Commu-
nication, Education and Leadership, Faith and Order, Interfaith 
Relations, and Justice and Advocacy. These commissions pursue 
objectives in such areas as peace and justice, poverty, racism, the 
environment, education, and the production of religious television 
programming (ibid.). Various nonmember denominations, includ-
ing the Catholic Church, cooperate with the NCC in performing 
service functions. The NCC maintains an ofﬁ ce in Washington 
DC to promote the organization’s moral and ethical positions on 
public policy issues. Mainline denominations engage in ecumeni-
cal interaction through the NCC as well as through bilateral and 
multilateral discussions in order to create greater opportunities 
for cooperation and possible uniﬁ cation. 
 
Whether through the NCC, cooperative activities among 
churches, or individual initiatives, these nine denominations, 
informed by closely related religious and moral convictions, pur-
sue often similar goals to ameliorate perceived social, economic, 
and political ills. However, within the denominations, dissenting 
groups have formed that object to the direction the denomina-
tions have taken on various policy questions and that either are 
attempting to alter or “renew” the denominations or are moving 
toward separation.
Renewal Movements
The liberal-conservative controversy so prominent in the late nine-
teenth century continues today in the mainline denominations, 

which amounts to one crucial element in the so-called culture war 
between those holding more liberal social and political beliefs and 
perspectives and those adhering to more conservative ones. The 
cultural divide occurs not only between mainline denominations 
and more conservative, fundamentalist, or evangelical denomi-
nations but also within the mainline denominations themselves. 
Whereas mainline denominations have sought to increase the 
interaction among them, dissidents within denominations have 
developed groups that raise objections to such goals or contem-
plate separation from the home denomination. Dissidents face a 
dilemma: should they remain within the existing structure of a 
mainline denomination, or should they secede, joining another 
denomination or creating a new one? Many have decided to fol-
low the ﬁ rst option. More conservative, evangelical elements 
within these denominations have expressed their dissatisfaction 
with the path their denominations have been following and have 
established various organizations to represent their views within 
the church. Wishing not to surrender completely all inﬂ uence 
in their home denominations, they have created what are called 
“renewal movements.”
 
Within the Episcopal Church some of those dissatisﬁ ed with 
the church hierarchy established the American Anglican Coun-
cil (AAC), which advocates the church’s return to a recognition 
of and commitment to biblical authority and the orthodox beliefs 
of the Anglican Communion. The group believes that the Epis-
copal Church has made compromises with contemporary culture 
by allowing false teachings to inﬂ uence the church’s stands on 
moral and theological questions. The AAC began in 1995 when a 
small group of Episcopal bishops, scholars, laypersons, and other 
church ofﬁ cials met to express their concern that the church’s 
leadership had strayed from the historical Christian faith based on 
scripture. Recognizing that the Episcopal Church had lost mem-
bership in recent decades, this group emphasized its membership 
in the 77-million-member Anglican Communion. At a subsequent 
meeting in 1996 a larger group of concerned Episcopal Church 
members developed a more detailed expression of their beliefs 
and initiated an organizational structure. The group elected a 
board of trustees and subsequently incorporated as the American 
Anglican Council. In 2003 the AAC expressed its strong opposi-
tion to the selection of V. Gene Robinson, an openly gay priest, as 
the bishop of the New Hampshire Diocese. Other Episcopal and 
Renewal Movements 27

28 Background and History
Anglican organizations have been established to provide a voice 
for those opposing the leadership of the Episcopal Church. For-
ward in Faith North America proclaims that it defends the historic 
Christian faith and scripture and opposes any attempts to stray 
from those values. Ekklesia, an international group of Anglicans 
with headquarters in Carrollton, Texas, professes adherence to 
scriptural authority, the historic creeds of the Christian faith, and 
the sacraments as instituted by Jesus (Ekklesia 2006).
 
In 1988 seventy-three ministers and elders of the Presbyterian 
Church (U.S.A.) met in Dallas, Texas, to issue a call for renewal in 
the denomination. More than a thousand Presbyterians met the 
following year to continue the call for renewal and to create Pres-
byterians for Renewal (PFR). The organization remains active in 
the PCUSA, objecting particularly to efforts by more liberal mem-
bers to alter traditional doctrine and to approve the ordination of 
actively gay pastors (PFR 2006). Recently  PFR has challenged a 
report from the Theological Task Force on Peace, Unity and Purity 
of the Church (LeBlanc 2006, 8).
 
Within the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Word 
Alone Network (WAN) began in 1996 as an electronic discussion 
group to express concern over the proposal to join with the Epis-
copal Church in full communion. The proposal included sharing 
ordained clergy and adopting the Episcopal notion of apostolic 
succession through bishops who retain the exclusive authority 
to ordain ministers. The 1997 ELCA Churchwide Assembly nar-
rowly defeated the concordat, but in 1999 the assembly adopted 
the interchurch agreement, titled Called to Common Mission, with 
minor revisions. Mark Chavez, executive director of the WAN, 
has claimed that the ELCA is engaged in idolatry, placing trust 
in something other than God (ibid., 6). Concerned about propos-
als to change ELCA policy on homosexuality and the ordination 
of gay pastors, the 2004 annual convention of the WAN adopted 
a resolution afﬁ rming biblical teaching on sexual relations and 
marriage and opposing any revision in the church’s interpreta-
tion of biblical standards. At the 2005 annual convention, par-
ticipants approved a resolution initiating the establishment of an 
association of churches in the ELCA that adheres to a common 
confession of faith. In 2006 the WAN reported having 230 member 
churches and approximately 6,000 individual members and more 
than 1,000 pastoral members (WAN 2006). More than 105 con-
gregations have left the ELCA to join Lutheran Congregations in 

Mission for Christ (LCMC), an alternative denominational struc-
ture formed by those who decided they could no longer remain 
with the ELCA. The LCMC adopted a constitution in March 2001 
(LCMC 2006).
 
Within the United Methodist Church, a renewal movement 
in effect began with the establishment of the denomination in 
the 1960s, when Charles W. Keysor, a Methodist pastor, began 
publication of Good News, a magazine for evangelicals within the 
church. The organization Good News, which resulted as an out-
growth of the magazine, continues as a renewal movement in the 
UMC. James Heidinger, president of Good News, has expressed 
satisfaction that evangelicals were successful in establishing their 
inﬂ uence within the UMC. For instance, since 2000, representa-
tion at the General Conference has been based on the number of 
members in a region, a policy that has increased the voice of the 
more conservative southern region. Different groups in the UMC 
have disagreed over the ordination of homosexuals, but so far 
denominational decisions have maintained the more traditional 
biblical interpretation of sexual relations.
 
Members of the American Baptist Churches USA have created 
dissenting groups within the organization. Bill Nicoson, execu-
tive director of American Baptist Evangelicals (ABE), believes that 
evangelicals within mainline churches may conclude that separa-
tion is the best option (LeBlanc 2006, 7). In the ABC, the Paciﬁ c 
Southwest region began the process of withdrawing from the 
denomination over the issue of homosexuality. In September 2005 
the region’s board of directors, representing more than 300 of the 
denomination’s 5,800 congregations, voted to begin the process 
of separation. Although the ABC’s ofﬁ cial policy holds that “the 
practice of homosexuality is incompatible with Christian teaching” 
(Moll 2005, 23), the denomination allows “gay-afﬁ rming” congre-
gations to maintain their afﬁ liation. ABE leaders announced plans 
to create a new association that could include as many as 2,000 
churches (ibid., 23).
 
The mission statement of the Institute on Religion and 
Democracy (IRD) declares that the organization is committed to 
renewing democratic society through an ecumenical alliance of 
Christians in the United States who assent to biblical and historic 
Christian teaching. The organization, which was established in 
1981, regards churches as a vital element in civil society (IRD 2006). 
However, according to the IRD, mainline denominations have 
Renewal Movements 29

30 Background and History
“thrown themselves into multiple, often leftist crusades—radical 
forms of feminism, environmentalism, paciﬁ sm, multi-cultural-
ism, revolutionary socialism, sexual liberation and so forth,” all 
of which supposedly have harmed the church and society (ibid.). 
To remedy the situation, the organization claims, churches must 
return to the traditional concerns of Christianity (ibid.). Commit-
tees associated with speciﬁ c denominations are afﬁ liated with the 
IRD. Presbyterian Action has focused on the PCUSA’s stand on 
marriage, homosexuality, and a proposed amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution deﬁ ning marriage as the union of one man and one 
woman. Episcopal Action has concentrated on a leadership group 
in the Episcopal Church that the committee considers unrepresen-
tative of the lay membership of the church. UMAction, the United 
Methodist committee, works to bring about “scripture based” 
reform in the denomination.
 
Within the Catholic Church, members concerned about the 
sexual abuse scandal formed organizations such as Voice of the 
Faithful (VOTF) in order to hold the church leaders responsible for 
the scandal and to increase the voice of lay members in the func-
tioning of the denomination. VOTF wants to ensure that church 
leaders respond to the needs of the victims of abuse. One goal 
of the organization has been to establish a fund to allow donors 
to contribute to ministries and programs with the assurance that 
the money will not be used for “secret settlements, legal fees, and 
public relations” (Post 2002).
Mainline Christian 
Denominations and Public Policy
By 2006 the electoral and public policy victories conservative 
religious groups had achieved began to energize those who were 
uncomfortable with the emphasis on such issues as abortion and 
same-gender marriage at the expense of what were considered 
more pressing concerns, including poverty, affordable health care, 
and global warming. Many moderate and liberal Christians who 
opposed the Bush administration’s policies, such as the Iraq war 
and budget cuts for social welfare programs, began to organize, 
forming such groups as Faith in Public Life, Catholic Alliance for 
the Common Good, Faithful America, and Network of Spiritual 

Progressives (Murphy and Cooperman 2006). Some believe that 
the so-called religious left is ready to reassert the political inﬂ u-
ence it wielded during the civil rights era of the 1950s and 1960s, 
and that members of mainline denominations are a potentially 
signiﬁ cant element in the reemergence of a progressive religious 
movement. However, observers question whether organizational 
success can be matched by increasing numbers of adherents, given 
that mainline denominations generally have been losing members 
in recent decades and have faced difﬁ cult internal conﬂ icts. 
The mainline denominations confront a variety of challenges 
to their role as inﬂ uencers of U.S. public policy. While they gener-
ally have representational structures—including regular conven-
tions—that allow grassroots members to be heard at the highest 
levels of the denominations, as well as organizational resources 
that facilitate communication with the larger society and planned 
activities to further their mission, disagreements involving deep 
religious beliefs and values can reduce the ability to convey to 
the larger society the stands of the denominations on particular 
issues. Most recently, strong disagreements over sexual matters 
have created serious divisions within many of the denominations. 
Chapter 2 examines in greater detail speciﬁ c public policy issues 
on which many of the denominations have taken a public stand 
and identiﬁ es the factors that tend to contribute to, or limit, the 
prospect for success. 
References
Allen, Charles L. 1998. Meet the Methodists: An Introduction to the United 
Methodist Church. Nashville, TN: Abingdon.
American Baptist Churches in the USA (ABC). 1974. “American Baptist 
Policy Statement on Primacy of the Local Church.” http://www.abc-usa.
org/Resources/resol/primacy.htm.
American Baptist Churches in the USA (ABC). 2006. “The Origins and 
Development of Baptist Thought and Practice.” http://www.abc-usa.
org/whoweare/ourhistory/history.aspx.
Archdiocesan Archives. 2006. “The U.S. Catholic Church: Historical 
Background.” http://www.archstl.org/archives/about/cathhist.htm.
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) (CCDC). 2006a. “Ofﬁ ce of the 
General Minister and President.” http://www.disciples.org/ogmp/.
References 31

32 Background and History
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) (CCDC). 2006b.  General 
Ministries home page: http://www.disciples.org/internal/genmin.htm.
Cummins, D. Duane. 2003. A Handbook for Today’s Disciples in the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). St. Louis, MO: Chalice.
Dionne, E. J., Jr. 2006. “Clarifying Separation of Catholic Church and 
Statesmen,” Houston Chronicle (March 4): B11.
Ekklesia. 2006. The Ekklesia Society home page. http://www.ekk.org/
news.php.
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). 2005. “Churchwide 
Units.” http://www.elca.org/churchwide.html.
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). 2006. “Roots of 
the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America.” http://elca.org/
communication/roots.html.
Hanson, Mark S. 2007. “Tackling Membership Decline.” The Lutheran 
(January): 58.
Hart, D. G., and Mark A. Noll. 1999. Dictionary of the Presbyterian and 
Reformed Tradition in America. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity.
Houston Chronicle. 2006 “Membership of ELCA Dips.” (August 5): F3.
Institute on Religion and Democracy (IRD). 2006. “Mission Statement.” 
http://www.ird-renew.org/site/pp.asp?c=fvKVLfMVIsG&b=356299.
Konolige, Kit, and Frederica Konolige. 1978. The Power of Their Glory, 
America’s Ruling Class: The Episcopalians. New York: Wyden.
LeBlanc, Douglas. 2006. “Evangelicals in the Mainline: Should They Stay 
or Should They Go?” Christian Research Journal 29 (1): 6–8.
Lutheran Congregations in Mission for Christ (LCMC). 2006. “A 
Historical View of LCMC.” http://www.lcmc.net/historical_view.htm.
Mead, Frank S., Samuel S. Hill, and Craig D. Atwood. 2005. Handbook of 
Denominations in the United States. 12th ed. Nashville, TN: Abingdon.
Moll, Rob. 2005. “American Baptist Exodus: Scripture, Homosexuality 
Divide Another Venerable Denomination.” Christianity Today 49 
(November): 23.
Murphy, Caryle, and Alan Cooperman. 2006. “Seeking to Reclaim the 
Moral High Ground: Religious Liberals Are Gaining New Visibility 
in American Politics.” Washington Post National Weekly Edition (May 
29–June 4): 12.
National Council of Churches (NCC). 1996. “Constitution and Bylaws.” 
http://ncccusa.org/pdfs/nccconstitution.pdf.
National Council of Churches (NCC). 2006. “NCC at a Glance: Who 
Belongs, What We Do, How We Work Together.” http://.ncccusa.org/
about/about_ncc.htm.

Noll, Mark. 2003. “American Lutherans Yesterday and Today.” In 
Richard Cimino, ed., Lutherans Today: American Lutheran Identity in the 
21st Century. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans.
O’Toole, James M. 2004. “Catholics I: Majority Faith with a Minority 
Mindset.” In Andrew Walsh and Mark Silk, eds., Religion and Public Life 
in New England: Steady Habits, Changing Slowly. Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littleﬁ eld.
Post, Jim. 2002. “Voice of the Faithful in the Future.” http://www.
voiceofthefaithful.org/Who_We_Are/future.html.
Presbyterian Church (USA). 2006. “U.S. and World Mission.” http://
pcusa.org/navigation/mission.htm.
Presbyterians for Renewal (PFR). 2006. “The History of PFR.” http://
www.pfrenewal.org/home/index.php?option=com_content&task=
view&id=55&itemid=70.
Reformed Church in America (RCA). 2006. “Brief Outline of RCA 
History.” http://rca.org/NETCOMMUNITY/Page.aspx?&pid=2181&
srcid=2183.
Reichley, A. James. 2002. Faith in Politics. Washington DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.
Smallwood, Irvin. 2005. “General Synod Overwhelmingly Calls for ‘Full 
Marriage Equality.’” http://news.ucc.org/index.php?option=com_conte
nt&task=view&id=243&Itemid=54.
Spong, John Shelby. 2005. The Sins of Scripture: Exposing the Bible’s Texts of 
Hate to Reveal the God of Love. New York: Harper Collins.
Steinfels, Peter. 2004. A People Adrift: The Crisis of the Roman Catholic 
Church in America. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Straub, Gregory. 2006. “Introduction to General Convention.” http://
www.episcopalchurch.org/53785_9883_ENG_HTM.htm.
Szasz, Ferenc Morton. 2004. “How Religion Created an Infrastructure 
for the Mountain West.” In Jan Shipps and Mark Silk, eds., Religion and 
Public Life in the Mountain West: Sacred Landscapes in Transition. Lanham, 
MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld.
United Church of Christ (UCC). 2006a. “The Christian Churches.” 
http://ucc.org/aboutus/shortcourse/chrchu.html.
United Church of Christ (UCC). 2006b. “German Evangelical Synod.” 
http://ucc.org/aboutus/shortcourse/gerevasyn.html.
United Church of Christ (UCC). 2006c. “The Evangelical and Reformed 
Church.” http://ucc.org/aboutus/shortcourse/evaref.html.
United Methodist Church (UMC). 2004a. “The Churches Grow, 1817–
1843.” http://archives.umc.org/interior.asp?mid=1209.
References 33

34 Background and History
United Methodist Church (UMC). 2004b. “World War and More 
Change, 1914–1939.” http://archives.umc.org/interior.asp?mid=1219.
United Methodist Church. 2006a. “Introduction to the Council of 
Bishops.” http://archives.umc.org/interior.asp?ptid=21&mid=5856.
United Methodist Church. 2006b. “Council of Bishops Frequently Asked 
Questions.” http://archives.umc.org/interior.asp?ptid=21&mid=5860.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB). 2006. “USCCB 
Departments and Associated Ofﬁ ces.” http://www.usccb.org/depts
.htm.
Varacalli, Joseph A. 2006. The Catholic Experience in America. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood.
Wall, John N. 2000. A Dictionary for Episcopalians. Revised ed. 
Cambridge, MA: Cowley.
Word Alone Network (WAN). 2006. http://wordalone.org/who.shtml.

35
2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
M
ainline Christian churches obviously do not exist in a vac-
uum. While they have internal debates and conﬂ icts, these 
denominations also act in various ways in the larger society, 
attempting to inﬂ uence, and at times being inﬂ uenced by, current 
trends in the secular world. Among the public policy issues on 
which mainline churches have expressed a position, or at least have 
had internal debates, are abortion, immigration, stem-cell research, 
the death penalty, same-gender marriage, faith-based funding, 
U.S. foreign policy, welfare policy, and the government’s role in 
economic and social matters. In order to have an impact on ques-
tions of policy, the churches must reach some level of agreement 
among the denominational leaders, clergy, lay leaders, and lay 
members. As with any interest group, the larger the membership of 
the group, the more likely that the organization will have its voice 
heard in the larger decision-making arena. The nine denominations 
that are under consideration here vary greatly in membership. The 
Catholic Church, the largest single denomination, has an estimated 
membership of more than 65 million. Other denominations have 
much smaller memberships. The United Methodist Church has 
a current membership of 8.3 million; the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America, 5.2 million; the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), 
3.4 million; the Episcopal Church, 2.3 million; the American Baptist 
Churches in the USA, 1.4 million; the United Church of Christ, 1.3 
million; the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), 820,000; and the 

36 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Reformed Church in America, 289,000. The nature of the public 
policy area can also affect the probability of success. Generally, 
domestic issues are subject to greater inﬂ uence than are foreign 
policy issues, the latter tending to be informed by considerations 
of power politics more than ethical concerns and are matters about 
which the general population remains less informed.
 
Sheer numbers of adherents by themselves do not necessar-
ily present an accurate measure of the inﬂ uence a denomination 
has on public policy. As noted in Chapter 1, the Episcopal Church 
traditionally exercised far greater inﬂ uence on public policy than 
the numbers of its lay membership might suggest. At least three 
other factors affect the inﬂ uence that a given denomination might 
have. First, the intensity with which the membership holds the 
beliefs and values of the church may contribute to the denom-
ination’s impact on the policy-making process. Associated with 
intensity is the extent to which the membership is in agreement 
with the clergy about the social, economic, and political objectives 
of the church. If the membership is deeply divided, the church 
leadership cannot be as persuasive in the public arena. Finally, the 
prestige that the leadership and individual members enjoy in the 
larger community can add to the church’s inﬂ uence. One measure 
of that prestige is the number of members who are serving as pub-
lic ofﬁ cials as well as the number of members who are engaged in 
prestigious professions.
Sexuality Issues 
within Denominations
Controversies within a denomination can diminish its potential 
inﬂ uence in the public arena. For instance, in the Catholic Church 
revelations of sexual abuse by priests of young boys over several 
years and reported attempts by church leaders to cover up the 
scandal have occupied much of the attention and resources of the 
church. The sexual abuse scandal surfaced in January 2002 when 
the Boston Globe began reporting on priests in the Boston area who 
had been charged with sexually molesting minors. Reportedly, 
the church hierarchy had avoided taking steps to end the abuse 
and had actually reassigned to other parishes those priests against 
whom complaints had been made, thus allowing them to continue 

the criminal behavior. The abuse scandals as well as the reports of 
homosexuality among priests appeared to have had an effect on 
church attendance and donations to the church. Gallup poll data 
indicate that by the end of 2002 Catholic Church attendance had 
suffered a 7 percent decline (Steinfels 2004, 41). The abuse scandal 
did not create, but did accelerate, trends such as the decline in 
church attendance, a reduction in the number of those choosing 
to enter the priesthood, and an increased willingness of church 
members to question the decisions of the denominational leader-
ship. Bishops were castigated for failing to act quickly to assist 
the victims of abuse or to prevent additional young people from 
becoming victims of abuse. Reports published in January 2003 
indicated that over the last sixty years, 4,268 people had charged 
1,205 priests with abuse (ibid., 45).
 
The case of Father John Geoghan placed in relief the dissatis-
faction that lay members had with the Catholic Church hierarchy. 
Although the archdiocese had been aware of Geoghan’s misdeeds, 
in 1984 Bernard Cardinal Law approved the priest as pastor of 
St. Julia’s parish, where he continued to molest children (Dreher 
2002, 27). Following complaints, Geoghan went into treatment 
once more, after which he returned to the parish and continued 
to molest children. In 1993 Geoghan assumed the chaplaincy of 
a nursing home but reportedly continued to sexually abuse chil-
dren. In 1998 Pope John Paul II ﬁ nally defrocked Geoghan, and 
the Catholic Church was forced to pay millions of dollars to settle 
civil suits related to his criminal conduct. In 2002 Geoghan was 
convicted of child molestation charges and in 2003 was killed by 
another inmate while serving his prison sentence.
 
Although lawsuits concerning the sexual misdeeds of clergy 
began in 1985, when a Louisiana priest was convicted of molest-
ing several boys in the Diocese of Lafayette, the church leadership 
failed to respond quickly to claims of sexual abuse. Following the 
Louisiana case, Reverend Thomas Doyle, a canon lawyer, coau-
thored a report warning that other cases would likely come to the 
surface, that the bishops needed to act quickly, and that traditional 
methods of treating child molesters did not achieve satisfactory 
results. The bishops failed to act on the recommendations (ibid., 
28). The ultimate costs of settling lawsuits proved staggering, 
with an estimated $1 billion paid to plaintiffs since 1950 (Hous-
ton Chronicle 2005a). In 2003 the Archdiocese of Boston reached 
a legal settlement with 552 people, agreeing to pay $85 million, 
Sexuality Issues within Denominations 37

38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
and the Diocese of Orange, California, agreed to pay $100 million 
to 90 abuse victims. In July 2005 the Diocese of Covington, Ken-
tucky, paid $120 million to hundreds of victims (Houston Chroni-
cle 2005b). The Diocese of Portland, Oregon, which had ﬁ led for 
bankruptcy, confronted abuse claims of more than $500 million, 
and the Archdiocese of Los Angeles faced settlements with vic-
tims for an equivalent amount. In July 2005 Voice of the Faithful, 
a Catholic lay reform group, estimated that sexual abuse lawsuits 
ultimately could cost Catholic dioceses between $2 and $3 billion 
(Kusmer 2005).
 
Various reasons have been suggested for the lack of effective 
action to stem the tide of abuse. First, even though bishops have sig-
niﬁ cant authority within the church hierarchy, church law prevents 
them from acting quickly to deal with priests accused of such mis-
deeds. Second, the Vatican likely chooses as bishops those priests 
who have developed a reputation for acting cautiously. Third, con-
temporary bishops came of age from the 1940s to the 1960s, when 
the church hierarchy was more rigid and before social attitudes had 
begun to change signiﬁ cantly. At the same time that the news media 
began to report revelations of child molestation by priests, additional 
stories came to light claiming the existence of a network of homosex-
uals in Catholic seminaries (Dreher 2002, 30). Although there is no 
necessary relationship between homosexuality and child molesta-
tion, the additional accounts lead more people to question the church 
leadership. In November 2005 the Vatican issued a decree, approved 
by Pope Benedict XVI, stating that men who practice homosexual-
ity, have “deeply rooted” homosexual tendencies, or support the 
“gay culture” should not be admitted to seminary. Estimates place 
the proportion of priests who are gay anywhere from 10 percent to 
50 percent (Ostling 2005, A6). To the extent that lay Catholics have 
challenged the authority of individual bishops and the United States 
Conference of Catholic Bishops, the ability of church leaders to inﬂ u-
ence public policy also may have been weakened.
 
The Episcopal Church also has faced internal controversy over 
sex-related issues. At the beginning of 2003 Episcopal clergy and 
laypeople, preparing for the triennial General Convention, faced 
the issue of blessing same-gender unions. Some more liberal bish-
ops were already allowing the ordination of gay priests and ceremo-
nies to bless same-gender unions. At the 2000 General Convention, 
the clergy and lay delegates had narrowly defeated a proposal to 
approve such blessings. In June 2003 clergy and lay delegates to a 

convention in the New Hampshire Diocese elected V. Gene Robin-
son, an openly gay priest, as bishop. Conservative Episcopalians in 
the United States and Anglicans around the world condemned the 
election as contrary to scripture as well as to denomination policy. 
The Lambeth Conference in 1998, a gathering of the primates of 
the Anglican Provinces occurring every ten years, had passed a 
resolution stating that homosexual practices were “incompatible 
with scripture” (Bates 2005, 6). Although conference resolutions are 
not considered binding on the member provinces, conservatives 
embraced the statement on homosexuality as mandatory policy. At 
the Episcopal Church General Convention in August 2003, both the 
House of Deputies and the House of Bishops approved Robinson’s 
election. The convention also approved a measure stating that a 
diocese wishing to do so could conduct same-gender blessings 
without violating church doctrine.
 
In response to the strong criticism of the actions that the Epis-
copal Church had taken in electing a gay bishop, the Archbishop 
of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, called a meeting of the Anglican 
primates at Lambeth in October 2003. In the United States, approx-
imately 2,700 Episcopalians who objected to the gay bishop met in 
Dallas in October and asked Williams to discipline the Episcopal 
Church, even though each Anglican province is self-governing and 
the Archbishop of Canterbury does not have the authority to sanc-
tion a member church (Kirkpatrick 2003, 3). At the Lambeth meet-
ing, primates signed a statement warning that Robinson’s ﬁ nal 
consecration as bishop could jeopardize the future of the Angli-
can Communion. Many in the United States speculated about the 
ultimate consequences, including the possible defection of con-
servative Episcopalians from the church and reductions in contri-
butions, which could limit the ability of the Episcopal Church to 
fund social services and missions. The controversy raised anew 
conﬂ icting interpretations of the Bible as well as the status of scrip-
ture in Christian belief. More liberal scholars noted that the Bible 
approved of slavery and polygamy and condemned divorce. The 
church has accepted contemporary attitudes on such issues, so 
should not the church accept changing perspectives on human 
sexuality? On the other hand, conservatives insisted on adhering 
to the Bible’s condemnation of homosexual behavior, quoting from 
the Book of Romans (1:26–27): “For this reason God gave them up 
to degrading passions. Their women exchanged natural inter-
course for unnatural, and in the same way also the men, giving 
Sexuality Issues within Denominations 39

40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
up natural intercourse with women, were consumed with passion 
for one another. Men committed shameless acts with men and 
received in their own persons the due penalty for their error.” 
 
Thirteen conservative bishops agreed to explore the possi-
bility of forming a new organization, the Network of Anglican 
Communion Dioceses and Parishes, and called for a constituting 
convention to be held in January 2004. The bishop of the Pitts-
burgh Diocese, Robert W. Duncan, agreed to serve as “modera-
tor and convening authority” (Houston Chronicle 2003). In January 
2004 the American Anglican Council sponsored the conference 
in Woodbridge, Virginia, where approximately 3,000 members 
examined possible actions that could be taken, including sepa-
ration from the Episcopal Church. Sessions of the conference 
discussed the development of parishes for the newly created 
network (Houston Chronicle 2004a). Adding to the tension within 
the church, in March 2004 six parishes collaborated in holding 
conﬁ rmation services for 110 young members conducted by ﬁ ve 
retired bishops and a Brazilian bishop without seeking authoriza-
tion from the Diocese of Ohio because the bishop had supported 
Robinson’s election. When the House of Bishops met in Navasota, 
Texas, that same month, some conservative bishops decided to 
boycott the meeting (Vara 2004a). V. Gene Robinson attended the 
meeting. The bishops attempted to ameliorate the controversy 
by offering an objecting parish a visiting conservative bishop to 
provide “pastoral oversight” if the parish and the bishop of the 
diocese fail to reach reconciliation of differences (Vara 2004b). The 
American Anglican Council responded to the proposal by calling 
it “woefully inadequate” (Houston Chronicle 2004b). At the meet-
ing, the bishops issued a statement criticizing the ﬁ ve retired bish-
ops who took part in conﬁ rmation services in Ohio.
 
In an effort to avoid division in the church, moderate and lib-
eral Episcopal clergy and laypeople from predominantly conser-
vative dioceses in eight states met in late March 2004 in Atlanta to 
call for reconciliation (Weber 2004, 23A). As the debate continued, 
a panel in England attempting to heal the division in the Epis-
copal Church released a statement from U.S. Presiding Bishop 
Frank Griswold in which Griswold commented that Robinson’s 
ordination as bishop occurred after thirty-ﬁ ve years of discus-
sion within the church on homosexuality. He stated that cultural 
circumstances in the United States differ greatly from those that 
Anglicans face in other parts of the world. A representative of the 

American Anglican Council responded that Griswold’s letter rep-
resented a justiﬁ cation for sin and that the stated Episcopal policy 
contradicted scripture (Houston Chronicle 2004c).
 
In June 2004 the Anglican Church of Canada, at a national 
church meeting, weighed in on the issue, afﬁ rming the “integ-
rity and sanctity” of same-gender relationships. However, gay 
supporters were dissatisﬁ ed that no decision was made on the 
authorization for local dioceses to decide for themselves whether 
to institute blessing ceremonies for same-gender couples (Ostling 
2004). In July 2004 the Lambeth Commission, a group of seventeen 
Anglican Communion leaders working to draft an arrangement 
intended to preserve Anglican unity, continued to receive opin-
ions from various national churches and other groups, including 
the Network of Anglican Communion Dioceses and Parishes, 
which requested that the Episcopal Church be disciplined in order 
to return it to the Anglican fold and that standards for Anglican 
membership be deﬁ ned (Houston Chronicle 2004d). In February 
2005 Anglican primates announced that, due to disagreements 
within the Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Can-
ada, those churches were being asked to withdraw temporarily 
from the Anglican Consultative Council, a representative advi-
sory group composed of bishops, clergy, and laypeople chosen 
by member churches of the Anglican Communion. The Consul-
tative Council, with the Archbishop of Canterbury as president, 
provides guidance to the communion on mission and interchurch 
relations (Barr 2005, A19; Wall 2000, 8).
 
In January 2006, as the Episcopal Church prepared for the 
2006 triennial General Convention in Columbus, Ohio, a church 
nominating committee announced the names of four candidates for 
the position of presiding bishop, succeeding Frank Griswold. Three 
of the four candidates had voted in favor of Robinson’s selection 
as bishop of the Diocese of New Hampshire. Conservative Episco-
pal spokespersons expressed their dissatisfaction with all four can-
didates, viewing each of them as failing to abide by the orthodox 
principles of the church (Vara 2006, A12). The personal pressures of 
the controversy within the church apparently had affected Bishop 
V. Gene Robinson, who announced in February 2006 that he had 
begun treatment for alcohol abuse (Ostling 2006, F4).
 
At the Episcopal Church General Convention in June 2006, del-
egates reluctantly approved a resolution requesting that dioceses 
avoid selecting actively gay bishops. Both liberal and conservative 
Sexuality Issues within Denominations 41

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
participants found fault with the resolution, which also did not 
appear to placate Anglican bishops in Africa and Asia. The con-
vention delegates selected as the denomination’s new presiding 
bishop Katharine Jefferts Schori, who had voted in favor of Rob-
inson’s ordination and had previously expressed her support for 
the blessing of same-gender unions. Conservative parishes and 
dioceses continued to explore the possibilities of disassociating 
from the Episcopal Church and afﬁ liating with another province 
within the Anglican Communion. In February 2007, Anglican pri-
mates from thirty-eight national churches in the Anglican Com-
munion, meeting in Tanzania, called on the U.S. Episcopal Church 
to agree not to sanction the blessing of same-gender unions and 
not to approve any candidate for bishop who is involved in a 
same-gender relationship (Vara 2007). The primates set a Septem-
ber 30, 2007, deadline for meeting their demands. 
The following month Episcopal bishops, meeting in Navasota, 
Texas, rejected the demands of the Anglican primates, including 
the proposal to form a pastoral council to supervise conserva-
tive congregations in the United States. Bishop Don Wimberly of 
Houston announced that, instead of accepting a pastoral council, 
the presiding bishop could appoint a “primatial vicar” to over-
see conservative churches. The bishops emphasized continuing 
discussion, announcing that they would listen to the concerns of 
church members and meet again in September (Karkabi 2007). The 
ultimate fate of the church in the United States, once so prominent 
in the American political establishment, remains in doubt.
 
Other mainline denominations also face sexuality issues. In 
2004 a court of thirteen United Methodist Church (UMC) pastors 
at the Paciﬁ c Northwest Annual Conference meeting in Bothell, 
Washington, held a trial for Karen Dammann, who was charged 
with violating church law by openly declaring that she was a lesbian 
living in a homosexual relationship with another woman. UMC 
law prohibits the ordination of “self-avowed practicing homosexu-
als” (Mitchell 2004, 9A). The trial court ultimately acquitted Dam-
mann of the charges, announcing that the church failed to present 
convincing evidence to support the charge. The acquittal led to 
controversy at the subsequent UMC General Conference in April. 
The disagreement over sexuality was seen as symptomatic of the 
ﬁ nancial and membership difﬁ culties the church faced, including 
a decline in membership from 10.7 million in 1965 to 8.3 million 

in 2004 (Vara 2004c, 1E). The General Council voted 551–345 to 
have the denomination’s Judicial Council review the Dammann 
case. Although the court subsequently ruled that it did not have 
the authority to review the acquittal ruling, the delegates voted 
to maintain the church’s position regarding the incompatibility 
of homosexuality and orthodox Christian teachings (Vara 2004d, 
4A). The council overwhelmingly approved a unity resolution 
that appeared to overcome possible divisions in the denomina-
tion resulting from the sexuality controversy. However, the Rev-
erend William Hinson, president of the Confessing Movement, a 
dissident conservative group, expressed his preference for biblical 
truth over denominational unity (Houston Chronicle 2004e).
 
The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), also facing declining 
membership, has confronted the issue of sexuality. In July 2004 
the denomination’s Legislative Assembly, by a narrow vote of 
259–255, rejected a proposal to allow regional church organi-
zations to ordain gay clergy and lay ofﬁ cers (Houston Chronicle 
2004f). In May 2004 the permanent judicial commission for the 
Ohio and Michigan Synod ruled that a minister who conducted 
marriage ceremonies for same-gender couples did not violate 
church law, even though the highest court of the church ruled 
in 2000 that blessing same-gender unions was allowed, but not 
marrying same-gender couples. In 2005, a regional judicial com-
mission in California acquitted another minister, Jane Spahr, who 
had conducted same-gender marriages, stating that the minister’s 
actions accorded with the “normative standards of the region in 
which she served” (Leff 2006, F4).
 
The extent to which the controversies over sexuality issues 
threaten the unity of these mainline denominations remains 
uncertain. However, it appears that such conﬂ icts have consumed 
the time, effort, and resources of those on both sides of the issue. 
To that extent, the denominations have been less able to focus 
on the policy issues that traditionally have informed their mis-
sion in the larger society. Although the denominations, especially 
the larger ones, have extensive bureaucracies to administer their 
programs, the possible reduction in resources due to members 
withholding contributions can restrict the effectiveness of their 
actions. An examination of the various areas of public policy in 
which mainline denominations engage will provide a perspective 
on their importance as well as further indication of the potential 
signiﬁ cance of internal divisions.
Sexuality Issues within Denominations 43

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Capital Punishment
The leadership of all of the nine mainline denominations under 
discussion have taken public stands against the death penalty. 
However, although the clergy and lay leadership wish to per-
suade the membership regarding the nature of the death penalty, 
given the strong support for the death penalty in the general pop-
ulation, they ultimately may not express the views of parishio-
ners. The Catholic Church afﬁ rms a doctrine of the sanctity of life 
that calls into question the use of the death penalty. The United 
States Conference of Catholic Bishops maintains a highly consis-
tent policy, opposing any course of action that intentionally leads 
to the death of a human being, including abortion and euthana-
sia as well as the death penalty. The bishops have questioned the 
argument that the death penalty has a deterrent effect, preventing 
others from committing similar crimes. They also reject the death 
penalty as a form of retributive justice. The bishops advocate abo-
lition as a means of ending what they consider a cycle of violence 
in American society, an expression of a belief in the worth of each 
individual from conception, a recognition that human life at every 
stage is sacred, and a course of action in accord with the example 
of Jesus (Overberg 2005).
 
In 2000 the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.) declared its continuing opposition to capital punishment 
and called for a moratorium on executions by the national gov-
ernment and all states that have instituted the death penalty. The 
General Assembly directed the stated clerk to present to the presi-
dent of the United States, members of Congress, and the gover-
nors and legislators of the thirty-eight states that impose the death 
penalty the call for a moratorium. The assembly noted that states 
had imposed the death penalty disproportionately on minority 
defendants and that all states have failed to meet American Bar 
Association standards for providing counsel for indigent prison-
ers. The resolution declared that in a representative democracy, 
the death penalty makes citizens executioners (PCUSA General 
Assembly 2000).
 
In a resolution adopted in 2003, the General Assembly of the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) (CCDC) declared that the 
death penalty is “contrary to God’s passion for justice.” As did 
other denominations, the CCDC noted the disproportionate num-
bers of poor and minority group members who are executed and 

claimed that such people receive inadequate legal defense. They 
asserted that the death penalty has not reduced the rate of crime. 
The resolution called for the elimination of the death penalty in 
the United States and encouraged church members and congre-
gations to campaign for the abolition of the death penalty and 
to establish ministries to assist those who have lost loved ones 
to violent criminal acts as well as families of those sentenced to 
death (CCDC 2003).
 
The General Conference of the United Methodist Church has 
adopted several resolutions expressing the denomination’s oppo-
sition to capital punishment. Church leaders have declared that 
they reject retribution and vengeance as reasons for taking human 
life, stating that capital punishment violates belief in God as the 
creator and redeemer of humankind. The General Conference 
called on church members to communicate with state governors 
and state and federal representatives to make known their oppo-
sition to capital punishment, and it has called for an immediate 
moratorium on executions (McAnally 2006).
 
The General Synod of the Reformed Church in America has 
expressed the denomination’s opposition to capital punishment, 
stating that the death penalty has unsubstantiated deterrent value; 
is “an uneven and unfair instrument of justice,” having been 
applied in a racially discriminatory way; and is subject to mistakes 
that cannot be undone. Foremost among the reasons for opposing 
the death penalty is the church’s stated objection that the punish-
ment fails to coincide with “the spirit of Christ and the ethic of 
love.” The General Synod has declared the death penalty to con-
tradict the Old Testament as well as the New Testament in that the 
punishment fails to address broader inequalities in society and has 
been applied more heavily on the poor and powerless. Unlike self-
defense, which could justify killing, the General Synod rejected 
the application of the death penalty against people who are in cus-
tody, and therefore do not threaten others. (RCA 1999).
Embryonic Stem-Cell Research
In August 2001 President George W. Bush announced his deci-
sion to allow limited national government funding of embryonic 
stem-cell research. The funding would be restricted to sixty-four 
lines of human embryonic stem cells, which originated from in 
Embryonic Stem-Cell Research 45

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
vitro fertilization clinics. Many Americans have a highly per-
sonal interest in stem-cell research, given the occurrence within 
the population of various diseases, such as Parkinson’s, Alzheim-
er’s, diabetes, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), as well as 
spinal cord injuries, stroke, cancer, and heart disease, for which 
stem-cell research might result in effective treatments. Although 
all denominations that responded to President Bush’s decision as 
well as to the prospects of stem-cell research expressed concern 
for maintaining ethical guidelines, some were more willing to 
support such research. The policy-making bodies in the denomi-
nations made their policy recommendations based largely on the 
same biblical foundation, but came to differing conclusions.
 
Bishop Joseph A. Firoenza, the president of the United States 
Conference of Catholic Bishops, responded most negatively, 
referring to President Bush’s decision as “morally unacceptable” 
(Shannon 2002). The pope and bishops have consistently held that 
the human embryo should be valued and treated as a person from 
the instant of fertilization and hence deserves absolute respect and 
protection. In other words, one human being (an embryo) can-
not be killed in order to achieve beneﬁ ts for other human beings. 
Assuming that many of the health problems for which stem-cell 
research would provide remedies are preventable, Catholics have 
suggested that, instead of concentrating limited public funds on 
highly expensive research that only the wealthier members of 
society can afford, resources should be devoted to policies that 
encourage behavior leading to the avoidance of diseases that 
many now face. Other mainline denominations, while expressing 
caution about the use of embryos in research, tended to express 
support for such research as holding promise for ameliorating 
human suffering and for saving lives that presently are being lost 
to incurable diseases.
 
The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) (PCUSA), in a resolution 
approved at the 2001 General Assembly noting that as Christians, 
church members are to assist in easing human suffering, afﬁ rmed 
that, with strict regulation, human embryonic stem cells should be 
used for research that could culminate in procedures to treat suc-
cessfully those suffering from severe illness (Race 2005). The reso-
lution distinguished between two sources of stem cells: aborted 
fetuses and early-stage embryos remaining from the process of in 
vitro fertilization. Although the use of tissue from fetuses is mor-
ally acceptable, assuming that the woman’s decision to undergo 

an abortion is independent of the decision to donate fetal tissue 
for research, the resolution noted moral questions uniquely raised 
in the instance of stem cells. Unlike an aborted fetus, researchers 
must terminate the life of embryonic tissue for the conscious pur-
pose of employing the tissue in research. As living tissue, human 
embryos have the potential of personhood. However, the respect 
for human embryos can be balanced against the potential for alle-
viating the suffering of many others. Therefore, research should 
be limited to embryos that will not be used in fertility treatments 
and will not be donated to other women. The General Assembly 
recommended strict regulation of any use of human embryos in 
the conduct of stem-cell research, including the prohibition of 
selling embryonic tissue. The PCUSA subsequently supported 
legislation proposed in Congress to extend national government 
ﬁ nancial support of stem-cell research.
 
The delegates to the 2001 General Synod of the United Church 
of Christ (UCC), noting the potential for developing treatments 
for serious diseases, called for national government funding of 
embryonic stem-cell research. The delegates noted that in 2001 
there were approximately 25,000 frozen embryos at in vitro fer-
tilization clinics that would likely be discarded and that the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) had established guidelines for 
national government funding of stem-cell research, including the 
use of frozen human embryos resulting from in vitro fertilization 
that would be discarded following treatment. In the resolution, 
delegates noted that banning research would preclude the possi-
bility of improving the lives of people now living. The resolution 
directed the general minister and president of the UCC to send a 
letter to President Bush, urging him to approve federal funding 
for embryonic stem-cell research within the guidelines that the 
NIH had established (Kershner 2001).
 
Deputies at the 2003 General Convention of the Episco-
pal Church approved a resolution urging the U.S. Congress to 
approve funding for research on embryonic stem cells that have 
resulted from in vitro fertilization. The resolution included four 
basic restrictions that should be placed on such research. First, the 
embryos to be used in research should no longer be required in the 
in vitro fertilization process and would otherwise be disposed of; 
second, those donating embryos consent to their use in research; 
third, the original purpose for creating the embryos was not to con-
duct research; and fourth, acquisition of the embryos did not result 
Embryonic Stem-Cell Research 47

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
from a commercial agreement (Thompson 2003). During debate on 
the resolution in the House of Deputies, some expressed their oppo-
sition, demonstrating that basic questions of ethics and morality 
still remained. Some questioned the morality of creating embryos, 
knowing that they ultimately will be destroyed, and others recom-
mended that unused embryos should be adopted for ultimate use 
by infertile women. Others claimed that the potential beneﬁ t of 
stem-cell research had been exaggerated and that, in any event, no 
human life (embryo) should be sacriﬁ ced to beneﬁ t others.
 
The United Methodist Church has gone on record calling for 
a ban on research that “generates waste embryos” (Bloom 2001). 
Following President Bush’s announced policy regarding stem-cell 
research, James Winkler, general secretary of the General Board 
of Church and Society, stated that the members of the board were 
pleased with the limitation on national government funding of 
embryonic stem-cell research. Prior to Bush’s announcement, 
Winkler had written to the president, urging him to establish a 
moratorium on funding research. Winkler opposed the destruc-
tion of human embryos in conducting research that he claimed 
showed little evidence of potential success in treating disease. 
Such destruction, he stated, raised serious moral and ethical ques-
tions. In 2004 delegates to the General Conference approved a 
resolution declaring that no more embryos than necessary should 
be created for reproductive purposes. However, delegates also 
expressed support for those who wish to donate early embryos 
remaining after the conclusion of in vitro fertilization, and called 
on the federal government to grant funding for research on such 
embryonic stem cells.
End-of-Life Decisions 
and the Right to Die
Terri Schiavo, the woman in a vegetative state for more than thir-
teen years who died in March 2005 after her husband Michael 
won a court battle against the woman’s parents to have her feed-
ing tube removed, raised anew difﬁ cult moral and ethical ques-
tions regarding end-of-life decisions and the right to die. The mass 
media followed the controversy closely, and people on both sides 
of the issue avidly stated their views. More conservative Christian 

leaders almost unanimously opposed the decision to allow Terri 
Schiavo to die. For instance, James Dobson, Focus on the Family 
founder, stated that “All human life is of value, regardless of the 
human’s stage of development, level of health, or ability” (Gilgoff 
2005, 16). Evangelicals and Catholics embraced the Schiavo case 
as an important instance of the battle between those who advo-
cate the “quality of life” and those who champion the “sanctity 
of life.” Undoubtedly, evangelical and Catholic spokespersons 
tended to identify the question of whether to allow Terri Schiavo 
to die with the issue of abortion. A strong stand on the abortion 
issue appeared to mandate an equally strong position on main-
taining Terri’s life.
 
Mainline denominations, which tend to perceive more com-
plex questions in end-of-life decisions, remained on the edge of 
the conﬂ ict. Two fundamental empirical questions were debated: 
ﬁ rst, did Terri have any level of consciousness at all, and second, 
had Terri conﬁ ded in her husband prior to her disability that she 
would not want to be kept alive in a vegetative state? Beyond 
these empirical questions, spokespersons stated varying positions 
regarding the preservation of life in circumstances of extreme 
disability. When Terri’s feeding tube was removed for the last 
time, conservative Christians appeared to object on a number of 
grounds, including the possibility that Terri did have some level 
of consciousness, that her condition might not be irreversible, that 
she might experience severe pain through starvation, and that the 
decision represented the crass view of the value of life dominant 
in modern society. Reverend Larry Hollon, general secretary of 
United Methodist Communications, the ofﬁ cial communications 
agency of the UMC, expressed his personal reaction to the inter-
vention of the U.S. Congress in the Schiavo case. Hollon, who had 
faced a similarly difﬁ cult circumstance, described the death of his 
ﬁ fteen-year-old son and responded to comments that then–House 
majority leader Tom DeLay had made: “The kindest, most lov-
ing thing [family members] can do may be to allow their loved 
one to die naturally without intervening, but Rep. DeLay has 
framed this as a barbaric act” (Hollon 2005). This retort undoubt-
edly expressed the view of many laypeople in mainline as well 
as evangelical denominations. Eighty-two percent of those inter-
viewed in a CBS News poll agreed that Congress and the presi-
dent should not become involved in the Schiavo matter, and 75 
percent of respondents in an ABC News poll indicated that they 
End-of-Life Decisions and the Right to Die 49

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
believed Congress had acted for political reasons in intervening in 
the case (ibid., 21).
 
Prior to the Schiavo case, many of the mainline denomina-
tions attempted to confront the often difﬁ cult end-of-life ques-
tions that many families must ultimately face, questions that 
involve the value of an individual human life, individual rights 
and freedom, perceptions of suffering, and religious beliefs about 
the person’s duties to God.
 
The leadership in mainline denominations generally have 
taken a cautious position on end-of-life issues, calling for further 
investigations of the difﬁ cult topic. Delegates to the 2002 Gen-
eral Assembly of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) requested that 
the assembly form a special committee to investigate the Chris-
tian and Reformed view of human life, including such practices 
as euthanasia and assisted suicide. Delegates hoped that such a 
study would provide a perspective different from current secular 
cultural standards.
 
In 1991 delegates at the General Convention of the Episcopal 
Church approved a resolution, “Establish Principles with Regard 
to the Prolongation of Life,” that expressed basic values regarding 
end-of-life decisions. The resolution declared morally wrong the 
intentional taking of a human life for the purpose of ending suf-
fering due to an incurable illness. However, the administration of 
drugs to relieve the pain of individuals suffering from incurable 
illnesses, even if those responsible for such administration know 
that it may bring death more quickly, does not violate the prin-
ciple of the sanctity of life. In addition, extraordinary measures 
to prolong the life of someone who has no reasonable chance of 
recovery may be withheld. In such circumstances, the counsel of 
others in the church community should be sought in determining 
whether to withhold artiﬁ cial life support, including water and 
nutrition. Any federal or state legislation should take into account 
the rights of individuals and should provide for the withholding 
of extraordinary life support technology. The resolution urged 
church members to make advance provision through a living will 
stating the individual’s wishes regarding the use of life support 
systems (Episcopal Church 2005).
 
In 1977 the Task Force on Ethical Issues in Human Medicine 
of the American Lutheran Church, prior to the church’s merger 
with other Lutheran denominations in 1988, issued a statement on 
facing death. The task force concluded that when death is “judged 

to be certain and imminent,” it would be unjust to the person to 
employ “extraordinary technology.” The continuation of artiﬁ cial 
life support depends on the conscious choice of the individual. 
The task force distinguished between meaningful pain, called 
“redemptive suffering,” and “the dehumanizing and mindless 
suffering of the artiﬁ cially-maintained terminally ill.” However, 
actions taken to cause death are wrong and impermissible. The 
task force afﬁ rmed a moral distinction between taking steps to 
end a person’s life and allowing a person to die. Underlying these 
principles, the task force noted that the Christian faith includes 
a duty to preserve health, but that life is not an absolute value. 
Death, when it comes, should be accepted in “the hope of the res-
urrection” (Journal of Lutheran Ethics 2006).
 
In 1994 the Commission on Christian Action of the Reformed 
Church in America, in response to Oregon’s Death with Dig-
nity law as well as physician Jack Kevorkian’s practice of assist-
ing terminally ill patients to commit suicide, issued a report on 
physician-assisted suicide. The commission stated the belief that 
Christians do not belong to themselves, but are stewards of a gift 
from God. Therefore, a decision to take action to end one’s life 
amounts to denying that the person belongs to God. The individ-
ual who suffers physical pain expresses “deep moral courage,” 
and the Christian community has the obligation to provide sup-
port for the sufferer and for those providing care. The commission 
recognized a dilemma—called the principle of double effect—in 
providing medication to relieve pain. The medication can relieve 
suffering but also may lead to the death of the patient. The com-
mission listed four criteria. First, the caregiver must intend the 
good effect of relieving pain, not the bad one of bringing about 
death. Second, the action must be good or, at minimum, “morally 
indifferent.” Third, the good result must not come from an evil 
action. Finally, the good that results must exceed any evil. In addi-
tion to these standards, the physician must inform the patient of 
the possible bad consequences of the medication (RCA 1994).
 
Mainline denominations have wrestled with the various 
end-of-life issues that become more complex as medical tech-
nology continues to advance. Questions about which medical 
procedures amount to “extraordinary treatment,” determining 
an unambiguous deﬁ nition of when death occurs, and what 
ultimately con stitute morally correct actions add to the intrica-
cies of the subject. The mainline denominations have asked for 
End-of-Life Decisions and the Right to Die 51

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
input from lay members, an important element in a commitment 
to democratic decision making. Such a process may encourage 
differing perspectives but also may lead some, who have strong 
views about the uncompromising nature of God’s commands, to 
object to what appears to be a relativistic stance of their denomi-
nation more characteristic of the secular culture than a group obe-
dient to God.
Faith-Based Initiative
Mainline Protestant denominations traditionally have supported 
the separation of church and state. Any interaction between 
churches and government to achieve a public good should be 
buffered by intermediate organizations such as Lutheran Social 
Services, an arm of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America 
and the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, and Catholic Chari-
ties. In 1996, as part of welfare reform legislation, the Personal 
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, Con-
gress initiated charitable choice. This legislation mandated that 
national government ofﬁ cials provide religious organizations with 
the same opportunity to receive government funding as secular 
nonproﬁ t organizations. Faith-based organizations that obtained 
government funding received protection of their religious char-
acter and mission. Government-funded religious groups were 
required to honor the religious liberty of clients, and funds could 
not be used to support such religious activities as worship or 
proselytization (Ryden and Polet 2005, 2). However, President Bill 
Clinton’s administration did not push for the implementation of 
the new program, and few state ofﬁ cials received adequate infor-
mation that would have allowed them to take advantage of chari-
table choice.
 
Soon after George W. Bush assumed the presidency in Janu-
ary 2001, he established the White House Ofﬁ ce of Faith-Based 
and Community Initiatives in addition to faith-based centers in 
the departments of Justice, Education, Health and Human Ser-
vices, Housing and Urban Development, and Labor (ibid., 3). 
The Bush administration then introduced legislation in Congress 
that would expand protections for faith-based organizations 
under charitable choice and provide tax incentives to encour-
age donations to religious groups engaged in charitable activi-

ties. However, when Congress failed to approve his proposals, 
President Bush announced in December 2002 executive orders 
that allowed the administration to implement policies geared to 
permit the national government to issue contracts that provide 
funding to faith-based organizations. The executive orders added 
two additional faith-based centers in the Department of Agri-
culture and the U.S. Agency for International Development and 
mandated that the seven faith-based ofﬁ ces in the various agen-
cies inspect their departments’ rules for any policies that might 
impede the issuance of contracts to faith-based groups; set aside 
funds for religious groups that applied for grants; and establish 
additional protections for the religious integrity of faith-based 
groups, including hiring rights. During ﬁ scal year 2003 national 
government agencies dispensed more than $1 billion to religious 
nonproﬁ t organizations, indicating that the Bush administration 
strategy of implementing faith-based funding via executive order 
had achieved some success (ibid., 4).
 
The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB) 
strongly supported President Bush’s faith-based initiative, but it 
expressed special concern over the hiring of staff for charitable 
activities funded by the federal government. The bishops wished 
to maintain control of employment decisions, taking into account 
the religious beliefs of potential employees. The bishops have 
opposed any provisions within proposed legislation that would 
limit the ability of religious organizations to hire those who share 
the religious values of the organization (USCCB 2005). This policy 
issue had become controversial in Congress. Those members of 
Congress more skeptical of the faith-based initiative expressed 
concern that religious groups receiving federal funding may use 
discriminatory hiring practices. Although Title VII of the Civil 
Rights Act  of 1972 permitted religious groups to use religious 
beliefs as a criterion in making hiring decisions, legislation autho-
rizing some social programs prohibits organizations that receive 
federal funding from discriminating against prospective employ-
ees on the basis of age, gender, race, or religion (Allen and Cooper-
man 2003, 14). Any religious group receiving government funding 
potentially faces a conﬂ ict between the group’s wish to maintain 
basic moral values and the larger social value of avoiding dis-
crimination. The USCCB strongly supported passage of the Char-
ity Aid, Recovery and Empowerment Act (CARE), which would 
provide additional funding in the Social Services Block Grant for 
Faith-Based Initiative 53

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
charities, both faith based and secular. The legislation also would 
allow non-itemizers who make charitable contributions to take a 
tax deduction and would create a Compassion Capital Fund to 
provide faith-based and community organizations with technical 
assistance (USCCB 2005).
 
In 2001 the Executive Council of the Episcopal Church, not-
ing that the church traditionally had received public funding, sup-
ported the new faith-based initiative but urged the establishment 
of safeguards to ensure the separation of church and state. Unlike 
the USCCB, the Episcopal Church’s Executive Council conditioned 
support for the program on eliminating any preference given to 
an employee or job applicant based on religious belief, national 
origin, sexual orientation, age, sex, or disability. The council also 
stated that recipients of assistance should not be required to engage 
in any religious activities as a condition for receiving services. 
With those conditions, the council resolved that governments be 
urged to increase assistance to faith-based and community service 
groups and that organizations within the Episcopal Church inves-
tigate the possibility of separate incorporation in order to distin-
guish more clearly between the delivery of social services and the 
religious mission of the church (Episcopal Church 2001).
 
After Congress initially passed legislation establishing a 
program of charitable choice in 1996, the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.) conducted a sample survey of church members, elders, 
pastors, and specialized clergy. Majorities of these constituen-
cies of the PCUSA stated that they did not believe that charitable 
choice threatened the principle of separation of church and state. 
Those questioned tended to believe that the provision of assis-
tance to the poor offers an opportunity to the church to share the 
gospel message. The surveyed group also thought that charitable 
choice could beneﬁ t the ﬁ nancial circumstances of the church. 
However, respondents expressed concern that accepting govern-
ment funding could lead to government regulation of faith-based 
organizations (Markum 2002).
 
Following passage of the 1996 legislation establishing chari-
table choice policy, members of the Board of Church and Soci-
ety of the United Methodist Church issued a statement declaring 
that the program violated the establishment clause of the First 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. James Winkler, chief execu-
tive of the board, suggested that existing safeguards, including 
churches establishing separate corporations for the receipt and 

use of public funding, be enforced in order to prevent govern-
ment regulation and inspection of church affairs. The 2000 UMC 
General Conference approved a resolution establishing criteria 
for the church groups receiving government funds. The resolu-
tion recommended that services provided should (1) contribute 
to meeting genuine need in the community; (2) avoid serving a 
religious purpose; (3) not discriminate on the basis of race, reli-
gious belief, or political preference; and (4) meet professional and 
administrative standards. Following President Bush’s proposal to 
expand faith-based funding, three UMC agencies—the Board of 
Global Ministries, the General Council on Finance and Adminis-
tration, and the Board of Church and Society—produced a guide 
to explain to local churches and other church organizations the 
purpose and requirements of faith-based funding.
 
In 2001 the presiding bishop of the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America, George Anderson, heading a denomination 
that traditionally has accepted government funding for the pro-
vision of social services, raised questions regarding the proposed 
faith-based initiative. His concerns were that such funding should 
not adversely affect the identity of religious groups; any funds 
received from governments should be used for a social beneﬁ t that 
serves the entire community; and the funding should not substitute 
for government programs aimed at the general welfare. Anderson 
raised concerns about possible limitations on a religious organiza-
tion’s freedom to hire employees and the potential need for addi-
tional staff that individual religious organizations may face in order 
to deal with regulations and paperwork (Anderson 2001).
Immigration
Mainline Christian denominations express an openness to immi-
gration of people from other countries and a willingness to help 
them to succeed in the United States. In justifying a humane 
immigration policy, members note a fundamental Christian value 
that strangers be made welcome. They cite scripture in support of 
this position. In the Old Testament Book of Leviticus (19:33–34), 
God tells the Jewish people, “When an alien resides with you in 
your land, you shall not oppress the alien. The alien who resides 
with you shall be to you as the citizen among you; you shall love 
the alien as yourself, for you were aliens in the land of Egypt: I 
Immigration 55

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
am the Lord your God.” In the New Testament Book of Matthew 
(25:35–36), Jesus proclaims, “for I was hungry and you gave me 
food, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a 
stranger and you welcomed me, I was naked and you gave me 
clothing, I was sick and you took care of me, I was in prison and 
you visited me.” Therefore, welcoming and assisting immigrants 
is considered a biblical mandate.
 
After the U.S. House of Representatives approved the Border 
Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal Immigration Control Act 
of 2005 (House Resolution 4437), Cardinal Roger Mahony of the 
Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles declared the legislation an 
attack on immigrants and those who might offer them assistance. 
Mahony stated that the Catholic Church and other organizations 
would join together in an effort to protect “the rights of all” by 
ultimately defeating the legislation (Muñoz 2006). For several 
years mainline denominations have taken a similar position on 
immigration. In 2005 a large number of national and local religious 
groups, including Catholic Charities USA, the Episcopal Church, 
the Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service, the stated clerk 
of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the United States Conference 
of Catholic Bishops, the General Board of Church and Society of 
the United Methodist Church, and the Wider Church Ministries of 
the United Church of Christ joined together in issuing a statement 
supporting comprehensive immigration reform. The religious 
groups noted the suffering that immigrant families endure when 
attempting to enter the United States and the exploitation they 
experience in the workplace, and advocated the establishment of 
a “safe and humane” immigration system that reﬂ ected Christian 
values (Institute on Religion and Public Policy 2005). The state-
ment urged public ofﬁ cials to approve legislation that would reg-
ularize the status of immigrants who satisfy “reasonable criteria” 
and allow them to enter a process of attaining lawful permanent 
resident status and ultimately U.S. citizenship. Further, legislation 
should reduce the time that separated family members must wait 
before they are reunited. In addition, legislation should provide 
for procedures for workers and their families wishing to migrate 
to the United States to work in legal and safe circumstances and 
have their rights protected. Finally, policies established to main-
tain border security should be informed by humanitarian values. 
The statement emphasized that public policy should respect the 
human dignity of persons.

 
The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA), in a 
statement on immigration policy, noted that U.S. history demon-
strates an unfortunate tendency to exclude newcomers who dif-
fer from those who have already established themselves in the 
country. The ELCA calls on Americans to welcome immigrants, 
refugees, and those seeking asylum and to recognize the oppor-
tunities they can offer present citizens to become aware of new 
perspectives and the gifts such people bring with them. The state-
ment claimed that the presence of new immigrants heightens 
understanding of the Christian belief that all people are God’s 
creation and that all have a responsibility to respect their human 
dignity (ELCA 2006). 
 
The 2004 General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.) approved a resolution recommended by the Advisory 
Committee on Social Witness Policy advocating the establish-
ment of a program for the legalization of undocumented persons 
in the United States. Immigration policy should provide for a 
more expeditious and humane process for family reuniﬁ cation. 
Exploitation of workers was declared a violation of just treatment 
that “all children of God” deserved. The resolution also called for 
the PCUSA to join with other faith-based and secular groups that 
are working to achieve the legalization of immigrants (PCUSA 
General Assembly 2004). When the immigration legislation came 
before the U.S. Congress in December 2005, Clifton Kirkpatrick, 
stated clerk of the PCUSA’s General Assembly, commented that 
the proposed legislation in Congress contradicted the intentions 
of the resolutions that the General Assembly had passed in 2004. 
Kirkpatrick interpreted the legislation as potentially making reli-
gious organizations and private citizens subject to criminal pros-
ecution for assisting undocumented immigrants. He commented 
that the legislation also would classify undocumented immigrants 
as “aggravated felons” subject to imprisonment and deportation 
without a hearing. In the context of the broader implications of the 
legislation, Kirkpatrick claimed that the new law could disrupt the 
U.S. economy by failing to establish procedures by which needed 
laborers could enter the country legally (Silverstein 2005).
 
The Reformed Church in America (RCA) also has taken stands 
over the years regarding the treatment of immigrants. In 1983 del-
egates to the General Synod approved resolutions calling on the 
U.S. Congress to enact legislation that includes “economically and 
racially just” policies regarding undocumented immigrants and 
Immigration 57

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
amnesty for undocumented aliens presently in the United States. 
The delegates called for strict enforcement of existing fair labor 
standards in order to eliminate the motivation to hire and exploit 
illegal aliens. The 1984 General Synod delegates noted that, given 
the denomination’s objective of developing congregations com-
posed of newly arrived Americans and biblical mandates such as 
Exodus 23:9 (“You shall not oppress a resident alien; you know 
the heart of an alien, for you were aliens in the land of Egypt”), 
they supported just immigration reform. In 1993 a report from the 
RCA’s Christian Action Commission, “Welcoming the Strangers in 
Our Midst,” emphasized “God’s special love for resident aliens” 
and the church’s mission of “welcoming strangers” through the 
formation of immigrant churches. In 1993 delegates to the General 
Synod passed resolutions to encourage citizenship classes in local 
congregations and to make available worship materials in vari-
ous languages. In 1995 the Christian Action Commission objected 
to the inclusion of provisions in the Republican Party’s Contract 
with America that would deny legal immigrants certain rights of 
U.S. citizenship (RCA 1995).
 
The Executive Council of the Episcopal Church, meeting in 
March 2006, called on church members to “follow the call of the 
Baptismal Covenant” in their ministry to illegal immigrants even 
though a proposed federal law might make such assistance a 
criminal act. The council strongly objected to legislation that could 
make illegal the actions of faith-based organizations following the 
biblical mandate to alleviate the suffering of illegal immigrants. 
The council interpreted the proposed legislation to mean that 
taking part in such activities as working in a soup kitchen could 
ﬁ t the deﬁ nition of “alien smuggling.” Bishop Jon Bruno of Los 
Angeles submitted a letter to the Los Angeles City Council decry-
ing what he considered an “irrational fear” within the nation that 
is leading to policies “reminiscent of the rounding-up of Japanese 
immigrants” during the Second World War. Bruno declared that 
the scriptures call on Christians to “embrace the strangers in our 
midst, for in them we see the face of Christ” (Schjonberg 2006). 
In March 2007 Alexia Salvatierra, executive director of Clergy 
and Laity United for Economic Justice and an ELCA pastor, 
announced that religious leaders from various denominations, 
including the Catholic, Lutheran, Methodist, and Presbyterian 
churches, were planning to revive the sanctuary movement to 

provide illegal immigrants with shelter and help them avoid 
depor tation (Prengaman 2007). 
Iraq War
By early 2006 support among the American public for the U.S. 
military intervention in Iraq had declined signiﬁ cantly as that 
country appeared to move ever closer to civil war between the 
Sunni and Shia populations. The initial rationale for the mili-
tary action, that Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein had been actively 
developing chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons—weapons 
of mass destruction—and that Iraq was a center for worldwide 
terrorist activity, had long ago lost credibility. As the insurgency 
developed momentum, the United States focused on restoring 
civil order, training Iraqis to take control of security operations, 
and molding democratic institutions and practices that would 
bridge the ethnic, cultural, and religious divisions within the 
country. The leadership of the mainline Christian denominations 
remained cautiously hopeful that the United States could attain 
such noble goals, but many expressed doubts about the practical-
ity of such objectives and the justice and morality of the military 
action and its consequences.
 
Prior to the U.S. invasion, spokespersons for these denomi-
nations advised the Bush administration against conducting a 
preemptive attack on another country. In September 2002 various 
religious leaders, including the moderator and the stated clerk of 
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the 
general secretary of the Reformed Church in America, the pre-
siding bishop of the Episcopal Church, the presiding bishop of 
the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the general minis-
ter and president of the United Church of Christ, the president 
of the Council on Christian Unity of the Christian Church (Dis-
ciples of Christ), and the general secretary of the General Board 
of Church and Society of the United Methodist Church signed a 
letter to President George W. Bush stating that, although Saddam 
Hussein remained a threat to his own people and Iraq’s neigh-
bors, engaging in preemptive military action was wrong on moral 
grounds and ultimately harmful to U.S. interests. The religious 
leaders declared that military action could result in many civilian 
Iraq War 59

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
deaths and injuries and suffering for huge numbers of innocent 
people. U.S. military action could destabilize the region and lead 
to increased militant activities in Arab and Islamic-majority coun-
tries. Instead of military action against Iraq, the religious leaders 
urged the president to focus attention on gaining a peace settle-
ment between Israel and the Palestinians (Churches for Middle 
East Peace 2002).
 
The concept of a just war informed the views of many reli-
gious leaders and laypeople. According to the principles of just war 
doctrine, in order to be considered just, a war can be fought only 
after all nonviolent avenues have been tried and the cause must be 
judged just; it must be fought by a legitimate authority, to right a 
wrong, and with a reasonable probability of success; the establish-
ment of a peaceful condition preferable to the situation prior to the 
war must be the likely outcome; the violence used should be pro-
portional to the objective of rectifying a wrong; and the weapons 
and tactics used must allow for the ability to distinguish between 
combatants and noncombatants. Bishop Wilton D. Gregory of the 
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops addressed a letter to 
President Bush in which the bishop, although noting that “people 
of good will” may come to differing judgments, raised serious ques-
tions regarding whether the proposed U.S. military action against 
Iraq would meet the requirements of the just war doctrine. Greg-
ory asked whether there existed “clear and adequate” evidence of 
a connection between the Iraqi regime and the suicide attacks of 
September 11, 2001, or of an impending attack. The bishop ques-
tioned whether the objective of limiting the proliferation of weap-
ons of mass destruction justiﬁ ed a preemptive military attack. With 
regard to a just war being fought by a legitimate authority, Gregory 
suggested the need for an international sanction, which would 
most clearly mean action by the United Nations Security Council. 
As for probability of success and proportionality, he feared that a 
war against Iraq could have unpredictable consequences for that 
nation and its civilian population as well as for the stability of the 
Middle East. Gregory urged the president to pursue alternatives to 
military action, including the resumption of weapons inspections, 
enforcement of a military embargo, and “carefully-focused” eco-
nomic sanctions (Gregory 2002).
 
Richard L. Hamm, general minister and president of the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), informed members of his 
denomination that he believed the United States had “squandered 

the good will that the world community felt toward the United 
States immediately after 9-11” because of the Bush administra-
tion’s policy of taking unilateral military action. Hamm claimed 
that many in other countries had come to view the United States 
as “arrogant and ignorant.” He viewed the issue to be primarily 
moral and ethical rather than political and urged fellow church 
members to pray for peace and to express their views to their rep-
resentatives in Congress and to the president (Hamm 2002).
 
The pleas of mainline religious leaders notwithstanding, the 
Bush administration initiated military action against Iraq in March 
2003. Religious groups then turned their attention to concern for 
the safety of U.S. military personnel and Iraqi civilians. Mark S. 
Hanson, presiding bishop of the Evangelical Lutheran Church 
in America, commented in April 2003 that the reconstruction of 
Iraq should include reestablishing “relationships between nations 
and the United Nations” and that U.S. objectives should focus 
on resolving the broader conﬂ icts in the Middle East (Hanson 
2003). More than a year later, in June 2004, Hanson reported that 
he had discussed Iraq with U.N. Secretary General Koﬁ  Annan. 
The bishop emphasized that the United Nations should play a 
signiﬁ cant role in moving from U.S. occupation to Iraqi self-
governance and that the United States must surrender leadership 
in the reconstruction of Iraq to the international community and 
the Iraqi people. Hanson expressed concern that the United States 
did not understand how its unilateral actions had adversely 
affected the way the nation was being perceived around the world 
(Hanson 2004).
 
In May 2004 the Council of Bishops of the United Methodist 
Church, noting the failure to determine the presence of weapons 
of mass destruction in Iraq as well as any connection between the 
Al Qaeda terrorist organization and the Saddam regime, approved 
a resolution deploring the continued military action by the United 
States and coalition forces, called on the U.S. government to ask 
the United Nations to take part in the transition to a new Iraqi 
government, recommended the creation of a multinational devel-
opment plan for rebuilding Iraq, and asked United Methodists 
to pray for peace and “advocate for public policies that promote 
justice, life, and reconciliation among adversaries” (UMC Council 
of Bishops 2004). In July 2004 the General Assembly of the PCUSA 
approved measures condemning U.S. preemptive military actions 
as ethically indefensible and contrary to just war doctrine. The 
Iraq War 61

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
assembly registered the concern of Presbyterians regarding the 
alleged abuse of prisoners in Iraq and at the Guantanamo prison 
facility (Smith 2004).
 
In 2006 Bishop Thomas Wenski, chairman of the Committee 
on International Policy, presented the United States Conference 
of Catholic Bishops’ position on the conﬂ ict in Iraq, noting that 
bishops had often communicated “grave moral concerns” about 
the U.S. military action in Iraq and the “unpredictable and uncon-
trollable negative consequences” of the operation. The bishops 
concluded that, based on available information, it was difﬁ cult 
to justify the use of military force in Iraq. Wenski advised that 
U.S. forces should stay in Iraq only until a “responsible transi-
tion” had occurred. In achieving the transition, the bishop stated 
that the United States must resist “excessive military responses” 
that can result in civilian casualties or the abuse of prisoners, reli-
gious freedom must be protected, the United States must coop-
erate with other nations in assisting refugees leaving Iraq, and 
public ofﬁ cials should not use the cost of the war to justify a fail-
ure to meet the needs of the poor in the United States and in other 
nations. The conference urged Congress to face these challenges 
of transition in Iraq and to deal with terrorism without depending 
only on military methods (USCCB 2006).
 
The efforts of mainline religious groups to inﬂ uence U.S. 
policy toward Iraq, both before and after the military invasion, 
proved unsuccessful. Moral and ethical considerations usually do 
not play a prominent role in foreign policy making, which tends to 
be controlled by some variation of the realist perspective of power 
politics. Foreign policy, unless it should gain the public’s atten-
tion or is widely recognized as unsuccessful, tends to be driven 
by a relatively small number of policy makers in the executive 
branch of the federal government. These policy makers welcome 
the input of religious leaders most often when that input supports 
decisions already made.
Abortion
For more than thirty years the issue of legalized abortion has 
divided the nation. The U.S. Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade 
in 1973 declared that state laws making abortion illegal invaded 
women’s right to privacy and therefore violated the due process 

clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. During the ﬁ rst trimester of 
pregnancy, state governments could not interfere with the decision 
a woman made in consultation with her physician regarding the 
medical procedure of abortion. The court decision allowed state 
governments to regulate abortion in subsequent months of preg-
nancy, restricting the procedure to circumstances where the health 
of the woman was in danger. Following the point of fetal viabil-
ity, states could prohibit late-term abortion procedures with the 
highly restricted exceptions involving the protection of the life or 
the health of the woman. Already in 1966 the Family Life Bureau 
of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, headed by 
Reverend James McHugh, had established the National Right to 
Life Committee to monitor state policies regarding abortion in 
order to maintain restrictions. Following the Roe decision, main-
line denominations began to develop positions on the issue.
 
The Catholic Church has taken the most adamant position 
on the issue of abortion as well as other issues regarding the 
sanctity of human life. In 1968 Pope Paul VI issued the encyclical 
Humanae Vitae, banning Catholics from using artiﬁ cial means of 
birth control. Although many U.S. Catholic clergy, scholars, and 
laypeople objected to the encyclical, it has remained the ofﬁ cial 
Catholic statement regarding the point at which life begins, thus 
supporting the position that abortion at whatever stage of preg-
nancy involves the ending of a sacred human life. In 1994 Pope 
John Paul II issued Evangelium Vitae, an encyclical pronounc-
ing the church’s position on the evil of abortion. Although large 
proportions of lay Catholics in the United States do not support 
these encyclicals (Varacalli 2006, 65), they provide devout Catho-
lics the inspiration for opposing any policy that allows for legal-
ized abortion.
 
Mainline Protestant denominations generally did not take 
as absolute a stance on the issue of abortion as did the Catholic 
Church. There arose disagreement within the denominations and 
hence the decision-making bodies had to arrive at statements that 
recognized what were considered the complexities of the issue. 
In the same year as the Roe decision, the General Synod of the 
Reformed Church in America adopted a statement expressing the 
view that “abortion ought not to be practiced at all” but at the same 
time recognizing that in actual complex circumstances where often 
“one form of evil is pitted against another form of evil”—hence 
acknowledging the possibility of moral dilemmas—exceptions to 
Abortion 63

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
general guiding principles may arise. The synod members sup-
ported restrictions on any abortion that might be performed “to 
insure individual convenience” and called on those who counsel 
women with problem pregnancies to “uphold the Christian alter-
natives to abortion.” The General Synod called on church mem-
bers to support a constitutional amendment to establish legal 
protections for the unborn (RCA 2006).
 
In 1991 the delegates at the Churchwide Assembly of the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America adopted a lengthy “social 
teaching statement” on abortion. In the statement, the delegates 
recognized that claims of rights in absolute language should 
be avoided. “A developing life in the womb does not have an 
absolute right to be born, nor does a pregnant woman have an 
absolute right to terminate a pregnancy.” The statement, citing 
biblical references, recognized the basic Christian belief that God 
has granted life as a gift. For instance, the Old Testament Book of 
Jeremiah (1:5) states, “Before I formed you in the womb I knew 
you, and before you were born I consecrated you.” The statement 
concluded that if an abortion is an option, it should be one of last 
resort; the church and the larger society must take responsibil-
ity for providing circumstances conducive to giving birth to new 
life; sex education should emphasize responsibility and the need 
for abstinence prior to marriage; and the church should encour-
age women in most circumstances of unintended pregnancy to 
give birth. It also promoted adoption as an important option to 
abortion. However, there may be acceptable reasons for ending a 
pregnancy with an abortion, including pregnancy resulting from 
circumstances in which women are oppressed to such an extent 
that they have no choice regarding sexual intercourse. 
 
With regard to public policy, the Lutheran statement called 
for sex education in the schools, community pregnancy preven-
tion programs, parenting classes, and the development of new 
methods of contraception. The government has a legitimate role 
to play in regulating abortion, and public policy should protect 
prenatal life as well as acknowledge women’s dignity and their 
right “to make responsible decisions in difﬁ cult situations.” The 
church opposes legislation that would either fail to regulate abor-
tion at all or outlaw abortion in all circumstances. The statement 
declared that “in cases where the life of the mother is threatened, 
where pregnancy results from rape or incest, or where the embryo 
or fetus has lethal abnormalities incompatible with life, abortion 

prior to viability should not be prohibited by law or by lack of 
public funding of abortions for low income women.” However, 
the church recognizes a conﬂ ict of values regarding public fund-
ing of abortions: “equity of access to legal medical services” can 
conﬂ ict with the use of people’s tax revenues for what some may 
consider morally objectionable purposes (ELCA 1991).
 
In 1994 the Episcopal Church, in a resolution passed at the 
seventy-ﬁ rst General Convention, reafﬁ rmed previous resolu-
tions regarding abortion. The resolution declared the belief that 
all life is sacred from conception to death and that abortion has a 
“tragic dimension.” While recognizing that every woman has the 
legal right to undergo an abortion, that right should be exercised 
“only in extreme situations.” The resolution opposed abortion for 
purposes of birth control, family planning, selecting the gender of 
a child, or “mere convenience,” but also opposed any government 
action at the local, state, or national level that restricts the right of 
women to “reach an informed decision about the termination of a 
pregnancy” or that limits women’s access to safe methods of tak-
ing action according to their decision (Episcopal Church 1994).
 
In 1992 the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) General Assembly 
approved a position statement noting that while no scriptural 
references speak directly about abortion, “taken in their totality,” 
scripture contains many references stating that a woman and child 
before and after birth deserve respect. The statement declared that 
women, “guided by the Scriptures and the Holy Spirit, in the con-
text of their communities of faith,” are able to make “good moral 
choices” regarding pregnancy and that the decision to terminate 
a pregnancy can be “a morally acceptable, though certainly not 
the only or required, decision.” Circumstances that could justify 
the decision to undergo an abortion include the medical deter-
mination of “severe physical or mental deformity” of the fetus, 
pregnancy resulting from rape or incest, or situations in which 
“the physical or mental health of either woman or child would 
be gravely threatened.” The General Assembly asserted that laws 
and administrative decisions should not limit access to abortion 
nor limit information regarding the abortion option or public 
funding for the disadvantaged requiring “necessary abortions.” 
No law should restrict access to, or use of, means of contraception 
(PCUSA 2006).
 
The United Methodist Church has initiated a policy regard-
ing abortion that afﬁ rms a belief in the sanctity of the unborn 
Abortion 65

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
human life. Although reluctant to approve abortion, the church 
recognizes the obligation to the well-being of the mother, and thus 
the “tragic conﬂ icts of life with life” could justify the decision to 
undergo an abortion. Therefore, the church supports the abortion 
option when such circumstances arise. However, abortion must 
not be used as a means of birth control or of gender selection. The 
church has declared its opposition to the late-term abortion pro-
cedure dilation and extraction, also know as “partial-birth abor-
tion,” except when the life of the woman is endangered or in cases 
of “severe fetal anomalies incompatible with life.” The church also 
encourages members, social service agencies, and the government 
to assist in adoptions as an alternative to abortion (UMC 2005).
Values and Public Policy
As the so-called culture war indicates, values can and do con-
ﬂ ict. Although mainline Christian denominations have provided 
value positions on the issues discussed in this chapter, the mes-
sages conveyed are subject to at least three restrictions. First, other 
groups, both secular and religious, hold conﬂ icting value posi-
tions and, as in traditional interest group competition, the dif-
fering arguments that various groups present can result in less 
clear alternatives for the public as well as for decision makers. 
Second, the message from a particular denomination may be 
muted because of internal disagreements over value questions. 
As James A. Reichley has observed (2002, 240), such disagree-
ments have occurred between the clergy and lay members. For 
instance, during the Vietnam conﬂ ict, the rank-and-ﬁ le members 
of mainline churches remained far more supportive of the war 
effort than did the clergy. This disagreement may lead to a more 
weakly stated position or to “minority reports” that essentially 
side with an interest outside the denomination. When clergy and 
laity agree on an issue, such as happened during the civil rights 
movement of the 1950s and early 1960s, a denomination can take 
a much stronger stand and potentially increase its inﬂ uence on 
public policy. Third, the extreme complexity of policy questions—
such as making end-of-life decisions—may militate against any 
categorical value positions; those holding similar values can hon-
estly disagree about what policy they should recommend. Perhaps 
with the exception of the Catholic Church, the mainline denomina-

tions appear to experience signiﬁ cantly less success in establishing 
strongly worded recommendations than do more fundamentalist 
and evangelical groups.
References
Allen, Mike, and Alan Cooperman. 2003. “Praying for a Hiring 
Exemption: Bush Supports Religious Groups’ Employment Rules.” 
Washington Post National Weekly Edition (June 30–July 13):14.
Anderson, George. 2001. “Faith-based Initiatives and the Church.” 
http://www.elca.org/bishop/text/010315.html.
Barr, Robert. 2005. “Anglicans Face Split over Gay Issues.” Houston 
Chronicle (February 25): A19.
Bates, Stephen. 2005. A Church at War: Anglicans and Homosexuality. 
London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Bloom, Linda. 2001. “Church Ofﬁ cial Lauds Bush’s Stem Cell 
Research Decision” (August 10). http://www2.umc.org/umns/news_
archives2001.asp?ptid=2&mid=3365.
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) (CCDC). 2003. “Resolution on the 
Death Penalty.” http://www.disciples.org/ga/pdf/pastassemblies/03/
resolutions/0324.pdf.
Churches for Middle East Peace. 2002. “Letter to President Bush on 
Iraq” (September 12). http://www.cmep.org/letters/2002Sep12_
BushReIraq.htm.
Dreher, Rod. 2002. “Sins of the Fathers: Pedophile Priests and the 
Challenge to the American Church,” National Review (February 11): 
27–30.
Episcopal Church. 1994. “Reafﬁ rm General Convention Statement on 
Childbirth and Abortion.” http://www.episcopalarchives.org/cgi-bin/
acts/acts_resolution-complete.pl?resolution=1994-A054.
Episcopal Church. 2001. “Executive Council Resolution: Regarding 
Public Funding for Faith-Based Social Service Programs.” http://www.
episcopalchurch.org/1866_70075_ENG_HTM.htm.
Episcopal Church. 2005. “Establish Principles with Regard to the 
Prolongation of Life.” http://www.episcopalchurch.org/3577_
60370_ENG_HTM.htm.
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). 1991. “What We 
Say about Public Life: Abortion.” http://elca.org/socialstatements/
abortion/.
References 67

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). 2006. “What 
We Say about Public Life: Immigration.” http://www.elca.org/
socialstatements/immigration/.
Gilgoff, Dan. 2005. “Life and Death Politics: The Schiavo Case Is Just 
the Latest Front in a Much Nastier War.” U.S. News and World Report 138 
(April 4): 14–18, 21.
Gregory, Wilton D. 2002. “Letter to President Bush on Iraq” (September 
13). http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/bush/bishops.htm.
Hamm, Richard L. 2002. “We Still Look for Peace.” http://www
.homelandministries.org/PEACE/HAMMstatement.htm.
Hanson, Mark S. 2003. “End of Overt Hostilities in Iraq War” (April 16). 
http://www.elca.org/bishop/m_iraq_041603.html.
Hanson, Mark S. 2004. “Public Church Reﬂ ections” (June). http://www
.elca.org/bishop/m_0604letter.html.
Hollon, Larry. 2005. “Commentary: Schiavo Case Underscores Need for 
End-of-Life Discussion.” http://www.interpretermagazine.org/interior
.asp?ptid=2&mid=7066.
Houston Chronicle. 2003. “Episcopal Bishops’ Network Counters Gay’s 
Consecration” (December 18): 8A.
Houston Chronicle. 2004a. “Episcopalians Meet to Discuss Split” (January 
10): A17.
Houston Chronicle. 2004b. “Unauthorized Service Angers Church 
Leaders” (March 25): 5A.
Houston Chronicle. 2004c. “Episcopal Memo Released” (April 10): 2E.
Houston Chronicle. 2004d. “Anglican Conservatives Want Action against 
Gay Bishop” (July 1): 7A.
Houston Chronicle. 2004e. “Methodists Choose Unity over Schism” (May 
8): 12A.
Houston Chronicle. 2004f. “Presbyterian Vote Rejects Gay Ordination” 
(July 3): 10A.
Houston Chronicle. 2005a. “Archdiocese OKs Deal in Abuse Cases” 
(March 10): A8.
Houston Chronicle. 2005b. “Settlement OK’d in Church Abuse” (July 6): A4.
Institute on Religion and Public Policy. 2005. “Interfaith Statement in 
Support of Comprehensive Immigration Reform” (October 14). http://
www.religionandpolicy.org/show.php?p=1.1.1686.
Journal of Lutheran Ethics. 2006. “Death and Dying: An Analysis Offered 
by Task Force on Ethical Issues in Human Medicine, ALC (1977).” 
http://elca.org/jle/article.asp?k=199.

Karkabi, Barbara. 2007. “Episcopal Bishops Spurn Demands from 
Anglicans.” Houston Chronicle (March 22): A8. 
Kershner, Tim. 2001. “Synod OKs Federally-Funded Embryonic Stem 
Cell Research.” http://www.ucc.org/ucnews/gsa01/stem.htm.
Kirkpatrick, Frank. 2003. “The Anglican Crackup.” Religion in the News 6 
(Fall): 2–4, 20.
Kusmer, Ken. 2005. “Lay Catholics Question Cost of Abuse.” Houston 
Chronicle (July 10): A8.
Leff, Lisa. 2006. “‘Her Right of Conscience:’ Panel Exonerates Minister 
Who Presided over Same-Sex Unions.” Houston Chronicle (March 11): F4.
Markum, Jack. 2002. “Charitable Choice.” Presbyterians Today (March): 7. 
McAnally, Tom. 2006. “Ofﬁ cial Church Statements on Capital 
Punishment.” http://archives.umc.org/umns/news_synd.asp?ptid=2&
story=%7B6C69E3F8-5173-4737-A8D2-AC0EF8564777%7D&mid=883.
Mitchell, Melanthia. 2004. “Supporters Arrested at Gay Pastor’s Church 
Trial.” Houston Chronicle (March 18): 9A.
Muñoz, Rosalio. 2006. “Cardinal Mahony Initiates Immigrant Rights 
Campaign.” People’s Weekly World (February 7). http://www.pww.org/
article/view/8536/.
Ostling, Richard N. 2004. “Canada’s Anglicans Afﬁ rm Gay 
Relationships.” Buffalo News (June 4): A4.
Ostling, Richard N. 2005. “In U.S., Vatican’s Anti-Gay Edict Draws 
Mixed Responses.” Houston Chronicle (November 24): A6.
Ostling, Richard N. 2006. “Too Great an Expectation? Pressure to Live 
Up to Ideals Can Make Some Clergy More Susceptible to Alcohol 
Abuse.” Houston Chronicle (February 18), F4.
Overberg, Kenneth R. 2005. “The Death Penalty: Why the Church 
Speaks a Countercultural Message.” Catholic Update. http://www
.americancatholic.org/Newsletters/CU/ac0195.asp.
Prengaman, Peter. 2007. “Churches Set To Help Immigrants.” Houston 
Chronicle (March 17): A8.
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) (PCUSA). 2006. “Abortion Issues.” 
Presbyterian 101. http://www.pcusa.org/101/101-abortion.htm. 
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) (PCUSA) General Assembly. 2000. 
“Moratorium on Capital Punishment.” http://ccmn2.tripod.com/
sitebuildercontent/sitebuilderﬁ les/Presbyterian_Teachings_on_the_
Death_Penalty.pdf..
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) (PCUSA) General Assembly. 2004. 
“Resolution Calling for a Comprehensive Legalizing Program for 
References 69

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Immigrants Living and Working in the United States.” http://www
.pcusa.org/acswp/pdf/immigration-resolution.pdf.
Race, Carolynn. 2005. “Next Steps: Federal Funding for Stem Cell 
Research.” http://www.pcusa.org/washington/issuenet/hc-050802
.htm.
Reformed Church in America (RCA). 1994. “A Christian Response to 
Physician-Assisted Suicide.” http://www.rca.org/NETCOMMUNITY/
Page.aspx?&pid=505&srcid=491.
Reformed Church in America (RCA). 1995. “Position on Immigrants 
and Immigration.” http://www.rca.org/NETCOMMUNITY/Page
.aspx?&pid=504&srcid=491.
Reformed Church in America (RCA). 1999. “Position on Capital 
Punishment.” http://www.rca.org/NETCOMMUNITY/Page
.aspx?&pid=496&srcid=491.
Reformed Church in America (RCA). 2006. “Summary of General Synod 
Statements on Abortion.” http://www.rca.org/NETCOMMUNITY/
Page.aspx?&pid=4928&srcid=491.
Reichley, A. James. 2002. Faith in Politics. Washington DC: Brookings 
Institution.
Ryden, David K., and Jeffrey Polet. 2005. “Introduction: Faith-Based 
Initiatives in the Limelight.” In David K. Ryden and Jeffrey Polet, eds. 
Sanctioning Religion? Politics, Law, and Faith-Based Public Services, 1–8. 
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Schjonberg, Mary Frances. 2006. “Executive Council Opposes ‘Unjust’ 
Immigration Laws.” Episcopal News Service (March 9). http://www
.episcopalchurch.org/3577_72778_ENG_HTM.htm.
Shannon, Thomas A. 2002. “Stem-Cell Research: How Catholic Ethics 
Guide Us.” http://www.americancatholic.org/Newsletters/CU/
ac0102.asp.
Silverstein, Evan. 2005. “Stated Clerk Calls on Congress to Rethink 
Proposed Immigration Bill.” Presbyterian News Service (December 8). 
http://www.pcusa.org/pcnews/2005/05680.htm.
Smith, Alexa. 2004. “Measures Condemn Iraq War, Prisoner Abuse.” 
http://www.pcusa.org/ga216/news/ga04122.htm.
Steinfels, Peter. 2004. A People Adrift: The Crisis of the Roman Catholic 
Church in America. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Thompson, Richelle. 2003. “Committee Passes Guidelines for Stem Cell 
Research.” http://www.episcopalchurch.org/3577_17341_ENG_HTM.
htm.

United Methodist Church (UMC). 2005. “Abortion.” http://archives
.umc.org/interior.asp?mid=1732.
United Methodist Church (UMC) Council of Bishops. 2004. “Resolution 
on the War in Iraq” (May 11). http://archives.umc.org/interior.asp? 
ptid=1&mid=5143.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB). 2005. “Faith-
Based Initiative.” http://www.usccb.org/sdwp/national/200510fbi
.htm.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB). 2006. “Iraq” 
(February). http://www.usccb.org/sdwp/international/200602iraq
.htm.
Vara, Richard. 2004a. “Bishops to Discuss Gay Ordination.” Houston 
Chronicle (March 19): 8A.
Vara, Richard. 2004b. “Clergy Devises Plan to Deal with Gay Bishop 
Split.” Houston Chronicle (March 24): 4A.
Vara, Richard. 2004c. “Sexuality Issues, Weak Budgets on the 
Methodists’ Front Burner.” Houston Chronicle (April 24): 1E.
Vara, Richard. 2004d. “Methodist Delegates Uphold Homosexuality 
Condemnation.” Houston Chronicle (May 5): 4A.
Vara, Richard. 2006. “Leadership Slate Upsets Episcopal Conservatives.” 
Houston Chronicle (January 16): A12.
Vara, Richard. 2007. “What Will the Church Decide?” Houston Chronicle 
(March 10): F1.
Varacalli, Joseph A. 2006. The Catholic Experience in America. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood.
Wall, John N. 2000. A Dictionary for Episcopalians. Cambridge, MA: 
Cowley.
Weber, Harry R. 2004. “Episcopalian Meeting Ends with Call for Unity.” 
Houston Chronicle (March 28): 23A.
References 71


73
3
Worldwide Perspective
M
ost of the mainline churches in the United States can trace 
their origins to Europe: the Episcopal Church and the United 
Methodist Church to Great Britain, the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America to Germany and the Scandinavian countries, 
and the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) to England and France. 
While the United States has maintained a tradition of formal 
separation of religious institutions and the state, many of these 
European countries have a tradition of state-supported religious 
organizations. Some, such as England, continue to maintain a 
state-supported church; others, such as Sweden, have severed 
such relationships; and yet others, like France, have a history of 
anticlericalism and secularism while at the same time maintaining 
past religious traditions. The continent of origin for U.S. denomi-
nations today has become far more secularized than the United 
States. Danièle Hervieu-Léger (2006, 46) notes the claim among 
students of religion that Europe, not the United States, represents 
the exception because it is the only region in the world where reli-
gion plays a signiﬁ cantly diminished role in public life. Whereas 
more than 90 percent of U.S. respondents to attitude surveys over 
several decades consistently have expressed a belief in God, Wil-
liam Murchison (2005, 36) reports that just 41 percent of Europeans 
report believing in a personal God. Recent surveys indicate that 
less than 25 percent of Europeans consider religion “very impor-
tant” in their lives, and only 15 percent attend a worship service 
once a week. In Great Britain it is estimated that more Muslims 
attend Friday prayers than Anglicans attend Sunday worship ser-
vices (ibid.).

74 Worldwide Perspective
 
Many in the United States have reacted negatively to the 
general lack of Christian belief and observance in Europe. For 
instance, George Weigel, an American Catholic theologian, has 
speculated about the possible consequences Europe faces as a result 
of increasing secularization—what international legal scholar 
Joseph Weiler terms “Christophobia” among European intellectu-
als (Weigel 2005, 19–20). Many Europeans regard their societies 
to be “post-Christian.” Weigel notes that Weiler identiﬁ es several 
elements of Christophobia, including the belief that the genocidal 
attack against Jews during the Second World War resulted from a 
long history of Christian anti-Judaism; the youth rebellion of the 
late 1960s that included a reaction against traditional European 
Christian identity; reaction against the once-dominant role that 
Christian Democratic parties played in post–Second World War 
Europe; the tendency to trace the roots of democracy in Europe 
only to the Enlightenment, ignoring the pre-Enlightenment Chris-
tian roots of democracy; and the mocking of Christianity in popu-
lar culture (Simpson 2006).
 
Of particular concern to Weigel is the refusal of ofﬁ cials to 
mention the contribution of Christian heritage to European civili-
zation in the preamble to the new constitution for the European 
Union. Despite the urging of Pope John Paul II and other Chris-
tians, the draft European constitution on which 2004 negotiations 
were based referred to classical Greek and Roman heritage as well 
as the Enlightenment, but, as Weigel (2005, 57–58) comments, “ﬁ f-
teen hundred years of Christian inﬂ uence on the formation of what 
is now Europe went unremarked.” Those opposing such a reference 
argued that no religious language should appear in the constitution 
in order not to offend those of different faiths or who have no reli-
gious beliefs. Weigel quotes Pope John Paul II as saying in response 
that “One does not cut off the roots from which one is born” (ibid., 
143). This quote brings to mind American novelist and Catholic 
Walker Percy’s comment that those who attempt to maintain the 
values that Christianity established while dispensing with Chris-
tianity itself are like the cartoon characters who run off a cliff and 
remain suspended in midair, not realizing they no longer have any 
support under them. Similarly, David Martin (2006, 64–65), reﬂ ect-
ing on religion in Europe, asks whether “the speciﬁ cally religious 
gold standard” is still required to support the values of European 
civilization, and responds that the “hidden gold standard” does 
provide a “permanent backing for secular enlightened usage.”

 
Reﬂ ecting on the present status of religious belief in Europe, 
Weigel (2005) presents four possible futures. First, Europe could suc-
ceed in maintaining economic prosperity and integrating increased 
immigrant populations and new states into the European Union. 
However, Weigel identiﬁ es serious difﬁ culties that Europe faces, 
including the ability to discover the “moral resources” he deems 
necessary to withstand social and political divisions associated 
with an increased Islamic population in Europe, estimated at 25 
million. In a similar vein, David Martin (2006, 78) observes that 
the Muslim populations of Europe maintain characteristics dis-
tinct from and in opposition to the weakened religious commit-
ment of most Europeans. Martin claims that Muslim communities, 
while using the language of freedom, rights, and multicultural-
ism, remain “integral, organic, monocultural and patriarchal.” 
Muslims and native Europeans have very different perceptions of 
religion, with the latter increasingly viewing religious belief as an 
individual choice and the former understanding belief as a com-
munal inheritance (Martin 2006, 82). Second, Weigel suggests that 
European nations could “muddle through,” with the native popu-
lation failing to reproduce itself and an increased Islamicization 
of the population. Third, with the assistance of immigrants from 
Christian parts of the non-Western world, Europeans could return 
to old traditions, ﬁ nding in Christianity “the spiritual, intellec-
tual, and moral resources to sustain and defend its commitments 
to toleration, civility, and human rights” (Weigel 2005, 148). Wei-
gel ﬁ nds some hope for this possible future in various remain-
ing Christian communities in Europe. Finally, Europe could fail 
to reverse the low birthrates that threaten demographic decline; 
the population, without Christian roots, would become more 
demoralized, and an increasingly aggressive Islamic population 
would prevail, resulting in “a thoroughly nonhumanistic theism” 
(ibid., 156). Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci expressed this fear, 
criticizing European ofﬁ cials and intellectuals for accommodat-
ing Muslim immigrants who refuse to adopt Western values and 
customs (Wilkinson 2006b, A20). Although Weigel correlates the 
decline in the birthrate throughout Europe to the weakening of 
religious belief, interestingly some have associated the recent and 
pronounced decline in Eastern Europe to the elimination of Com-
munist-era incentives to have children, such as free housing and 
subsidized child care. In addition, women in Europe have entered 
the workplace and thus have delayed motherhood or dispensed 
Worldwide Perspective 75

76 Worldwide Perspective
with that option completely (Rosenthal 2006, A20). It remains an 
open question whether a renewal of religious belief would alter 
these social conditions that militate against child bearing. None-
theless, some suggest that young Europeans’ estrangement from 
religious institutions is a partial explanation for a pronounced 
decline in the marriage rate. For instance, in 2004 the rate was 4.3 
per 1,000 people in France and 5.1 in England, compared to 7.8 in 
the United States (Moore 2006, 18). 
 
Although from Weigel’s perspective a comparison of the sta-
tus of religious belief in the United States with that of Europe has 
consequences beyond a simple contrast of understandings of sepa-
ration of church and state and the relationship of churches with 
government, the levels of participation in the traditional denomi-
nations, and church participation in social and economic reform 
movements. This chapter deals primarily with these sorts of ques-
tions, attempting to compare and contrast the status of religion in 
the United States with that of various European nations. I examine 
the place of Christian churches in six European countries—England, 
France, Germany, Italy, Poland, and Sweden—highlighting the 
similarities as well as the differences among European countries 
regarding the role played by religious organizations in these soci-
eties. Poland, a former member of the Communist bloc of Eastern 
European nations allied with the Soviet Union, represents a major 
exception to the other ﬁ ve countries in that religious belief and 
church attendance there are much higher, comparing favorably 
with that of the United States. The status of religious institutions 
and religious belief in these six countries will provide a context in 
which to understand better the position of the mainline Christian 
denominations in the United States as well as the more general 
role that religion plays in U.S. politics and society. I will provide 
brief accounts of the historical evolution of religious belief and 
institutions in these countries and highlight the religious conﬂ icts 
that arose in Europe but that were largely absent in the United 
States.
England
The Church of England began over a highly complex dispute 
between major political and Catholic religious leaders of the six-
teenth century. King Henry VIII and Pope Clement VIII engaged 

in a confrontation over Henry’s request that the pope consent to 
the annulment of the king’s marriage to Catherine of Aragon, the 
daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain. Catherine had given 
birth to several children, but only one—Mary—had survived, 
thus failing to provide the king with a male heir. Henry’s mar-
riage to Catherine itself was of questionable legitimacy. In 1504 
Henry’s older brother, Arthur, at the age of fourteen, had married 
Catherine. Shortly thereafter Arthur died, thus denying his father, 
Henry VII, a generous dowry. In order to retain the dowry, Henry 
VII intended to have his second oldest son, the future Henry VIII, 
wedded to Catherine. Church law, which prohibited a man from 
marrying his brother’s wife, stood in the way. Although there 
were doubts regarding the pope’s authority to set aside church 
law, he acceded to Henry VII’s request, and in 1509 Henry the 
younger married Catherine. The doubtful legality of the marriage 
provided the justiﬁ cation for Henry’s request that the marriage be 
annulled. When the pope repeatedly refused to agree to an annul-
ment, the king separated from Rome and in 1529 had the ques-
tion referred to the universities, which, under pressure, agreed 
to the king’s wishes. In 1531 a convocation of the English church 
declared that Henry was “the singular protector, the only and 
supreme lord, and as far as permitted by the law of Christ, even 
the supreme head” of the church (Latourette 1975, 801).
 
The pope excommunicated Henry, declaring once more the 
validity of Henry’s marriage to Catherine. In 1534 Henry suc-
ceeded in having Parliament pass the Act of Succession and the 
Act of Supremacy, which declared the king to be the only head of 
the Church of England. Earlier, Henry had published under his 
name a book claiming to refute Martin Luther’s theology, for which 
the pope had named him the “Defender of the Faith,” a title the 
king continued to use. In addition to the formal break with Rome, 
Henry had the monasteries repressed, thus altering the basic struc-
ture of religious life in England. Various religious organizations 
were dissolved and the assets transferred to the royal treasury. 
Parliament repealed prohibitions on the printing and distribution 
of the scriptures and legalized the marriage of priests, actions that 
very possibly contributed to the ultimate emergence of a variety of 
religious groups other than the Church of England.
 
When Henry’s daughter Elizabeth succeeded to the throne 
in 1558, the ingredients of religious conﬂ ict that engulfed France 
appeared to be present in England. However, Elizabeth concerned 
England 77

78 Worldwide Perspective
herself more with the actions than the beliefs and opinions of her 
subjects; she focused mainly on political stability and the mainte-
nance of a strong nation rather than religious convictions. As long 
as Catholics did not engage in treasonous acts and Puritans did 
not overstep their bounds, they could enjoy freedom of thought 
and conscience (Harbison 1955, 121).
 
The early eighteenth century saw the beginning of Method-
ism in England, largely through the efforts of two brothers, John 
and Charles Wesley. While at Oxford in 1729, Charles established 
a club with two others in order to improve their studies. When 
John, a priest like his father in the Church of England, returned to 
Oxford after helping in his father’s parish, he became the leader 
of the study group. Called the Holy Club, the group came to be 
known as the Methodists in reference to the systematic meth-
ods that characterized the members of the group. The members 
retained the name, which subsequently became the ofﬁ cial title of 
the new religious movement.
 
In 1735 the Wesley brothers, missionaries in the Society for 
the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, left England for 
Georgia, a newly founded colony in the New World that gave ref-
uge to debtors and Protestants escaping persecution in Germany 
(Latourette 1975, 1024). Charles, suffering from illness, returned 
to England in 1736, and John, involved in disputes with colonists, 
soon followed. In 1738 John had a religious experience that con-
ﬁ rmed for him the fundamental Protestant belief in salvation by 
faith alone. As John carried his emotional message to the general 
population, he experienced strong critical reaction. Nonetheless, 
by 1790, shortly before his death, the Methodist movement had 
attracted more than 71,000 members in Great Britain, making it 
the largest independent Protestant group in England. Although 
John considered Methodism to be an appendage of the Church 
of England, at his death in 1791, followers formally established 
the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Various differences over such 
issues as the nature of the group’s relationship with the Church of 
England and disagreement over Arminianism—the doctrine, sup-
ported by John Wesley, that human free will played a role along 
with God’s sovereignty in salvation—and the Calvinist belief 
in predestination and election—the preferred doctrine of fellow 
Methodist George Whiteﬁ eld—led to divisions in the movement.
 
In the nineteenth century the Church of England faced serious 
challenges from a rapidly changing social and intellectual climate. 

The vast population of the nation, which suffered from the dislo-
cation brought about by industrialization, looked upon the church 
as an institution of privilege concerned only with the interests of 
the upper classes. Changes occurred within the Church of England 
itself. For instance, those in the Anglo-Catholic movement called 
for the adoption of Catholic practices, such as introducing greater 
ritual within the Church of England. As a result of the use of such 
Catholic traditions, those in independent groups drifted further 
from the Church of England, forming in 1846 the Evangelical 
Alliance in order to bring together Evangelicals from various 
splinter groups (Latourette 1975, 1171). As scientiﬁ c knowledge 
increased and social awareness developed, some reacted nega-
tively to such changes, refusing to make any compromises with 
such innovation, while many others left the church completely. 
Some attempted to ﬁ nd common ground with those critical of a 
fundamentalist interpretation of the Bible, accepting the histori-
cal study of scripture, and with scientists such as Charles Darwin 
who appeared to threaten traditional Christian beliefs. Various 
forms of socialism developed in an attempt to address the social 
evils of the day. In accordance with that trend, various Christian 
social movements were established to ameliorate economic and 
social problems. The Church of England, which spread through-
out the world as the British Empire expanded, moved to unify the 
various Anglican churches that had followed the ﬂ ag. The church 
began holding the Lambeth Conferences, meetings of bishops in 
the Anglican Communion, which ﬁ rst gathered in London in 1867 
and subsequently met at ten-year intervals.
 
The First World War devastated the younger population of 
England and other countries on the European continent, and the 
social, political, and economic disruption resulting from the con-
ﬂ ict decreased the inﬂ uence of religion in the country. Churches 
nonetheless attempted to reestablish their standing among the 
population. For example, in 1924 various churches joined in the 
Conference on Christian Politics, Economics, and Citizenship to 
plan a strategy for reaching out to those who had fallen away from 
the church. Others worked to heal divisions through the union of 
dissenting groups. For instance, in 1929 the Church of Scotland 
and the United Free Church of Scotland combined after more 
than eighty years of separation, and in 1932 the larger Methodist 
groups agreed to unite (ibid., 1387). The Church of England, dem-
onstrating a level of tolerance, permitted a variety of theological 
England 79

80 Worldwide Perspective
approaches and organizational understandings, from conservative 
Evangelicals to Anglo-Catholics who hoped for a reunion with the 
Catholic Church and advocated the Church of England’s recogni-
tion of the pope as the leader of Christians but without the strict 
hierarchy of the Catholic Church or the doctrine of infallibility.
 
In the early twentieth century, Parliament and church ofﬁ -
cials agreed to certain policies to allow for greater independence 
of the Church of England from the government. The Enabling Act 
of 1919 introduced such policies as permitting the residents of a 
parish to participate in the choice of a pastor. In 1921 the Church 
Assembly was established, a body composed of lay as well as 
clerical members (ibid., 1391). Despite such reforms, the intellec-
tual movements hostile to traditional Christian belief that arose in 
the nineteenth century continued to inﬂ uence general attitudes as 
the country entered the twentieth. Such noted authors as George 
Bernard Shaw and D. H. Lawrence rejected the authority of the 
Christian establishment, and the continued inﬂ uence of industri-
alization and the creation of large numbers of factory jobs, with 
workers drawn away from traditional rural society, also con-
tributed to the weakening of established religious institutions. 
The Great Depression, beginning in 1929, added to the adverse 
inﬂ uences on the churches. With economic hardship, donations 
declined, and the creation of government programs took from 
churches one of their traditional social functions. People in the 
upper classes, who had been major ﬁ nancial supporters of church 
organizations, contributed more heavily to such government pro-
grams in the form of taxes, and the poor came to depend not on 
religious charity but on government programs (ibid., 1392). The 
Second World War, like the First World War, caused major social 
disruptions, further diminishing the status of religious organi-
zations, and German bombing raids early in the war destroyed 
many churches’ physical structures. Following the war the num-
ber of people interested in becoming pastors increased brieﬂ y, but 
by the 1950s the Church of England experienced a further decline 
in the number of clergy.
 
In contrast to the difﬁ culties the Church of England faced, the 
Catholic Church experienced signiﬁ cant growth during the ﬁ rst 
half of the twentieth century. While the total number of Catholics 
in England and Wales was estimated at approximately 1.8 mil-
lion in 1914, their numbers had risen to more than 2.6 million by 
1950. The growth was attributed to conversion by marriage and 

the high birthrate in Catholic families (Latourette 1975, 1395). The 
great majority of the population of the Republic of Ireland, which 
became independent of Great Britain in 1949, was Catholic. The 
majority of the population of Northern Ireland, which remained 
part of Great Britain, was Protestant, but the presence of a sig-
niﬁ cant Catholic minority led to major civil conﬂ ict. The ill will 
between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland has contin-
ued into the twenty-ﬁ rst century. In 2006 Ian Paisley, noted Prot-
estant leader of the Democratic Unionist Party, rejected the call to 
take part in a power-sharing executive group to recommence the 
peace process with Sinn Fein, the Irish Republican Army’s political 
wing (Houston Chronicle 2006). However, in March 2007 Paisley and 
Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams, under pressure from British North-
ern Ireland Secretary Peter Hain, agreed to cooperate in forming 
a coalition government, thus raising hopes that the long hostility 
between Protestants and Catholics would soon end (Katz 2007).
 
The English monarch today retains the title of Defender of 
the Faith, promising in the coronation oath to support and main-
tain the Christian church. She is the “supreme governor” of the 
Church of England. On the recommendation of the prime min-
ister, the monarch approves the appointment of archbishops and 
deans and formally opens sessions of the General Synod, the gov-
erning body of the church. The church plays important symbolic 
roles during public occasions. Bishops and priests perform state 
weddings and funerals, conduct memorial services, and ofﬁ ciate 
at major events such as coronations.
 
The Church of England and the British government are inter-
twined. Twenty-six bishops, including the archbishops of Canter-
bury in the south and of York in the north, along with the bishops 
of London, Durham, and Winchester, serve in the House of Lords 
and have the title of Lords Spiritual. Given greater religious plural-
ism within English society, questions have been raised regarding 
the possible extension of membership to other Christian denomi-
nations. Although the English constitution contains no principle 
of religious freedom, in practice various religious groups freely 
associate, engage in worship activities, and present their religious 
views publicly. The Church of England is within the worldwide 
Anglican Communion, and the archbishop of Canterbury serves 
as that group’s formal spiritual leader, although he has little 
authority to command compliance from member churches in other 
countries.
England 81

82 Worldwide Perspective
 
A bishop and at least one assistant bishop preside over each 
of forty-three dioceses in the two provinces of Canterbury and 
York. The clergy and lay members of each synod elect members of 
the General Synod, which meets in London or York at least twice 
a year. Synod members serve ﬁ ve-year terms and are divided into 
three houses: the House of Bishops, the House of Clergy, and the 
House of Laity. Any church law that the General Synod may pass 
must receive the agreement of the monarch, and some church laws 
require parliamentary approval. The Church of England includes 
more than 16,000 churches and forty-two cathedrals. The parish, 
the basic unit of the Church of England, is governed by a priest, 
called a vicar or rector, who is sometimes assisted by a deacon or a 
parish lay worker. The priest collaborates with a parochial church 
council composed of the members of the congregation. The coun-
cil, in collaboration with the bishop, appoints the priest and is 
responsible for maintaining church buildings (BBC 2006).
 
Church attendance in England has continued to decline in 
recent years. Approximately a million people attend services in 
the Church of England each Sunday. They tend to be older peo-
ple, with far fewer of those between the ages of ﬁ fteen and thirty 
attending regularly. Declining participation in church services 
notwithstanding, contributions actually have increased each year. 
Although the Church of England is the country’s ofﬁ cial religious 
institution, each parish assumes the ﬁ nancial responsibility for 
maintaining the local church. Despite declining regular church 
attendance, participation in religious holiday events has remained 
relatively high. For instance, in 2002 approximately 40 percent of 
church members reportedly attended church services on Christ-
mas (BBC 2006).
 
Members and clergy of the Church of England have faced 
some of the same controversies as mainline denominations in the 
United States. For instance, in 1992 the General Synod approved 
the ordination of women. However, responding to objections, the 
next year it provided a mechanism by which a parish could refuse 
to accept a woman priest. The ﬁ rst woman priest was ordained in 
1994, and presently approximately 20 percent of priests are female. 
The next step would be to approve women as bishops. Ofﬁ cially, 
the Church of England permits the ordination of gay priests if they 
are celibate. Along with the rest of the Anglican Communion, the 
Church of England has struggled with the question of whether 
the church should bless same-gender unions. In February 2007 the 

General Synod of the Church of England afﬁ rmed the position that 
homosexuality does not disqualify a person from full participa-
tion in the church, but rejected a proposed statement committing 
the church to “respect the patterns of holy living to which lesbian 
and gay Christians aspire” (Houston Chronicle 2007b). Since 2003, 
when the Episcopal Church elected an actively gay bishop, Arch-
bishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams has struggled to maintain 
unity within the worldwide Anglican Communion. 
France
Like other European countries in recent years, France has 
become increasingly secularized. Unlike England, France has a 
100-year tradition of separation of church and state. Although 
approximately two-thirds of the population identify with the 
Catho lic Church, the proportion of the population taking part in 
various religious observances such as baptisms and weddings has 
declined signiﬁ cantly over the last ﬁ fteen years. In recent surveys, 
less than half of younger French residents claim they believe in 
God, and 40 percent state they have no religious afﬁ liation (French 
Embassy in Australia 2000). The French Catholic Church faces a 
crisis of personnel similar to that of the U.S. Catholic Church. In 
1960 the church had 45,000 priests, but today that number has 
dropped to 22,000. Ordinations of new priests have declined to 
approximately 100 per year, down from about 1,000, and the 
number of nuns has declined from 100,000 to 52,000. The Catholic 
Church has attempted to counter these troubling trends by try-
ing to attract younger people to the church, organizing religious 
activities such as the annual World Youth Day, at which the pon-
tiff is invited to speak.
 
Although the storm of the sixteenth-century Reformation 
was centered in Germany, from 1562 to 1593 France also experi-
enced signiﬁ cant social and political disruption, called the Wars 
of Religion, resulting from the rise of the Calvinist movement. By 
1560 the French Calvinists, called Huguenots, had gained strength 
in the nation’s larger towns; attracted signiﬁ cant support among 
artisans, tradesmen, and farmers; and succeeded in gaining con-
verts among the nobility (Harbison 1955, 106). In 1561, although 
legally prohibited, the Huguenots had established approximately 
2,500 churches. The vast majority of the population as well as the 
France 83

84 Worldwide Perspective
major social structures, including the monarchy and the theolo-
gians of the University of Paris, remained ﬁ rmly in the Catholic 
fold throughout the period of civil strife. For both sides in the con-
ﬂ ict, loyalty to the religious cause overshadowed commitment to 
the monarchy or the nation, and both sides were guilty of commit-
ting atrocities. For instance, in 1572, in an event called the Massa-
cre of St. Bartholomew, major Calvinist leaders were murdered in 
Paris and subsequently more than 10,000 Huguenots around the 
country were killed.
 
In 1594 Henry of Navarre, a Protestant, agreed to convert to 
Catholicism in return for becoming Henry IV, King of France. He 
famously commented that “Paris was well worth a mass” (Latour-
ette 1975, 767). The new king pledged to protect the Huguenots, 
and this promise ultimately led to peace. In 1598 Henry issued a 
compromise statement, the Edict of Nantes, that granted to the 
Huguenots liberty of conscience, freedom of worship in several 
designated towns, and civic and legal rights on an equal basis 
with Catholics, including the right to hold public ofﬁ ces, to attend 
universities and schools, and to be admitted to hospitals. The 
edict notwithstanding, Henry’s son, Louis XIII, conducted three 
campaigns against the Huguenots. In 1629 the Peace of Alais 
reafﬁ rmed many of the assurances granted to the Protestants in 
the Edict of Nantes. Although the Huguenots never made up 
more than 11 or 12 percent of the population, as long as religious 
guarantees were honored, they prospered, gaining inﬂ uence in 
national and local affairs. However, during the reign of Louis XIV, 
increased restrictions were placed on the Huguenots, including 
the destruction of churches and the removal of Protestant chil-
dren from their families to be raised by Catholics. Finally, in 1685 
the edict was revoked completely. Many Huguenots ﬂ ed, settling 
in other countries, and Protestantism signiﬁ cantly declined in 
France (ibid., 769). Not only Protestants but also Catholics suf-
fered reverses under Louis XIV, for the notion of the divine right 
of kings superseded the claims to authority of both Catholics and 
Calvinists (Harbison 1955, 112).
 
In the late eighteenth century, as economic and political 
con ditions in France worsened, the country moved toward the 
revolution of 1789. The Catholic Church, identiﬁ ed with the old 
aristocracy and considered an enemy of the revolution, suffered 
conﬁ scation of property and restrictions on its role in French 
society. With the fall of Napoleon in 1814 and the restoration of 

the Bourbons to the monarchy, conservative Catholics tended 
to regard the revolution as a great crime, and the most extreme 
among them claimed that God had granted absolute authority to 
the king and the pope. Following the revolution of 1848, the hos-
tility between the church and supporters of the revolution sub-
sided. The view developed that democracy and the Catholic faith 
were compatible, and several of the clergy participated in the ﬁ rst 
National Assembly of the Second Republic (Latourette 1975, 1106). 
Nonetheless, in 1870, with the fall of Louis Napoleon and the Sec-
ond Empire and the establishment of the Third Republic, many 
Catholic clergy and leading lay members, such as Joseph Marie 
de Maistre, renewed their support for the restoration of the mon-
archy. The new government thus resumed the animosity toward 
the Catholic Church and imposed restrictions on the church. The 
parliament took various measures contrary to church doctrine, 
including legalizing divorce and permitting labor on Sunday. 
However, Pope Leo XIII took steps to ease the hostility between 
Catholics and the new republic. Finally, in 1892 the pope issued 
an encyclical exhorting Catholics to accept the existing governing 
system.
 
Relations between the Catholic Church and the government 
once again worsened in the 1890s with the controversial case of 
Alfred Dreyfus, the Jewish army ofﬁ cer unfairly convicted of trea-
son. Catholics tended to oppose Dreyfus’s cause, which resulted 
in popular opinion unfavorable to the church. In 1901 the French 
parliament approved the Association Act, which required formal 
government approval of the existence of any religious organiza-
tion in France. The difﬁ cult process of gaining such approval led 
to the closing of various religious orders and several thousand 
Catholic schools (ibid., 1107). In 1905 the French government 
ended the Concordat of 1801 that had established the relation-
ship between church and state, thus disestablishing the Catho-
lic Church and relegating it to a status comparable to any other 
denomination. Pope Pius X criticized the actions of the French 
government, and in 1907 the French parliament eased the restric-
tions on the church but did not undo the disestablishment deci-
sion. State policies undoubtedly advanced the secularization of 
French society. By the 1940s just over three-fourths of the popula-
tion had been baptized in the Catholic Church, including children 
living in France’s capital, Paris. However, observers questioned 
whether baptism was anything more than a lingering social 
France 85

86 Worldwide Perspective
convention. The proportion of Catholics who regularly practiced 
their faith was estimated to vary between 2 percent in the munici-
palities and 38 percent in rural areas (ibid., 1367). Following the 
Second World War, secularization continued, with the non-Chris-
tian movements of existentialism and Marxism coming increas-
ingly into vogue. In the twentieth century France followed a 
policy called laïcité, which involves the separation of church and 
state and the guarantee of religious freedom. Government ofﬁ cials 
traditionally have avoided making public statements referring to 
religious considerations when debating public policy questions. 
Although the United States and France both adhere to the doc-
trine of separation of church and state, the French government 
actively promotes secularism to a much greater extent than the 
United States. For instance, in 2001 the French parliament (com-
posed of the National Assembly and the Senate) approved a law 
banning religious groups from engaging in activities to establish 
psychological dependence among followers (Creswell 2002).
 
The French government owns and cares for all church build-
ings built before 1905. In addition, the state pays the salaries 
of some church workers, such as prison, military, and hospital 
chaplains. Approximately 15 percent of students attend Catho-
lic schools, and the church has negotiated agreements with the 
government whereby the state provides funds for teacher salaries 
(Minkenberg 2003, 204). One exception to the separation principle 
in France is the region of Alsace, which was part of Germany at 
the time the nation established that principle.
 
Today, Protestants constitute between 2 and 3 percent of the 
French population. Restricted prior to the ofﬁ cial separation of 
church and state in 1905, Protestants ﬁ nally gained a status equal 
to that of Catholics. The Protestant Federation of France comprises 
ﬁ fteen churches. Participation among Protestants in religious 
observances is very low, with more than 50 percent participating 
little or not at all. While more than half of Catholic priests are 
older than sixty, Protestant clergy are signiﬁ cantly younger, and 
15 percent of them are women. The Reformed Church, France’s 
largest Protestant denomination with 300,000 adherents, in recent 
times has lost nearly half of its membership and nearly a third of 
its ministers (Ecumenical News International 2005).
 
With the decline in Christian religious participation, Islam has 
grown in signiﬁ cance. Muslims make up between 5 and 10 percent 
of the French population. Muslim youth rioted in the poorer sub-

urbs of Paris and in other parts of France in fall 2005; although 
the riots were motivated largely by the dim economic future of 
these youth and alleged racism rather than religion per se, Fouad 
Ajami (2005, 50), director of Middle East Studies at Johns Hop-
kins University, claimed that radicalized Islam contributed to the 
intensity of the turmoil. The riots raised deeper concerns among 
Christians about the future of the country as a secular state when 
a large minority population holds signiﬁ cantly different cultural 
and religious norms (Tolson 2005, 35).
Germany
Germany was the original site of the Protestant Reformation of 
the early sixteenth century. Ever since, the nation essentially has 
been divided between Protestant and Catholic populations. Today, 
Protestants and Catholics each make up approximately one-third 
of the population, with about 30 percent of Germans having no 
religious afﬁ liation. The German Basic Law, ratiﬁ ed in 1949, con-
tains ﬁ ve articles on religion taken from the liberal Weimar Con-
stitution of 1919. Among the provisions are a no-establishment 
clause, protection of freedom of religion and belief, and a prohi-
bition on discrimination based on religious afﬁ liation or beliefs. 
Germany does not have a state church, and legally churches are 
public corporations. Both Protestants and Catholics engage in dis-
cussions of signiﬁ cant social and political issues, such as disarma-
ment, labor policy, abortion, and the environment (Germany Info 
2006). Although the German constitution establishes separation of 
church and state, interactions between the government and reli-
gious institutions reach a level that would be looked upon with 
concern, if not completely rejected, in the United States. The rela-
tionship between church and state has been called one of “positive 
neutrality.” Because religious organizations contribute to the pub-
lic life of the nation, the government grants them certain beneﬁ ts 
(Monsma and Soper 1997, 172). For instance, churches may provide 
religious instruction in the public schools to children of adherents. 
Also, the German government cooperates with religious institu-
tions in having taxes collected from church members. The major 
religious groups that take part in these activities are the Catholic 
Church, the Evangelical Church in Germany, and Jewish organiza-
tions. In 1995 the Constitutional Court ruled that the display of 
Germany 87

88 Worldwide Perspective
the cruciﬁ x in public school classrooms violated the principle of 
separation of church and state and that a cruciﬁ x must be removed 
if any student or teacher protests (Minkenberg 2003, 203).
 
Following Martin Luther’s break with the Catholic Church 
beginning in 1517, violent social and political disruptions occurred 
in Germany. The Peasants’ War of 1524 and 1525, a rebellion involv-
ing religious differences but primarily concerning economic issues 
such as taxation and deﬂ ation, brought attacks on the nobles, 
including church ofﬁ cials, whom the peasants blamed for their 
plight. Although Luther expressed sympathy for the peasants’ 
cause, he strongly objected to violence against the nobility and 
urged the princes to use stern force against the rebels, which the 
princes were most willing to do. Although Luther issued a pam-
phlet asking for mercy on the captives taken by the princes, the 
peasants came to view him as a traitor (Latourette 1975, 725). Such 
events led Luther to distrust the peasants, to have greater concern 
for establishing civil order, and to be willing to rely on the princes 
for maintaining peace. Approximately a century later, Germany 
was the major focus of the Thirty Years’ War, another religiously 
based conﬂ ict that attracted the participation of other European 
countries and led to the destruction of German cities and a break-
down of social stability (ibid., 894).
 
In the early nineteenth century a new European intellectual 
movement began, arising from Deism and the Enlightenment, that 
was centered in German universities. Students from Scandinavia, 
Great Britain, the United States, and other predominantly Prot-
estant countries studying in Germany carried the views of Ger-
man theologians and philosophers back to their own countries. 
Participants in the movement would have a major inﬂ uence on 
mainline Protestant theologians and denominations in the United 
States. This movement engaged in a scientiﬁ c and rationalistic 
examination of the Bible and Christian history, an approach that 
came to be known as “higher criticism.” Johann Salomo Semler, an 
eighteenth-century theologian and progenitor of the movement, 
argued that although the Bible contained revelation and time-
less truths, not all portions of scripture carried the same value. 
According to Semler, the contents of books were inﬂ uenced by 
the time periods in which they were written. Similarly, Johann 
Gottfried von Herder, an eighteenth-century preacher, claimed 
that the books of the Bible could be understood only within the 
context of the time periods in which they were written. The great 

eighteenth-century German philosopher Immanuel Kant also con-
tributed greatly to a revised understanding of the nature of Chris-
tianity (ibid., 1051).
 
In the mid-nineteenth century, the German territories moved 
toward uniﬁ cation, largely through the efforts of conservatives, of 
whom Otto von Bismarck, the German Empire’s ﬁ rst chancellor, 
was most prominent. The consolidation did not include Austria, 
where the population was predominantly Catholic, so the result 
was a Protestant majority in the new country. However, various 
religious currents ﬂ ourished, including more orthodox beliefs; 
pietism; religious inﬂ uences from other countries such as Great 
Britain and the United States; and the ofﬁ cial church of Germany, 
the Landeskirchen (ibid., 1120). Following the First World War the 
religious denominations, including Catholics, prospered under 
the Weimar Republic. However, with the rise of Hitler in the early 
1930s, churches came under increasing restriction. In 1933 the 
National Socialist regime disbanded the Center Party, the politi-
cal organization many Catholics had supported. That same year 
the Vatican, attempting to guarantee the religious freedom that 
had prevailed prior to the Nazi takeover, negotiated a concordat 
with the German government. However, the following year the 
government repressed Catholic labor organizations and severely 
restricted Catholic publications. In 1935 the Nazi regime began a 
program of indoctrination in Catholic schools and subsequently 
restricted Catholic education in order to win the loyalty of chil-
dren away from the church. To weaken them further, Nazi ofﬁ cials 
brought various criminal charges against religious organizations 
(ibid., 1368).
 
The Lutheran church perhaps found it more difﬁ cult to 
resist the Nazi regime, given that Lutherans traditionally were 
more willing to accept secular authority. Many religious lead-
ers bowed to the wishes of the Nazi regime, organizing the Faith 
Movement of German Christians, a group that opposed commu-
nism, advocated German traditions and what it considered the 
legacy of Martin Luther, and attempted to create a uniﬁ ed church 
organization parallel to the Nazi movement (ibid., 1375). How-
ever, other religious leaders, including Lutheran pastors such as 
Dietrich Bonhoeffer, opposed the Nazi regime. Bonhoeffer, who 
became involved with anti-Nazi conspirators, was imprisoned in 
the Buchenwald concentration camp in 1943 and executed in 1945 
(Chadwick 1990, 366).
Germany 89

90 Worldwide Perspective
 
Following the Second World War the Allies divided Germany 
into separate zones, which became East and West Germany, with 
East Germany controlled by the Soviet Union. Predominantly 
Protestant areas were included in East Germany, and the church 
came under severe pressure from the new Communist regime. 
During forty-ﬁ ve years under Communist rule, the regime in East 
Germany strongly discouraged the population from participating 
in religious observance. Therefore, participation rates were much 
lower than in West Germany, and when Germany reunited, the 
rates of participation for the nation as a whole dropped.
 
A controversial court case in early 2007 demonstrated that 
Germany, like other European countries, was ﬁ nding it difﬁ cult to 
accommodate increasing religious pluralism. A Muslim woman, 
born in Germany but with a Moroccan cultural background, 
requested that a judge grant an accelerated divorce, claiming that 
her husband beat her. The judge, herself a woman, denied the 
request, citing a verse from the Quran that appears to sanction 
husbands beating their wives for disobedience (Landler 2007). 
Although the judge ultimately was replaced, and public ofﬁ cials, 
legal experts, and German Muslim leaders strongly objected to 
the ruling, arguing that all people living in the country should 
be governed by the German legal code, the case suggested that 
Germans may need to develop a clearer understanding of their 
contemporary secular culture in the context of a Christian tradi-
tion and new religious inﬂ uences. 
Italy
For most of two millennia Italy has been the spiritual center of 
the Christian faith, with the Catholic pope, with few exceptions, 
located in the city of Rome. Not surprisingly, more than 85 per-
cent of the Italian population claim Catholicism as their religious 
afﬁ liation, at least nominally. Like residents in other European 
countries, few Italians participate in worship services; estimates 
indicate that just 20 percent of Italian Catholics participate regu-
larly in church life. According to recent polls, 14 percent of Italians 
identify themselves either as atheists or agnostics.
 
As Italy developed into a uniﬁ ed nation in the late nineteenth 
century, the papal states were dissolved. In the early nineteenth 
century, nationalist leaders such as Giuseppe Garibaldi supported 

uniﬁ cation of the country with the pope playing a signiﬁ cant polit-
ical role. Although Pope Pius IX initially supported uniﬁ cation, 
he ultimately opposed the nationalist goals. Count Camillo Benso 
di Cavour, who succeeded in establishing the Kingdom of Italy, 
designed the country’s constitution and served as the ﬁ rst prime 
minister. He was a strong anticleric and took action against certain 
parts of the church. Until 1870 the pope, with French military sup-
port, maintained control of Rome and the immediate environs. 
However, with the withdrawal of French forces, the Italian army 
occupied the city and the pope remained essentially a prisoner 
in the Vatican. In 1871 Cavour attempted to appease the papacy, 
offering the pope sovereignty over the church’s properties, includ-
ing the Vatican and the Lateran in Rome, and an annual pension 
in compensation for the loss of the papal states. However, Pope 
Pius IX refused to agree, requesting that Catholic princes reinstate 
his political position. In 1868 he prohibited Catholics from par-
ticipating in the new government, which nonetheless continued 
to provide clergy salaries, to prohibit divorce, and to allow the 
church to offer religious instruction in the schools. However, the 
government also expropriated a large proportion of church prop-
erty, reduced the number of monasteries, and assumed responsi-
bility for charitable activities. Although many Catholics refused 
to abide by the pope’s prohibition on political participation, many 
did, which resulted in the government being controlled by those 
indifferent, or hostile, to the church, thus increasing the distance 
between church and state (Latourette 1975, 1112–1113).
 
Protestants in Italy have always represented a small minor-
ity of the population. In the nineteenth century the Waldenses, 
a Christian group that traced its history back to the twelfth cen-
tury, rejected the papacy and such Catholic elements as the mass, 
purgatory, and indulgences, stressing instead the simple gospel 
message. By the mid-nineteenth century, King Charles Albert of 
Savoy had granted the Waldenses religious and civil rights. Prot-
estants in Great Britain and the United States provided ﬁ nancial 
aid to the group, and the Kingdom of Italy instituted measures 
recognizing religious liberty (ibid., 1154).
 
The Catholic Church’s status in the newly created nation 
remained in ﬂ ux until after the Fascist government under Benito 
Mussolini came to power in 1922. In 1929 the Vatican entered into 
an understanding regarding church-state relations, called the 
Lateran Treaty, which established an uneasy truce between Pope 
Italy 91

92 Worldwide Perspective
Pius XI and Mussolini. The treaty reestablished the pope’s secular 
authority by creating Vatican City as a separate state, recognized 
the pope as a sovereign prince, and compensated the pope for the 
loss of income from conﬁ scated lands. A concordat, also agreed 
to in 1929, normalized relations between the Vatican and the gov-
ernment of Italy. The agreement made instruction in the Catholic 
religion mandatory in the secondary schools, exempted seminary 
students from military service, and authorized government sti-
pends for priests and bishops (Donovan 2003, 97–98). In return, 
the government received the right to participate in the appoint-
ment of clergy. The agreements notwithstanding, the relationship 
between the church and the Fascist government remained uneasy. 
For instance, Mussolini required Catholic youth organizations to 
be included within the Fascist structure, and the Fascist govern-
ment disbanded young Catholic men’s groups and attempted 
to exercise government control over church schools (Latourette 
1975, 1365). Although Pope Pius XI challenged the Fascist regime 
by declaring, in response to the Italian invasion of Ethiopia, that 
such wars of aggression were unjust, the Catholic Church failed 
to mount an unqualiﬁ ed protest, instead using the circumstance 
to increase papal authority over the Catholic Church in Ethiopia 
(ibid., 1365). When Italy entered the Second World War, the pope 
appealed successfully to both sides to treat Rome as an open city 
off limits to bombing and destruction. 
 
After the Fascist regime of Benito Mussolini disintegrated 
during the Second World War, the Catholic Church stood as a 
major force in opposition to the Communist party, which was 
competing for the opportunity to govern Italy. The provisions of 
the Lateran Treaty were incorporated into the new constitution 
of 1948, and the Catholic Church allied itself with the Christian 
Democratic Party (DC), mobilizing Catholic voters, including 
parish priests and members of youth organizations and women’s 
groups, to support its candidates. Pope Pius XII worked to reafﬁ rm 
the traditional status of Christianity in Italy and Europe (Donovan 
2003, 100). The DC became the dominant party in Italy, winning 
48.5 percent of the vote in the 1948 elections and more than half 
of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies. However, although the 
DC depended on the pope to encourage political unity among the 
nation’s Catholics and the capacity of the church to mobilize vot-
ers, party leaders wished to establish their independence within 
the political realm. The church’s authority in society remained 

limited during the 1950s. Given the difﬁ culties the DC faced in 
governing and the church’s association with the party, the Catho-
lic Church’s reputation declined (ibid., 102). A national referen-
dum in 1974 resulted in legalizing divorce, a major defeat for the 
Catholic Church, and in 1978 the Italian parliament approved an 
abortion measure, which voters ratiﬁ ed by referendum in 1981.
 
A revision of the Lateran agreement in 1984 established 
the principle of the secular state while maintaining government 
support of religious institutions (U.S. Department of State 2005). 
Christian denominations other than the Catholic Church—includ-
ing Adventists, Assemblies of God, Baptists, and Lutherans—have 
negotiated agreements with the Italian government to receive 
certain privileges such as ministerial access to hospitals, pris-
ons, and military facilities; registration of religious marriages; 
and exemptions of students from school attendance on religious 
holidays. The agreement provided for regulation of the Vatican 
bank—which had suffered from scandal—and subjected church 
property to taxation, but it also established tax deductions for reli-
gious donations and the use of the tax structure to make volun-
tary contributions to the church. An estimated 40 to 45 percent of 
taxpayers make such contributions (Donovan 2003, 103).
 
In contrast to the United States, where public displays of reli-
gious symbols such as the Ten Commandments have created sig-
niﬁ cant political and legal controversy, in Italy Christian images 
such as the cruciﬁ x regularly appear in schools and other public 
buildings. In 2004 the Constitutional Court ruled constitutional 
a 1928 statute mandating the display of cruciﬁ xes in classrooms, 
and in 2005 a court determined that cruciﬁ xes could remain at 
polling stations. Although the Italian constitution prohibits gov-
ernment support for private schools, the Catholic Church has 
sought government assistance to support its large number of 
private schools, which have suffered from declining enrollment. 
Although the revised concordat ended the religious teaching 
requirement in the schools, the government allows the church to 
choose Catholic teachers who are paid by the government to teach 
religion courses in the public schools. Students are not required 
to attend these courses and may register for alternative classes. 
Government agencies provide land for places of worship and can 
subsidize their construction. The Italian government also plays a 
role in maintaining historic places of worship, where many artis-
tic and cultural artifacts are housed.
Italy 93

94 Worldwide Perspective
 
By 1995 the DC had ceased to exist and its heir apparent, the 
Italian Popular Party, failed to provide a satisfactory alternative 
for the Catholic Church. Anticommunism had been a major ral-
lying point for the DC, but with the fall of communism in the 
late 1980s as well as revelations of corruption within the party, 
no sufﬁ ciently cohesive force remained to maintain a single politi-
cal organization for Catholics. Several political parties along the 
political spectrum declared afﬁ liation with the Christian cause, 
and the Vatican initiated a policy of partisan nonalignment. Church 
advocacy then shifted toward interest group action, the efforts 
of inﬂ uential individuals, and the operation of formal church-
state interaction. The church hierarchy backed candidates who 
supported its value positions, including the defense of human 
life, advocacy of the family within the institution of marriage, 
liberty in education, support for local government, and a prefer-
ence for assisting the less advantaged in society (ibid., 109). How-
ever, Mark Donovan has noted that measures of Italian public 
opinion indicate that the population tends to object to the church 
inter vening in the public arena to make policy recommendations 
(ibid., 113).
 
Nonetheless, the Catholic Church continues to maintain a 
presence in public policy. For instance, in 2004 the church success-
fully backed legislation that declared an embryo to be equivalent 
to human life, banned the use of sperm for artiﬁ cial insemination, 
and restricted the use of embryos in scientiﬁ c research. Comment-
ing on the draft constitution for the European Union, Pope John 
Paul II and Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (the future Pope Benedict 
XVI) declared that the document should recognize Europe’s Chris-
tian heritage. In such ways, the Catholic Church in Italy appears 
to have taken on a role comparable to that of mainline denomina-
tions in the United States, which periodically issue statements on 
public policy in an essentially secularized society.
 
In 2006 Pope Benedict XVI became involved in a worldwide 
controversy over a speech that he delivered at the University of 
Regensburg in his native Germany. The pope angered Muslims 
by quoting the fourteenth-century Byzantine Emperor Manuel 
II Paleologus who, in a dialogue with an “educated Persian,” 
stated, “Show me just what Muhammad brought that was new, 
and there you will ﬁ nd things evil and inhuman, such as his 
command to spread by the sword the faith he preached” (Wilkin-

son 2006a, A15). Following sometimes violent reaction, including 
the murder of a Catholic nun in Somalia that some associated with 
the pope’s comments, Benedict issued a statement of regret, com-
menting that the quote did not express his personal view. Those 
reporting on Benedict’s speech emphasized that the pope also 
focused his presentation on increased secularism and a decline in 
European Christian vitality. The incident suggested that the pope, 
although no longer a major authoritative participant in Italian 
politics, still plays a signiﬁ cant symbolic role in world politics. 
The pope’s comments appeared to echo the attitudes of others in 
Italy and other European countries. For instance, Italian journalist 
Oriana Fallaci, who died in September 2006, had begun a public 
campaign against Islam following the September 11, 2001, terror-
ist attacks, referring to Islamists as “SS and Black Shirts who wave 
the Quran” (Wilkinson 2006b). In November 2006 Pope Benedict 
traveled to Turkey, a trip that had been planned prior to his con-
troversial comments. Turkey, an overwhelmingly Muslim nation, 
does not legally recognize the Catholic Church. Before becoming 
the pontiff, Benedict had expressed reservations about Turkey 
entering the European Union. However, on this trip, he altered 
his view, expressing support for Turkey’s inclusion. Nonetheless, 
Benedict emphasized that Muslim countries would be expected to 
respect the religious beliefs of Christians just as Western European 
countries should recognize the rights of those from other cultures. 
The pontiff has stated that peace can be ensured only through 
“respect for the religious convictions and practices of others, in a 
reciprocal way in all societies” (Carosa 2006).
Poland
Although the Catholic Church traditionally had been suspicious 
of the development of democratic government, following the 
Second World War the church in Poland came to support the for-
mation of democratic institutions. John Anderson (2003, 144) attri-
butes this shift to Catholic opposition to Communist rule and to 
the liberalizing results of the Second Vatican Council held from 
1962 to 1965. In Poland, a predominantly Catholic country, the 
Catholic Church followed such a policy of advocating democratic 
reforms during the period of Communist rule.
Poland 95

96 Worldwide Perspective
 
In 1925 the Vatican established relations with Poland through 
a concordat, and the church at that time acceded to the establish-
ment of a nondemocratic government. Poland had a signiﬁ cant 
Orthodox Ukrainian population, which the government and 
the Catholic Church attempted to convert to Catholicism. Many 
Orthodox clergy were imprisoned and executed (Latourette 1975, 
1371). When Germany and the Soviet Union invaded Poland 
at the beginning of the Second World War, the Catholic Church 
became the target of repression. The pope maintained contact 
with the Polish government-in-exile and allowed its ambassador 
to stay in the Vatican. In 1947 the Communist faction within the 
country gained complete control of the Polish government and 
attempted to sever ties between the Polish church and the Vatican. 
In 1950 the government and the Polish bishops signed an agree-
ment guaranteeing freedom of worship and religious education, 
but doubts quickly arose regarding the effectiveness of this agree-
ment (ibid., 1372).
 
Although the Catholic Church in Poland followed a defensive 
strategy during the ﬁ rst decades following the Second World War, 
by the 1970s the church began aggressively to oppose the Com-
munist regime, forming an alliance with intellectual and working 
groups (Anderson 2003, 144). The election in 1978 of Polish priest 
Karol Wojtyla as Pope John Paul II strengthened this alliance. The 
workers, forming Solidarity (Solidarnośc), an independent labor 
union backed by the Catholic Church, objected primarily to the 
economic conditions in Poland, but the church provided a reli-
gious and moral justiﬁ cation for the struggle. In 1980 union leader 
Lech Walesa led a strike to gain recognition for Solidarity and a 
forty-hour work week (McElroy 2006, 30). As the Communist 
regime began to weaken in the late 1980s, the Catholic Church 
became increasingly critical of those in power, and when the 
regime crumbled, church leaders played signiﬁ cant roles in the 
shift to a new structure of government. However, the transition 
to a democratic system posed the signiﬁ cant question regarding 
what role the church, which had acted as an opponent to the previ-
ous Communist government, would play in a democracy. Having 
struggled against an authoritarian regime for so long, church lead-
ers insisted that the church should receive special status within 
the new constitution and laws. After several drafts, the constitu-
tion backed by the Solidarity party recognized the centuries-long 

Christian heritage. In addition, the document identiﬁ ed a right to 
life that began at conception and required the government to sup-
port the teaching of religious beliefs in the public schools. As the 
Constitutional Commission debated the proposed constitution, 
representatives of the Catholic Church emphasized three points: 
avoiding an explicit statement of separation between church and 
state, including a reference to God and Christian values, and pro-
tecting the fetus (Anderson 2003, 145). Ultimately, Article 53 of the 
constitution guaranteed the religious rights of all citizens. 
 
Politically, the Catholic Church offered to support those 
involved in creating political parties that were friendly to the inter-
ests of the church. Immediately following the fall of the Communist 
regime, the church supported the Solidarity coalition in the elec-
tions in 1989. In several instances, church ofﬁ cials allowed Solidar-
ity electoral committees to meet on church property. In 1990 Polish 
bishops suggested that religious education should be mandatory. 
During the following school year, several school ofﬁ cials did intro-
duce the subjects of religion and ethics, apparently on a voluntary 
basis. The bishops expressed concern about the moral character of 
media broadcasting, although the church received permission to 
broadcast masses and to establish Catholic radio stations. In the 
1995 presidential campaign, church ofﬁ cials, while taking an ofﬁ -
cially neutral stance, recommended to voters that they withhold 
support from those candidates who participated in the former 
Communist regime. Instances of bishops attempting to persuade 
voters did not succeed, leading John Anderson (2003, 148) to con-
clude that the political inﬂ uence of the church should not be over-
stated. On the issue of abortion, in 1992 the church succeeded in 
having a bill passed in the National Assembly that restricted the 
practice. However, when the Socialists returned to power in 1995, 
the National Assembly, over the objections of the church leader-
ship, eased the restriction somewhat. The church attempted to 
have a provision introduced into the constitution, but achieved 
limited results. Therefore, the efforts of church leaders notwith-
standing, Poland permitted a limited right to abortion as well as 
divorce. Solidarity, the initial spark that brought greater freedom 
in the 1980s, lost its most prominent member, Lech Walesa, who 
resigned his membership, claiming that the organization no lon-
ger stood for its founding principles. The leaders of the Law and 
Justice faction, identical twins Lech and Jaroslaw Kaczynski, won 
Poland 97

98 Worldwide Perspective
the 2005 election for president and prime minister, respectively, 
and promised to eliminate corruption and establish a new Poland 
based on Christian values (Reiter and Rakoweic 2006, A21).
 
The difﬁ culties of the Communist era continued to inﬂ uence 
the attitudes and actions of Polish citizens and to affect Catho-
lic Church ofﬁ cials. In December 2006 the news media reported 
rumors that the newly appointed archbishop of Warsaw, Stanislaw 
Wielgus, had collaborated with Sluzba Bezpieczenstwa, Poland’s 
security service, in the 1970s. With continued media reports, Wiel-
gus abandoned his initial denials and admitted that the collabora-
tion accounts were true, although he still claimed never to have 
informed on anyone. After consulting with Vatican ofﬁ cials, Wiel-
gus bowed to pressure and announced his resignation just hours 
before the scheduled mass to celebrate his elevation to archbishop 
(Fleishman and Kasprzycka 2007). These events illustrated the 
continuing signiﬁ cance of the Communist era and the Catholic 
Church to the Polish nation. Researchers estimate that as many 
as 10 percent of Poland’s priests, monks, and nuns collaborated 
in some way with the secret police. Some in the church claim that 
knowledge of collaboration was available for years but was not 
publicized, perhaps out of respect for Pope John Paul II, or even 
at his direction (Houston Chronicle 2007a). 
Sweden
Sweden traditionally has been called the nation of empty churches. 
Today a smaller percentage of Swedes profess a faith in God than 
the residents of any other country in Europe. Less than 10 percent 
of the Swedish population regularly attends church. However, 
70 percent still receive baptism. The number of youths taking 
part in conﬁ rmation has declined signiﬁ cantly in recent years, 
and today approximately 40 percent of ﬁ fteen-year-olds attend 
religious classes in preparation for conﬁ rmation (Olofsson 2004, 
35). Approximately 50 percent of couples marry in the church. 
Until recently the Lutheran Church was the ofﬁ cial state religion, 
receiving government assistance to maintain church buildings 
and to pay pastors’ salaries. Unless they expressed an alterna-
tive preference, all Swedish citizens were considered members of 
the church. Before 1950 Swedes could not leave the Evangelical 
Lutheran National Church (the Church of Sweden) unless they 

joined another church approved by the king. Unlike churches in 
the United States that are called “evangelical,” referring to funda-
mentalist beliefs and a personal conversion experience, the term 
as used in the Swedish church’s name refers to its origins in the 
Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth century. Although the 
church-state relationship was severed in 2000, more than 80 per-
cent of Swedes still remained members of the Lutheran Church, 
and most continued to pay an annual church tax of approximately 
1.25 percent of annual income (ibid., 32).
 
Each of the church’s 2,225 parishes is governed by a parish 
council, which, along with the pastor, makes policy regarding 
educational, social, and evangelistic activities (Church of Sweden 
2005). A bishop leads each of the thirteen dioceses of the Church of 
Sweden. The priests of the dioceses, along with an equal number 
of lay delegates, elect the bishop. The archbishop of Uppsala heads 
the national church organization. Karl Gustav Hammar served 
as archbishop from 1997 to 2006. Conservative members of the 
church criticized Hammar for some of his theological state ments 
regarding the virgin birth of Jesus and Jesus’s bodily resurrection, 
as well as his public stands on political questions. For instance, 
Hammar criticized the U.S. invasion of Iraq, recommended a 
boycott of items produced in Israel, and supported the rights of 
homosexuals.
 
Christianity ﬁ rst came to Sweden in the ninth century when 
the Frankish Benedictine monk Ansgarious, devoted to extending 
the Roman church to new territories, preached the Christian mes-
sage in the trading town of Birka (Pleijel 1960, 13). Around the year 
1000 the ﬁ rst Swedish king converted to Christianity. Christian 
inﬂ uences from Britain as well as Germany shaped early Chris-
tian practices in Sweden. The church established its organizational 
structure, forming bishoprics throughout the country and requir-
ing tithes and tax exemption for church property. With the Refor-
mation, Lutheran doctrine spread quickly to Sweden, due in part 
to the education of many Swedish clergy in Germany and to King 
Gustav Vasa’s desire to establish independence from the inﬂ uence 
of Rome and hence gain greater sovereignty for Sweden.
 
With the Reformation, the king became head of the church, 
assuming the role in religion formerly played by the pope. The 
Uppsala Council in 1593, headed by Duke Charles, who would 
later become King Charles IX, accepted the Augsburg Confession 
as the fundamental Lutheran statement of faith and declared that 
Sweden 99

100 Worldwide Perspective
the national church of Sweden would be Evangelical-Lutheran 
(Gustafsson 2003, 51). The Canon Law of 1686 authorized the king 
to supervise and defend the church. The government of Sweden 
established severe church regulations, including restrictions on 
freedom of religion, largely to protect the Lutheran denomination 
from the intrusion of Catholics and Calvinists. Church and state 
became closely associated, with priests not only serving the church 
but also serving the state, performing various nonreligious duties 
as civil servants. The local parish clergyman served as the leader in 
spiritual as well as temporal matters. As Hilding Pleijel (1960, 20) 
has noted, church and state “entered into a relationship so close 
that religious orthodoxy and civic loyalty had become practically 
synonymous.” The government did not allow citizens to leave the 
church and considered straying from church teaching or repudiat-
ing doctrines of the Lutheran Church crimes punishable by exile. 
For instance, Baptists faced imprisonment because they held wor-
ship services independently of the Lutheran clergy, and the chil-
dren of Baptists were required to be baptized (Gustafsson 2003, 
51). Subsequently, the ofﬁ cial Lutheran Church became the only 
permitted religion in Sweden, although exceptions were allowed 
beginning in the seventeenth century. In the early seventeenth cen-
tury, under the rule of Gustavus II Adolphus, Sweden expanded 
territorially and, in accord with Lutheran doctrine, the Bible was 
translated into the various languages of the new provinces.
 
By the eighteenth century various so-called free churches 
were established, including Methodists, Baptists, Quakers, and 
the Salvation Army. By the early decades of the twentieth century 
Seventh Day Adventists had established approximately a hundred 
churches. Followers of such movements as pietism and Moravi-
anism spread their inﬂ uence in various Swedish provinces, thus 
inﬂ uencing the character of religious tradition among the pop-
ulation. During the ﬁ rst half of the nineteenth century Sweden 
underwent a series of economic, social, political, and religious 
changes associated with the transformation from an agrarian to 
an industrialized society. By 1860 the presence of other churches, 
including the Catholic and Methodist-Episcopal, was ofﬁ cially 
recognized (Ahrén 1960, 32). In 1878 Peter Waldenström gathered 
many within the free-church movement into the Swedish Mission 
Covenant. Without permission from government authorities to 
celebrate the Lord’s Supper and to preach, the Mission Covenant 
group built many chapels throughout Sweden while remaining 

ofﬁ cially within the Church of Sweden (Latourette 1975, 1147). 
The Church of Sweden itself gained from the government greater 
control of its own activities.
 
Clergy and lay members attempted to reach workers in the 
factories, especially the younger people, with their message 
regard ing the evils of strong drink. Some pastors became politi-
cally active, especially in the Social Democratic movement, and 
a few even gained seats in the Riksdag, the Swedish parliament 
(ibid., 1148). In the late twentieth century the Social Democratic–
controlled government had continued the campaign against alco-
hol consumption, scrupulously regulating the sale of alcoholic 
beverages and strictly enforcing drunk driving laws (Heclo and 
Madsen 1987, 27).
 
In the nineteenth century two separate theological paths 
developed within the Church of Sweden, each associated with 
one of the major Swedish universities. At Uppsala, there evolved 
a more philosophical and subjective view of Christianity that 
deemphasized the formal church structure, while the faculty at 
Lund tended to promote the formalism of the church. Protestants 
in Sweden became active in social policy in an attempt to confront 
various problems arising from industrialization and the resulting 
social change. In 1863 the government permitted the formation of 
a national ecclesiastical council, which was composed of clergy 
and laypeople representing the dioceses and the two major uni-
versities. The council took part in making decisions affecting the 
church. In addition to alternative religious denominations, others, 
primarily those in academics and the labor movement, challenged 
the structure and beliefs of the state church. The critical and his-
torical study of the Bible, which originated in Germany, reached 
Sweden via the Swedish students who attended German univer-
sities. The faculty at Uppsala University tended to welcome the 
new approach to religion and biblical study, but others reacted 
negatively to the new approaches. In addition to these academic 
inﬂ uences, Marxism attracted many workers in Swedish industry, 
thus alienating them from the church. The more educated Swedes, 
although often maintaining ofﬁ cial adherence to the church, in 
fact became critical of traditional religious beliefs. Faculty at the 
University of Lund in the twentieth century—particularly Gus-
taf Emanuel Hildebrand Aulén and Anders Nygren—expressed 
strong criticism of the liberal inﬂ uences of the nineteenth century 
and supported the major theologians of the earlier centuries in an 
Sweden 101

102 Worldwide Perspective
attempt to preserve what they considered to be the true Christian 
faith. They emphasized God’s love as a fundamental ingredient in 
Christianity (Latourette 1975, 1385).
 
The state church softened its traditional policy of exclusive-
ness as the ofﬁ cial church, initiating interaction with various Chris-
tian groups. In 1863 a rule requiring all church members to receive 
communion at least once each year was repealed. Each citizen was 
subject to the authority of a secular borough as well as a parish, 
and the parish had the right to assess taxes on anyone living in 
the parish in order to ﬁ nance the activities of the religious organi-
zation. The Church Assembly, established in the 1860s, consisted 
of bishops, clergy, and lay representatives and was elected by the 
parishes. This body had veto power over any policy related to reli-
gion. Prior to 1908 the Swedish government required that every 
marriage must be conducted within the Church of Sweden, but 
in that year a new law provided the option of marriage through 
a civil ceremony. In the late 1920s education, which had been the 
responsibility of the parishes, began to be transferred to secular 
authorities. In 1930 the Riksdag determined that in the larger par-
ishes, church councils would be elected by a system of propor-
tional representation. This move introduced the political parties 
into the representative structure of the Church of Sweden.
 
In 1952 the Riksdag approved legislation that ﬁ nally estab-
lished the formal principle of religious liberty. Under this legisla-
tion, no persons could be required to be a member of the Church 
of Sweden against their wishes, and people could withdraw their 
church membership at their own choosing. However, few people 
took advantage of this option; members of the Lutheran Church 
continued to make up nearly 99 percent of the Swedish popu-
lation (Gustafsson 2003, 55). In the 1950s many Swedes voiced 
their concern about the continuation of the Lutheran Church as 
the ofﬁ cial state church, arguing that such an arrangement vio-
lated the principle of religious freedom. Nonetheless, at that time 
more than 85 percent of children were baptized in the church and 
a similar percentage were conﬁ rmed (Ahrén 1960, 32). In 1958 a 
commission was established to examine the ofﬁ cial status of the 
state church. After ten years, the commission issued a ﬁ nal report 
that presented four possible models for an altered relationship 
between church and state, extending from no signiﬁ cant change 
to establishing a church that was completely independent of the 
state. Thus began several years of political negotiations to deter-

mine the precise details of the altered status of the church in 
Swedish society. The church continued to lose its civil functions, 
which included the keeping of the vital statistics of citizens, such 
as birth and death records, in the local rector’s ofﬁ ce, and main-
taining cemeteries.
 
In 1991 civil registration of citizens was transferred from the 
priests of the church to the secular tax authority. In 1994 the Pre-
paratory Committee on Church Matters presented a proposal that 
the church should be separated from the state but that the Riks-
dag should approve a new law afﬁ rming that the Church of Swe-
den would remain an Evangelical-Lutheran denomination, that 
all regions of the country would be included in a parish, and that 
the church would have a democratic organization. Although the 
church would no longer have the authority to levy taxes, the state 
would assist in collecting fees from members. The government 
also would provide ﬁ nancial assistance in maintaining historic 
churches (Gustafsson 2003, 66). With the changes in church sta-
tus taking effect on January 1, 2000, many expected that member-
ship would decrease signiﬁ cantly. However, the loss of members 
was minimal. Elections to the various levels of church organiza-
tion occurred in September 2001, with a turnout rate of 14 per-
cent (ibid., 69). Various political parties gained representation, 
which exceeded that of representatives unaligned with any party. 
This outcome led some to conclude that although the church has 
gained greater independence from government, it still is closely 
tied to the political system, with political parties able to exercise 
inﬂ uence within the church.
 
Other Scandinavian countries are contemplating greater inde-
pendence of the church from the state. In Norway, a government-
appointed committee in January 2006 recommended that the 
Storting (Norwegian parliament) and the king no longer take part 
in church affairs, including the selection of bishops. A modiﬁ ca-
tion of church-state relations would require amending the nation’s 
constitution before going into effect (Stoichevski 2006, 36). Den-
mark also is considering the separation of church and state. In 
2003 Finland’s parliament approved the Freedom of Religion Act, 
which established a less complicated procedure for Evangelical-
Lutheran Church members to leave the church.
 
Although there are other denominations in Sweden, the 
Lutheran Church continues to dominate, with approximately 
7.6 million members, even though many are associated with the 
Sweden 103

104 Worldwide Perspective
church in name only. The Lutheran Church has joined with other 
denominations to form the Christian Council of Sweden, which 
includes twenty-ﬁ ve member churches and three “observers” 
categorized into four groups: the Lutheran Church; the Catholic 
Church, with approximately 165,000 members; the free churches, 
which include various Protestant denominations (including Bap-
tist, Methodist, Reformed, Mission Covenant, and Pentecostal 
churches) consisting of 250,000 members; and the Eastern Ortho-
dox and Oriental Orthodox churches, with a total membership of 
100,000. These churches participate in ecumenical discussions as 
well as evangelism activities (Christian Council of Sweden 2005).
 
The Church of Sweden participates in activities outside the 
nation’s boundaries. Through Church of Sweden Aid, the church 
offers emergency relief as well as more extended development 
assistance to other nations. The organization works with local 
churches to provide economic assistance and to protect the envi-
ronment, and also advocates debt cancellation for poor countries 
and fair-trade policies. The Church of Sweden Mission, founded 
in 1874, conducts foreign missionary work at the invitation of 
other countries and in cooperation with local congregations. The 
organization assists local congregations, provides medical assis-
tance, and advocates respect for human rights.
 
Just as with mainline denominations in the United States, con-
servative members and clergy in the Swedish Lutheran Church 
have objected to liberal trends, including the decision to allow 
the ordination of women beginning in 1960 and, more recently, 
more accepting attitudes toward homosexuals and gay mar-
riage (Olafsson 2004). However, due to the tradition of having an 
ofﬁ cial state church, Swedish clergy are much more closely tied 
to government policy than are clergy in the United States, where a 
very different tradition of separation of church and state prevails.
Conclusion
European countries have a long history of interaction between 
church and state, which frequently led to violent conﬂ ict. In the 
United States, although the original thirteen states practiced the 
establishment of religion, the last state-established church came 
to an end in Massachusetts in 1833. The countries discussed here 
have to various degrees accepted the principle of separation of 

church and state, although church-state relations beyond those 
usually considered constitutionally acceptable in the United States 
continue. The level of religious observance in Europe pales in com-
parison to that of the United States. The long history of ofﬁ cial 
church recognition and the resulting controversy and conﬂ ict may 
contribute to explaining the increased levels of apparent indiffer-
ence to formal religious institutions and the lack of organizational 
structures geared toward religious inﬂ uence in politics that tend to 
pervade the U.S. political process.
 
Does the present state of religious organization and belief in 
Europe portend the status of religion in the United States in the 
future? Observing that the mainline churches can trace their roots 
back to Europe, and noting membership declines in recent decades, 
we might answer in the afﬁ rmative. However, other factors sug-
gest a negative response. The shift from the mainline churches to 
more evangelical denominations and nondenominational churches 
points to a continuing relevance of religious afﬁ liation to a large 
segment of the U.S. population. In addition, if Europeans’ atti-
tudes toward religion are taken as the exception in a world where 
the norm is signiﬁ cant religious belief and commitment, there may 
be little reason to expect the United States to follow in the footsteps 
of Europe. The religious beliefs of U.S. citizens and elected ofﬁ cials 
may be expected to continue to inﬂ uence public policy making. 
However, the extent to which that inﬂ uence comes from the main-
line denominations remains an open question.
References
Ahrén, Per-Olov. 1960. “Organization and Legal Status.” In Robert 
Murray, ed., The Church of Sweden: Past and Present, 31–44. Malmö, 
Sweden: Allhem.
Ajami, Fouad. 2005. “The Boys of Nowhere.” U.S. News and World Report 
(November 21): 50.
Anderson, John. 2003. “Catholicism and Democratic Consolidation in 
Spain and Poland.” In John T. S. Madeley and Zsolt Enyedi, eds., Church 
and State in Contemporary Europe: The Chimera of Neutrality. London: 
Frank Cass: 137–156.
British Broadcasting Company (BBC). 2006. “The Church of England.” 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/christianity/cofe/cofe_1.shtml.
References 105

106 Worldwide Perspective
Carosa, Alberto. 2006. “Holding a New Line: Pope Benedict, Islam, and 
the Media.” Chronicles (December): 20.
Chadwìck, Owen. 1990. “Great Britain and Europe.” In John 
McManners, ed., The Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Christian Council of Sweden. 2005. “Four Church Families.” http://
www.skr.org/english/fourchurchfamilies.4.ec944110677af1e8380001508
8.html.
Church of Sweden. 2005. “Facts about the Church of Sweden.” 
http://svenskakyrkan.se/ArticlePages/200508/16/20050816074719_
svkhjs928/20050816074719_svkhjs928.dbp.asp.
Creswell, Mike. 2002. “Leaders Assess Impact of New French Religion 
Law.” Baptist News Service. http://www.rickross.com/reference/
general/general426.html.
Donovan, Mark. 2003. “The Italian State: No Longer Catholic, No 
Longer Christian.” In John T. S. Madeley and Zsolt Enyedi, eds., Church 
and State in Contemporary Europe: The Chimera of Neutrality, 95–116. 
London: Frank Cass.
Ecumenical News International. 2005. “French Religion Faces New 
Future 100 Years after Church-State-Law.” http://www.eni.ch/articles/
display.shtml?05-0791.
Fleishman, Jeffrey, and Ela Kasprzycka. 2007. “New Archbishop Resigns 
Hours Before Inauguration.” Houston Chronicle (January 8): A8.
French Embassy in Australia. 2000. “Religion in France.” http://www
.ambafrance-au.org/article-imprim.php3?id_article=462.
Germany Info. 2006. “Religion.” http://www.germany.info/relaunch/
culture/life/religion.html.
Gustafsson, Göran. 2003. “Church-State Separation Swedish-Style.” 
In John T. S. Madeley and Zsolt Enyedi, eds., Church and State in 
Contemporary Europe: The Chimera of Neutrality, 51–72. London: Frank 
Cass.
Harbison, E. Harris. 1955. The Age of Reformation. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
Heclo, Hugh, and Henrik Madsen. 1987. Policy and Politics in Sweden: 
Principled Pragamatism. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Hervieu-Léger, Danièle. 2006. “The Role of Religion in Establishing 
Social Cohesion.” In Krzysztof Michalski, ed., Religion in the New Europe. 
New York: Central European University Press.
Houston Chronicle. 2006. “Leader Rejects Power Sharing.” (May 23): A9.

Houston Chronicle. 2007a. “Church in Poland Reels Over Cold War 
Scandal” (January 10): A10.
Houston Chronicle. 2007b. “Anglicans Afﬁ rm Policies on Gay 
Communicants” (March 1): A16.
Katz, Gregory. 2007. “N. Ireland Leaders Strike Pivotal Accord.” Houston 
Chronicle (March 27): A10.
Landler, Mark. 2007. “German Judge Stirs Protest by Citing Quran.” 
Houston Chronicle (March 23): A19.
Latourette, Kenneth Scott. 1975. A History of Christianity, Volume II: 
Reformation to the Present. New York: Harper and Row.
Martin, David. 2006. “Integration and Fragmentation: Patterns of 
Religion in Europe.” In Krzysztof Michalski, ed., Religion in the New 
Europe. New York: Central European University Press.
McElroy, John Harmon. 2006. “Workers of Another World United: 
A Personal Commemoration of Poland’s Solidarity 25 Years Later.” 
Touchstone (December): 28–33.
Minkenberg, Michael. 2003. “The Policy Impact of Church-State 
Relations: Family Policy and Abortion in Britain, France, and Germany.” 
In John T. S. Madeley and Zsolt Enyedi, eds., Church and State in 
Contemporary Europe: The Chimera of Neutrality. London: Frank Cass.
Monsma, Steven V., and J. Christopher Soper. 1997. The Challenge of 
Pluralism: Church and State in Five Democracies. Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littleﬁ eld.
Moore, Molly. 2006. “Romance, But Not Marriage.” Washington Post 
National Weekly Edition (November 27–December 3): 18.
Murchison, William. 2005. “Vanishing Sea of Faith: European Islam and 
the Doubtful Future of Christian Europe.” Touchstone (October): 36–40.
Olofsson, Folke T. 2004.  “A Grief Observed: On Being a Living Priest in 
a Dying Church in Sweden.” Touchstone (November): 32–39.
Pleijel, Hilding. 1960. “The Church of Sweden: An Historical 
Retrospect.” In Robert Murray, ed., The Church of Sweden: Past and 
Present, 13–28. Malmö, Sweden: Allhem.
Reiter, Natalia, and Malgorzata Rakoweic. 2006. “Former President of 
Poland Leaves Solidarity Behind.” Houston Chronicle (September 1): A21.
Rosenthal, Elisabeth. 2006. “European Birthrates Are Still Declining: 
Numbers at an All-Time Low as Many Find Having Children Too 
Costly.” Houston Chronicle (September 4): A20.
Simpson, Victor L. 2006. “Bishops Balking at Satirical Stabs Aimed at 
Vatican.” Houston Chronicle (November 26): A25.
References 107

108 Worldwide Perspective
Stoichevski, William. 2006. “No More State Church in Norway?” The 
Lutheran (August 2006): 36–37.
Tolson, Jay. 2005. “An Education in Muslim Integration: Could 
Islamic Schools Be Part of the Solution?” U. S. News and World Report 
(November 21): 37–38, 40.
United States Department of State Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, 
and Labor. 2005. “Italy: International Religious Freedom Report 2005.” 
http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2005/51560.htm.
Weigel, George. 2005. The Cube and the Cathedral: Europe, America, and 
Politics without God. New York: Basic Books.
Wilkinson, Tracy. 2006a. “Benedict Drops Bombshell with Quote on 
Islam.” Houston Chronicle (September 13): A15.
Wilkinson, Tracy. 2006b. “Italian Author Was Country’s Most 
Provocative Journalist.” Houston Chronicle (September 16): A20.

109
4
Chronology
T
his chronology highlights the current activities of the mainline 
denominations as well as their historical roots, pinpointing 
their ﬁ rst appearance on the North American continent and 
their various organizational transformations; the issues that led 
to internal divisions and the current expression of these divisions 
in the context of the larger social and political conﬂ icts within 
American society known as the culture war; moves toward unity 
among denominations; and the larger issues in the public realm 
with which the denominations have become involved.
1628 
 Dutch settlers in New Amsterdam (subsequently New 
York City) establish a Reformed congregation when an 
ordained minister arrives from the Netherlands.
1631 
 Roger Williams arrives in Massachusetts and quickly 
clashes with the Puritan leadership when he asserts 
that the civil authority should not enforce adher-
ence to those parts of the Ten Commandments deal-
ing solely with the relationship between individual 
human beings and God.
1634 
 Catholics, led by Cecil Calvert, establish a colony in 
Maryland.
1644 
 Roger Williams issues The Bloudy Tenet of Persecu-
tion for the Cause of Conscience Discussed, in which he 
defends religious liberty. Having left Massachusetts 
in 1636 because of disagreements with the authorities 
over religious questions, Williams allows Baptists who 

110 Chronology
have been expelled from Massachusetts to live in the 
new settlement of Providence.
1647 
 A Massachusetts law declares that any person in the 
colony who derives authority from the Catholic pope 
in Rome will be considered a disturber of the public 
peace and safety and an enemy of the true Christian 
religion.
1706 
 Presbyterians in Philadelphia establish the ﬁ rst pres-
bytery in North America.
1707 
 Baptist adherents establish the Philadelphia Baptist 
Association, composed of ﬁ ve congregations in Penn-
sylvania and New Jersey.
1734 
 Jonathan Edwards, a Calvinist minister, theologian, 
and effective speaker, begins a religious revival in 
Northampton, Massachusetts. The revival contributes 
signiﬁ cantly to the religious movement called the Great 
Awakening that is sweeping through the colonies.
1773 
 Ten preachers from three colonies hold the ﬁ rst annual 
conference of American Methodism at St. George’s 
Church in Philadelphia on July 14.
1784 
 Methodist ministers meet in Baltimore and establish 
the Methodist Episcopal Church in America.
1785 
 The Episcopal Church holds its ﬁ rst General Conven-
tion in Philadelphia. The delegates begin work on 
a constitution and revisions to the Book of Common 
Prayer.
1787 
 John Leland, a Virginia Baptist pastor, withdraws his 
opposition to the proposed Constitution when James 
Madison assures him that, once ratiﬁ ed, the document 
will be amended to guarantee religious freedom.
1789 
 John Carroll, a member of the Society of Jesus, is 
selected as the ﬁ rst Catholic bishop in the United 
States. Georgetown College is established as the coun-
try’s ﬁ rst Catholic institution of higher education.
1800 
 Followers of Philip William Otterbein and Martin 
Boehm establish the Church of the United Brethren, a 
predominantly German-speaking denomination.
1801 
 Presbyterians and Connecticut Congregationalists 
agree to the Plan of Union, which encourages coop-
eration among missionaries of the two denominations. 
1644 
(cont.)

Chronology 111
The plan leads to increased expansion of the churches 
in the western territories. Although Presbyterians ben e-
ﬁ t most from the agreement, conservative (Old School) 
Presbyterians object to the lack of exclusive control 
over missionary activities.
1804 
 Separating themselves from the Presbyterian Church, 
Barton W. Stone and ﬁ ve colleagues establish a reli-
gious organization that will ultimately become the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).
 
  In a eulogy for Alexander Hamilton, who has 
been killed in a duel with Aaron Burr, Presbyterian 
min ister Eliphalet Nott condemns the practice of duel-
ing, calling it an absurd practice originating in a bar-
barous age.
1809 
 Thomas Campbell, organizer of the Christian Asso-
ciation of Washington, Pennsylvania, issues the Dec-
laration and Address, in which he expresses the basic 
principles of the New Testament and the objective of 
Christian unity.
1812 
 Congregational ministers in New England vote to 
denounce the War of 1812 and present antiwar ser-
mons to their congregations.
1816 
 Experiencing discrimination within the church, dis-
affected African Americans leave the Methodist 
Epis co pal Church to establish the African Methodist 
Episcopal Church.
1819 
 Dutch Reformed congregations incorporate as the 
Reformed Protestant Dutch Church.
1821 
 As happened in 1816, another group of disaffected 
African Americans leaves the Methodist Episcopal 
Church and establishes the African Methodist Episco-
pal Zion Church.
1828 
 Lyman Beecher, a Presbyterian minister, joins with 
other Christians to found the General Union for Pro-
moting the Observance of the Christian Sabbath. The 
group attempts to use boycotts and persuasion to get 
people to observe the Sabbath.
1830 
 Thomas Campbell and his son Alexander, who 
emigrated from Ireland, leave the Baptist organiza-
tions with which they originally joined, forming the 

112 Chronology
Disciples, a precursor of the Christian Church (Dis-
ciples of Christ).
 
  Approximately 5,000 ministers and laypeople, 
dissatisﬁ ed with insufﬁ cient lay representation in the 
Methodist Episcopal Church, leave the denomination 
to form the Methodist Protestant Church.
1837 
 At the General Assembly meeting of the Presbyte-
rian Church, Old School proponents, having gained a 
majority of representatives, end the 1801 Plan of Union 
with the Congregationalists, whom they consider to 
have aided the New School partisans. This move elim-
inates four synods that were formed under the plan, 
thus decreasing the strength of the New School. The 
issue of revivalism—which the Old School opposes 
and the New School encourages—as well as contro-
versy over abolition result in the division of the Old 
and New School Presbyterians.
1844 
 When the New England Convention of Christians 
ratiﬁ es a resolution condemning slavery, Southern 
Christian congregations form the Southern Christian 
Association.
 
  Delegates to the General Convention of the Meth-
odist Episcopal Church (MEC) vote to suspend a 
Southern bishop who has refused to free slaves that 
he owns. Southern delegates quickly devise a plan to 
separate from the MEC, forming the Methodist Epis-
copal Church, South.
1845 
 The American Baptist Foreign Mission Society decides 
that no candidate who owns slaves will be appointed 
for service, and the American Baptist Home Mission 
Society concludes that separate northern and south-
ern conventions should be established. As a result, 
members in the Southern states establish the Southern 
Baptist Convention separate from a group of northern 
Baptist societies.
1853 
 The Congregational Church in Butler, New York, 
ordains a woman, Antoinette Brown, and calls her to 
the ministry.
1854 
 More than 3,000 clergymen in New England sign a 
petition opposing the Kansas-Nebraska bill, which 
will allow the extension of slavery beyond the limits 
1830 
(cont.)

Chronology 113
set in the Missouri Compromise of 1821 by provid-
ing for the creation of two new territories—Kansas 
and Nebraska—with the expectation that Kansas will 
permit slavery and Nebraska will not. With the back-
ing of Senator Stephen A. Douglas, President Franklin 
Pierce, and Southern representatives, the bill becomes 
law.
1855 
 Congregational minister Henry Ward Beecher pro-
claims from the pulpit of Plymouth Church in Brook-
lyn, New York, his support for John Brown and those 
ﬁ ghting to maintain Kansas as a free state. He raises 
money to purchase riﬂ es, called “Beecher’s Bibles,” 
for those opposing slavery.
1857 
 As the Civil War approaches, New School Presbyteri-
ans divide into northern and southern groups.
1859 
 Charles Darwin publishes The Origin of Species, in 
which he presents a theory of evolution based on 
natural selection. Disagreements arise in Christian 
denominations between those who attempt to accom-
modate their religious beliefs to Darwin’s theory and 
those who argue that the new science contradicts the 
Genesis account of creation, replacing purpose and 
spirituality with a random and materialistic under-
standing of human existence.
1860 
 Unlike the Presbyterians who are divided over the 
slavery issue, the Campbell-Stone movement, which 
will become the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), 
avoids division by stating that the issue is not a matter 
of faith but of opinion.
1861 
 With Southern state secession, northern and southern 
Old School Presbyterians divide into two separate 
groups. The southern group becomes the Presbyterian 
Church in the Confederate States of America.
1866 
 Following the Southern defeat in the Civil War, the Old 
School Presbyterians in the South rename themselves 
the Presbyterian Church in the United States (PCUS).
 
  The German Reformed Church joins with the 
Dutch Reformed Church to establish the Reformed 
Church in the United States.
1867 
 The Congregational Church becomes the ﬁ rst denomi-
nation ofﬁ cially to allow the ordination of women.

114 Chronology
 
  The Reformed Protestant Dutch Church, incor-
porated in 1819, changes its name to the Reformed 
Church in America.
1870 
 Northern Old School and New School Presbyterians, 
divided since the Civil War, merge to form the Presby-
terian Church in the U.S.A. (PCUSA).
1874 
 Francis Landey Patton, professor of theology at the 
Presbyterian Theological Seminary of the Northwest 
in Chicago, accuses David Swing, popular minister at 
Fourth Presbyterian Church in Chicago, of heresy. Pat-
ton charges that Swing’s sermons and book, Truths for 
Today, deny the teachings of the Westminster Confes-
sion of Faith. Swing responds that human creeds are 
imperfect and must be revised to correspond with cur-
rent cultural circumstances. Although the Presbytery 
of Chicago acquits Swing of all charges, Swing leaves 
the denomination when Patton announces his inten-
tion to appeal the case to the Northern Illinois Synod. 
Swing continues as an independent minister, and his 
views encourage the ascendance of theological liberal-
ism in the late nineteenth century.
1878 
 The General Conference of the Southern Method-
ist Church censures Vanderbilt University professor 
Alexander Winchell for abandoning a literal interpre-
tation of the Genesis account of creation in favor of 
a more allegorical reading. When Winchell refuses to 
resign, the Methodist university eliminates his teach-
ing position.
1882 
 Catholics found the Knights of Columbus in New 
Haven, Connecticut. This association of men encour-
ages fraternity, benevolence, and tolerance.
1884 
 James Woodrow, a theologian in the Southern Presby-
terian denomination, a scientist, and uncle of future 
President Woodrow Wilson, states in an address that 
the church should not take a position on the issue of 
evolution, declaring the subject outside the sphere of 
religious belief. The pronouncement raises a great deal 
of controversy within the denomination.
1886 
 The Southern Presbyterian General Assembly perma-
nently removes James Woodrow from the faculty of the 
Presbyterian seminary in Columbia, South Carolina, 
1867 
(cont.)

Chronology 115
because Woodrow has declared that the church should 
not take a stand either in support of or in op position 
to evolution theory because the topic exceeds that 
institution’s jurisdiction. The assembly votes 137–13 
in favor of a statement proclaiming that Adam had no 
natural animal forebears.
1889 
 U.S. Catholic bishops found Catholic University of 
America in Washington DC.
1891 
 Pope Leo XIII issues the ﬁ rst modern social encycli-
cal, Rerum Novarum (On the Condition of the Working 
Class), which proclaims the basic right of workers to 
attain an adequate material and spiritual life. Thus, the 
Catholic Church avoids taking a stand of unqualiﬁ ed 
support for the capitalist system that is developing in 
the United States.
1892 
 Delegates to the 1892 General Assembly of the Pres-
byterian Church in the U.S.A., meeting in Portland, 
Oregon, approve a declaration, called the Portland 
Deliverance, that afﬁ rms the inerrancy of the Bible and 
requires all ministers in the denomination to accept 
this doctrine.
 
   The Presbytery of Cincinnati tries and convicts 
Henry Preserved Smith, professor of the Old Testament 
at Lane Theological Seminary, on charges that he has 
denied the verbal inspiration and inerrancy of the Bible, 
a position he expressed at the 1891 Presbyterian Gen-
eral Assembly in defense of Augustus Briggs, a major 
advocate of higher criticism of the Bible. The presbytery 
suspends Smith from the ministry. Smith subsequently 
publishes his views in Inspiration and Inerrancy.
1893 
 The Presbyterian assembly convicts of heresy Charles 
Augustus Briggs, a prominent Old Testament scholar, 
chair of biblical studies at Union Theological Seminary, 
and advocate of the higher critical approach to biblical 
scholarship, even though his presbytery has acquitted 
him of the charges. Although the assembly suspends 
Briggs from the ministry, the board of directors of the 
seminary refuses to accept the ruling, retaining Briggs 
on the faculty.
1899 
 Pope Leo XIII issues the encyclical Testem benevolentiae 
(On the Heresy of Americanism), in which he warns 

116 Chronology
Catholics about heretical attitudes contrary to the 
faith, including tailoring beliefs to the larger culture. 
Although both liberal and conservative groups within 
the U.S. Catholic Church interpret the statement as 
supporting their position, the conservative camp ulti-
mately claims the victory.
1907 
 Established in the mid-nineteenth century as the 
northern group of Baptists, the American Baptist Mis-
sionary Union reorganizes as the Northern Baptist 
Convention.
1908 
 The northern Methodists establish the Federation for 
Social Service to adopt progressive social principles 
and guide the denomination’s social welfare projects.
 
  Mainline Protestant denominations join in estab-
lishing the Federal Council of Churches, an ecumeni-
cal organization intended to increase the churches’ 
inﬂ uence on social and economic matters.
1910 
 The General Assembly of the Northern Presbyterian 
Church approves a social statement that will become 
an important ingredient in the Federal Council of 
Churches. Among the proposed social reforms are 
improving working conditions for women, ending 
child labor, establishing workmen’s compensation, 
limiting the length of the workweek, and providing 
higher wages for industrial employees.
 
  Francis James Grimké, an African American Pres-
byterian minister who has spoken against racism and 
segregation in the Presbyterian Church and the wider 
American society, plays a signiﬁ cant role in the creation 
of the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People (NAACP), a civil rights organization.
1914 
 Norman M. Thomas, a Presbyterian minister (better 
known later as the leader of the Socialist Party), forms 
the Association of Paciﬁ st Ministers to oppose Chris-
tian involvement in warfare.
 
  The Presbyterian Church in the United States 
(PCUS), the United Presbyterian Church of North 
America (UPCNA), the Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A. (PCUSA), and the Associate Reformed Presby-
terian Synod issue the “United Declaration of Chris-
tian Faith and Social Service,” which calls on religious 
1899 
(cont.)

Chronology 117
groups to oppose social injustice and asks individuals 
to engage in social, political, and economic interac-
tions that adhere to the principles of love and justice. 
However, the declaration recommends that congrega-
tions refrain from taking positions and acting on par-
ticular political and social issues. 
1917 
 Beginning the merger process of Lutheran denomina-
tions, three Norwegian synods combine to form the 
Norwegian Lutheran Church in America (NLCA). Vari-
ous Lutheran groups cooperate to establish the National 
Lutheran Commission to assist U.S. military personnel.
 
  With the cooperation of President Woodrow 
Wilson, the Catholic Church establishes the National 
Catholic War Council to coordinate Catholic assistance 
in the war effort. The formation of the council repre-
sents a signiﬁ cant ﬁ rst step in creating a national orga-
nization dedicated to larger social activities and is the 
precursor to the United States Conference of Catholic 
Bishops.
1918 
 Continuing the uniﬁ cation process among Lutheran 
groups, three German synods combine to form the 
United Lutheran Church in America (ULCA).
1919 
 Monsignor John A. Ryan, who is beginning his twenty-
six-year tenure as director of the National Catholic 
Welfare Council’s social action department, issues the 
pamphlet “Social Reconstruction: A General Review 
of the Problems and Survey of Remedies.” Ryan advo-
cates such reforms as child labor bans, government-
supported unemployment and retirement insurance, 
the right of workers to organize, and equal pay for 
men and women for equivalent labor.
1922 
 Harry Emerson Fosdick, a Baptist minister and pas-
tor of the First Presbyterian Church in New York 
City, preaches the sermon “Shall the Fundamental-
ists Win?” in which he questions the virgin birth of 
Jesus, the inerrancy of the Bible, and the literal second 
coming of Jesus. Ivy Lee widely distributes copies of 
the sermon, retitled “The New Knowledge and the 
Christian Faith.” Because of the views expressed in the 
sermon, Fosdick becomes the focus of controversy in 
the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.

118 Chronology
1924 
 A group of Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. minis-
ters meets in Auburn, New York, to prepare a response 
to the Five Point Deliverance statement adopted by 
the 1910 General Assembly and reafﬁ rmed in 1916 
and 1923. The Five Point Deliverance speciﬁ es that 
clergy must adhere to such beliefs as the inerrancy of 
the Bible, the virgin birth, the substitutionary atone-
ment and bodily resurrection of Jesus, and the factual 
accuracy of miracles recounted in the Bible. One hun-
dred and ﬁ fty ministers attending the meeting publish 
the Auburn Afﬁ rmation, which does not deny any of 
these beliefs but considers them theories about facts for 
which other explanations could be offered. Therefore, 
the ministers oppose making adherence to the Five 
Points a requirement for ordination or orthodoxy. The 
afﬁ rmation is reissued in May with 1,274 signatures. 
1927 
 Following several years of controversy between fun-
damentalists and more progressive members, the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. General Assembly 
approves a resolution stating that the assembly cannot 
pronounce any belief essential without employing the 
precise wording of the Westminster Confession.
1928 
 Alfred E. Smith, governor of New York and a Catho-
lic, wins the Democratic nomination for president but 
loses decisively to Herbert Hoover in the general elec-
tion. Political analysts attribute Smith’s defeat in part 
to his religious afﬁ liation.
1930 
 Three German Lutheran groups merge to establish the 
American Lutheran Church (ALC).
 
  The National Lutheran Commission, originally 
created at the start of the First World War to offer assis-
tance to U.S. military personnel, begins a program of 
assistance within the United States.
1931 
 The Congregational Churches and the Christian 
Church merge to form the Congregational Christian 
Churches.
 
  Pope Pius XI issues the encyclical Quadragesimo 
Anno (Forty Years After), establishing the Catholic 
Church’s understanding of its relationship with the 
larger society. The statement calls for “subsidiar-
ity,” or the presence of organizational structures to 

Chronology 119
mediate between individuals and the state as a pro-
tection against the domination of social and economic 
institutions.
 
  Charles Cofﬂ in, a Catholic priest, begins radio 
broadcasts in which he presents his views on current 
social and political issues. Originally a supporter of 
President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal programs, 
Cofﬂ in becomes a major critic of the New Deal.
1933 
 Dorothy Day, a left-leaning journalist turned Catholic, 
and Peter Maurin, a French Catholic populist, found 
the Catholic Worker movement and begin establish-
ing hospitality houses around the United States to 
feed and house the poor. Day and Maurin emphasize 
spiritual as well as material needs, paciﬁ sm, and the 
importance of love.
1934 
 The Evangelical Synod and the Reformed Church com-
bine to form the Evangelical and Reformed Church.
1936 
 J. Gresham Machen founds the Presbyterian Church 
of America (later called the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church) after the  Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. 
suspends him from the ministry for establishing the 
Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions.
1939 
 The Methodist Episcopal Church; the Methodist Epis-
copal Church, South; and the Methodist Protestant 
Church join to form the Methodist Church.
1944 
 Notwithstanding past statements supporting social 
change to beneﬁ t the less advantaged, delegates to the 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A. proclaim that the church has failed to act effec-
tively to improve economic and industrial relations.
1946 
 The Evangelical Church and the United Brethren 
Church unite to form the Evangelical United Brethren 
Church.
1950 
 Members of the Northern Baptist Convention reorga-
nize, changing the group’s name to the American Bap-
tist Convention.
 
  Various Protestant, Anglican, Orthodox, Evangel-
ical, and African American churches join in establish-
ing the National Council of Churches of Christ in the 
U.S.A. The organization replaces the old Federal Coun-
cil of Churches and other ecumenical organizations.

120 Chronology
1951 
 Catholic Bishop Fulton J. Sheen begins a television 
program, “Life Is Worth Living,” which attracts a large 
audience. The program acquaints many Americans 
with the Catholic faith.
1953 
 New Orleans Archbishop Joseph Francis Rummel 
issues a letter titled “Blessed Are the Peacemakers,” in 
which he denounces racism and the practice of racial 
segregation.
1955 
 New Orleans Archbishop Joseph Francis Rummel 
orders the desegregation of Catholic schools in the 
archdiocese.
1957 
 The Congregational Christian Churches—formed by 
the merger of the Congregational Churches and the 
Christian Church in 1931—and the Evangelical and 
Reformed Church—established in 1934 through the 
merger of the Evangelical Synod and the Reformed 
Church—meeting at the General Synod in Cleveland, 
Ohio, join to establish the United Church of Christ 
(UCC). Cleveland becomes the location for the new 
denomination’s national headquarters.
 
  In August a group of religious activists, primar-
ily Quakers and Catholic Workers, hold a protest at 
the gates of a Nevada nuclear test site. Eleven of the 
protesters trespass onto the test-site grounds and are 
arrested. 
1958 
 After discussions during the early 1950s, the  Presbyte-
rian Church in the U.S.A. and the United Presbyterian 
Church of North America (UPCNA), a denomination 
originally formed in 1858, join to create the United 
Presbyterian Church in the United States of America 
(UPCUSA). The Presbyterian Church in the United 
States (PCUS) rejects union with the predominantly 
northern denomination.
 
  Methodists agree to eliminate, over a ten-year 
period, the Central Jurisdiction, which includes exclu-
sively black Methodist churches.
1959 
 The General Synod of the United Church of Christ 
calls for effort and prayer to end racial segregation 
and discrimination in the United States.
1960 
 Danish and Norwegian Lutheran groups merge with 
the American Lutheran Church, originally a predomi-
nantly German denomination.

Chronology 121
 
  John Kennedy, a Catholic, wins the Democratic 
presidential nomination, challenging the common 
view that a Catholic cannot be elected president. He 
is the ﬁ rst Catholic to be nominated since Al Smith 
in 1928. In a speech to the Houston Ministerial Asso-
ciation, Kennedy assures the American public that he 
believes in absolute separation of church and state, 
stating that he does not speak for his church on public 
matters, and the church does not speak for him. He 
declares that if elected president, he will make deci-
sions independent of the Catholic hierarchy.
 
  Northern Presbyterians declare that laws and cus-
toms mandating racial discrimination are violations of 
the law of God, and therefore Christians can justiﬁ ably 
disregard such laws if they do so in a peaceable and 
orderly way.
1962 
 The United Lutheran Church in America joins with 
German, Slovak, Icelandic, Swedish, Finnish, and 
Danish groups to form the Lutheran Church in Amer-
ica (LCA).
 
   Pope John XXIII convenes the Second Vatican 
Council, which will meet three months each year 
from 1962 to 1965. The council examines the Catholic 
Church’s position in the modern world. Deliberations 
lead to signiﬁ cant reforms in the Catholic Church, 
including changes in the national church organization 
that allow priests, nuns, and laypeople greater opportu-
nity to express their views within the church hierarchy.
1965 
 The Methodist General Board of Christian Social Con-
cerns recommends that President Lyndon Johnson’s 
administration surrender responsibility for resolving 
the Vietnam conﬂ ict to the United Nations.
1966 
 With a mandate from the Vatican Council, the Catho-
lic bishops in the United States establish the National 
Conference of Catholic Bishops (NCCB) and the United 
States Catholic Conference (USCC). The NCCB, com-
posed entirely of bishops, exercises control over the 
church’s affairs in the country, and the NCCB’s com-
mittees, composed of laypeople and clergy as well as 
bishops, deal with issues in the larger society.
 
  The Family Life Bureau of the National Confer-
ence of Catholic Bishops establishes the National Right 

122 Chronology
to Life Committee, which is dedicated to maintaining 
existing restrictions on abortion.
 
  Henry I. Louttit, Episcopal bishop of the Cen-
tral Archdeanery of South Florida, leads a group that 
demands that Reverend James Pike be tried for heresy. 
Pike, the dean of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in 
New York, has publicly rejected such orthodox Chris-
tian beliefs as the virgin birth of Jesus and the doc-
trine of the Trinity. The House of Bishops ultimately 
approves a mild censure of Bishop Pike.
1967 
 Referring to the results of the Second Vatican Council, 
which concluded in 1965, progressive Jesuit educators 
along with Father Theodore Hesburg, president of the 
University of Notre Dame, issue the Land O’Lakes 
declaration that calls for greater academic freedom in 
Catholic institutions of higher learning. The declara-
tion recommends increased openness to ecumenical 
initiatives and secular scholarship in order to advance 
the educational quality of Catholic institutions.
 
  After nine years of development, the General 
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. 
adopts a new confession of faith. Christian reconcili-
ation emerges as the main theme of the confession, 
which focuses on four major areas for reform: discrimi-
nation in society, international conﬂ ict, the continua-
tion of poverty amid afﬂ uence, and the relative status 
of males and females in society. Conservatives object 
to the confession, referring to the weakening of the 
orthodox view of scriptural authority and the deity of 
Christ, the failure to mention the virgin birth of Christ, 
and the omission of the doctrine of predestination.
1968 
 A representative assembly meeting in Kansas City, 
Missouri, approves the Provisional Design for the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).
 
  The Methodist Church and the Evangelical United 
Brethren unite, establishing the United Methodist 
Church.
 
  Pope Paul VI issues the encyclical Humanae Vitae 
(Of Human Life), which prohibits Catholics from using 
artiﬁ cial means of birth control and states that sexual 
1966 
(cont.)

Chronology 123
intercourse naturally should result in the procreation 
of children. Many U.S. Catholic clergy and a large 
majority of laypeople object to, or simply ignore, the 
encyclical. The encyclical initiates subsequent dissent 
among American Catholics on a number of issues.
 
  Conservative lay Catholics establish Catholics 
United for the Faith, an organization that defends the 
traditional Catholic faith against progressive inﬂ uences.
 
  Good News Magazine, published by Good News, 
a dissenting organization within the United Meth-
odist Church, includes an article strongly criticizing 
the denomination’s adult Sunday school curriculum, 
claiming that the material lacks grounding in biblical 
theology.
1972 
 Members of the American Baptist Convention reorga-
nize the group, changing the name to American Bap-
tist Churches in the U.S.A. (ABC).
 
  The Reformed Church in America approves the 
ordination of women as elders and deacons.
1973 
 Following disagreements within the Southern-based 
Presbyterian Church in the United States (PCUS) over 
adherence to strict Calvinist theology, the denomina-
tion’s involvement in the civil rights movement, and 
the ordination of women, conservative members of 
the denomination establish the Presbyterian Church 
in America (PCA).
 
  The U.S. Supreme Court rules in Roe v. Wade that 
state laws restricting abortion violate the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and women’s 
right to privacy, thus beginning a long conﬂ ict between 
“pro-life” and “pro-choice” groups as well as efforts 
by mainline denominations to formulate moral posi-
tions on the issue. The Catholic Church ﬁ rst takes the 
initiative in attempting to reduce or eliminate abor-
tions in the United States.
 
  Delegates to the General Synod of the Reformed 
Church in America adopt a resolution expressing 
opposition to the practice of abortion, but recognizing 
that the procedure might be the lesser of two evils in 
some situations. The resolution supports limitations 

124 Chronology
on abortions performed for “individual convenience” 
and urges women with “problem pregnancies” to 
choose an alternative to abortion.
 
  The Reformed Church in America ordains the 
denomination’s ﬁ rst woman minister.
1974 
 The majority of students and faculty at the Lutheran 
Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS) Concordia Semi-
nary in St. Louis leave the seminary in protest against 
LCMS policies and establish Seminex (“seminary-in-
exile”), which will become the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America’s Lutheran School of Theology in 
Chicago.
1976 
 More moderate members and clergy of the Lutheran 
Church–Missouri Synod leave to form the Association 
of Evangelical Lutheran Churches (AELC).
 
  The Fellowship of Catholic Scholars is established 
to oppose secularization in the Catholic Church and 
Catholic institutions of higher learning.
1977 
 The Task Force on Ethical Issues in Human Medicine 
of the American Lutheran Church concludes that when 
the death of a person is certain, the decision to with-
hold extraordinary medical technology is morally 
acceptable; however, any action intended to cause the 
death of such a person is wrong.
 
  Paul Moore, an Episcopal bishop in New York, 
ordains a practicing lesbian. Following objections from 
others in the denomination, Moore issues a statement 
of regret.
1979 
 Representatives from the American Lutheran Church, 
the Lutheran Church in America, and the Association 
of Evangelical Lutheran Churches form a committee to 
develop a plan for a merger among the three groups.
1981 
 A group dissatisﬁ ed with the claimed leftist causes 
advocated by mainline denominations, such as femi-
nism, paciﬁ sm, multiculturalism, and sexual liberation, 
establishes the Institute on Religion and Democracy. 
The organization advocates the return to traditional 
Christian values within the mainline denominations.
1982 
 Catholics, Quakers, and other religious activists hold 
the ﬁ rst Lenten Desert Experience at a Nevada nuclear 
1973 
(cont.)

Chronology 125
test site, combining observance of the 800th birthday of 
St. Francis of Assisi and a protest of nuclear testing.
 
  The American Lutheran Church, the Lutheran 
Church in America, and the Association of Evangelical 
Lutheran Churches, each holding simultaneous con-
ventions, agree to a proposal to form the Commission 
for a New Lutheran Church, which will prepare for a 
merger among the three Lutheran groups.
1983 
 With the more fundamentalist members having left 
the church to form the Presbyterian Church in Amer-
ica, the Presbyterian Church in the United States joins 
with the northern Presbyterian Church (UPCUSA). 
The merged denomination takes on the name Presby-
terian Church (U.S.A.) (PCUSA).
 
  Delegates to the General Synod of the Reformed 
Church in America, advocating “economically and 
racially just” immigration policies, approve resolu-
tions that ask the U.S. Congress to pass legislation 
providing for amnesty for undocumented aliens pres-
ently residing in the United States.
 
  The National Conference of Catholic Bishops 
issues a pastoral letter on nuclear war, “The Challenge 
of Peace: God’s Promise and Our Response.” Joseph 
Cardinal Bernardin takes a leading role in developing 
the letter. In a lecture series, Bernardin calls on Ameri-
cans to protect human life from nuclear war as well as 
abortion.
1984 
 Catholics, Quakers, and other religious activists hold 
the annual forty-day vigil at a Nevada nuclear test 
site, to protest nuclear weapons and to commemorate 
the destruction of the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki at the end of the Second World War.
1985 
 A Louisiana priest is convicted of sexually molesting 
several boys in the Diocese of Lafayette, beginning a 
series of lawsuits against the church.
1986 
 The American Lutheran Church, the Lutheran Church 
in America, and the Association of Evangelical Luth eran 
Churches, holding simultaneous conventions, approve 
a new constitution that unites the three groups as the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA), 

126 Chronology
becoming the fourth largest Protestant denomination 
in the United States.
 
  American Catholic bishops issue a pastoral letter, 
“Economic Justice for All,” which states that poverty 
and unemployment levels in a nation as rich as the 
United States represent “a social and moral scandal” 
that Americans cannot ignore. Government should 
strive to ensure justice and economic rights for all 
Americans, including such measures as instituting 
job creation programs and increasing the minimum 
wage. The letter appears to have little effect nation-
ally on the discussion of economic policy. Archbishop 
Rembert Weakland of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, a Bene-
dictine monk identiﬁ ed with the liberal faction within 
the Catholic Church, plays a major role in developing 
the letter.
1988 
 The merger of the American Lutheran Church, the 
Lutheran Church in America, and the Association of 
Evangelical Lutheran Churches, agreed to in 1987, 
takes effect.
 
   Conservative members of the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.) organize Presbyterians for Renewal to work 
for maintaining the biblical standards of the denomi-
nation.
1989 
 Members of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) who are 
concerned about the direction of the denomination 
meet to establish formally Presbyterians for Renewal.
1990 
 With the publication of Ex corde Ecclesiae (Out of the 
Heart of the Church), the Apostolic Constitution on 
Catholic Colleges and Universities, Pope John Paul II 
attempts to restore traditional Catholic education in 
the United States and elsewhere. Although Catholic 
bishops are expected to establish norms of scholar-
ship in keeping with the Apostolic Constitution, many 
progressive bishops and educational personnel in the 
United States begin an effort to delay implementation.
1991 
 Delegates to the Episcopal Church General Assem-
bly approve a resolution, “Establish Principles with 
Regard to the Prolongation of Life,” declaring that the 
intentional taking of human life in order to end suffer-
ing resulting from incurable illnesses is morally wrong. 
1986 
(cont.)

Chronology 127
However, the resolution states that the administration 
of drugs to relieve suffering is permissible even if such 
drugs might bring death more quickly. The resolution 
also states that extraordinary measures to prolong 
the life of someone with no hope of recovery can be 
withheld.
 
  Delegates to the Churchwide Assembly of the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America adopt a 
“social teaching statement” on the issue of abortion. 
Rather than calling for a legal ban on the practice of 
abortion, the statement declares that abortion should 
be a last-resort option and that the church and society 
should assist in ensuring that pregnant women face 
conditions conducive to giving birth, including pro-
viding sex education in the schools, pregnancy preven-
tion programs, parenting classes, and the development 
of new contraception methods.
1992 
 The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.) approves a statement recognizing that under 
certain conditions—such as severe physical or mental 
abnormality of the fetus, rape, or incest—the abor-
tion option can be justiﬁ ed. In addition, the statement 
declares that no legal restrictions should be placed on 
methods of contraception.
 
  The Society of Catholic Social Scientists is created 
to combine Catholic teaching with social science and 
public policy research.
1994 
 The Commission on Christian Action of the Reformed 
Church in America, responding to passage of the Death 
with Dignity law in Oregon, issues a report stating the 
belief that Christians do not belong to themselves, that 
life is a gift from God, and that human beings are stew-
ards of that gift. Pain-relieving drugs that can hasten 
death may be administered, but under strict control.
 
  Pope John Paul II issues the encyclical Evangelium 
Vitae (The Gospel of Life), which condemns the prac-
tice of abortion, thus providing devout Catholics in 
the United States with added inspiration for opposing 
legalized abortion.
 
  The General Synod of the Episcopal Church 
approves a resolution declaring that life is sacred 

128 Chronology
from conception to death and recognizing that while 
women have the legal right to undergo an abortion, 
that right should be exercised only in extreme circum-
stances and should not be used as a means of birth 
control, gender selection, or simply for convenience.
1995 
 A group of Episcopal bishops, scholars, and laypeople 
who believe that the Episcopal Church must return 
to the basic truths of the Christian faith initiates steps 
toward creating the American Anglican Council.
 
  Members of the Christian Action Commission of 
the Reformed Church in America oppose items in the 
Republican Party’s Contract with America that call for 
denying legal immigrants rights that American citi-
zens enjoy.
1996 
 A small group of Evangelical Lutheran Church in 
America clergy and laypersons who are dissatisﬁ ed 
with a proposal to establish full communion with the 
Episcopal Church begin the Word Alone Network as 
an electronic discussion group to facilitate communi-
cation among those opposed to the union.
 
  Congress passes the Personal Responsibility and 
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, legislation that 
introduces charitable choice to allow faith-based orga-
nizations to obtain federal government funding for 
such social welfare activities as job training and drug 
rehabilitation. The legislation does not require reli-
gious organizations to separate social programs from 
religious activities or to adhere to national laws man-
dating equal treatment regardless of race, gender, or 
sexual preference.
 
  Members of the Board of Church and Society of 
the United Methodist Church issue a statement declar-
ing that the new legislation creating a program of chari-
table choice violates the establishment clause of the 
First Amendment. James Winkler, chief executive of the 
board, recommends that safeguards be maintained to 
prevent government intervention in church operations.
 
  George Anderson, presiding bishop of the Evan-
gelical Lutheran Church in America, raises concerns 
regarding the charitable choice legislation and recom-
1994 
(cont.)

Chronology 129
mends that government funding of religious organiza-
tions not affect religious group identity.
 
  A larger group of disaffected Episcopal Church 
members meets to develop an organizational structure 
and incorporate as the American Anglican Council.
1997 
 New York Bishop Paul Moore, Jr., ordains a lesbian 
woman, Ellen Marie Barrett, as a priest in the Episco-
pal Church. This action causes a great deal of contro-
versy within the denomination.
1998 
 Pope John Paul II defrocks Father John Geoghan, 
who has been accused of multiple instances of child 
molestation.
 
  Reversing, at least in part, ﬁ ve centuries of dis-
agreement, representatives of the Catholic Church 
and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America sign 
the “Joint Statement on the Doctrine of Justiﬁ cation.” 
Although the agreement opens the door to further dis-
cussion between Lutherans and Catholics, the agree-
ment appears to have few practical implications for 
lay members of the two churches.
1999 
 The Churchwide Assembly of the Evangelical Luth-
eran Church in America adopts Called to Common 
Mission, an agreement of full communion with the 
Episcopal Church. The agreement includes the sharing 
of ordained clergy and adoption of the Episcopal ideal 
of apostolic succession through bishops, who retain 
the sole authority to ordain ministers. Many Luther-
ans strongly oppose the agreement, particularly those 
involved in the Word Alone Network, claiming that 
the notion of apostolic succession violates fundamen-
tal Lutheran beliefs.
2000 
 In March members of the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America who object to the ELCA’s agree-
ment, Called to Common Mission, with the Episcopal 
Church hold a constituting convention in Mahtomedi, 
Minnesota, formally establishing the Word Alone Net-
work, a dissenting organization within the ELCA.
 
  Delegates to the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) 
General Assembly declare the denomination’s con-
tinuing opposition to capital punishment and call on 

130 Chronology
the federal government and all state governments that 
have death penalty laws to institute a moratorium on 
executions.
 
  Sister Helen Prejean, a resident of a New Orleans 
housing project and a member of a group opposed to 
the death penalty, takes part in presenting 2.5 million 
signatures collected from around the world to U.N. 
Secretary General Koﬁ  Annan.
2001 
 Soon after taking ofﬁ ce, President George W. Bush 
establishes the White House Ofﬁ ce of Faith-Based and 
Community Initiatives and faith-based ofﬁ ces in the 
departments of Justice, Education, Health and Human 
Services, Housing and Urban Development, and 
Labor in order to facilitate the eligibility of religious 
organizations to receive federal government fund-
ing for charitable activities. The Bush administration 
introduces legislation in Congress to encourage faith-
based funding.
 
  In March several disaffected congregations in the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America join together 
to form an alternative denominational organiza-
tion, Lutheran Congregations in Mission for Christ 
(LCMC).
 
  The Catholic Church combines the National Con-
ference of Catholic Bishops and the United States 
Catholic Conference to form the United States Confer-
ence of Catholic Bishops.
 
  Bishop Joseph A. Firoenza, president of the United 
States Conference of Catholic Bishops, objects to Presi-
dent George W. Bush’s decision to allow for limited 
government funding of embryonic stem-cell research 
using sixty-four lines of embryonic stem cells origi-
nating from human embryos received from in vitro 
fertilization clinics. The bishop calls President Bush’s 
decision morally unacceptable.
 
  Delegates to the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) 
General Assembly approve a resolution calling for 
the careful regulation of human embryonic stem-cell 
research and afﬁ rming the use of stem cells for research 
that may result in returning to health those suffering 
from serious illnesses.
2000 
(cont.)

Chronology 131
 
  Delegates to the General Synod of the United 
Church of Christ call for federal government funding 
of embryonic stem-cell research as a possible means of 
developing treatments for serious illnesses.
 
  James Winkler, general secretary of the General 
Board of Church and Society of the United Methodist 
Church, states that board members support President 
Bush’s announcement of a limitation on government 
funding of stem-cell research.
 
  The Executive Council of the Episcopal Church 
announces the denomination’s support for President 
Bush’s proposed faith-based initiative, but recom-
mends that any program include appropriate safe-
guards to ensure the separation of church and state.
2002 
 In January the Boston Globe begins an exposé of Catho-
lic priests in Boston who are accused of sexually abus-
ing minors. The news accounts claim that the church 
hierarchy ignored complaints and reassigned priests 
accused of abuse. The news stories spur legal action 
against the Catholic Church in Boston and other parts 
of the country.
 
  Catholic Church members concerned about the 
revelations of sexual abuse of children by priests estab-
lish Voice of the Faithful, an organization dedicated 
to holding the church leadership responsible for any 
sexual abuse committed by priests and to increasing 
the inﬂ uence of lay members in the denomination.
 
  Gallup poll data indicate that during 2002, Catho-
lic Church attendance has declined by 7 percent, which 
many interpret as one consequence of new revelations 
about sexual abuse in the church.
 
  Bishop Wilton D. Gregory of the United States 
Conference of Catholic Bishops writes to President 
George W. Bush, questioning whether the imminent 
U.S. military operation in Iraq meets the conditions 
for a just war. Gregory raises doubts about any solid 
evidence of a relationship between Iraq and the Sep-
tember 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and questions the use 
of a preemptive military attack to limit the spread of 
weapons of mass destruction.

132 Chronology
 
  In September religious leaders, including repre-
sentatives from the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the 
Reformed Church in America, the Episcopal Church, 
the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the 
United Church of Christ, the Christian Church (Dis-
ciples of Christ), and the United Methodist Church, 
sign a letter addressed to President Bush stating that 
preemptive war is morally wrong and harmful to the 
nation’s interests. Such action, they argue, could lead 
to many civilian injuries and deaths, destabilize the 
Middle East, and encourage further militant actions.
 
  Richard L. Hamm, general minister and president 
of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), informs 
denomination members that he believes the Bush 
administration, by taking unilateral military action, is 
losing the support of the world community. He asks 
church members to contact representatives and sena-
tors in Congress and the president to express their 
views on the impending conﬂ ict.
 
  The Vatican, concerned about impending U.S. 
military action against Iraq, sends a senior cardinal 
and personal friend of former President George H. W. 
Bush to the United States to present in private to Presi-
dent George W. Bush the views of Pope John Paul II.
 
  In December Cardinal Bernard Law, Catholic 
archbishop of Boston, shortly before his forced resig-
nation over the sexual abuse scandal, warns against 
U.S. military involvement in Iraq.
 
  In December, given congressional failure to pass 
legislation to establish faith-based funding, Presi-
dent Bush announces executive orders allowing the 
administration to issue federal government contracts 
to faith-based institutions. Additional faith-based cen-
ters are instituted in the Department of Agriculture 
and the U.S. Agency for International Development. 
Faith-based ofﬁ ces in the various agencies are ordered 
to determine if regulations unduly restrict the issu-
ance of contracts to faith-based groups and to set aside 
funds for grants to religious group applicants.
 
  The United Church of Christ congregation in 
Jaffrey, New Hampshire, protesting the Boy Scouts 
2002 
(cont.)

Chronology 133
of America policy of excluding gay scout masters, 
announces that the local troop may no longer hold 
meetings in the church’s facilities.
2003 
 Following the U.S. invasion of Iraq in March, Presiding 
Bishop Mark S. Hanson of the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America states that the reconstruction of 
Iraq should include cooperation with the United 
Nations and that U.S. policy should strive to resolve 
the larger conﬂ ict in the Middle East.
 
   The Permanent Judicial Commission of the Pres-
byterian Church (U.S.A.) upholds the decision of 
church moderator Fahed Abu-Akel to refuse to call 
a special assembly requested by conservative church 
members to deal with the issue of enforcing the ban 
on gay clergy. However, the commission admonishes 
Abu-Akel for appealing to those asking for the meet-
ing to withdraw their petition.
 
   The Episcopal Diocese of New Hampshire elects 
an openly gay priest, V. Gene Robinson, as bishop. Con-
servatives in the denomination, particularly mem bers 
of the American Anglican Council, quickly denounce 
the election as contrary to biblical mandate.
 
  In August both the House of Deputies and the 
House of Bishops of the Episcopal Church General 
Convention approve Robinson’s elevation to the posi-
tion of bishop of the New Hampshire Diocese.
 
  Delegates to the Episcopal Church General Con-
vention approve a resolution supporting federal gov-
ernment funding of strictly regulated research on 
embryonic stem cells derived from in vitro fertilization.
 
  Approximately 2,700 Episcopalians opposed to 
the election of an actively gay bishop meet in Dallas 
and ask the Archbishop of Canterbury to discipline the 
Episcopal Church for violating the resolution passed 
by the 1998 Lambeth Conference of Anglican primates 
that declared homosexual practices to be incompatible 
with scripture.
 
  In October, at the invitation of Archbishop of 
Canterbury Rowan Williams, thirty-eight national pri-
mates of the Anglican Communion meet in London 
to discuss the consecration of V. Gene Robinson as 

134 Chronology
bishop of New Hampshire. Bishops prepare a state-
ment claiming that the actions of the Episcopal Church 
in the United States threaten the unity of the Anglican 
Communion.
 
  Thomas Reilly, attorney general of Massachusetts 
and a practicing Catholic, issues a strong criticism of 
the Catholic Archdiocese of Boston, outlining a history 
of sexual abuse by church ofﬁ cials.
 
  The Catholic Archdiocese of Boston reaches a legal 
settlement with those claiming to have been sexually 
abused by priests, agreeing to pay $85 million.
 
  The Catholic Diocese of Orange, California, agrees 
to pay $100 million to those claiming to be victims of 
child abuse by priests.
 
  Delegates to the Christian Church (Disciples of 
Christ) General Assembly adopt a resolution declar-
ing the death penalty “contrary to God’s passion for 
justice,” noting the disproportionate number of poor 
and minorities who are executed.
2004 
 In January approximately 3,000 Episcopal Church 
members who oppose V. Gene Robinson’s election as 
bishop of the New Hampshire Diocese attend a con-
ference in Woodbridge, Virginia, sponsored by the 
American Anglican Council, to discuss options for 
dissenting church members, including the establish-
ment of a new parish network called the Network of 
Anglican Communion Dioceses and Parishes.
 
  In January Catholic Archbishop Raymond Burke 
of St. Louis declares that he would refuse to allow 
presidential candidate John Kerry, a Catholic, to par-
ticipate in the sacrament of holy communion because 
of Kerry’s pro-choice stand on the issue of abortion. 
Although antiabortion Catholics urge other bishops to 
take a similar position, others recommend a broader 
consideration of moral issues during the campaign, 
such as poverty and the war in Iraq.
 
  On January 20 dissenting Episcopalians represent-
ing twelve dioceses, meeting in Plano, Texas, launch 
the Network of Anglican Communion Dioceses and 
Parishes. The delegates adopt its Structural Charter; 
afﬁ rm its Theological Charter; and elect Robert Dun-
2003 
(cont.)

Chronology 135
can, bishop of Pittsburgh, the new organization’s 
moderator.
 
  In March V. Gene Robinson is invested as bishop 
of New Hampshire at a ceremony held at St. Paul’s 
Church in Concord, New Hampshire.
 
  Participants at the Word Alone Network’s annual 
convention adopt a resolution opposing any change in 
the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America’s inter-
pretation of biblical teaching on sexual relations and 
marriage.
 
  A court of thirteen United Methodist Church pas-
tors at the Paciﬁ c Northwest Annual Conference hold 
a trial for Karen Dammann, a pastor charged with 
living in a lesbian relationship with another woman. 
Although UMC law forbids the ordination of “self-
avowed practicing homosexuals,” the court acquits 
Dammann of the charges.
 
  In April the Reformed Church in America (RCA) 
merges its publication division with that of the Chris-
tian Reformed Church (CRC). Publication operations 
for both denominations will be handled by the CRC’s 
Faith Alive Christian Resources division located in 
Grand Rapids, Michigan. The RCA’s director of opera-
tions and support comments that the denomination 
can no longer ﬁ nancially support its own publications 
division.
 
  In May the permanent judicial commission of the 
Ohio and Michigan Synod of the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.) rules in favor of a minister who conducted 
same-gender marriage ceremonies. The ruling reverses 
the decision of a lower church court.
 
  The Council of Bishops of the United Methodist 
Church recommends that the U.S. government allow 
the United Nations to participate in the development 
of a new Iraqi government and asks denomination 
members to support policies that will promote justice 
and reconciliation among the warring parties.
 
  In June Presiding Bishop Mark S. Hanson of the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, following 
a meeting with U.N. Secretary General Koﬁ  Annan, 
reiterates his position stated more than a year earlier 

136 Chronology
that the United Nations should play a major role in the 
reconstruction of Iraq and the return of that country 
to self-rule. The bishop expresses concern for the way 
people in other nations view the United States.
 
  In July the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) General 
Assembly passes a resolution supporting the creation 
of a legalization program for undocumented persons 
in the United States. The resolution denounces the 
exploitation of workers who are in the United States 
illegally.
 
  In a separate decision, the PCUSA General Assem-
bly narrowly rejects (259–255) a proposal to allow 
regional denominational organizations to ordain gay 
clergy and lay ofﬁ cers.
 
  The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America 
Conference of Bishops, meeting in Chicago from Sep-
tember 30 to October 4, hold a closed session with 
sexuality task force members to discuss various possi-
ble recommendations regarding the blessing of same-
gender unions and the status of pastors involved in 
same-gender sexual relationships.
 
  In October the Lambeth Commission on Commu-
nion issues a statement asking the Episcopal Church 
to apologize for electing V. Gene Robinson, an openly 
gay priest, as the bishop of New Hampshire and to 
refrain from consecrating openly gay bishops and 
blessing same-gender unions until the Anglican Com-
munion develops a policy on these issues.
 
  In November the United States Conference of 
Catholic Bishops elects William Skylstad, bishop of 
Spokane, Washington, as the organization’s new presi-
dent. Skylstad is elected just days after he announces 
that the Spokane diocese will enter Chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy, claiming that the amount of damages being 
sought in lawsuits charging the diocese with failure to 
address cases of sexual molestation of children exceeds 
the diocese’s ﬁ nancial resources.
2005 
 In February Anglican primates announce that the 
Episcopal Church in the United States and the Angli-
can Church of Canada are being asked to withdraw 
temporarily from the Anglican Consultative Council 
2004 
(cont.)

Chronology 137
due to disagreements within these provinces on issues 
of sexuality.
 
  Following the death of Pope John Paul II in April, 
the College of Cardinals elects Cardinal Joseph Rat-
zinger as the next pontiff. Ratzinger takes the title of 
Pope Benedict XVI. Pope Benedict is expected to fol-
low the conservative policies of his predecessor.
 
  MeLinda Morton, an Evangelical Lutheran Church 
in America chaplain at the Air Force Academy in Colo-
rado Springs, Colorado, resigns, citing an atmosphere 
of religious intolerance at the academy. Academy ofﬁ -
cials release interim guidelines that encourage sen-
sitivity to religious beliefs and distinguish between 
ofﬁ cial communications and personal expressions of 
religious belief.
 
  In July the General Synod of the United Church of 
Christ approves by a large margin a resolution accept-
ing same-gender marriage. Although not binding 
on individual congregations, the resolution requests 
that member churches consider instituting marriage 
policies that do not discriminate on the basis of gen-
der. The resolution also asks local congregations to 
consider advocating legislation that allows gay and 
lesbian couples to marry. Delegates also approve a res-
olution declaring that the denomination “celebrates 
and reafﬁ rms our church’s faith in Jesus Christ,” but 
reject language that would require the question “Do 
you profess Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior?” to be 
asked of clergy in ordination vows.
 
  In July the General Assembly of the Christian 
Church (Disciples of Christ) elects Sharon Watkins to 
a six-year term as general minister and president of 
the denomination beginning in that month. 
 
  In other actions, delegates approve a resolution 
to be communicated to President George W. Bush, 
Alaska Governor Frank H. Murkowski, and members 
of Congress disapproving of any oil and gas explora-
tion in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. 
 
  In a separate resolution, delegates support pas-
sage of legislation to guarantee workers and their 
families a living wage.

138 Chronology
 
  The Catholic Diocese of Covington, Kentucky, 
pays $120 million to settle lawsuits brought by those 
claiming to be victims of sexual abuse by priests.
 
  The Catholic reform group Voice of the Faithful 
estimates that sexual abuse lawsuits could cost dio-
ceses between $2 and $3 billion.
 
  In August the American Baptist Churches in the 
U.S.A. Minister’s Council defeats a proposal that 
would call for its members to adhere to the belief that 
sexual intimacy is appropriate only in heterosexual 
marriage.
 
  In September the board of directors of the Paciﬁ c 
Southwest region of the American Baptist Churches in 
the U.S.A. votes to recommend leaving the denomi-
nation. The ABC’s decision to allow “gay-afﬁ rming” 
congregations to remain in the denomination moti-
vates the Paciﬁ c Southwest region’s decision.
 
  The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops 
strongly backs passage of the Charity Aid, Recovery 
and Empowerment Act, which will offer additional 
funding to charities, both religious and secular, 
through the Social Services Block Grant.
 
  A Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) regional judicial 
commission in California acquits a minister who con-
ducted same-gender marriages, stating that her actions 
were in agreement with the normative standards of 
the region.
 
  Cardinal Roger Mahony of the Catholic Arch-
diocese of Los Angeles expresses opposition to the 
Border Protection, Antiterrorism, and Illegal Immigra-
tion Control Act that won U.S. House of Representa-
tives approval, claiming that the legislation unfairly 
penalizes immigrants and those who might give them 
assistance.
 
  Clifton Kirkpatrick, stated clerk of the Presbyte-
rian Church (U.S.A.)’s General Assembly, expresses 
his concern about provisions of the immigration leg-
islation that the U.S. House of Representatives has 
approved, commenting that the legislation will clas-
sify undocumented aliens as felons and subject them 
to deportation without a hearing, and could destabi-
2005 
(cont.)

Chronology 139
lize the U.S. economy because needed workers cannot 
enter the country.
 
  In October the nine-member Judicial Council of 
the United Methodist Church, meeting at the First 
United Methodist Church in Houston, in a unanimous 
vote (with one member absent) defrocks Irene Eliza-
beth Stroud, a lesbian minister from Pennsylvania. 
The council’s judgment overrules the decision of an 
appeals court, which reversed the original decision to 
defrock Stroud after she announced to the members 
of the First United Methodist Church of Germantown 
in Philadelphia, where she has served as an associate 
pastor, that she is a lesbian living in a committed rela-
tionship with another woman.
 
  In another case, the UMC Judicial Council, in a 
ﬁ ve-to-three ruling (with one member absent) rein-
states a pastor who was suspended because he denied 
church membership to a gay man. Bishop Charlene P. 
Kammerer of the Virginia Conference removed Edward 
H. Johnson as pastor of South Hill United Methodist 
Church, but the majority opinion of the Judicial Coun-
cil states that a pastor has the duty to use judgment 
in deciding who may be accepted as a member of a 
local church. A dissenting council member writes that 
the decision violates the principle that the church is 
open to all. The two cases illustrate the divisions 
within the United Methodist Church over the issue of 
homosexuality.
 
  In October the Catholic Archdiocese of Los Ange-
les releases summaries of ﬁ les documenting the fail-
ure of diocesan leaders to deal with the many priests 
accused of sexually molesting children. Leaders failed 
to notify the police or church members, instead shift-
ing suspected priests to other parishes or offering 
them counseling.
 
  In October the North Texas Association of the 
United Church of Christ votes to accept as a member 
of the denomination the Cathedral of Hope in Dallas, 
a liberal church considered to be the world’s largest 
gay congregation.

140 Chronology
 
  In December U.S. District Judge John E. Jones 
III, a member of an Evangelical Lutheran Church in 
America congregation, rules in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area 
School District that the theory of intelligent design is 
simply repackaged creationism, lacks credibility as 
science, and therefore has no place in the public school 
curriculum of Dover, Pennsylvania.
2006 
 In January, Robert H. Schuller, noted pastor of the 
Reformed Church in America–afﬁ liated Crystal Cathe-
dral in Garden Grove, California, announces that his 
son, Robert A. Schuller, will succeed him. An instal-
lation ceremony for the younger Schuller is held on 
January 22.
 
  In February, at the Ninth Assembly of the World 
Council of Churches (WCC) meeting in Porto Alegre, 
Brazil, delegates from the United States, including 
Michael Livingstone, president of the National Coun-
cil of Churches of Christ in the U.S.A., and Sharon Wat-
kins, general minister and president of the Christian 
Church (Disciples of Christ), present a letter of apol-
ogy to the delegates on behalf of the U.S. Conference 
of the WCC for U.S. actions in the world, including the 
war in Iraq.
 
  An Episcopal Church nominating committee 
announces the names of four candidates for presid-
ing bishop, a position subject to election at the General 
Convention later in the year. Three of the four candi-
dates voted in favor of ratifying V. Gene Robinson’s 
selection as the bishop of New Hampshire. Conserva-
tive Episcopal spokespersons express dissatisfaction 
with all four candidates.
 
  In March the Executive Council of the Episcopal 
Church asks denomination members to adhere to the 
“Baptismal Covenant” by alleviating the suffering of 
illegal immigrants even if federal legislation should 
make such assistance illegal.
 
  Bishop Thomas Wenski, chairman of the United 
States Conference of Catholic Bishops Committee on 
International Policy, issues a statement expressing 
the moral concerns of the bishops regarding the U.S. 
military operation in Iraq. The bishops state that U.S. 
2005 
(cont.)

Chronology 141
military personnel should remain in Iraq only until a 
transition of power to Iraqis has occurred, and they 
urge the U.S. government not to rely solely on military 
methods to resist terrorism.
 
  In March ﬁ fty-ﬁ ve Catholic lawmakers issue the 
document “Statement of Principles by Fifty-Five Cath-
olic Democrats in the U.S. House of Representatives.” 
This brief document expresses an obligation to care 
for the poor and disadvantaged and a commitment 
to reducing the number of unwanted pregnancies by 
adopting policies that assist women in carrying preg-
nancies to term.
 
  In March the Vatican defrocks a former vice 
chancellor of the Boston Archdiocese of the Catholic 
Church, along with six other priests who have been 
accused of sexually molesting children. The Boston 
archbishop expresses sorrow for the harm the priests 
have done.
 
  In April, in a nonbinding referendum, delegates 
of the American Baptist Churches in the Southwest 
vote to recommend leaving the Covenant of Relation-
ships with the ABC.
 
  A Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) regional judicial 
commission, in a six-to-one vote, acquits Jane Spahr, 
a minister in San Rafael, California, of charges that 
she violated the denomination’s constitution—which 
speciﬁ es that marriage is a union of a man and a 
woman—by marrying two lesbian couples. The court 
states that the constitution’s reference to marriage is 
“a deﬁ nition, not a directive.”
 
  Delegates to the June General Assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) revise a policy on Mid-
dle East investments that was ratiﬁ ed at the 2004 Gen-
eral Assembly. The previous policy, which called for 
selective divestment in multinational corporations 
conducting business in Israel, led to objections from 
church members and Jewish organizations. The new 
policy states that Presbyterian investments in both 
Israel and Palestinian territories should be limited to 
peaceful activities.

142 Chronology
 
  Attempting to deal with the issue of homosexual-
ity, delegates to the PCUSA General Assembly retain a 
church law stating that clergy, lay elders, and deacons 
must restrict sexual relations to marriage between a 
man and a woman, but they pass new legislation stat-
ing that local congregations may follow a more ﬂ exible 
policy when selecting clergy and lay ofﬁ cials if sexual 
orientation becomes an issue.
 
  The PCUSA General Assembly creates controversy 
in the wider Christian community by asking the church 
to consider alternative formulations of the Trinity 
(Father, Son, and Holy Spirit), such as “Mother, Child, 
and Womb” and “Rock, Redeemer, and Friend.”
 
  In June delegates to the Episcopal Church Gen-
eral Convention elect Katharine Jefferts Schori as the 
denomination’s presiding bishop–elect, who will take 
ofﬁ ce in November.
 
  On the last day of the Episcopal convention, Jef-
ferts Schori, in a sermon, refers to “our mother Jesus” 
giving birth to a new creation, a statement that further 
upsets conservatives.
 
  Following the urging of Presiding Bishop Frank 
Griswold and Presiding Bishop–Elect Katharine Jef-
ferts Schori, Episcopal Church General Convention 
delegates agree to a resolution asking dioceses to 
refrain from consecrating gay bishops. Liberal as 
well as conservative delegates express their displea-
sure with the resolution. The resolution responds to 
the 2004 Windsor Report, a statement of the Lambeth 
Commission on Communion, chaired by Archbishop 
Robin Eames of Ireland.
 
  The Episcopal Church publicly apologizes for 
slavery, promises to ﬁ ght against racism, and initiates 
an investigation of possible compensation to African 
American church members for any historical involve-
ment in slavery and the slave trade.
 
  In June Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Wil-
liams issues a statement proposing that the Episcopal 
Church in the United States either reject the invest-
ment of gay bishops and the blessing of same-gender 
unions or surrender full membership in the Anglican 
Communion. To be enacted, Williams’s proposal must 
2006 
(cont.)

Chronology 143
be considered by several major church meetings, a 
process that will take at least four years.
 
  In June delegates to the General Synod of the 
Reformed Church in America instruct General Secre-
tary Wesley Granberg-Michaelson to send letters to 
President George W. Bush, Secretary of State Condo-
leezza Rice, and U.S. Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist 
urging a relaxation of travel restrictions on church lead-
ers traveling between the United States and Cuba.
 
  In July the Episcopal dioceses of Springﬁ eld, 
Illinois, and Central Florida join four other dioceses 
(Pittsburgh; South Carolina; San Joaquin, California; 
and Fort Worth, Texas) in rejecting the authority of 
Presiding Bishop–Elect Katharine Jefferts Schori and 
seeking oversight from Anglican provinces in other 
countries.
 
  In July President George W. Bush vetoes a bill that 
would expand federal funding for stem-cell research 
using surplus embryos from fertility clinics. Congress 
fails to override the veto.
 
  In September the Episcopal Diocese of Newark 
avoids further controversy within the denomination 
by selecting a Massachusetts priest as the new bishop 
rather than an openly gay candidate.
 
  In September Anglican Communion primates 
from Asia and Africa, meeting in Kigali, Rwanda, 
declare that the process of establishing a separate 
Anglican Communion structure in the United States 
should begin. The primates suggest that conservative 
Episcopalians choose a representative other than Pre-
siding Bishop Katharine Jefferts Schori to attend the 
next meeting of Anglican primates scheduled for Feb-
ruary 2007.
 
   In October the Catholic Diocese of Davenport, 
Iowa, becomes the fourth diocese to ﬁ le for bankruptcy. 
Bishop William Franklin states that the settlement of 
more than two dozen claims of sexual abuse against as 
many as eleven priests requires this action. The diocese 
has paid more than $10.5 million in settlements.
 
  U.S. Representative Mark Foley (R-FL) resigns 
from Congress when it is revealed that he sent sexually 
suggestive e-mail messages to House pages. In October 

144 Chronology
Foley reveals the name of the Catholic priest he claims 
sexually molested him when he was a teenage altar boy. 
The Archdiocese of Miami bars the priest, who is now 
sixty-nine years old and living in Malta, from function-
ing as a priest. Mary Ross Agosta, a spokeswoman for 
the diocese, offers an apology to Foley.
 
  In October the United States Conference of Catho-
lic Bishops drafts the document “Ministry to Persons 
with Homosexual Inclination: Guidelines for Pastoral 
Care.” Although the bishops afﬁ rm the church’s disap-
proval of same-gender sexual relationships, they rec-
ommend that parishes reach out to gay Catholics by, 
for instance, baptizing the adopted children of same-
gender couples. 
 
  In November the Catholic Archdiocese of Los 
Angeles agrees to a $60 million settlement in a case 
involving forty-ﬁ ve individuals making claims of sex-
ual abuse against twenty-ﬁ ve priests. Cardinal Roger 
Mahoney states that he and the church accept respon-
sibility. More than 500 sexual abuse lawsuits against 
the archdiocese remain.
 
  In November estimates are made that approxi-
mately 200 congregations have left the United Church 
of Christ after the denomination’s 2005 General Synod 
afﬁ rmed the right of same-gender couples to marry.
 
  In December the members of two large parishes 
and ﬁ ve additional smaller churches in Virginia vote 
to secede from the Episcopal Church and afﬁ liate with 
the Nigerian Anglican Church and its archbishop, 
Peter J. Akinola, who is a strong opponent of the U.S. 
church’s stand on homosexuality. Observers speculate 
that the secessions could lead to legal struggles over 
ownership of church property.
2007 
 In January several United Methodist Church bishops 
and ministers sign a petition objecting to the prospec-
tive establishment of a George W. Bush presidential 
library museum and public policy institute at South-
ern Methodist University in Dallas. The signers cite 
the war in Iraq, the alleged use of torture on prisoners, 
and the death penalty as reasons for their opposition. 
Methodists are asked to sign the petition online.
2006
(cont.)

Chronology 145
 
  In February primates from thirty-eight Angli-
can national churches, meeting in Tanzania, demand 
that the U.S. Episcopal Church agree not to sanction 
any ceremony to bless same-gender unions and not 
to approve any candidate for bishop who is involved 
in a sexual relationship with a person of the same 
gender. The primates set a September 30, 2007, dead-
line for accepting these demands. In addition, the 
primates announce that they will establish a ﬁ ve-
member pastoral council to manage U.S. congrega-
tions that object to the liberal sexual policies of the 
Episcopal Church.
 
  In February Michael Webb, attorney for the Cath-
olic Diocese of San Diego, announces that the diocese 
will ﬁ le for bankruptcy protection. The announcement 
is made just before the ﬁ rst trial is to begin in a lawsuit 
alleging sexual abuse by diocesan priests. San Diego 
will become the ﬁ fth Catholic diocese to ﬁ le for bank-
ruptcy protection.
 
  In February Robert Drinan, Catholic priest and 
liberal Democratic congressman (D-MA) from 1971 to 
1980, dies. Drinan was the ﬁ rst member of Congress to 
call for President Richard M. Nixon’s impeachment.
 
  In February the disciplinary committee of the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America announces 
that a gay pastor involved in a same-gender relation-
ship will be removed from the pastoral roster, effec-
tive August 15. However, committee members object 
to the policy barring practicing homosexuals from the 
clergy and urge church leaders to alter the policy at an 
August meeting. Mark Chavez, head of Word Alone 
Network, a group that supports the ban, comments 
that the current policy conforms to scripture.
 
  In March Episcopal bishops, meeting in Nava-
sota, Texas, reject the demands of Anglican primates, 
publicly announcing that “all God’s children, includ-
ing gay and lesbian persons, are full and equal partici-
pants in the life of Christ’s Church.” They also reject 
the proposal to establish a foreign pastoral council to 
oversee dissenting congregations.


147
5
Biographical Sketches
T
he individuals covered here either have played signiﬁ cant 
formal roles within the denominations or have been alterna-
tive voices within the mainline churches. Some are historical 
ﬁ gures, such as Reinhold Niebuhr and Harry Emerson Fosdick, 
who helped to lay the present religious and ethical foundations 
of the mainline denominations. Others, such as Katharine Jefferts 
Schori, Sharon E. Watkins, and Roger Mahoney, currently hold 
leadership positions within mainline denominations. Yet others, 
including Joan Chittister and John Shelby Spong, represent voices 
of dissent within the mainline denominations. Together, the peo-
ple selected for inclusion provide a broad sample of the beliefs, 
values, concerns, and social and political engagement within the 
mainline denominations.
Daniel Berrigan (b. 1921)
A Catholic priest, peace activist, and poet, Daniel Berrigan, along 
with his brother Philip, also a priest, gained widespread recog-
nition in the 1960s for engaging in protests against the Vietnam 
War. Berrigan authored more than thirty books, including The 
Trial of the Catonsville Nine in 1970. Born in Virginia, Minnesota, 
to an Irish-Catholic family, Berrigan entered a Jesuit seminary 
after completing high school in 1939 and was ordained in 1952. 
He studied in France, where he became familiar with the worker-
priest movement. Berrigan taught theology at Le Moyne College 
in Syracuse, New York, from 1957 to 1962, and from 1963 to 1965 

148 Biographical Sketches
he served as assistant editor of Jesuit Missions, after which he 
became associate director of United Religious Work. In the 1950s 
Daniel and Philip engaged in the civil rights movement, taking 
part in the protest marches in Selma, Alabama. In the 1960s, as 
the United States became more deeply involved in Vietnam, Ber-
rigan took part in establishing an interfaith coalition to protest 
the war. In 1969 Berrigan traveled to Hanoi with Howard Zinn, a 
radical intellectual and professor at Boston University, to assist in 
the release of three American pilots imprisoned by the North Viet-
namese government. Later that year Berrigan decided to engage 
in more radical protest. He joined a group of war protesters who 
entered the draft board ofﬁ ce in Catonsville, Maryland, took 
nearly 400 draft ﬁ les, and burned them outside the building. The 
group came to be known as the Catonsville Nine. Police arrested 
Berrigan and he was placed on trial, found guilty, and sentenced 
to three years in prison. However, he ﬂ ed from custody and for 
four months was sheltered by supporters. During that time, he 
made brief appearances at public events. Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation agents ﬁ nally captured Berrigan, and he served eighteen 
months in prison. He was paroled in 1972.
 
In 1980 Daniel and Philip, along with six others, formed the 
Plowshares Movement to protest nuclear weaponry. The group, 
which came to be known as the Plowshares Eight, entered the 
General Electric plant in King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, which 
manufactured nose cones for nuclear warheads. They hammered 
on two nose cones—symbolic of the prophecy of peace in the 
Book of Isaiah (2:4): “He shall judge between the nations, and 
shall arbitrate for many peoples; they shall beat their swords into 
plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall 
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any 
more”—and poured blood on ﬁ les. Authorities arrested the group 
on felony and misdemeanor charges and in 1981 they were placed 
on trial in Norristown, Pennsylvania. After the jury convicted the 
group of various charges, including burglary, and sentenced them 
to prison terms, a lengthy appeal process began. After nearly ten 
years, the Pennsylvania Court of Common Pleas in Norristown 
sentenced the Plowshares Eight to parole for up to twenty-three 
and one-half months, taking into account time already served. 
More recently, Berrigan has participated in protests against the 
1991 Gulf War, the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan, and the invasion 
of Iraq. On Good Friday in 2003 Berrigan, then eighty-three years 

Biographical Sketches 149
old, was arrested at an antiwar protest at the USS Intrepid aircraft 
carrier in New York City.
Joan Chittister (b. 1936)
Joan Chittister, a member and former prioress of the Benedic-
tine Sisters of Erie, Pennsylvania, has published more than thirty 
books and contributes a column for the National Catholic Reporter, 
a liberal publication. Her writings deal with such topics as jus-
tice, equality, the maintenance of peace, and the rights of women. 
An activist, she proclaims that human beings should be willing 
to bring needed changes to society. She has claimed that pray-
ing to God to eliminate nuclear weapons is a type of blasphemy 
because human beings made the weapons and, if they decide 
to do so, they can eliminate them. Within the Catholic Church, 
Chittister often has disagreed with ofﬁ cial church policy and has 
received criticism from more conservative members for her advo-
cacy of women’s ordination as priests. In 2004 she spoke in Dub-
lin, Ireland, at a conference supporting women’s ordination even 
though the Vatican opposed her attendance. Chittister questions 
whether everything that is to be known about the Christian faith 
was available in the ﬁ rst century. She notes that Catholics learned 
from Protestants that people could read the Bible for themselves. 
Referring to Copernicus, Chittister comments that Catholics also 
learned that the telescope could reveal more about the cosmos 
than what is written in the book of Genesis, and they discovered 
that they could stop segregating churches, schools, and society in 
general.
 
Chittister contracted polio one month after entering a Bene-
dictine convent at the age of sixteen. Initially, she lost the use of 
an arm and a leg and was conﬁ ned to an iron lung. Recovery from 
the disease lasted four years, after which she was able to resume 
her religious training. She earned a master of arts degree in com-
munication arts from the University of Notre Dame. From 1974 
to 1990 Chittister served as president of the Conference of Ameri-
can Benedictine Prioresses and was for twelve years the prioress 
of the Benedictine Sisters of Erie. In addition, she has served as 
president of the Leadership Conference of Women Religious and 
as the co-chair of the Global Peace Initiative of Women, an organi-
zation associated with the United Nations. Chittister has attended 

150 Biographical Sketches
various international conferences, including the Fourth UN Con-
ference of Women in Beijing, China, in 1999, and the Pan-Asian 
Youth Summit in Hiroshima, Japan, in 2004.
 
In her National Catholic Reporter column, Chittister presents 
her views on current political events. With the U.S. invasion of Iraq, 
she commented frequently on U.S. foreign policy. In November 
2003 she suggested that the Patriot Act, which granted increased 
powers to the federal government to combat terrorism, threatened 
democracy in the United States at the same time that the Bush 
administration proclaimed that the United States was attempting 
to spread democracy in the Middle East. Just over a year later, Chit-
tister criticized the U.S. government for the continuing occupation 
of Iraq, referring to the failure to discover evidence that Saddam 
Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction and to revela-
tions of prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib prison. She commented on 
the arrogance of the occupation and the quagmire into which the 
nation had become embroiled. By the end of 2005 Chittister urged 
the reestablishment of the constitutional system of checks and bal-
ances in the federal government, citing Congress’s lack of will to 
investigate the Bush administration’s intentions to invade Iraq at 
the same time that many in the rest of the world raised questions 
about the military action. She encouraged an investigation of why 
the checks and balances system failed to work. In March 2006 
Chittister expressed her views on Iran’s intention to proceed with 
a nuclear program, warning against committing the same policy 
mistakes and again criticizing the doctrine of preemptive war. She 
referred to the “blood spattered children” in Iraq who were being 
prepared for a future war. Chittister declared that while invading 
another nation, the U.S. government spied on its own citizens and 
fortiﬁ ed the borders against the poor, and she contrasted the exis-
tence of the poor with the nation’s great wealth. She found fault 
with the new Iraqi constitution, claiming that it did not guarantee 
democracy for the women of the country.
 
Chittister has reproached the hierarchy of the Catholic Church 
on issues other than her call for the ordination of women. She 
defended Thomas Gumbleton, the auxiliary bishop of Detroit, 
who denounced the Conference of Catholic Bishops of Ohio for 
opposing legislation intended to extend the statute of limitations 
in child sexual abuse cases. She declared that the bishops had 
neglected the abused in an effort to avoid ﬁ nancial responsibility. 
Comparing Gumbleton with those in government—from Daniel 
Ellsberg, who released the Pentagon Papers, to Joseph Wilson, 

Biographical Sketches 151
who criticized faulty intelligence prior to the Iraq invasion—Chit-
tister wondered whether the church would treat a truth teller any 
better than did a secular institution.
William Sloane Cofﬁ n, Jr. 
(1924–2006)
From the civil rights movement of the early 1960s through the 
protest movement against the Vietnam War and on to the crusade 
to eliminate nuclear weapons, William Sloane Cofﬁ n, Jr., played 
an active role among mainline clergy pursuing political causes. 
Cofﬁ n was born into a New York family of privilege. His father 
was vice president of W. and J. Sloane, a furniture manufacturing 
company, and was also president of the board of trustees of the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art. Cofﬁ n’s uncle, Henry Sloane Cof-
ﬁ n, served as president of the Union Theological Seminary. After 
his father’s sudden death in 1933, Cofﬁ n’s mother moved the fam-
ily to Carmel, California, where the three children attended pub-
lic school. Cofﬁ n showed talent as a piano player, so his mother 
encouraged his musical ability, taking him to Europe in 1939 to 
study music in Paris. When the Second World War began, Cofﬁ n 
and his mother moved to Geneva, Switzerland, and then returned 
to the United States, where Cofﬁ n attended Phillips Academy in 
Andover, Massachusetts. After graduating from high school, he 
began to study music at Yale University, but in 1943 he joined 
the army, serving in military intelligence. After the war, Cofﬁ n 
returned to Yale and graduated in 1949. Cofﬁ n entered the Union 
Theological Seminary, but after a year, he joined the Central Intel-
ligence Agency (CIA), at least partially because he regretted tak-
ing part in the forcible repatriation of Soviet citizens after the war 
and wanted to oppose the oppressive Stalinist regime. However, 
Cofﬁ n became disillusioned with the organization because of 
its involvement in the overthrow of the Iranian prime minister 
in 1953 and the coup d’état in Guatemala in 1954. After leaving 
the CIA, Cofﬁ n entered Yale Divinity School, where in 1956 he 
received a bachelor of divinity degree and was ordained a Pres-
byterian minister. In 1958 Cofﬁ n took the position of chaplain at 
Yale University, where he stayed until 1975. In 1961, at the request 
of Sargent Shriver, director of the Peace Corps at the beginning of 
John F. Kennedy’s presidency, Cofﬁ n took a temporary leave from 

152 Biographical Sketches
Yale to develop a training program and to construct a Peace Corps 
camp in Puerto Rico.
 
During his tenure at Yale, Cofﬁ n became involved in politi-
cal causes. He organized so-called freedom riders to travel by bus 
to Southern states to protest segregation policies. In 1963 he was 
arrested while participating in a demonstration at a segregated 
amusement park in Baltimore. An early critic of U.S. involvement 
in Vietnam, Cofﬁ n became active in the movement to oppose the 
military draft. In 1968 a federal grand jury indicted Cofﬁ n and four 
others, including Benjamin Spock, the noted pediatrician, for con-
spiring to help young men resist the draft. Cofﬁ n, Spock, and two 
other defendants were convicted, but the verdict was overturned 
on appeal. In 1977 Cofﬁ n left Yale to become senior minister at 
the Riverside Church in New York City, which was afﬁ liated with 
the United Church of Christ and the American Baptist Churches 
in the U.S.A. While serving at Riverside Church, Cofﬁ n continued 
to advocate progressive causes—including gay rights, the needs 
of the poor, and nuclear disarmament—and remained engaged 
in current politics. In 1979 he participated in a mission to Iran to 
conduct Christmas services for the American hostages being held 
in Teheran. In 1987 Cofﬁ n left the New York church to become 
president of SANE/FREEZE (subsequently called Peace Action), 
an organization that advocated nuclear disarmament. He claimed 
that the United States and other nuclear nations were practicing 
nuclear apartheid by insisting on maintaining their own arsenals 
while attempting to keep other nations from developing such 
weapons. After becoming the organization’s president emeritus 
in the early 1990s, Cofﬁ n continued to present lectures on the 
dangers of nuclear weapons and the need to develop peaceful 
ties with other nations. Although Cofﬁ n suffered a stroke in 1999, 
which slowed his activities somewhat, he continued to oppose 
U.S. military involvement around the world, speaking out against 
the Persian Gulf War in 1991 and the Iraq War in 2003.
John Claggett Danforth (b. 1936)
Throughout U.S. history, members of the Episcopal Church have 
played signiﬁ cant roles in the country’s political, economic, 
and social life. John Danforth, a retired senator, a former U.S. 
ambassador to the United Nations, and an ordained priest in the 

Biographical Sketches 153
Episcopal Church, is an archetype of the inﬂ uential mainline Epis-
copalian who believes in moderation, reasonableness, and com-
promise. While holding public ofﬁ ce, his religious training and 
beliefs undoubtedly inﬂ uenced his stands on political issues, and 
he gained a reputation for being a highly principled politician. 
In more recent years Danforth, generally considered a political 
moderate, has become a vocal critic of the religious right and the 
Republican Party’s alliance with conservative Christian groups.
 
Born in St. Louis, Danforth is the grandson of William H. Dan-
forth, who founded Ralston Purina, and son of Donald Danforth, 
who became chief executive of the company. Danforth graduated 
from Princeton University in 1958 and went on to attend both Yale 
University Law School and Yale Divinity School, receiving both a 
bachelor of divinity degree and a bachelor of laws degree in 1963. 
He was ordained in the Episcopal Church the same year. Danforth 
practiced law in New York City and St. Louis before running as 
a Republican for the ofﬁ ce of Missouri attorney general in 1968. 
He ran successfully for reelection in 1972. In 1976 Danforth won 
the U.S. Senate election in Missouri, succeeding retiring Senator 
Stuart Symington. Danforth won reelection in 1982 and 1988. He 
gained wide attention during the 1991 conﬁ rmation battle of U.S. 
Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas for his strong support 
for Thomas. The two men had become friends when Thomas 
worked with Danforth in the Missouri attorney general’s ofﬁ ce 
and in the U.S. Senate as an aide.
 
Although Danforth never served as a full-time Episcopal 
priest, he has held numerous positions within the church, includ-
ing membership on the governing board of Washington Cathedral; 
associate priest of the Church of the Holy Communion in Univer-
sity City, Missouri; assistant rector of the Church of the Epiphany 
in New York City; and assistant chaplain for New York’s Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Danforth presided at the funerals 
of Washington Post owner Katharine Graham in 2001 and former 
President Ronald Reagan in 2004.
 
After leaving the Senate in 1995, Danforth resumed his private 
law practice. In 1999 Attorney General Janet Reno asked him to head 
an investigation of the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s actions 
during the 1993 siege at the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, 
Texas. Although Danforth was rumored to be George W. Bush’s 
choice as a vice presidential running mate in 2000, that position 
went to Richard Cheney. In September 2001 President Bush asked 

154 Biographical Sketches
Danforth to serve as special envoy to Sudan, a country devastated 
by civil war. Although he devoted himself to bringing peace to 
the war-ravaged country, his efforts to resolve differences among 
the warring factions ultimately proved unsuccessful. In July 2004 
Danforth succeeded John Negroponte as the U.S. ambassador to 
the United Nations, where he continued to focus on ameliorating 
the violent conditions in Sudan. After just ﬁ ve months Danforth 
resigned from the U.N. position, stating that he wished to spend 
more time with his wife. Prior to President Bush’s choice of Con-
doleezza Rice, some had speculated that Danforth might be the 
president’s choice for secretary of state.
 
In March 2005 Danforth published an opinion column in the 
New York Times expressing his deep concern about the inﬂ uence 
of the religious right in the Republican Party. He cited the party’s 
support for a constitutional amendment to prohibit gay marriage 
and opposition to embryonic stem-cell research, and also referred 
to Republicans’ efforts to pass a bill empowering the federal courts 
to hear an appeal from the Florida state court system over its rul-
ing that a feeding tube could be removed from Terri Schiavo, a 
woman who had been in a vegetative state for more than thirteen 
years. In each case, Danforth claimed that Republicans had bowed 
to the wishes of conservative Christians. Although he opposed 
abortion, Danforth stated that he could not accept the claim that 
human cells are equivalent to human beings who are suffering 
from diseases that possibly could be treated through embryonic 
stem-cell research. To restrict such research, he argued, involved 
introducing religious doctrine into statutory law. Although recog-
nizing that religious conservatives as well as religious liberals have 
a basic right to engage in political activity, Danforth faulted the 
Republican Party for adhering to the political agenda of a speciﬁ c 
religious movement. The traditional agenda of the party, including 
limited government, limited regulation and taxation, judges who 
interpret the law and do not legislate, and maintaining a strong 
national defense, has been jeopardized by undue attention to the 
conservative Christian agenda. Danforth stated that while in the 
Senate, he worried about the size of the deﬁ cit but did not spend 
any time agonizing over the effect that gays might have on the 
institution of marriage. In fall 2006 Danforth published Faith and 
Politics: How the “Moral Values” Debate Divides America and How to 
Move Forward Together, in which he presented in detail his argu-
ment about the appropriate role of religion in democratic politics.

Biographical Sketches 155
Dorothy Day (1897–1980)
Dorothy Day founded the Catholic Worker, a publication that advo-
cated a combination of Catholic belief and a commitment to radical 
social reform to create a more just society. Born in Brooklyn, New 
York, Day spent most of her early years in Chicago. Her concern 
for the plight of the working class in the early twentieth century 
led her to embrace Communist ideology. In 1914 Day received a 
scholarship to the University of Illinois at Urbana, but she showed 
little interest in formal studies. She left college after two years and 
moved to New York City, where she became a reporter for The Call 
and The Masses, socialist periodicals. When the latter publication 
expressed opposition to U.S. involvement in the First World War, the 
U.S. Postal Service denied The Masses a mailing permit and raided 
its ofﬁ ces, seizing issues of the magazine and mailing lists. In 1917 
Day moved to Washington DC, where she joined other women in 
picketing the White House in support of women’s right to vote. 
Police arrested Day and she served thirty days in a workhouse.
 
In 1924 Day entered a common-law marriage with Forster Bat-
terham, an anarchist who did not believe in religion or marriage. 
When she became pregnant in 1926, Day decided to have the child 
despite Batterham’s objections. She previously had undergone an 
illegal abortion to terminate a pregnancy resulting from another 
affair and thought it was a miracle that she could become preg-
nant again. After the child was born in early 1927, Day had the girl 
baptized in the Catholic Church. With the end of her relationship 
with Batterham, Day joined the Catholic Church, and thus began 
her efforts to combine religious faith with radical social views. In 
late 1932 Day reported on a march in Washington DC for Common-
weal and America magazines. The demonstrators were publicizing 
the need for jobs, unemployment insurance, old-age pensions, and 
health care. On her return to New York, Day met Peter Maurin, 
a French immigrant, who urged her to begin a newspaper based 
on Catholic social values and the need to transform society peace-
fully. In May 1933 Day and Maurin began publishing The Catholic 
Worker. They printed 2,500 copies of the ﬁ rst issue, which sold for 
a penny. Within a year they were printing 100,000 copies, and by 
1936 they distributed 150,000 copies of each issue. In addition to 
starting The Catholic Worker, Day took more direct steps to aid the 
destitute, opening a house in New York to shelter the homeless. By 
1936 the Catholic Worker movement had established thirty-three 

156 Biographical Sketches
houses around the country. The movement also established farm 
communes, but they achieved only limited success.
 
Day advocated paciﬁ sm in the pages of The Catholic Worker. 
Her position on the Spanish Civil War, which began in 1936, stim-
ulated opposition to the newspaper among Catholics as well as 
those on the political left. The fascist side, led by Francisco Franco, 
received support from American Catholics, while the American 
left backed the Republican faction. By refusing to support either 
side in the civil war, Day lost many newspaper subscribers. Con-
cerned with the Nazi treatment of Jews in Germany, Day helped 
to found the Committee of Catholics to Fight Anti-Semitism. Even 
with American entry into the Second World War following the 
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Day maintained a paciﬁ st stance 
and urged movement members to provide assistance for the sick 
and wounded, help feed the hungry, and offer shelter to the home-
less. Many men associated with the Catholic Worker movement 
were either imprisoned or served as medics in the military.
 
Following the Second World War, as fear of nuclear conﬂ ict 
gripped the nation, Day and the Catholic Worker community in 
New York refused to take part in a mandated yearly civil defense 
drill that began in 1955. Each year the group demonstrated against 
nuclear weapons instead of taking part in the drill. By 1961, the 
last year the drill was held, 2,000 people joined the protest. During 
the Vietnam War, Day and other members of the Catholic Worker 
movement protested U.S. military policy. Many in the movement 
again faced prison for refusing military service while other mem-
bers entered alternative service. In 1973, at the age of seventy-ﬁ ve, 
Day was arrested for picketing with farm workers. That same year 
the Jesuit magazine America devoted an issue to Day, stating that 
over the previous forty years she had served as a model for the 
American Catholic community.
Robert (Bob) W. Edgar (b. 1943)
In January 2000 Robert W. Edgar became the general secretary of 
the National Council of Churches of Christ in the USA (NCC), 
the major U.S. organization of mainline denominations. The orga-
nization includes thirty-ﬁ ve Protestant, Anglican, Orthodox, and 
historically African American denominations. Edgar, a former 
member of Congress from Pennsylvania, expresses distinctly lib-

Biographical Sketches 157
eral positions on various political issues. Born in Philadelphia, 
Edgar graduated from high school in Springﬁ eld, Pennsylvania, 
and went on to Lycoming College in Williamsport, Pennsylvania, 
where he received a bachelor of arts degree in 1965. In 1968 he 
received a master of divinity degree from Drew University Theo-
logical School in Madison, New Jersey, and was ordained a minis-
ter in the United Methodist Church. In 1969 he earned a certiﬁ cate 
in pastoral psychiatry from the Hahnemann Medical College and 
Hospital in Philadelphia. From 1971 to 1974 Edgar served as the 
chaplain of Drexel University in Philadelphia. In 1974 he entered 
politics, campaigning as a Democratic candidate for the U.S. House 
of Representatives in the Seventh Congressional District, which 
traditionally voted Republican. He won the election and went on 
to serve six terms. While in Congress, Edgar focused on several 
public policy areas, including improving public transportation, 
limiting questionable water projects, and protecting the environ-
ment. In 1986 Edgar decided not to run for reelection, and instead 
made an unsuccessful bid for a seat in the U.S. Senate, running 
against Senator Arlen Specter. Following his defeat, Edgar brieﬂ y 
served as a special assistant to Representative William H. Gray III 
before becoming president of the Claremont School of Theology 
in Claremont, California, a position he held from 1990 to 2000.
 
Edgar has been active in various organizations, including the 
National Coalition for Health Care, Common Cause, the National 
Religious Partnership for the Environment, and the Environmen-
tal and Energy Study Institute. As a member of the executive com-
mittee of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, he joined in 
sending a letter to members of Congress, urging them to oppose 
the 2004 Marriage Protection Act. In November 2005 he joined with 
other representatives of the NCC to call on Congress to increase 
the national minimum wage. A report issued by the NCC titled “A 
Just Minimum Wage: Good for Workers, Business and Our Future” 
noted that, despite inﬂ ation, the minimum wage, which was $5.15 
per hour, had not been increased since 1997 and declared that this 
was not a fair wage either economically or ethically.
James A. Forbes, Jr. (b. 1935)
James Forbes, an ordained minister in the American Baptist 
Churches in the USA and the Original United Holy Church of 

158 Biographical Sketches
America, supports progressive causes in U.S. politics. In 1989 
Forbes became the ﬁ fth senior pastor of the Riverside Church in 
New York City, succeeding William Sloane Cofﬁ n. Before assum-
ing the pastorate of the Riverside Church, Forbes served from 1976 
to 1985 as an associate professor of preaching at Union Theologi-
cal Seminary and from 1985 to 1989 as the ﬁ rst Joe R. Engle Profes-
sor of Preaching at the seminary. When he accepted the position 
at the Riverside Church, the seminary named Forbes the ﬁ rst 
Harry Emerson Fosdick Adjunct Professor of Preaching. Forbes 
also serves on the teaching staff of Auburn Theological Seminary 
in New York City. He served as pastor at St. John’s United Holy 
Church of America in Richmond, Virginia, from 1965 to 1973; at 
Holy Trinity Church in Wilmington, Delaware, from 1960 to 1965; 
and at St. Paul’s Holy Church in Roxboro, North Carolina, from 
1960 to 1969. From 1968 to 1970 Forbes served as campus minister 
at Virginia Union University in Richmond. He is a member of the 
board of directors of the Interfaith Alliance Foundation, an orga-
nization dedicated to helping communities achieve social justice.
 
In 2004 Forbes made several presentations, one at the Demo-
cratic National Convention, in which he used the theme of the 
United States returning to the original spiritual and moral values 
on which the nation was established, as expressed in the Decla-
ration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights. 
Using the analogy of the prodigal son, Forbes urged the United 
States to return home. He noted that although the United States 
has never lived up to the ideals established in these documents, 
they still point to what the nation should be. However, in recent 
years, the nation has strayed from spiritual and moral values. He 
referred to the widening gap between rich and poor; a spirit of 
domination; and a culture of materialism, consumerism, rugged 
individualism, and intolerance.
 
Forbes advised his audience not to let the religious right 
determine their level of religious devotion. Frequency of church 
attendance should not be the measure of a person’s worth in God’s 
sight. He had harsh words for those who use government to ben-
eﬁ t special interests while otherwise proclaiming that govern-
ment is irrelevant and should be as small as possible. According 
to Forbes, such people make a prostitute out of that government. 
He urged citizens not to allow the terrorist events of September 
11, 2001, lead to the abandonment of the high principles of the 
nation, and urged religious and progressive leaders to take part in 

Biographical Sketches 159
returning the nation to the values of the past. Progressive voices, 
he declared, must speak against the “right wing madness.”
Harry Emerson Fosdick 
(1878–1969)
In the 1920s and 1930s Harry Emerson Fosdick defended modern-
ism in Christianity against fundamentalist beliefs. Fosdick ques-
tioned several of the major tenets of fundamentalism, including 
the virgin birth of Jesus, the literal inerrancy of the Bible, and the 
second coming of Christ, and embraced the social gospel, empha-
sizing the importance of human reason in religious faith and the 
responsibility of Christians to engage in social as well as personal 
betterment. He argued that the belief in scriptural infallibility 
had restricted biblical research, contributed to persecution, and 
delayed human progress. Fosdick emphasized direct religious 
experience in contrast to philosophical, theological, and cultural 
expressions of that experience that may vary over time. The 
controversies that Fosdick faced in the early twentieth century 
have repeatedly resurfaced in subsequent years within mainline 
denominations and between them and more evangelical and fun-
damentalist groups.
 
Born in Buffalo, New York, Fosdick graduated from Colgate 
University in 1900. In 1901 he entered Union Theological Semi-
nary in New York City, where he was exposed to such inﬂ uences 
as higher criticism of the Bible and the pragmatism of William 
James. As the result of working with the poor in the Bowery while 
at the seminary, Fosdick experienced a nervous breakdown. Fol-
lowing treatment at a sanitarium in Elmira, New York, he returned 
to Union Theological Seminary, receiving his degree in 1904. He 
was ordained a Baptist minister in 1903 and became a pastor of the 
First Baptist Church in Montclair, New Jersey. Fosdick remained 
at that church until 1915, when he became a professor of practi-
cal theology at Union Theological Seminary, where he had taught 
part-time since 1908. He taught students a method of preaching 
that emphasized personal counseling to a large group. In 1918 
Fosdick became a minister at a Presbyterian church. Concerned 
about fundamentalist inﬂ uence in the church, in 1922 he preached 
his famous sermon, “Shall the Fundamentalists Win?” in which 

160 Biographical Sketches
he not only criticized fundamentalism but also expressed his own 
modernist beliefs. In 1923 delegates to the general assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church approved a resolution asking the New York 
church to require preaching and teaching that conformed with 
the denomination’s confession of faith, including belief in bibli-
cal inerrancy, the virgin birth of Jesus, the physical resurrection, 
and the second coming of Christ. Unwilling to accept the require-
ments of the resolution, Fosdick resigned.
 
In 1931, with the ﬁ nancial assistance of John D. Rockefeller, 
Jr., Fosdick became the pastor of the newly constructed Riverside 
Church, which was afﬁ liated with the Northern Baptist Conven-
tion. In fact, the church was interdenominational and open to all 
Christians of all races. Fosdick remained the pastor until his retire-
ment in 1945. During his tenure as pastor, he developed a national 
radio ministry. Fosdick attempted to steer a course between fun-
damentalism on one hand and a radicalism that would deny what 
he considered the basic truths of the Christian faith on the other. 
He championed various social causes, including civil liberties 
and civil rights, and invited African Americans to preach from his 
pulpit. Consistent with his progressive social philosophy, Fosdick 
advocated birth control and planned parenthood, supporting the 
work of Margaret Sanger.
Wesley Granberg-Michaelson 
(b. 1945)
The 1994 General Synod of the Reformed Church in America 
selected Wesley Granberg-Michaelson as the denomination’s gen-
eral secretary. Granberg-Michaelson graduated from Hope Col-
lege in 1967 and from Princeton Theological Seminary in 1968. 
From 1969 to 1975 he worked for Oregon Senator Mark O. Hatﬁ eld. 
While a member of the Church of the Saviour in Washington DC, 
Granberg-Michaelson became acquainted with the commitment a 
local congregation can make to social causes and the importance 
of small groups in the activities of a church. In 1976 Granberg-
Michaelson became managing editor of the progressive Christian 
magazine Sojourners, a position he held until 1980. In 1981 he 
moved with his wife to Missoula, Montana, where he established 
the New Creation Institute, an organization concerned with the 

Biographical Sketches 161
environmental responsibility of Christians as well as the church’s 
role in maintaining the health of individuals. In 1982 he joined 
the staff of the World Council of Churches (WCC) as executive 
secretary of the section on Justice, Peace, and Creation, focusing 
his attention on environmental issues. He decided to complete 
an education in theology, and graduated from Western Theologi-
cal Seminary in Holland, Michigan, in 1984. From 1992 to 1994 
Granberg-Michaelson served as a staff member of the WCC in 
Geneva, Switzerland. He worked to solidify relations between the 
WCC and evangelical groups. In 1994 he accepted the position 
of general synod secretary of the Reformed Church in America. 
Among the books that Granberg-Michaelson has authored are 
Leadership from Inside Out: Spirituality and Organizational Change, 
published in 2004, and Issues of Christian Conscience: Ecology and 
Life, published in 1988.
 
Granberg-Michaelson has taken public stands on various 
political issues. For instance, in 1998 he called for President Bill 
Clinton’s resignation, claiming that, due to the president’s moral 
failure stemming from the Monica Lewinsky affair, the nation 
faced a political crisis. The president, he asserted, had inappro-
priately segregated personal morality from public responsibility. 
Among articles that Granberg-Michaelson published in Sojourn-
ers, “Our Gravest Temptation: Politicians Have Given the Presi-
dent a Military Blank Check” presented an initial reaction to the 
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. While recognizing the enor-
mity of the assault on innocent civilians, Granberg-Michaelson 
cautioned against allowing the attacks to push the United States 
into extreme responses that could create more enemies for the 
nation around the world.
Wilton D. Gregory (b. 1947)
In 2001 Wilton D. Gregory was elected president of the United 
States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB), thus becoming 
the ﬁ rst African American to hold that position. Gregory’s major 
challenge as president of the USCCB was the sexual abuse scandal 
that has rocked the church. He attempted to face the scandal head-
on, calling the instances of abuse crimes and apologizing publicly 
to the victims and the members of the church. Gregory called the 
sex scandal the worst crisis in the history of the church because it 

162 Biographical Sketches
threatened the relationship of trust between church leaders and 
lay members. On social issues, Gregory has advocated the view 
that racism is a sin as serious as more generally recognized sins 
and has declared that Catholics have an obligation to take steps 
to eliminate racism. He identiﬁ ed racial proﬁ ling and white ﬂ ight 
from inner-city schools as major social problems. Gregory has 
written in opposition to euthanasia, physician-assisted suicide, 
and the death penalty.
 
Born in Chicago to Protestant parents, Gregory was baptized 
at age twelve in the Catholic Church. He was educated at Quigley 
Preparatory Seminary South and Niles College of Loyola in Chi-
cago, and St. Mary of the Lake Seminary in Mundelein, Illinois, 
where he received a master’s degree in pastoral theology in 1973, 
the same year he was ordained a priest. He served for three years 
as the priest of a parish in Glenview, Illinois, and then began stud-
ies at the Pontiﬁ cal Liturgical Institute of San Anselmo in Rome, 
earning a doctorate in sacred liturgy in 1980. Gregory then became 
a professor at St. Mary of the Lake Seminary. In 1983 Gregory was 
ordained a bishop, becoming at the time the youngest U.S. Catho-
lic bishop. After serving for ten years as auxiliary bishop under 
Joseph Cardinal Bernardin in Chicago, he was appointed by Pope 
John Paul II as bishop of the Belleville, Illinois, Diocese. In 1998 
Gregory was elected vice president of the National Conference of 
Catholics Bishops (now the United States Conference of Catholic 
Bishops). After three years in this position, he was chosen presi-
dent of the conference.
 
Confronting the sexual abuse scandal, Gregory and USCCB 
Vice President William S. Skylstad met with Vatican ofﬁ cials, 
including Pope John Paul II, in 2002 to discuss the crisis. Returning 
to the United States, Gregory met with reporters to answer ques-
tions about the widening scandal. He admitted that the church had 
made mistakes in its handling of the issue. Although Gregory had 
been told that the Vatican would allow the U.S. Catholic Church to 
handle the situation, Vatican authorities subsequently called the 
thirteen U.S. cardinals and conference leaders to Rome for further 
discussions. At a meeting of the USCCB following the Rome con-
vocation, Gregory targeted the bishops, not the offending priests, 
for blame because they allowed abusers to remain in the ministry 
and reassigned them to parishes where they continued to sexually 
abuse youth. The bishops adopted a zero-tolerance policy, declar-
ing that any priest found to have sexually abused a minor would 
be expelled from the ministry, and agreed to inform civil authori-

Biographical Sketches 163
ties of any claim of abuse. However, the Vatican ordered the bish-
ops to revise portions of the policy.
Frank T. Griswold (b. 1938)
In 1997 the General Convention of the Episcopal Church elected 
Frank Griswold to a nine-year term as presiding bishop. He was 
invested in the position in January 1998. Early in his tenure as pre-
siding bishop, Griswold advocated ecumenism, supporting full 
communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and 
closer relations with the Catholic Church. However, the dissension 
within his own denomination led to fears of internal disintegra-
tion that tended to overshadow his efforts to achieve external alli-
ances with other denominations. Therefore, the presiding bishop 
expended much effort attempting to maintain unity among liberal 
and conservative factions within the denomination. Griswold rec-
ommended eliminating nonessential features in the church and 
concentrating instead on the essential and the enduring.
 
In addition to serving as primate and chief pastor of the Epis-
copal Church and as the president of the House of Bishops, Gris-
wold has held other positions within the denomination, including 
chief executive ofﬁ cer of the Domestic and Foreign Missionary 
Society. Within the Anglican Communion, Griswold has served 
as a member of the joint standing committee of the Anglican Pri-
mates and the Anglican Consultative Council. He was a mem-
ber of the standing committee for the 1998 Lambeth Conference. 
Prior to becoming presiding bishop, Griswold served as bishop 
coadjutor (1985–1987) and bishop of Chicago (1987–1997). Before 
being elected a bishop, he served three parishes in Pennsylvania. 
In 1959 Griswold received a bachelor of arts degree in English 
literature from Harvard College (known at Harvard as an A.B., 
or artium baccalaureus, degree). In 1962 he received a bachelor of 
arts degree in theology at Oriel College, Oxford University, and 
was awarded a master of arts degree in 1966. He was ordained 
a priest in the Episcopal Church in 1963. In 2000 Griswold pub-
lished a brief book, Going Home: An Invitation to Jubilee, an appli-
cation to contemporary society of the Old Testament tradition of 
release from ﬁ nancial obligation.
 
With the dissension within the Episcopal Church over the 
choice of V. Gene Robinson, an openly gay priest, as the bishop 
of the New Hampshire Diocese, Griswold attempted to present a 

164 Biographical Sketches
conciliatory stance, walking a perilous line between liberals who 
desire recognition of same-gender unions and the ordination of 
gay priests on the one hand, and on the other conservatives who 
emphasize biblical passages they claim condemn homosexual 
activity as sinful. In 2004 he commented that the focus on sexu-
ality issues distracted the denomination’s attention away from 
more serious questions that involve matters of life and death. 
Griswold’s sympathies at times appear to reside with the more 
liberal elements within the Episcopal Church. For instance, he 
has commented that while some in the church ﬁ nd divorce and 
remarriage acceptable—a practice that Jesus condemned—they 
are not willing to accept the marriage of gays and lesbians—a 
topic about which Jesus never spoke. Griswold saw some congre-
gations leave the denomination over the issue of homosexuality. 
In June 2006, at the last general convention for which he would 
serve as presiding bishop, Griswold, along with Katharine Jefferts 
Schori, the newly elected presiding bishop, engaged successfully 
in last-minute efforts to have the convention’s House of Depu-
ties and House of Bishops approve a resolution responding to the 
Anglican Communion’s request that the Episcopal Church place 
a moratorium on the consecration of gay bishops.
Mark S. Hanson (b. 1946)
In 2001 delegates to the Churchwide Assembly of the Evangelical 
Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) elected Mark S. Hanson the 
denomination’s presiding bishop, and in 2003 Hanson was elected 
president of the Lutheran World Federation. He also serves on the 
executive council of the National Council of Churches of Christ 
in the U.S.A. (NCC). Hanson received a bachelor’s degree in soci-
ology from Augsburg College in 1968, and in 1969 he became a 
Rockefeller fellow at the Union Theological Seminary in New 
York—a non-Lutheran school—where he received a master of 
divinity degree in 1972. After his ordination in 1974, Hanson 
served as pastor at Prince of Glory Lutheran Church in Minne-
apolis. In 1979 he moved to Edina Community Lutheran Church 
in Edina, Minnesota, and in 1988 he assumed the pastorate at 
University Lutheran Church in Hope, Minnesota. In 1995 Hanson 
was elected bishop of the Saint Paul Area Synod of the ELCA, 

Biographical Sketches 165
and in 1998 he was chosen president of the Minnesota Council of 
Churches, serving in that position until 2000. Hanson authored 
Faithful Yet Changing: The Church in Challenging Times, published 
by the ELCA publishing house, Augsburg Fortress Books. In the 
book, Hanson dealt with such topics as prayer, love, social justice, 
and witnessing to the Christian faith.
 
Hanson has supported ecumenical efforts, including discus-
sions with the Catholic Church that led to the Joint Declaration 
on the Doctrine of Justiﬁ cation, an agreement signed in October 
1999 by representatives of the Lutheran World Federation and 
the Catholic Church. He has expressed his enthusiasm for further 
discussions between Lutherans and Catholics and has suggested 
that the 500th anniversary in 2017 of the Lutheran Reformation 
should be an occasion for further reconciliation between Luther-
ans and Catholics. However, Hanson has faced dissension within 
the denomination over the Churchwide Assembly’s approval 
in 1999 of the agreement with the Episcopal Church, “Called to 
Common Mission,” that established full communion between the 
two denominations. Objecting to the agreement, some pastors 
and lay members established the Word Alone Network, which 
has continued to increase in membership as other issues, most 
notably questions of sexuality, have arisen. Hanson defended the 
agreement with the Episcopal Church against charges that it was 
a deception perpetrated by the Lutheran Church hierarchy, noting 
that two drafts of the agreement had been circulated among con-
gregations for study and discussion, and that nearly 70 percent of 
voting members of the Churchwide Assembly approved “Called 
to Common Mission.” Some Lutheran congregations have left the 
ELCA and joined an alternative group called Lutheran Congrega-
tions in Mission for Christ. A major reason for disassociation with 
the ELCA has been objections to proposals to allow for the ordina-
tion of openly gay pastors.
 
For many years Hanson has been active in pursuing such 
issues as racial justice, welfare rights, immigration rights, and hous-
ing for the poor. He also has expressed his concern for the environ-
ment, warning against the possibility of “ecocide,” the destruction 
of a livable environment. An antiwar activist during his student 
days at the Union Theological Seminary, Hanson has continued his 
critical stance toward U.S. military involvement around the world. 
In March 2003, in a letter to denomination members, although not-

166 Biographical Sketches
ing strong disagreements among Lutherans over involvement in 
Iraq, Hanson expressed deep concern about the Bush adminis-
tration’s decision to initiate preemptive military action. Hanson 
stated that the United States, because of its wealth and power, has 
the responsibility to pursue policies that will lead to the peaceful 
resolution of conﬂ icts. In 2006 Hanson joined with other denomi-
nation leaders in urging the Bush administration to take a more 
active role in bringing peace to the Middle East.
Katharine Jefferts Schori 
(1954– )
In June 2006 delegates to the seventy-ﬁ fth General Convention of 
the Episcopal Church elected Katharine Jefferts Schori to be the 
denomination’s presiding bishop. Jefferts Schori’s tenure as presid-
ing bishop promises to be as trying as her predecessor’s, Frank T. 
Griswold. Although liberal church members applauded her elec-
tion, more conservative factions within the denomination expressed 
their objection to the choice. For instance, Bishop Jack Iker of Fort 
Worth, Texas, stated that the election amounted to a “gesture of 
deﬁ ance” and would contribute to the movement toward division 
and separation. Jefferts Schori’s election indicated to many that the 
disagreement within the Episcopal Church over the election of V. 
Gene Robinson, an openly gay bishop, and the question of same-
gender unions would continue to divide the denomination. In 2003 
Jefferts Schori voted in favor of Robinson’s ordination, explain-
ing that the General Convention should accept the decision of the 
members of the New Hampshire diocese who knew of Robinson’s 
thirteen-year relationship with another man but did not regard it as 
grounds for disqualiﬁ cation. Jefferts Schori also supports the bless-
ing of same-gender unions. She has stated that, as a woman who 
entered a traditionally male occupation, she identiﬁ es with those 
whom many consider on the margins of society.
 
Born in Pensacola, Florida, Jefferts Schori graduated from 
high school in New Jersey and received a bachelor of science 
degree in biology from Stanford University in 1974. She studied 
oceanography at Oregon State University, receiving a master of 
science degree in 1977 and a doctorate in 1983. After working for 

Biographical Sketches 167
the National Marine Fisheries Service in Seattle, Jefferts Schori 
moved to Corvallis, Oregon, with her husband. At the urging 
of fellow church members at the Episcopal Church of the Good 
Samaritan in Corvallis, she decided to enter seminary studies and 
received a master of divinity degree from Church Divinity School 
of the Paciﬁ c in Berkeley, California, in 1994 and a doctor of divin-
ity degree in 2001. She was ordained a priest in 1994. Following 
ordination, Jefferts Schori served for six years as assistant rector of 
the Episcopal Church of the Good Samaritan in Corvallis. In 2001 
she became the bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Nevada, where 
she actively pursued ecological issues related to past nuclear test-
ing, the mining industry, and water quality.
 
In 2004 Jefferts Schori supported immigration reform, urging 
the two U.S. senators from Nevada to back fair reform measures. 
Referring to the Judeo-Christian tradition of caring for the stranger 
and to the nation’s long history of immigration, she advocated 
legislation that would permit increased numbers of workers to 
enter the United States legally and allow them to achieve perma-
nent residence status and ultimately citizenship. Jefferts Schori 
also urged a policy that would allow those already in the coun-
try to move toward citizenship. In 2005, expressing her concern 
for the less advantaged, Jefferts Schori appealed to the senators 
and members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Nevada 
to oppose the ﬁ scal year 2006 Federal Budget Reconciliation Act. 
She argued that budget cuts for food stamps, Medicaid, child care, 
and children’s health programs would harm the most vulnerable 
in American society.
Elizabeth A. Johnson (b. 1941)
An exponent of feminist theology and of new understandings of 
the traditional Catholic faith, Elizabeth Johnson is a professor of 
theology at Fordham University and a nun in the order of the Sis-
ters of St. Joseph. Johnson has argued that the Bible and other 
Christian writings support the use of feminine as well as mas-
culine language to describe God. Her theological writings ques-
tion patriarchal ways of understanding God and the world and 
promote new religious perspectives based on the experiences of 
women.

168 Biographical Sketches
 
Johnson was born in Brooklyn, New York, and became a 
nun in 1959. In 1964 she received a bachelor of arts degree in the 
classics from Brentwood College on Long Island, and in 1970 she 
completed a master’s degree in theology at Manhattan College 
in the Bronx. In 1981 Johnson received a doctorate in theology 
from Catholic University of America in Washington DC, and from 
1981 until 1991 she taught theology at Catholic University, after 
which she moved to Fordham University’s Bronx campus. In 1990 
Johnson published Consider Jesus: Waves of Renewal in Christol-
ogy, in which she examined twentieth-century Catholic thought 
on Christ. In 1992 Johnson published She Who Is, in which she 
proposed a feminist theology, reinterpreting the doctrine of the 
Trinity in terms of the feminine Sophia (wisdom). Johnson initi-
ated the discussion with the “Spirit-Sophia” of the Trinity rather 
than the Father, thus avoiding what she considered the traditional 
patriarchal, and thus ﬁ nite, understanding of God. She argued 
that to speak of God in purely masculine terms implies that the 
masculine is preferable to the feminine. Fundamental to Johnson’s 
discussion is the observation that the Catholic Church, in order to 
survive, must change with evolving societal conceptions of gen-
der. Without such change, she claimed, social reality will move 
beyond the church.
 
In a 1993 lecture, “Women, Earth, and Creator Spirit,” pre-
sented at Saint Mary’s College in Notre Dame, Indiana, John-
son suggested correlations between the exploitation of natural 
resources and the exploitation of women. In 1996, in “Does God 
Play Dice? Divine Providence and Chance,” published in Theologi-
cal Studies, she investigated the relationship between the role of 
chance, which natural science afﬁ rms, and the Christian view of 
a providential God. Johnson attempted to preserve the individual 
as an autonomous creature acting within a divinely established 
structure that allows for unpredictable, random, natural pro-
cesses to operate toward a divine end. She concluded that God 
uses chance in the working of his providence.
 
In 1998 Johnson published Friends of God and Prophets: A Femi-
nist Theological Reading of the Communion of Saints, in which she criti-
cized the traditional doctrine of the communion of saints, labeling 
it hierarchical and patriarchal, consisting of a group of primarily 
male intercessors between a masculine God and people on earth. 
Reinterpreting the doctrine, Johnson posited a community struc-

Biographical Sketches 169
ture, based on feminine experience, that includes the living and the 
dead who together interact with God. The symbol of the commu-
nion of saints, Johnson claimed, should support women’s efforts to 
achieve equal dignity and to assist the church in becoming a true 
community of equally valued “friends of God and prophets.”
Barry W. Lynn (b. 1948)
An ordained minister in the United Church of Christ (UCC), Barry 
Lynn has served as the executive director of Americans United for 
Separation of Church and State (AU) since 1992. Lynn has gained 
wide recognition as a strong opponent of ofﬁ cial religious involve-
ment in the public sphere. On issues such as the display of the 
Ten Commandments, the words “under God” in the pledge of alle-
giance, and the teaching of intelligent design in the public schools 
as an alternative to the theory of evolution, Lynn is a vocal pro-
ponent of the wall of separation doctrine, advocating the removal 
of religious inﬂ uence from government policy. According to Lynn, 
religious organizations have the right under the U.S. Constitu-
tion to practice their religious beliefs but do not have the right to 
impose those religious beliefs on others through ofﬁ cial public pol-
icy. While Lynn has not served as a minister of a congregation for 
an extended period, he maintains his ministerial position within 
the UCC. This ofﬁ cial status undoubtedly grants greater credibil-
ity to his pronouncements on church-state relations.
 
Born in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, Lynn received a bachelor 
of arts degree from Dickinson College in 1970 and a master of the-
ology degree from Boston University in 1973. From 1971 to 1974 
he taught in the religious studies department of Cardinal Cushing 
Central High School in South Boston, Massachusetts, after which 
he served as the director of the To Heal a Nation program of the 
United Church of Christ. After receiving a doctor of laws degree 
from Georgetown University in 1978, Lynn served for two years 
as legislative counsel for the UCC’s Ofﬁ ce of Church and Society 
in Washington DC. From 1984 to 1991 he worked as legislative 
counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). While 
working with the ACLU, Lynn cowrote the organization’s policy 
on church-state relations and led opposition to the 1986 Meese 
commission report on pornography.

170 Biographical Sketches
 
In 1992 Lynn accepted the position of executive director of 
Americans United for Separation of Church and State, an orga-
nization established in 1947 to oppose state funding of religious 
schools. Although AU had fallen on hard times, Lynn used his 
contacts with the ACLU and his fund-raising abilities to revive the 
organization. AU had a staff of ten when Lynn arrived, but ulti-
mately that number increased to thirty-ﬁ ve as the annual budget 
exceeded $4 million. In 1995 Lynn coauthored Your Right to Reli-
gious Liberty: A Basic Guide to Religious Rights, in which the authors 
discussed such topics as government aid to religious organiza-
tions, religion and public education, the role of chaplains in the 
military, conscientious objection, religion in the workplace, reli-
gious displays in public places, and “deprogramming” adherents 
to religious cults.
 
Lynn is a major media ﬁ gure, appearing on such news pro-
grams as Larry King Live; Meet the Press; CBS Morning News; Fox 
Morning News; and the ABC, CBS, and NBC evening news pro-
grams. He also has written opinion pieces for newspapers and 
news magazines, including USA Today, the Wall Street Journal, and 
The Nation. Critics claim that Lynn is trying to remove Christian-
ity from the public sphere, thus allowing Christians fewer rights 
than other people. However, Lynn argues that the U.S. religious 
tradition constituted in the First Amendment provides for a strict 
separation of religious practice from secular public policy and 
hence establishes a prohibition on coercive state-sponsored reli-
gious observance of any kind. In addition to the constitutional 
issue, Lynn claims that separation of church and state has practical 
implications. He holds that past attempts to impose religious obser-
vance in the public schools led to social unrest and violence. Lynn 
opposes voucher systems for education, claiming that this type of 
government involvement in religion creates competition among 
religious denominations for government favors. Although Lynn 
opposes government involvement on social and religious ques-
tions, he tends to take liberal positions on other issues regarding 
government action, rejecting the libertarian position on economic 
and social questions such as assistance to the less advantaged. He 
dismisses the basic doctrine of individualism, adhering instead to 
a belief in communal responsibility. Lynn has expressed concern 
for the rise during recent decades of the religious right, and in 
2006 he published Piety and Politics: The Right-Wing Assault on Reli-

Biographical Sketches 171
gious Freedom, in which he identiﬁ es the religious right as a major 
threat to First Amendment freedoms.
Roger Michael Mahoney 
(b. 1936)
Appointed archbishop of Los Angeles in 1985 by Pope John Paul 
II, Roger Mahoney has championed the cause of the less fortunate, 
especially Hispanics. Mahoney was born in Hollywood, California, 
and spent his early years in the San Fernando Valley. He attended 
St. John’s Seminary in Camarillo and was ordained a priest in 1962. 
Two years later Mahoney received a master of arts degree in social 
work from Catholic University of America in Washington DC. He 
returned to California to become the diocesan director of Catholic 
Charities and Social Services as well as a faculty member at Coal-
inga College in Fresno. He began his ministry with Hispanic people 
by joining the Administrative Council of the Episcopal Committee 
for Hispanics and helping organize a committee for farm workers. 
Mahoney worked in cooperation with farm worker organizer Cesar 
Chavez. In 1975 Pope Paul VI appointed Mahoney auxiliary bishop 
of Fresno and titular bishop of Tamascani. In 1980 Pope John Paul II 
named Mahoney bishop of the Diocese of Stockton. That same year, 
Governor Jerry Brown appointed Mahoney the ﬁ rst chairperson of 
the California Agricultural Labor Relations Board, which became 
involved in resolving labor disputes between the United Farm 
Workers Union and growers. Upon the retirement of Cardinal Man-
ning in 1985, the pontiff appointed Mahoney the new archbishop of 
Los Angeles, an archdiocese of 4 million Catholics in Santa Barbara, 
Ventura, and Los Angeles counties. In 1991 Mahoney was granted 
the title of cardinal.
 
Mahoney is generally considered one of the more liberal 
spokes persons for American Catholicism, supporting change 
within the church as well as progressive causes in society. He has 
been active in the larger community, serving on the Blue Ribbon 
Committee for Affordable Housing Los Angeles and the Fed-
eral Commission on Agricultural Workers. Following the riots 
resulting from the acquittal of police ofﬁ cers accused of the Rod-
ney King beating in 1992, he was appointed to the Rebuild L.A. 

172 Biographical Sketches
Commission. He served on several commissions established by 
the Catholic bishops, including the Committee on Farm Labor, 
the Committee on Migration and Refugees, and the Committee 
on Pro-Life Activities, which deals with such issues as abortion, 
physician-assisted suicide, and capital punishment. Mahoney 
also has expressed his concern over violence in the United States. 
For instance, following the shooting at Columbine High School 
in Littleton, Colorado, in 1999, he referred to the various possible 
causes, including the breakdown of the family, the collapse of a 
sense of community, the loss of respect for life, the portrayal of 
violent acts in the media, and the ready availability of ﬁ rearms 
and other weapons.
 
Mahoney’s archdiocese has been involved in the sexual abuse 
scandal that shook the Catholic Church in the United States. In 
October 2005 the church released documents revealing that 
Ma honey had participated in the transfer from parish to parish 
of more than one hundred priests in his archdiocese who had 
been accused of the sexual abuse of young people. More recently 
Mahoney has become personally involved with the controversial 
issue of immigration. He has supported the legalization of undoc-
umented immigrants and the establishment of guest-worker pro-
grams. Following the U.S. House of Representatives’ passage of a 
strict immigration bill, Mahoney declared that anti-immigration 
feelings in the United States were the result of hysteria and he 
called the legislation inhumane. In March 2006 he stated that if 
the bill became law, priests in his diocese were to ignore its pro-
visions. Some more conservative Catholics have distanced them-
selves from Mahoney’s activist stance on immigration, especially 
his call for disobeying the law. For instance, William F. Buck-
ley, Jr., suggested that the United States Conference of Catholic 
Bishops should rebuke Cardinal Mahoney’s call for disobeying 
the law despite his humanitarian motives. Calling the writing of 
law a democratic exercise, Buckley declared that Mahoney was 
in the wrong for showing contempt for authority in a democratic 
community.
Martin E. Marty (b. 1928)
For ﬁ fty years Martin Marty has contributed to the understand-
ing of the place of religion in American public life. Distinguished 

Biographical Sketches 173
professor emeritus at the University of Chicago—where he taught 
for thirty-ﬁ ve years—and an ordained Lutheran pastor, Marty has 
written or edited more than ﬁ fty books on the history of religion 
and the contemporary signiﬁ cance of the religious experience of 
Americans. Marty served as the book review editor and was suc-
cessively the contributing, associate, and ultimately senior editor 
of Christian Century, an inﬂ uential mainline Protestant magazine. 
He continues to write the column M.E.M.O. for the magazine.
 
Born in West Point, Nebraska, Marty moved to Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, when he was a teenager and attended Concordia Uni-
versity and Washington University. Marty received a master of 
divinity degree from Concordia Seminary and a master of sacred 
theology degree from the Lutheran School of Theology in Chi-
cago. He went on to complete the doctorate in American religious 
and intellectual history from the University of Chicago. Ordained 
in 1952, Marty served as an assistant Lutheran pastor in River For-
est, Illinois, from 1952 to 1956 and as a pastor in Elk Grove Village, 
Illinois, from 1956 to 1963, when he joined the faculty of the Uni-
versity of Chicago as professor of the history of modern Christian-
ity. As a result of conﬂ icts within the Lutheran Church–Missouri 
Synod in the 1970s, Marty left that denomination. In 1998 Marty 
became the Fairfax M. Cone Distinguished Service Professor 
Emeritus at the University of Chicago, and the university’s Insti-
tute for the Advanced Study of Religion, which he founded and 
directed, was renamed the Martin Marty Center.
 
Marty has written an impressive series of books on the his-
tory of religion in the United States. In Righteous Empire: The Prot-
estant Experience in America, published in 1970, Marty recounted 
the development of Protestant denominations and the inﬂ uence 
that Protestants have had on the shaping of American values and 
beliefs as well as their impact on national events. His many other 
works include Pilgrims in Their Own Land: Five Hundred Years of 
Religion in America, published in 1984, which presents a history 
of American religious experience that contains accounts of many 
individuals who played prominent roles in religion. Beginning 
in 1987 Marty directed the seven-year Fundamentalism Project 
of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and coauthored 
ﬁ ve volumes resulting from the research. From 1996 to 1999 he 
directed the Public Religion Project, funded by the Pew Charita-
ble Trusts. In one volume resulting from this study, Politics, Reli-
gion and the Common Good, Marty examined the role religion plays 

174 Biographical Sketches
in American public life. Although religion can be a divisive force, 
Marty argued that religious convictions can play many positive 
roles, including providing strength during a crisis, demonstrat-
ing an alternative to exaggerated individualism, and encouraging 
people to be politically active.
 
Some have criticized Marty for not taking stronger stands 
on such contemporary issues as abortion, sexuality, and U.S. for-
eign policy, particularly faulting him for failing to take up such 
issues in his Christian Century column. Nonetheless, throughout 
his career as a teacher and a scholar, Marty has been a model for 
the mainline denominations, presenting moderate views on the 
subjects he engages. As a historian, he has attempted to present 
the progression of various strains in the nation’s religious history, 
recognizing the pluralistic nature of that development. Although 
formally retired, Marty has continued an active speaking agenda 
and, especially after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, is 
often asked to help his audiences achieve a better understanding 
of Islam.
A. Roy Medley (b. 1948)
During his tenure as general secretary of the American Baptist 
Churches in the U.S.A. (ABC), A. Roy Medley has faced severe 
challenges to the unity of the denomination, which has lost mem-
bers and ﬁ nancial support attributed to controversy over church 
policy regarding homosexuality. Born in Ringgold, Georgia, Med-
ley received a bachelor of arts degree in psychology from the 
University of Chattanooga and a master of divinity degree from 
Princeton Theological Seminary. In 1972 and 1973 he attended the 
Ecumenical Institute of the World Council of Churches in Bossey, 
Switzerland. Early in his career Medley became associate pastor 
at First Baptist Church in Trenton, New Jersey, where he stayed 
from 1974 to 1977. He was ordained a Baptist minister in 1975. In 
1977 and 1978 he served as interim pastor at Christ Congregation 
in Princeton, New Jersey. After this experience as a local pastor, 
Medley entered church administration, becoming the administra-
tive assistant to the manager of American Baptist National Minis-
tries’ Operations and Program Resource Unit. From 1978 to 1985 
he served as a member of the National Council of Churches of 
Christ working group on hunger and poverty and the Ecumenical 

Biographical Sketches 175
Development Cooperative Fund of the World Council of Churches, 
and became the director of the Neighborhood Action Program of 
American Baptist National Ministries. He was responsible for var-
ious programs, including development and recruitment.
 
In 1986 Medley became an area minister and minister of Mis-
sion Support for the ABC of New Jersey, one of the thirty-four 
regions within the denomination, where he was responsible for 
stewardship education and fund-raising. As area minister, Med-
ley focused on such activities as pastoral recruitment and conﬂ ict 
management. In 1992 Medley became the executive minister for 
New Jersey. He emphasized renewing older congregations, devel-
oping new churches, and attracting minorities to the denomina-
tion. In 2001 the ABC General Board conﬁ rmed Medley as the 
denomination’s new general secretary. As general secretary, Med-
ley, along with the General Ministries ofﬁ ce, has such responsibili-
ties as executing the policies that the General Board determines, 
maintaining relations with other denominations, raising and 
administering funds to support the mission budget, managing the 
denomination’s communication media, maintaining records, and 
scheduling the denomination’s biennial meetings.
 
Medley has joined with the leadership of other denomina-
tions in attempting to inﬂ uence public policy. In January 2005 
Medley, along with ﬁ fty-six other denomination leaders, signed a 
letter addressed to President George W. Bush that was published 
in the New York Times. The letter urged the president to use his 
leadership to end the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂ ict and stated that 
bringing peace to Jerusalem is crucial to a defense strategy to 
combat terrorism. In September 2005 Medley met with leaders of 
the Interfaith Convocation on Hunger at the National Cathedral 
in Washington DC. The group issued a letter to members of Con-
gress and the president, urging them to remain committed to the 
goal of eliminating hunger. The group asked that national leaders 
prevent budget cuts to the national food stamp program.
 
At the same time that Medley engaged in ecumenical activi-
ties to improve ties with other denominations, he faced the pros-
pect of deep divisions within the ABC. At the 2005 denominational 
meeting, the delegates passed a resolution afﬁ rming a policy that 
allows congregations to join another geographical region or associ-
ation of the ABC if the congregation and the region mutually agree 
to the move. The resolution was an attempt to deal with disagree-
ments that arose in regional organizations over congregations that 

176 Biographical Sketches
had established a welcoming policy toward gays and lesbians. 
Commenting on the question, Medley stated that although he was 
“still traditional” regarding issues of human sexuality, he did not 
wish to separate himself from those who held differing views on 
homosexuality, a position he called a “paradox.” He noted that 
the ABC was established on the principle of regional and local 
autonomy, and therefore the General Board or general secre-
tary could not usurp the rights of local congregations. Thus, the 
national organization could not require regional and local church 
organizations to abide by a resolution passed in 1992 opposing 
homosexual conduct.
 
In September 2005 the executive committee of the American 
Baptist Churches of the Paciﬁ c Southwest decided to initiate the 
process of withdrawing from the denomination. In October, Med-
ley announced that the denomination was closing its communica-
tions department as part of a budget cut resulting from declining 
funds. Despite his concern over the ABC Paciﬁ c Southwest’s 
intention to leave the denomination, Medley stated that specula-
tion about the demise of the ABC was unfounded and that the 
denomination was moving ahead with establishing closer rela-
tionships with other Baptist groups. In April 2006 the members of 
the ABC Paciﬁ c Southwest voted to continue the process of end-
ing the regional organization’s relationship with the ABCUSA.
Reinhold Niebuhr (1892–1971)
Reinhold Niebuhr’s political activism rivaled his theological work 
in contributing to his prominence as a major ﬁ gure in mainline 
Christianity. In his early years, Niebuhr adhered to a liberal and 
even socialist political ideology, but ultimately offered an alterna-
tive to the optimistic premises of the Social Gospel movement as 
well as to the more conservative elements within mainline Chris-
tianity of the twentieth century. Today, many of the positions that 
Niebuhr voiced can be detected in the theological and social stands 
that the mainline denominations have taken. Born in Wright City, 
Missouri, the son of a German Evangelical pastor, Niebuhr decided 
to follow in his father’s vocation. He graduated from Elmhurst 
College, the proseminary of the German Evangelical Synod, in 
1910. Niebuhr then attended Eden Seminary in St. Louis, Missouri, 
where he received a bachelor of divinity degree and was ordained 

Biographical Sketches 177
a pastor in 1913. He went on to study at Yale University, where 
in 1914 he earned another bachelor of divinity degree, and the 
following year he received a master of arts degree. While at Yale, 
Niebuhr was strongly inﬂ uenced by liberal Protestantism.
 
Although the Yale faculty encouraged him to complete a 
doctorate, he decided to gain practical experience as a minister. 
He went to Detroit to serve as pastor of the Bethel Evangelical 
Church, a small congregation of less than a hundred members. As 
the automobile industry grew, so did the size of the congregation, 
reaching nearly 700 members by the time he left in 1928. While in 
Detroit, Niebuhr sided with the workers against Henry Ford, criti-
cizing the working conditions in the automobile plants and allow-
ing union organizers to speak at his church. The First World War 
and the cynical aftermath for which the victors were responsible 
led Niebuhr to embrace paciﬁ st views. In 1922 he joined the Fel-
lowship for a Christian Social Order and a year later became the 
organization’s traveling secretary, giving lectures in the eastern 
and midwestern states. In 1925 Niebuhr became involved in the 
Detroit mayoral race, opposing a Protestant candidate who had 
accepted support from the Ku Klux Klan. The winning candidate, 
a Catholic, appointed Niebuhr to chair an interracial committee to 
investigate race relations in the city. In 1928 Niebuhr left Detroit 
to become a professor of practical theology at Union Theological 
Seminary in New York City.
 
Niebuhr’s political experience convinced him that the lib-
eral belief in reason and the basic goodness of human beings 
was ﬂ awed. He joined the Socialist party and became editor of 
the socialist publication World Tomorrow. In 1930 Niebuhr entered 
politics more directly by running as the Socialist candidate for 
the New York state senate, but received less than 5 percent of the 
vote. In 1932 he entered the political waters once more, running 
for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives, but did no better. 
He remained a socialist during the 1930s, but no longer took an 
active role in politics. Soon after the 1932 election, Niebuhr pub-
lished Moral Man and Immoral Society, in which he concluded that 
although love may guide individuals, for groups of individuals, 
justice must be the overriding consideration. Current events, he 
observed, demonstrated that the notion of original sin, so objec-
tionable to humanists, inﬂ uenced much of human action.
 
With the onset of the Second World War, Niebuhr altered 
his paciﬁ st stance and became a strong advocate of the struggle 

178 Biographical Sketches
against Nazism, which he concluded should take precedence over 
the class struggle. In 1940 Niebuhr left the Socialist party, and in 
1941 he founded the publication Christianity and Crisis. He became 
the chair of the Union for Democratic Action, which in 1947 became 
Americans for Democratic Action. During the Second World War, 
Niebuhr was one of a few who expressed concern for the fate of 
Jews in Europe. In 1944 he published The Children of Light and the 
Children of Darkness, in which he defended democracy as the gov-
erning system that promoted equality and coincided most closely 
with Christian doctrine. Also in 1944 Niebuhr took part in the 
creation of the Liberal party of New York. Following the Second 
World War, Niebuhr remained active in public life. In 1948 he took 
part in the creation of the World Council of Churches, an associa-
tion supported by mainline denominations. In 1949 he served as a 
delegate to the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural 
Association conference in Paris. As Senator Joseph R. McCarthy 
increased his attacks on alleged Communists in the U.S. govern-
ment, Niebuhr claimed that the senator in fact hampered the ﬁ ght 
against communism. Observing the rise of evangelist Billy Gra-
ham, Niebuhr expressed his displeasure at the increase in religious 
fundamentalism in the United States. In 1964 President Lyndon 
Johnson presented the Medal of Freedom to Niebuhr. However, 
as Johnson increased U.S. military operations in Vietnam, Niebuhr 
became a vocal critic of the war. He also came to oppose nuclear 
deterrence, a policy that he previously had supported.
Sean Patrick O’Malley (b. 1944)
Six months after Bernard Cardinal Law’s resignation in Decem-
ber 2002 as archbishop of Boston due to the sexual abuse scandal, 
Pope John Paul II appointed Sean Patrick O’Malley to lead the 
diocese through the crisis. O’Malley already had experience han-
dling abuse cases when he served as archbishop of the Fall River, 
Massachusetts, diocese. After a priest had been accused of molest-
ing more than 100 children, O’Malley reached settlements with 
victims, imposed a zero-tolerance policy regarding priests found 
to have abused minors, and instituted abuse-education classes. 
In 2002, as archbishop of the Palm Beach, Florida, diocese, he 
dealt again with allegations of sexual abuse. Two bishops before 
him had left due to sexual abuse charges. O’Malley promised to 

Biographical Sketches 179
remove all priests who were guilty of sexual abuse and to report 
all abuse claims to civil authorities.
 
O’Malley was born in Lakewood, Ohio, and was raised in 
Herman, Pennsylvania, where he entered the St. Fidelis Semi-
nary, a boarding school for those intending to enter the Capu-
chin order. The school specialized in languages, and O’Malley 
received training in Latin, German, Spanish, Greek, and Hebrew. 
In 1965, at the age of twenty-one, O’Malley joined the Capuchin-
Franciscan order, which follows the teachings of St. Francis of 
Assisi, the thirteenth-century monk who led a life of poverty and 
devotion. In 1970 he was ordained a priest. O’Malley attended 
Capuchin College in Washington DC, and earned a master of arts 
degree in religious education and subsequently received a doctor-
ate in Spanish and Portuguese literature from Catholic University, 
where he taught from 1969 to 1973. O’Malley became involved 
in social causes, including participation in the Catholic Church’s 
annual rally in Washington DC against abortion and calling for a 
commitment to assisting those in poverty. When asked to take part 
in a ministry to the Latino population of Washington, O’Malley 
established Centro Catolico Hispano, which provided various 
services to the Hispanic population, including legal advice and 
instruction in English as well as employment, medical, and den-
tal assistance. Engaging in social activism, O’Malley assisted ten-
ants in a dilapidated tenement owned by Antioch Law School. He 
moved into the tenement, helped the residents to make improve-
ments to the building, and guided them in establishing a coopera-
tive that ultimately purchased the building.
 
In 1978 O’Malley became executive director of the Ofﬁ ce 
of Social Ministry within the diocese, and in 1984 the Vatican 
appointed him coadjutor bishop of St. Thomas, the U.S. Virgin 
Islands. The following year he became bishop. While bishop, 
O’Malley established a hospice for AIDS patients and built living 
quarters for the homeless. Even after becoming the archbishop 
of Boston, O’Malley maintained a humble lifestyle, refusing to 
move into the archbishop’s mansion, living instead in a small 
apartment.
 
Upon assuming the position of archbishop of Boston, 
O’Malley quickly replaced the church’s lead counsel who had been 
handling the civil lawsuits against the diocese, and hired the attor-
ney with whom he had worked in settling abuse charges in Fall 
River. Approximately one month after O’Malley came to Boston, 

180 Biographical Sketches
the archdiocese reached a settlement with 550 people who claimed 
they had been sexually abused by ofﬁ cials in the church. The total 
cost of the settlement was $85 million. In addition to the monetary 
settlement, the church offered victims mental-health counseling. 
With regard to the abortion issue, O’Malley commented in 2004 
that if politicians fail to vote “correctly” on issues such as abortion, 
they should not present themselves for communion in the Catholic 
Church. O’Malley also has taken a public stand regarding the issue 
of marriage and homosexuality. He objected to any proposal before 
the Massachusetts legislature that would link a deﬁ nition of mar-
riage as a union between one man and one woman with the legal 
recognition of same-gender civil unions, fearing that those who 
support the marriage deﬁ nition would be coerced into accepting 
something they otherwise opposed.
Norman Vincent Peale 
(1898–1993)
Best known as the advocate of the doctrine of positive thinking 
and as an exponent of the small-town values of the nineteenth 
century in an increasingly urbanized society, Norman Vincent 
Peale had a profound effect on mainline Christian thinking dur-
ing much of the twentieth century. Peale’s father, originally a phy-
sician, became a Methodist minister who moved frequently from 
congregation to congregation. At the time of Norman’s birth, his 
father was serving a church in Bowersville, Ohio. Peale gradu-
ated from high school in Bellefontaine, Ohio, and attended Ohio 
Wesleyan University, graduating in 1920. He initially worked as 
a journalist, but in 1921 he entered Boston University’s school of 
theology, a Methodist school, and was ordained a Methodist min-
ister in 1922. Beginning with his ﬁ rst congregation, King’s High-
way Methodist Church in Brooklyn, New York, Peale used sales 
techniques, including personal visits to the growing neighbor-
hood and postcard mailings, to attract new members. In 1927 Peale 
moved to University Methodist Church in Syracuse, New York, 
and employed the same strategy to attract people to the church. 
In 1932 Peale changed his afﬁ liation to the Reformed Church in 
America and became the minister of Marble Collegiate Church in 
Manhattan, a position he held for ﬁ fty-two years. His simple style 

Biographical Sketches 181
of preaching, laced with stories taken from his personal experi-
ences, attracted people to the church, and membership grew from 
600 to more than 5,000.
 
In 1932 Peale was asked to broadcast a radio program, “The 
Art of Living,” for the Federal Council of Churches. The program 
remained on the air for forty years, with a broadcast of Peale’s 
Sunday sermons added in later years. Requests for printed cop-
ies of his sermons led to the establishment of the Foundation 
for Christian Living, located in Pawling, New York, to print and 
mail literature. In 1945 Peale, along with his wife and a Pawling 
businessman, founded Guideposts, a magazine containing Peale’s 
inspirational stories. The magazine ultimately achieved a circu-
lation of more than one million copies. Peale became a popular 
speaker, scheduling engagements around the country. In 1947 
Peale, along with Kenneth Beebe, founded the Horatio Alger 
Association, which recognized those who had overcome difﬁ cult 
circumstances to achieve success.
 
In two books, The Art of Living (1947) and A Guide to Conﬁ -
dent Living (1948), Peale used anecdotes to present principles for 
living a successful and happy life. In 1952 he published his most 
well-known book, The Power of Positive Thinking. Although origi-
nally he had titled the manuscript “The Power of Faith,” his pub-
lisher suggested a title that would attract nonchurch members. 
In this and other writings, Peale emphasized the attainment of 
power from Christ in order to achieve success and happiness. He 
recommended basic principles of rational living that, if followed, 
would result in self-fulﬁ llment and happiness, and illustrated 
these simple rules of living with personal stories. He maintained 
that prayer could be effective in assisting people in living their 
everyday lives and that churches must offer their members prac-
tical lessons to help them achieve success and happiness. Many 
criticized Peale’s practical advice to achieve success, claiming 
that he had distorted the original Gospel message. They claimed 
that Peale presented a strategy that involved believing in oneself 
rather than in God. Others criticized Peale, who had opposed the 
New Deal programs of President Franklin Roosevelt in addition 
to socialism and communism, for his conservative political mes-
sage and his friendships with conservative politicians. Peale was 
viewed as the conformist, asking his listeners to adjust themselves 
to a changing America in terms of a nineteenth-century sense of 
self-mastery rather than confronting serious social problems.

182 Biographical Sketches
George F. Regas (b. 1930)
Those wishing to respond to the political challenge of the religious 
right look to liberal religious ﬁ gures such as George F. Regas for 
inspiration. Rector of All Saints Episcopal Church in Pasadena, 
California, for twenty-eight years, Regas guided his congregation 
toward a liberal and activist stance on contemporary public policy 
issues. He constantly emphasized the themes of peace and justice. 
Regas retired from his position at All Saints in 1995, and three years 
later he became executive director of the Regas Institute, an organi-
zation dedicated to the study of progressive religion and to counter-
ing the inﬂ uence of conservative Christian groups on public policy 
issues. Collaborating with the liberal group People for the Ameri-
can Way, Regas established the Progressive Religious Partnership, 
an organization of Christian, Jewish, Muslim, and Buddhist reli-
gious leaders that presents a progressive religious perspective on 
issues of justice in the areas of economics, race, and gender as well 
war prevention and the maintenance of a just peace.
 
Regas attended the Episcopal Divinity School in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, and Cambridge University, and received his doc-
torate from Claremont School of Theology in Claremont, Califor-
nia. He became rector of All Saints Church in Pasadena in 1967. 
In 1970, during the U.S. government’s bombing campaign against 
Cambodia, Regas spoke publicly against U.S. involvement in 
Vietnam, delivering a sermon titled “Mr. President, the Jury Is 
In.” He criticized President Richard Nixon’s war policies and 
proposed that the church support the establishment of a Peace 
Operation Center to oppose the war. Because of his outspoken 
comments, conservative members of his congregation attempted 
to have Regas removed. However, Regas stayed at the church, 
and All Saints ultimately became a major center for liberal politi-
cal activism in the Los Angeles area. The church established the 
Center to Reverse the Arms Race, and during Ronald Reagan’s 
presidency All Saints sent representatives to Central America to 
express opposition to U.S. Latin American policy.
 
In 1990, when the George H. W. Bush administration was 
planning the Gulf War, Regas spoke from his pulpit on Christmas 
Eve against U.S. military involvement. Following the terrorist 
attacks of September 11, 2001, Regas opposed U.S. military action 
against Afghanistan. In 2002, as the George W. Bush administra-
tion prepared for the invasion of Iraq, Regas, as the representative 

Biographical Sketches 183
of the Progressive Religious Partnership, declared that preemptive 
action against Iraq, which he concluded would cost thousands of 
lives and billions of dollars and could encourage additional acts 
of terrorism, would violate the moral foundations of the nation. 
Regas, along with other members of the organization’s executive 
committee, met with the leadership of the U.S. Senate to express 
his concern for the Bush administration’s preparations for uni-
lateral military action. Regas has proposed an alternative to both 
paciﬁ sm and just-war theory, which emphasizes conﬂ ict resolu-
tion processes and the investigation of the causes of conﬂ ict.
 
During Regas’s tenure at All Saints, the church established 
such programs as an AIDS Service Center, medical assistance for 
uninsured children, homeless shelters, and the Coalition for a Non-
Violent City. Regas supported the blessing of same-gender unions, 
and in 1991 the church began the practice of blessing such unions. 
In 2000 Regas responded to more conservative Christians regard-
ing homosexuality, claiming that for those writing the Bible, homo-
sexuality did not represent a major issue. He observed that both 
liberals and conservatives tend to be selective when interpreting 
scripture. For instance, those who profess to be biblical literalists 
are in fact selective literalists; they emphasize the antihomosex-
ual pronouncements in the Old Testament Book of Leviticus, but 
ignore such rules as stoning an adulterer and not eating pork and 
the acceptance of slavery. Regas recognizes the Bible as the foun-
dational document of Christian churches, but taking the Bible seri-
ously involves taking into account what has been learned in the 
many years since the books of the Bible were written. For Regas, 
the real difﬁ culty involves not attempting to place homosexuality 
into the context of biblical passages that condemn it, but to con-
trast the prejudice practiced against homosexuals with what the 
Gospels say about Christ’s gracious love.
Robert H. Schuller (b. 1926)
Many people in the United States and around the world know 
Robert H. Schuller as the televangelist who broadcasts from the 
Crystal Cathedral, the 10,000-member megachurch in Garden 
Grove, California. The church has a $72 million budget, employs 
approximately 500 people, and broadcasts television programs 
to millions of viewers around the world. Schuller disseminates 

184 Biographical Sketches
a positive religious message called “possibility thinking.” His 
church is the most well-known congregation within the Reformed 
Church in America (RCA), although most of those who have 
viewed Schuller’s church service on television undoubtedly are 
not aware of the Crystal Cathedral’s afﬁ liation with this mainline 
denomination that has no more than 300,000 members nation-
wide. A focus for criticism of Schuller, and possibly an ingredient 
in his great success, is that he does not speak out on major con-
temporary issues such as race and homosexuality.
 
Schuller was born in Alton, Iowa, to Dutch-American par-
ents who adhered to the Dutch Reformed tradition. After gradu-
ating from high school in 1943, Schuller attended Hope College in 
Holland, Michigan, a small liberal arts college afﬁ liated with the 
RCA. After receiving a bachelor of arts degree, Schuller enrolled 
at Western Theological Seminary, an RCA institution also located 
in Holland. In 1950 he received a master of divinity degree and 
became the pastor of the Ivanhoe Reformed Church in Riverdale, 
Illinois. During his tenure at the church, the congregation grew 
from forty to four hundred members.
 
In 1955 RCA leaders asked Schuller to establish a new con-
gregation in Garden Grove, California. With few RCA members in 
the area, Schuller dropped the denominational afﬁ liation from the 
church name, calling it the Garden Grove Community Church. 
With few assets to begin a church, he rented a local drive-in the-
ater, where he preached from the refreshment stand roof and his 
wife Arvella played a portable organ. Attending a worship ser-
vice in automobiles became so popular that when in 1961 Schuller 
built a church structure, he provided members the option of com-
ing into the church or staying in their cars. In 1968 Schuller estab-
lished New Hope, a twenty-four-hour counseling and suicide 
prevention telephone service. In 1970 the church opened the Rob-
ert H. Schuller Institute for Successful Church Leadership, which 
held four-day conferences at which Schuller presented practical 
advice to pastors and lay leaders. Rick Warren, the popular author 
of The Purpose-Driven Church (1995) and The Purpose-Driven Life 
(2002), attended the institute. Also in 1970, Schuller began a tele-
vision ministry. Originally telecast on the West Coast, the “Hour 
of Power” program soon expanded to more than 150 stations. 
Inﬂ uenced by Norman Vincent Peale, also a Reformed Church 
pastor, Schuller emphasized a positive message, calling on people 
to shed negative self-images and to develop self-esteem, which 

Biographical Sketches 185
he considered a fundamental human need. Possibility thinking 
involves eliminating negative thoughts and encouraging more 
positive attitudes. Such a theme coincided with a more progres-
sive view of Christianity and society that mainline denomina-
tions have tended to adopt. Although more traditional Christians 
criticized Schuller’s approach to Christian doctrine, his optimistic 
message gained favor with many, including political leaders. U.S. 
presidents from Richard M. Nixon to George W. Bush spoke well 
of Schuller for his positive religious message.
 
As the church continued to grow, Schuller decided to build a 
new sanctuary, a star-shaped glass-and-steel structure that would 
seat nearly 3,000 people. Those who wanted to remain in their 
cars during the service could do so. With the dedication of the 
new building in 1980, the church was renamed the Crystal Cathe-
dral of the Reformed Church in America. In 1992 Schuller opened 
the Fuqua International School of Christian Communications and 
became the school’s chancellor. He has authored more than thirty 
books, among them My Journey: From an Iowa Farm to a Cathedral 
of Dreams (2002), an autobiography in which Schuller described 
various crises in his own life that ultimately ended well, and 
Don’t Throw Away Tomorrow, published in 2005, in which Schuller 
focused on familiar themes, including optimism, positive values, 
maintaining a focus, and looking to an ultimate authority.
 
In January 2006 Schuller stepped down as the senior pastor 
of Crystal Cathedral, handing over that position to his son, Rob-
ert Anthony Schuller. However, Schuller planned to continue the 
weekly television program.
Fulton J. Sheen (1895–1979)
Fulton Sheen is best known for his television programs, Life Is 
Worth Living (1952–1957) and The Bishop Sheen Program (1961–
1968), on which he presented nondenominational interpretations 
of current events as well as more personal musings. During the 
early years of his broadcasts, Sheen became perhaps the most 
well-known Catholic in the United States. In addition to radio 
and television broadcasts, Sheen wrote more than sixty books, 
beginning with God and Intelligence in Modern Philosophy: A Critical 
Study in the Light of the Philosophy of St. Thomas (1925) and ending 
with Treasure in Clay (1980).

186 Biographical Sketches
 
Sheen was born in El Paso, Illinois. His parents moved to 
Peoria, where in 1913 Sheen graduated from the Spalding Insti-
tute, which was directed by the Brothers of Mercy. He graduated 
from St. Viator College in Bourbonnais, Illinois, and enrolled in St. 
Paul’s Seminary in Minnesota. After his ordination in 1919, Sheen 
continued his studies in philosophy at the Catholic University of 
America in Washington DC, receiving doctor of sacred theology 
and bachelor of canon law degrees in 1920. He then enrolled at 
the Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium, receiving a doc-
torate in 1923 and the agrege en philosophie in 1925. In addition, 
Sheen studied at the Sorbonne in Paris and at the Angelicum and 
Gregorian in Rome, and taught at St. Edmund’s College in Ware, 
England. After completing his studies, Sheen was called back to 
the United States to serve a parish in Peoria. However, he quickly 
moved on to the Catholic University where he ﬁ rst assumed the 
chair of apologetics and subsequently taught philosophy. He 
maintained his faculty position at the university until 1950.
 
In 1930 Sheen began a series of radio broadcasts for NBC 
titled the Catholic Hour, which continued until 1952. In addition to 
the radio broadcasts, he preached regularly at St. Patrick’s Cathe-
dral and conducted classes in Catholicism for those interested in 
converting. In 1952 Sheen applied his polished speaking skills to 
television, broadcasting ﬁ rst on the DuMont network from 1952 
until 1957, when he shifted to ABC. Sheen became a well-known 
television personality. He appeared opposite the popular celebri-
ties Frank Sinatra and Milton Berle, but held his own in the rat-
ings, ultimately achieving an audience estimated at more than 20 
million viewers. A popular theme that he pursued was criticism of 
communism. Sheen’s broadcast in February 1953, which involved 
a mock funeral for Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, gained much atten-
tion when Stalin died the next month. Analysts note that, unlike 
many anti-Communists of the time, Sheen did not resort to char-
acter assassination and did not offer unqualiﬁ ed praise for the 
U.S. system, presenting criticisms of materialist aspects of Ameri-
can capitalism. In addition to his television ministry, Sheen served 
as auxiliary bishop of New York from 1951 to 1966 and as national 
director of the Society for the Propagation of the Faith from 1950 
to 1966.
 
Following a dispute with New York Cardinal Francis Spell-
man, Sheen received an appointment as bishop of the Diocese of 
Rochester, New York. While serving as bishop, Sheen remained in 

Biographical Sketches 187
the public eye, taking stands on racial questions and opposing U.S. 
involvement in Vietnam. Not as skilled with administration as he 
was with the mass media, Sheen resigned his position in 1969, at 
which time  Pope Paul VI appointed him to the largely ceremonial 
post of archbishop of the titular See of Newport, Wales. Sheen’s 
writings, although scholarly, are generally not considered very 
original. His efforts in the broadcast media brought him the great-
est fame as a spokesman for the Catholic Church. In retrospect, he 
demonstrated that religious broadcasting can be conducted with 
high intellectual and ethical standards.
John Shelby Spong (b. 1931)
John Shelby Spong, retired Episcopal bishop of Newark, New Jer-
sey, has published several books expressing ideas that more con-
servative Christians ﬁ nd objectionable but that also suggest where 
mainline Christian denominations may be heading. Striking at the 
heart of traditional Christianity, Spong has questioned the belief 
in Jesus as the “only son” of God and grouped the belief in the 
virgin birth of Jesus with similar accounts in various other cul-
tures. Spong commented that with the early eighteenth-century 
discovery of the presence of the egg cell as a vital ingredient in 
conception, such virgin birth stories, including that of Jesus, lost 
all credibility. He concluded that such stories reﬂ ect the sexism 
of patriarchal cultures. Spong argued that Christians must sur-
render such beliefs in order to stay relevant in the modern world. 
Many who object to Spong’s recommendations question whether 
in rejecting some of the fundamental beliefs to which Christians 
have adhered over the centuries, Christianity can continue to sur-
vive at all.
 
Spong was born in Charlotte, North Carolina, when racial 
segregation still dominated Southern culture. He graduated from 
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1952, and in 
1955 he received a master of divinity degree from the Protestant 
Episcopal Theological Seminary in Virginia. From 1955 to 1957 
Spong served as the rector of St. Joseph’s Church in Durham, 
North Carolina, which is located near Duke University. From 
there, he moved to Calvary Parish, Tarboro, North Carolina. Dur-
ing his stay in Tarboro, Spong ﬁ rst became involved in a contro-
versial social issue. As the struggle over desegregation developed, 

188 Biographical Sketches
Spong announced from the pulpit that he expected African Amer-
ican children to be protected and that he would be with the chil-
dren as they attempted to enter a previously segregated all-white 
school. In 1965 Spong moved to Lynchburg, Virginia, as rector of 
St. John’s Church, where, to the displeasure of those with more 
fundamentalist beliefs, he began an adult Bible study class that 
engaged in textual criticism. In 1969 Spong left Lynchburg for 
Richmond, Virginia, where he became rector of St. Paul’s Church. 
While in Richmond, he was elected to the executive council of the 
diocese of Virginia and became a deputy to the Episcopal Gen-
eral Convention. Spong also began a televised Bible class and 
subsequently published two books, This Hebrew Lord (1974) and 
In Search of Jewish-Christian Understanding (1975), both of which 
investigated the relationship between Judaism and Christianity.
 
In 1976 Spong was chosen to serve as bishop coadjutor of 
Newark, becoming diocesan bishop in 1978. He continued to focus 
on social issues, speaking out on such topics as affordable health 
care and access to high-quality education. In the mid-1980s Spong 
commissioned a task force within the diocese to study sexual rela-
tions in contemporary society, particularly the increasing number 
of unmarried young people living together, unmarried older peo-
ple cohabiting for economic reasons, and people staying together 
in long-term homosexual relationships. The committee’s controver-
sial report supported the recognition of gay marriage. Spong subse-
quently published Living in Sin? A Bishop Rethinks Human Sexuality 
(1988), in which he dealt with the subject of the task force’s report. 
The strong conservative response to the report and Spong’s book 
led him to write Rescuing the Bible from Fundamentalism: A Bishop 
Rethinks the Meaning of Scripture (1991). In 1989 Spong continued to 
stir controversy within the Episcopal Church when he ordained a 
homosexual to the priesthood.
 
Spong’s wife, Joan Ketner Spong, died of cancer in 1988. Joan 
had suffered from mental illness for ﬁ fteen years and had refused 
treatment for cancer. In January 1990 Spong remarried. Spong 
continued to write and speak on controversial subjects, urging 
his denomination to accept the changed world view of the mod-
ern era. He published additional controversial works, including 
Why Christianity Must Change or Die (1998) and Here I Stand: My 
Struggle for a Christianity of Integrity (2000). His book, The Sins of 
Scripture (2005), directly attacks the fundamentalist view of the 
Bible as the inspired and inerrant word of God. Spong focuses on 

Biographical Sketches 189
morally unacceptable scriptural pronouncements, including the 
treatment of women and children and the anti-Semitism of the 
Gospels, and speculates that Paul, the author of many of the New 
Testament epistles, was a suppressed homosexual. In 2007 Spong 
published Jesus for the Nonreligious, in which he attempts to walk 
a delicate line between traditional Christians and those who com-
pletely reject a belief in God.
John H. Thomas (b. 1950)
In 1999 delegates to the General Synod of the United Church of 
Christ elected John H. Thomas the denomination’s general minis-
ter and president. Thomas is one of ﬁ ve members of the Collegium 
of Ofﬁ cers, over which he presides. He graduated with a bachelor 
of arts degree from Gettysburg College in 1972 and received a mas-
ter of divinity degree from Yale Divinity School in 1975, at which 
time he was ordained and began serving as the associate minister 
of the First Congregational United Church of Christ in Cheshire, 
Connecticut. In 1981 Thomas became the minister of the First 
United Church of Christ in Easton, Pennsylvania. In 1988 Thomas 
attended the Ecumenical Institute in Bossey, Switzerland, and in 
1991 he joined the administrative staff of the UCC, becoming assis-
tant to the president for ecumenical concerns. Thomas took part 
in developing full communion relationships with the Evangelical 
Lutheran Church in America, the Reformed Church in America, and 
the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.). In 1998 the negotiations resulted 
in full communion among the denominations. Thomas also has 
represented the UCC in ecumenical organizations, including the 
World Council of Churches, the National Council of Churches, and 
the World Alliance of Reformed Churches.
 
Thomas personally reﬂ ects the more liberal stance of his 
denomination. For instance, when James C. Dobson, conservative 
Christian leader and founder of Focus on the Family, declared that 
the cartoon character SpongeBob Squarepants expressed inappro-
priate tolerance for homosexuality, Thomas responded that the 
UCC welcomed the SpongeBob character, proclaiming that Jesus 
did not turn people away, and neither does his denomination. He 
indicated that Dobson, rather than the cartoon character, had 
crossed a moral line by presenting the inaccurate message that 
Christians do not adhere to the important values of tolerance and 

190 Biographical Sketches
diversity. Thomas added that people should be able to confront 
the cross not as judgment but as embrace. The UCC leader was 
photographed with a SpongeBob doll sitting in a chair across 
from his desk.
 
In June 2005 Thomas issued a statement to members of the 
denomination regarding same-gender marriage. Recognizing 
that church members held fundamentally differing positions on 
the issue, he called for continued dialogue and the creation of a 
“climate of respect” for differing theological and moral views. 
Thomas then presented his own view of the issue. Recognizing 
that the United Church of Christ welcomes all people, he recom-
mended that the UCC General Synod adopt a resolution afﬁ rming 
that gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender persons have the same 
right of marriage as heterosexual couples. Noting that the United 
States has a history of limiting the citizenship rights of various 
groups, Thomas identiﬁ ed the limitation on marriage rights as 
one of the few remaining areas in which the nation restricts full 
citizenship status to people considered alien. He declared that the 
marriage amendments that several state legislatures have passed, 
while presented as afﬁ rmations of traditional views of marriage, 
actually demean homosexual persons.
Sharon E. Watkins (b. 1954)
In April 2005 the General Board of the Christian Church (Disciples 
of Christ) (CCDC) unanimously endorsed Sharon Watkins as the 
denomination’s general minister and president, and in July the 
General Assembly, meeting in Portland, Oregon, unanimously 
elected her to the denomination’s highest post. She became 
the ﬁ rst woman to assume the highest ofﬁ ce in a U.S. mainline 
denomination. Watkins has had varied educational and profes-
sional experiences. In 1975 she received a bachelor of arts degree 
from Butler University in Indianapolis with a major in French 
and Economics. From 1977 to 1979 Watkins gained international 
experience working as a missionary and director of education in 
Kinshasa, Zaire, where she developed and tested an adult literacy 
program and taught reading, writing, and English as a second 
language. Returning to the United States in 1979, Watkins became 
a staff associate for the Africa Department, Division of Overseas 
Ministries of the CCDC.

Biographical Sketches 191
 
In 1980 Watkins entered Yale Divinity School. While in Con-
necticut, in addition to pursuing a master of divinity degree, she 
remained active in church work, serving as a student associate 
with the Downtown Cooperative Ministry in New Haven, as a 
part-time assistant minister, and then as a full-time assistant min-
ister. After receiving her degree in 1984, Watkins ﬁ rst became 
interim coordinator of the Downtown Cooperative Ministry, sup-
porting such projects as a homeless shelter and providing assis-
tance to senior citizens. From 1985 to 1989 she served as pastor of 
the Boone Grove Christian Church in Indiana. During this time, 
Watkins gained ﬁ rsthand experience with the economic difﬁ cul-
ties of farmers and the ecological problems that rural areas face, 
including the pollution of groundwater. In 1989 Watkins assumed 
the position of director of church relations at Phillips University, 
becoming assistant vice president for development in 1992 and 
associate vice president for university relations in 1993. In 1994 
she became director of student services at Phillips Theological 
Seminary. From 1992 to 1996 Watkins studied theology at the sem-
inary, receiving a doctor of ministry degree. In 1997 she became 
senior minister at the Disciples Christian Church in Bartlesville, 
Oklahoma. Watkins has held various ofﬁ ces within the CCDC, 
including moderator of the church organization in Oklahoma 
(2000–2002) and member of the Commission on Clergy (1995–
1996) and the General Board and the Administrative Committee 
beginning in 2001.
 
As general minister and president, Watkins has afﬁ rmed 
the commitment the CCDC has made to combating racism and 
achieving reconciliation among various ethnic and racial groups 
in order to bridge racial, language, and class divisions. She has 
emphasized the role of the CCDC as a group seeking unity among 
Christians, noting that the denomination is concerned primarily 
with inclusiveness rather than the maintenance of speciﬁ c doc-
trines or creeds.


193
6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter presents data gleaned from empirical studies and 
surveys of Christian denominations in the United States that 
highlight the basic demographic characteristics of mainline 
Christians compared with evangelical Protestants, the political 
attitudes of mainline Christians contrasted with those of evan-
gelical Protestants, and the political behavior of members of these 
denominations. The second part of the chapter contains excerpts 
from documents issued by the nine denominations included in 
this investigation as well as statements from individual members. 
These selections present the policy positions of the denomina-
tions in the subject areas discussed in Chapter 2. In any attempt to 
assess the potential inﬂ uence of such communications, we must 
keep in mind, given the discussion in Chapter 7 of several dissent-
ing groups, that the denominational leadership may not speak for 
a certain segment, perhaps even a majority, within the denomina-
tion. In addition, there are some differences among the mainline 
denominations in their positions on some of the issues. On the 
question of abortion, the judgment of the Catholic Church differs 
signiﬁ cantly from that of the mainline Protestant churches, which, 
perhaps more accepting of the notion that moral dilemmas may 
occur, pitting one moral good against another, have expressed a 
greater willingness to accept abortion as an option for a woman, 
at least in certain circumstances such as rape or severe fetal defor-
mities. James L. Guth et al. (1997, 14) have noted that progressive 
clergy in the mainline Protestant churches have emphasized social 
justice issues while conservative leaders in evangelical denomina-
tions have focused more on concern for moral reform. Following 

194 Data and Documents
the lead of Martin Marty, Guth et al. (1997, 191) suggest the exis-
tence of a “two-party system” in American Protestantism. The 
mainline and evangelical churches are distinguishable from each 
other both theologically and politically, constituting two Christian 
“parties.”
Data Overview of the 
Mainline Denominations
An important element in the political inﬂ uence of any group is 
the number of members. Students of interest groups note that 
although large memberships can add to the clout a group may 
have on policy issues—representing greater voting strength, pool 
of ﬁ nancial resources, and opportunity for mass political mobili-
zation—the larger a group, the more likely that differing perspec-
tives will develop among members and supporters, thus diluting 
its impact on the external political environment. The denomina-
tions treated here vary widely in total membership and trends 
over the last ten years. Table 6.1 reports total membership and 
number of congregations for each of the nine denominations, 
comparing 1990 ﬁ gures with those from 2000.
 
All the denominations except the Catholic Church lost mem-
bership between 1990 and 2000, and expectations were that these 
churches would continue to lose members. Several explanations 
are offered for the reductions, including the greater appeal of 
evangelical churches; the conﬂ icts within the mainline churches 
over such matters as the acceptance of homosexual pastors, the 
status of gay members, and the willingness of the denominations’ 
leadership to speak publicly on social and economic issues; a 
more rapid decline in birth rates among mainline denomination 
members;  general population shifts away from areas where the 
mainline churches have been more dominant; and the decreas-
ing appeal of denominational identiﬁ cation, which traditionally 
was frequently associated with ethnic origin. Mainline Protes-
tant denominations appear to be caught between two opposing 
trends: the increasing attraction of more conservative evangelical 
churches along with an increasing number of people who have no 
religious afﬁ liation at all.

 
In contrast to the mainline denominations, A. James Reich-
ley (2002, 263) notes, increasing Catholic Church membership 
can be attributed largely to the immigration of sizable numbers 
of Hispanics into the United States. Unlike the mainline Protes-
tant denominations, the Catholic Church has continued to rely 
on ethnic loyalties to maintain its membership base. In contrast 
to expanding lay membership, the Catholic Church faces a major 
challenge in maintaining an adequate number of priests and 
nuns. Table 6.2 is derived from data presented by Peter Steinfels 
(2003, 29–30) in his discussion of the crises facing the church. As 
the membership in the Catholic Church continued to increase, the 
number of priests and other religious persons declined greatly. 
Sisters traditionally were the mainstay of Catholic schools. How-
ever, with the reduction in the number of nuns available to serve 
in the church’s school system, the proportion of Catholic youth 
TABLE 6.1
Number of Mainline Churches and Their Membership, 
1990 and 2000
 
 
 
Percent 
 
Percent
Denomination 
Year 
Churches 
Change 
Members 
Change
American Baptist  
2000 
5,756 
 
1,436,909 
 Churches in the U.S.A. 
1990 
5,808 
–0.9 
1,535,971 
–6.4
Catholic Church 
1998 
19,584 
 
62,018,436 
 
1990 
23,685 
–17.3 
58,568,016 
+5.9
Christian Church  
2000 
3,781 
 
820,000 
 (Disciples of Christ) 
1990 
4,069 
–7.1 
1,049,692 
–21.9
Episcopal Church 
2000 
7,364 
 
2,333,327 
 
1990 
7,354 
+0.1 
2,446,050 
–4.6
Evangelical Lutheran  
2000 
10,816 
 
5,125,919 
 Church in America 
1990 
11,087 
–2.4 
5,240,739 
–2.2
Presbyterian Church  
2000 
11,178 
 
3,485,332 
 (U.S.A.) 
1990 
11,501 
–2.8 
3,788,009 
–8.0
Reformed Church in  
2000 
898 
 
289,329 
 America 
1990 
924 
–2.8 
326,850 
–11.5
United Church of Christ 
2000 
5,923 
 
1,377,320 
 
1990 
6,260 
–5.4 
1,599,212 
–13.9
United Methodist  
2000 
35,469 
 
8,340,954 
 Church 
1991 
37,100 
–4.4 
8,789,101 
–5.1
Source: Association of Religion Data Archives (http://www.thearda.com).
Data Overview of the Mainline Denominations 195
Corrections 
are marked on 
tables through-
out to align the 
table column 
head, and to 
reduce space 
between last 
line of tables 
and rules. The 
spacing cur-
rently matches 
the specs for 
this job exactly. 
Please indicate 
speciﬁ cally how 
many points 
you would like 
these measure-
ments adjusted, 
so we can 
change the 
specs accord-
ingly.

196 Data and Documents
educated in parochial schools declined from approximately 50 
percent in 1965 to less than 25 percent in 2002 (Steinfels 2003, 30).
 
The Baylor Institute for Studies of Religion survey (Bader et 
al. 2006) provides a breakdown of the religious afﬁ liation of Amer-
icans based on a random sample of Americans conducted in 2006. 
Table 6.3 presents the results. The present investigation combines 
mainline Protestant denominations with the Catholic Church. In 
the Baylor survey, these two groups together constitute 43.3 per-
cent of the sample, the largest religious segment of the U.S. popu-
lation. Evangelical Protestant denominations by themselves make 
up approximately one-third of the sample. To the extent that the 
policy positions of evangelical Protestant groups differ from those 
of mainline Protestants, they represent an important challenge in 
the policy-making arena.
Religious Beliefs 
and Policy Preferences
The Baylor Religion Study offers revealing information about the 
religious beliefs of mainline Protestants in contrast to the beliefs of 
evangelical Protestants and those unafﬁ liated with any religious 
group. Table 6.4 provides ﬁ ndings from that study, presenting the 
two extreme responses in each category: beliefs about God, about 
Jesus, and about the Bible.
The ﬁ ndings indicate signiﬁ cant differences between evan-
gelical Protestant and mainline Protestant respondents (African 
American respondents are not included in this table), with greater 
TABLE 6.2
Number of Catholic Professionals and Institutions, 1965 and 2002
 
1965 
2002 
Percent Change
Priests 
58,132 
45,713 
–21.4
Ordinations 
994 
479 
–51.8
Sisters 
179,954 
75,000 
–58.3
Brothers 
12,271 
5,690 
–53.6
Parishes 
17,637 
19,496 
+10.5
Elementary Schools 
15,000 
7,000 
–53.3
Source: Peter Steinfels (2003, 29–30).

proportions of evangelicals expressing a strong belief in God, 
in Jesus as the son of God, and in the Bible as the literal truth. Cath-
olics and mainline Protestants differed somewhat on the ﬁ rst two 
beliefs, with a higher proportion of Catholics expressing strong 
belief in God and Jesus as the son of God, but nearly identical small 
proportions of both groups registered a high conﬁ dence in the literal 
truth of the Bible, in contrast to a much larger proportion of evan-
gelical respondents expressing this view. Not surprisingly, those 
TABLE 6.3
U.S. Religious Afﬁ liation, 2006
Afﬁ liation 
Percentage of Sample
Evangelical Protestant 
33.6
Mainline Protestant 
22.1
Catholic 
21.2
Black Protestant 
5.0
Other 
4.9
Jewish 
2.5
Unafﬁ liated 
10.8
Note: The percentages do not add to 100 percent due to rounding errors.
Source: Baylor Institute for Studies of Religion—American Piety in the 21st Century, selected ﬁ ndings (Bader et al. 2006, 8).
TABLE 6.4
Religious Beliefs of Evangelical Protestant, Mainline Protestant, 
Catholic, and Unafﬁ liated Respondents (percentage)
 
Evangelical 
Mainline 
 
 
Protestant 
Protestant 
Catholic 
Unafﬁ liated
Belief about God 
 
 
 
No doubts that God exists 
86.5 
63.6 
74.8 
11.6
Don’t believe in anything beyond  
0.4 
0.7 
1.1 
37.1
 the physical world
Belief about Jesus 
 
 
 
Jesus is the son of God 
94.4 
72.2 
84.9 
11.0
Jesus is a ﬁ ctional character 
0.0 
0.9 
0.2 
13.7
Belief about the Bible 
 
 
 
Literally true 
47.8 
11.2 
11.8 
1.0
Ancient book of history and legends 
6.5 
22.0 
19.8 
82.3
Source: Baylor Institute for Studies of Religion—American Piety in the 21st Century, selected ﬁ ndings (Bader et al. 2006, 14).
Religious Beliefs and Policy Preferences 197

198 Data and Documents
respondents who were unafﬁ liated with any religious group 
expressed the lowest level of belief.
 
Paul A. Djupe and Christopher P. Gilbert (2003), in a sur-
vey of more than 2,400 Evangelical Lutheran Church in Amer-
ica and Episcopal Church clergy, determined the frequency of 
clergy involvement in various forms of political activity and their 
approval of each type of activity. Table 6.5 presents results from 
their study.
 
Assuming that this sample is at least to some extent represen-
tative not only of the ELCA and Episcopal Church clergy but of all 
mainline Protestant clergy in the eight denominations examined in 
this study, moderately large proportions of pastors engage in such 
political activities as offering prayer and taking a stand on an issue, 
either publicly or from the pulpit, and urging church members 
to register to vote. Higher proportions of clergy approve of such 
actions than actually engage in them, suggesting that although 
certain pastors personally prefer not to participate in certain forms 
of political activity, they regard such activity to be appropriate 
if others choose to take part. As activities become more partisan, 
the rate of engagement tends to decline, with just 11.4 percent 
and 6.1 percent of the sample, respectively, having engaged in 
publicly endorsing candidates and actively campaigning. Not 
surprisingly, the lowest level of activity as well as approval was 
endorsing candidates while preaching, which is prohibited for 
organizations such as churches that enjoy tax-exempt status. 
Nearly as low is engaging in civil disobedience, although nearly 
50 percent of the sample approved of this form of political activity, 
perhaps in part a recognition of the importance and popularity 
of this form of political engagement during the days of the civil 
rights movement.
 
Djupe and Gilbert also report the percentage of ELCA and 
Episcopal Church clergy who addressed in some way sixteen 
public policy issues in 1998. Based on a factor analysis procedure, 
the authors divided the issues into two categories: social justice 
and moral reform. The results are presented in Table 6.6.
 
As Djupe and Gilbert note, ELCA and Episcopal Church 
clergy are more likely to voice their concerns about social justice 
issues than moral reform issues. This ﬁ nding coincides with the 
general view that mainline church leaders and policy-making 
groups more often have taken public stands on these issues. As 
the authors observe, six of the seven issues receiving greater atten-
tion are in the social agenda category; at least two-thirds of both 

groups of clergy focused on issues in this area. The clergy in the 
two denominations tend to differ somewhat: although Episcopal 
clergy more often emphasized homosexuality and gay rights, 
ELCA clergy spoke more frequently about political scandals (spe-
ciﬁ cally the Clinton impeachment proceedings), national defense, 
and gambling laws (Djupe and Gilbert 2003, 34). The authors note 
that the tendency of clergy to take stands on public policy issues 
has increased since the 1960s (Djupe and Gilbert 2003, 109).
 
Andrew Kohut et al. (2000) present results from the 1996 
Pew Religion Survey regarding reports by those who attend wor-
ship services a minimum of once each month on the issues their 
clergy had discussed. These results are reproduced in Table 6.7. 
Respondents from all religious groups report their clergy dis-
cussing most often the hunger and poverty issue. As the authors 
note, evangelical and mainline Protestant churches differ most 
markedly on the issues of abortion (66 percent versus 35 percent), 
school prayer (71 percent versus 46 percent), and homosexuality 
(45 percent versus 24 percent), with evangelical clergy speaking 
TABLE 6.5
Clergy Participation in and Approval of Political Activities 
in 1998 (percentage)
 
Performed Act 
Clergy Approved
Action 
in 1998 
of Act
Publicly offer prayer on an issue 
55.8 
80.9
Publicly take a stand on an issue 
51.4 
81.4
Take a stand on an issue while preaching 
48.9 
63.6
Urge church members to register and vote 
46.3 
87.2
Contact public ofﬁ cials 
39.7 
89.0
Contribute money to party, PAC, candidate 
25.7 
64.8
Organize an action group in church 
23.7 
57.0
Publicly offer prayer for candidates 
20.4 
39.1
Organize a study group in church 
13.6 
77.9
Join a national group 
12.3 
60.3
Publicly endorse candidates 
11.4 
25.9
Participate in a protest march 
7.8 
68.8
Actively campaign 
6.1 
35.5
Engage in civil disobedience 
1.7 
49.5
Endorse candidates while preaching 
1.4 
7.1
Note: PAC = political action committee.
Source: Djupe and Gilbert (2003, 30).
Religious Beliefs and Policy Preferences 199 

200 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.7
Issues Discussed by Clergy at Place of Worship (percentage)
 
 
Evangelical 
Mainline 
Black 
Issue 
All 
Protestant 
Protestant 
Protestant 
Catholic
Hunger and poverty 
87 
86 
91 
93 
90
Abortion 
60 
66 
35 
56 
75
World trouble spots 
59 
55 
68 
69 
59
School prayer 
56 
71 
46 
73 
40
Pornography 
41 
59 
26 
33 
34
Homosexuality 
36 
45 
24 
51 
19
Right-to-die laws 
29 
25 
21 
31 
38
Death penalty 
27 
26 
19 
39 
27
Health care reform 
26 
21 
16 
62 
18
Candidates and elections 
21 
20 
12 
47 
12
Source: 1996 Pew Religion Survey, presented in Kohut et al. (2000, 105).
TABLE 6.6
Clergy Addressing Public Policy Issues 
in 1998 (percentage)
 
ELCA 
Episcopal Church
Social Justice Issues 
 
Hunger and poverty 
88.6 
91.6
Environment 
77.6 
74.2
Education 
77.6 
75.7
Civil rights 
74.6 
80.4
Women’s issues 
73.8 
71.0
Unemployment, economy 
66.0 
67.5
Gay rights 
45.3 
60.1
Government spending, deﬁ cits 
36.5 
34.2
Moral Reform Issues 
 
Family problems 
86.4 
79.0
Gambling laws 
51.5 
32.0
Homosexuality 
51.3 
64.3
Current political scandals 
48.9 
42.1
Capital punishment 
48.9 
50.1
Abortion 
48.2 
46.0
Prayer in public schools 
42.1 
43.0
National defense 
38.5 
32.2
Source: Djupe and Gilbert (2003, 33).

on these issues far more frequently than mainline clergy. The 
only two issues that more than 50 percent of mainline Protestant 
respondents reported their clergy discussing were social welfare 
and troubled conditions around the world.
 
Whether or not clergy discuss particular issues publicly or from 
the pulpit, their public policy views may both reﬂ ect and inﬂ uence 
the publicly stated policy positions of denominational decision-
making bodies and leadership. Djupe and Gilbert (2003, 40) pres-
ent the political opinions of ELCA and Episcopal Church clergy on 
several issues. Table 6.8 reproduces the results on a select number 
of issues, primarily those on which there was greater approval.
 
Although a majority of both ELCA and Episcopal Church 
clergy approve of the policy positions, a consistently greater pro-
portion of Episcopal Church clergy agree with the statements that 
indicate a more liberal stance. On the two issues on which agree-
ment likely indicates a more conservative position (school prayer 
and defense spending), a larger percentage of Episcopal Church 
than ELCA clergy agree. This result suggests that there is a higher 
TABLE 6.8
Political Opinions of ELCA and Episcopal Church Clergy 
(percentage of those who agree with the statement)
Issue 
ELCA Clergy 
Episcopal Clergy
Homosexuals should have all the same rights and privileges as other 
82.8 
86.6
 American citizens.
Public policy should discourage ownership and use of handguns. 
72.7 
73.9
More environmental protection is needed, even if it raises prices or cuts jobs. 
71.2 
74.2
The federal government should do more to solve social problems such as  
64.6 
68.6
 unemployment and poverty.
We need government-sponsored national health insurance so that everyone can  
64.0 
70.3
 get adequate medical care.
Capital punishment should be abolished. 
59.7 
68.2
Recent welfare reform laws are too harsh and hurt children. 
52.6 
60.7
Blacks and other minorities need special government help to achieve an equal  
51.1 
56.4
 place in America.
We need a federal law or amendment to permit prayer as a regular exercise 
10.1 
16.3
 in schools.
The United States should spend more on the military and defense. 
8.0 
12.3
Source: Djupe and Gilbert (2003, 40).
Religious Beliefs and Policy Preferences 201

202 Data and Documents
proportion of conservative clergy in the Episcopal Church than 
in the ELCA, which may help to explain the greater threat to 
denominational unity in the Episcopal Church since the election 
of V. Gene Robinson, an actively gay priest, as bishop of the New 
Hampshire Diocese.
Documents and Quotations
The following documents and quotations provide a sample of 
mainline denominations’ expressions of concern on public policy 
issues that reﬂ ect basic value positions, focusing on the issues 
discussed in Chapter 2. Many of the statements are derived from 
the denomination’s ofﬁ cial documents, but some originated in the 
declarations of individuals.
Equality and Poverty
Extreme poverty binds more than one billion of God’s children, depriv-
ing them of the abundant life God intends for all. The MDGs [Mil-
lennium Development Goals] are a set of eight targets for eradicating 
global poverty adopted by the 191 member states of the United Nations, 
including the United States, out of the conviction that humanity can 
build a better and safer world if it is willing to unite. The Goals reﬂ ect 
the reality that the resources, strategies, and knowledge to end global 
poverty exist if only the moral and political will can be built. Chris-
tians must play a key role building this will and holding governments 
accountable for promises made.
 
A world that meets the Goals would have 500 million fewer people 
living on less than a dollar a day, 70 percent of whom will be women. 
More than 400 million fewer people will go to bed hungry each night. 
The lives of 30 million children currently destined to die before their ﬁ fth 
birthday would be saved. The rise of HIV and AIDS, malaria and tuber-
culosis would be halted, and infection and death rates would begin to 
decline. The population of orphans in the world—currently numbered at 
more than 110 million—would begin to decline as well. In short, a world 
that has achieved the MDGs will be a world that more greatly reﬂ ects 
Christ’s prayer that all be one as he and the Father are one.
 
—Joint pastoral letter from Frank T. Griswold, Presiding Bishop and 
Primate, the Episcopal Church, and Mark S. Hanson, Presiding Bishop, 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (September 14, 2006)
 
America has not felt at home a lot lately with the widening gap 
between the rich and the poor, with the new spirit of dominionism 

taking over in the name of God, America doesn’t quite feel the same. 
The redevelopment of class preference, and the ignoring of the poor, or 
the kind of abandonment of the spirit of tolerance and inclusiveness, 
a growing spirit that serves the few and abandons the common good, 
America has not quite been feeling like herself, or itself, if the feminist 
critique would require me not to always use her in a negativity, using 
she. So, I say to you that I believe we ought to celebrate, because those 
of us who are in here, we just long for the time when America can say, 
lift it up citizens, I’m back. . . .
 
There are many who are allowing themselves to be hopelessly 
divided between the red and the blue, and that also includes between 
races and class. There are those who have lost a sense of mission, and 
who think that the primary existence of America is simply to ﬁ ght ter-
rorists. There are those who are now in a matter of what I call prosti-
tuted patriotism. . . .
 
Then there are those who, using the same image, prostitute 
government, use her when it’s beneﬁ cial for what your special interests 
are, and the rest of your time you’re talking about how irrelevant it is, 
the smaller the better, not being able to enjoy any beneﬁ ts there from. 
Prostitution.
 
Well, I’m here to say, we don’t need to spend too much time talking 
about who led her away, or how she drifted away, but the truth is, let’s 
say, America is not quite herself, given the virus of hate that’s spread-
ing through the land, given the triumph of greed, given the pride that 
sometimes reaches supremacist dimensions, nationalism, imperialism, 
dominionism, rugged individualism that cares only about itself, private-
ism, consumerism, all of these others, somebody has led to the abandon-
ment of the true American ideals. . . .
 
How can we ﬁ nd the way back? I want to suggest, let us remem-
ber those who inspired us to be at our best, our founding mothers and 
fathers, let us look again at the founding documents, and help citizens 
across the country to see that therein is the DNA of America, and any-
body who acts in a way that thumbs a nose at the Constitution, at the 
Declaration of Independence, at the Bill of Rights, that you have had a 
strange shift in your DNA, a genetic mutation, making something real 
odd, and that’s what’s happening in America, a shift in the DNA. Those 
founding documents tell us who we are really supposed to be.
 
—James Alexander Forbes, Jr., American Baptist Churches in the USA 
Ministry, and Pastor of Riverside Church (speech in Washington DC, June 3, 
2004)
Public Schools
While we acknowledge and afﬁ rm the contribution of private schools 
to the welfare of children and the nation, public schools are the primary 
Documents and Quotations 203

204 Data and Documents
route for most children—especially the children of poverty—into full 
participation in our economic, political, and community life. As a con-
sequence, all of us, Christians and non-Christians alike, have a moral 
responsibility to support, strengthen, and reform the public schools. 
They have been and continue to be both an avenue of opportunity and 
a major cohesive force in our society—a society becoming daily more 
diverse racially, culturally, and religiously.
 
We welcome the fact that many public schools now teach about 
our nation’s diversity and the role of religion in human life and history, 
and applaud the schools’ efforts to promote those virtues necessary for 
good citizenship in a pluralistic democracy. . . . Just as we encourage 
schools to ensure that all religions are treated with fairness and respect, 
so we urge parents and others to refrain from the temptation to use 
public schools to advance the cause of any one religion or ethnic tradi-
tion, whether through curriculum or through efforts to attach religious 
personnel to the public schools. 
 
—National Council of Churches of Christ policy statement, “The 
Churches and the Public Schools at the Close of the Twentieth Century” 
(November 11, 1999)
As a minister and a lawyer, I have learned over the years that few social 
issues spark more confusion and misunderstanding than school prayer. 
Despite common belief, the Supreme Court has not banned prayer in 
schools. The high court ruled that school-sponsored, mandatory pro-
grams of religious worship in public schools violate the First Amend-
ment. A child’s religious upbringing, the court declared, belongs to his 
or her parents, not school ofﬁ cials.
 
Children have the right to pray voluntarily in school whenever 
they like. They may also read the Bible or other religious books dur-
ing their free time. All over the country, students meet freely in public 
schools after classes to study the Bible, Jewish scriptures or other reli-
gious and non-religious texts. Attendance at these “equal access clubs” 
is voluntary, and students—not school ofﬁ cials—run them. Clearly, 
there is a place for voluntary religious activity in public education. . . .
 
Our nation is a religiously diverse society where the government 
welcomes various religious expressions but ofﬁ cially endorses none. 
Our policy of separation of church and state has given America more 
religious freedom than any other country.
 
—Barry W. Lynn, Executive Director of Americans United for Separa-
tion of Church and State (March 29, 2002)
The scriptural witness that “the heavens are telling the glory of God, 
and the ﬁ rmament proclaims [God’s] handiwork” (Psalm 19:1) is a theo-
logical foundation for the empirical sciences in Western culture since the 
16th century. Its implication has been that in order to know the world 

that God creates, it is necessary to look at the world and see what it is 
like. Presbyterians as members of the Reformed tradition have histori-
cally afﬁ rmed this view, and so have valued the pursuit of scientiﬁ c 
knowledge and its dissemination through public education. . . .
 
Today efforts continue at state and local levels to undermine public 
science education by removing, reducing, or impugning references to 
biological evolution, Big Bang cosmology, the age of the earth, or the 
ﬁ ndings of anthropology with respect to human origins. Yet, the Presby-
terian Church (U.S.A.) has not clearly delineated in its creeds, confes-
sions, General Assembly resolutions and study papers, or educational 
materials developed by the church, the relationship of the ﬁ ndings of 
the sciences concerning the historical origins of the universe, the earth, 
life, and humanity to the afﬁ rmation of God as creator. The understand-
ing of this relationship is essential for Presbyterians if they are to fulﬁ ll 
their responsibilities as credible witnesses to God as creator of a histori-
cal universe, and as Christian citizens in relation to public education.
 
—Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), 213th General Assembly (2001)
Mainline Political Engagement
The temptation to try to ﬁ ght ﬁ re with ﬁ re is understandable. Conserva-
tive religious thought has had such a long free ride in the media that 
it is presupposed to be the true expression of religious belief. Progres-
sives who speak out get covered only when they are the man-bites-dog 
story. Witness the hurrahs and amazement that greeted an evangelical 
Christian coalition that took the remarkably benign step of accepting the 
overwhelming evidence of scientists that global warming is real. At the 
same time, religious leaders who speak out against the war in Iraq or 
against draconian budget cuts get very little coverage, since the media 
still believe religious advocacy for peace and the poor is to be expected 
and is thus not news. 
 
But there is much that is new—and bears watching—in the way 
progressive religion is operating these days. Political progressives and 
just plain old garden-variety Democrats are so desperate to be saved 
that they seem willing to accept unthinkingly the notion that progres-
sive religion is not only the antidote to right-wing religion but also that 
progressive God-talk is the best way to express moral values. . . .
 
In the end, religious leaders at their best are not policy wonks, 
message gurus or campaign consultants. They stand at the margins of 
power, with the powerless, seeking to change the status quo. Dorothy 
Day, Martin Luther King Jr., William Sloane Cofﬁ n and the Berrigan 
brothers did not have a seat at the table and did not want it. To the 
extent that today’s progressive religious leaders act out of that tradi-
tion, there is hope. If, on the other hand, they play the ancient role of 
Documents and Quotations 205

206 Data and Documents
theological adviser to princes and kings, we may all get more than we 
bargained for.
 
—Frances Kissling, President of Catholics for a Free Choice (The Nation, 
April 24, 2006)
The public conversation about religious and moral values now has the 
potential to be a serious and thoughtful discussion in America. The 
good news for religion and public life in America is that the word reli-
gious will no longer always be followed by the word Right.
 
To move away from the bifurcating politics of liberal and conserva-
tive, left and right, would be an enormously positive change and would 
open up a new “politics of solutions.” Right now, Washington responds 
to a problem or crisis in two ways. First, politicians try to make us afraid 
of the problem, and second, they look for somebody to blame for it. . . . 
But they seldom get around to actually solving the problem. The media 
make everything worse by assuming that every political issue has only 
two sides, instead of multiple angles for viewing and solving the prob-
lem. . . . The answer is to put values at the center of political discourse 
and, in every public debate, to ask what kind of country and people we 
really want to be. We would ﬁ nd new agreements across old political 
boundaries and new common ground among people who agree on 
values and are ready to challenge the special interests on all sides who 
are obstructing the solutions most Americans would support. Ideologies 
have failed us; values can unite us, especially around our most common 
democratic visions.
 
—Jim Wallis, God’s Politics (2005)
Sexuality Issues
The television evangelists are always talking about the sin of Sodom 
and Gomorrah and how homosexuality destroyed the city. I do not 
know one respectable Biblical scholar attributing the destruction of 
Sodom and Gomorrah to homosexuality. Yet the words sodomy and 
sodomite have come to mean the perversity of homosexuality. . . .
 
The sin of Sodom and Gomorrah was the sin of inhospitality, the 
sin of hardness of heart in the presence of human need, the sin of injus-
tice and neglecting the poor. That was the abomination to God. Those 
were the Sodomites. It is amazing how God’s judgment upon a city for 
its corporate injustice has been transformed into a clarion call against 
private sexual behavior. . . .
 
In no way do I discount the Bible. It is the foundational document, 
the foundation for all churches around the world. It is central to my life 
as a religious person. But if you take the Bible seriously, you can’t read 
it literally and dismiss what we have learned in the centuries after the 
Bible was ﬁ nished.

 
Today we know gay and lesbian couples who live deeply commit-
ted lives of love and integrity. This sexual orientation and its expression 
in an honorable relationship was not the subject matter of the biblical 
writers. The really serious problem for Christians who live by “The 
Book” is not how to square homosexuality with certain passages which 
on the surface condemn it—but rather how to reconcile rejection, preju-
dice, and cruelty toward gays with the gracious, unconditional love of 
Christ.
 
—George Regas, Episcopal priest and Rector Emeritus of All Saints 
Church, Pasadena, California (Los Angeles Times, February 3, 2000)
The state has an obligation to promote the family, which is rooted in 
marriage. Therefore, it can justly give married couples rights and 
beneﬁ ts it does not extend to others. Ultimately, the stability and 
ﬂ ourishing of society is dependent on the stability and ﬂ ourishing of 
healthy family life.
 
The legal recognition of marriage, including the beneﬁ ts associated 
with it, is not only about personal commitment, but also about the social 
commitment that husband and wife make to the well-being of society. It 
would be wrong to redeﬁ ne marriage for the sake of providing beneﬁ ts 
to those who cannot rightfully enter into marriage.
 
Some beneﬁ ts currently sought by persons in homosexual unions 
can already be obtained without regard to marital status. For example, 
individuals can agree to own property jointly with another, and they can 
generally designate anyone they choose to be a beneﬁ ciary of their will or 
to make health care decisions in case they become incompetent. . . .
 
Marriage is a basic human and social institution. Though it is regu-
lated by civil laws and church laws, it did not originate from either the 
church or state, but from God. Therefore, neither church nor state can 
alter the basic meaning and structure of marriage.
 
Marriage, whose nature and purposes are established by God, can 
only be the union of a man and a woman and must remain such in law. 
In a manner unlike any other relationship, marriage makes a unique 
and irreplaceable contribution to the common good of society, especially 
through the procreation and education of children.
 
The union of husband and wife becomes, over a lifetime, a great 
good for themselves, their family, communities, and society. Marriage is 
a gift to be cherished and protected.
 
—United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, “Between Man and 
Woman: Questions and Answers about Marriage and Same-Sex Unions” 
(November 12, 2003)
 
While not the most important discipleship issue in the New 
Testament, nor our highest priority of ministry lest we focus on one set 
of sins above others that afﬂ ict us such as racism, greed, sexism and 
Documents and Quotations 207

208 Data and Documents
gluttony, nonetheless, sexual concerns increasingly dominate our atten-
tion (Romans 1:28). We live in a culture obsessed with sex. We see evi-
dence of sexual abuse every day. We are stunned at the reports of sexual 
impropriety by persons in caring professions (I Corinthians 6:18). Many 
persons have been victims of these abuses. The result is an environment 
of deep suspicion regarding the sexual integrity of persons in authority. 
In this context, the matter of homosexual practices continues to divide 
American Baptists.
 
The ofﬁ cial position of the American Baptist Churches USA is that 
“the practice of homosexuality is incompatible with Christian teaching” 
and that marriage is intended to be “between a woman and a man” 
(Ephesians 5:31). This is my personal belief, as the General Secretary 
of ABCUSA, but more so, it is my responsibility to uphold this as the 
ofﬁ cial position of the General Board of ABCUSA. This has been imple-
mented in the admission of ofﬁ cial exhibitors at the ABCUSA Biennial, 
chaplain endorsements, and in the stafﬁ ng practices of the staff account-
able to me. . . .
 
Finally, I call upon all American Baptists to practice a life of prayer, 
purpose (Philippians 1:21), and passion (Philippians 3:13) in our lives 
together. We must pray with and for one another, share our purpose in 
Christ, and practice passionate care and regard for one another. In this 
way we bear witness to Jesus Christ (Philippians 2:1–11).
 
—A. Roy Medley, General Secretary of the American Baptist Churches 
in the U.S.A., letter titled “A Call for American Baptists to Live Lives of High 
Moral and Ethical Responsibility” (July 17, 2006)
Immigration
As the Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Nevada, I feel compelled to 
call upon you and the other members of Congress to support the move 
toward fair and just immigration reform. The Episcopal Church has lent 
strong support to interfaith efforts to accomplish this goal. I trust that 
in the coming days you will join your fellow Senators in pressing for 
comprehensive immigration reform. . . .
 
I ask your support for legislation which will provide for a substan-
tial increase in the number of workers who can enter the United States 
legally, and eventually work toward permanent residence and citizen-
ship. I urge adoption of a system which would permit those already 
here to work toward permanent residence and eventual citizenship, 
recognizing that certain criteria must be met. I have the utmost concern 
that the ancient religious and humanitarian expectation of hospitality 
and care for the stranger not be delegitimized or legally sanctioned. The 
Episcopal Church and our interfaith partners are on record as strongly 
opposing any such action, and we urge the adoption of the language 
drafted by the Senate Judiciary Committee.

 
America is a nation of immigrants, and has been the rich beneﬁ -
ciary of their gifts and talents, for hundreds of years. We would not 
exist, and we would not enjoy the global position we do today, without 
the contributions of immigrants. I urge a just and equitable approach to 
the urgent need for immigration reform.
 
—Katharine Jefferts Schori, Episcopal bishop of the Diocese of Nevada 
(elected presiding bishop of the Episcopal Church in 2006). Letter to U.S. Sena-
tors Harry Reid and John Ensign (April 21, 2004)
We call upon our elected ofﬁ cials to enact legislation that includes the 
following:
 
An opportunity for hard-working immigrants who are already 
contributing to this country to come out of the shadows, regularize their 
status upon satisfaction of reasonable criteria and, over time, pursue an 
option to become lawful permanent residents and eventually United 
States Citizens;
 
Reform in our family-based immigration system to signiﬁ cantly 
reduce waiting times for separated families who currently wait many 
years to be reunited;
 
The creation of legal avenues for workers and their families who 
wish to migrate to the U.S. to enter our country and work in a safe, 
legal, and orderly manner with their rights fully protected; and
 
Border protection policies that are consistent with humanitarian 
values and with the need to treat all individuals with respect, while 
allowing the authorities to carry out the critical task of identifying and 
preventing entry of terrorists and dangerous criminals, as well as pursu-
ing the legitimate task of implementing American immigration policy.
 
—Institute on Religion and Public Policy, “Interfaith Statement in 
Support of Comprehensive Immigration Reform” (October 14, 2005); support-
ing organizations include the Episcopal Church; Lutheran Immigration and 
Refugee Service; Stated Clerk, Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.); United States 
Conference of Catholic Bishops; General Board of Church and Society, United 
Methodist Church; and Wider Church Ministries, United Church of Christ.
Whereas, the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) in the United States 
and Canada, throughout its history, has fought for social justice and 
advocated in favor of the poor and dispossessed . . . and
 
Whereas, there are thousands of undocumented workers in the 
United States, most of whom are hard working people who make 
important contributions to our society, pay taxes and raise children . . .
 
Therefore, be it resolved . . . that the General Assembly calls the 
different expressions of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) to 
develop initiatives to better serve undocumented workers and to help 
undocumented ministers to secure ministerial licenses and religious 
worker visas; and
Documents and Quotations 209

210 Data and Documents
 
Be it further resolved that Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) 
ministers, at local, regional and general levels, contact their political 
representatives asking them to address the plight of undocumented 
workers in the United States; and
 
Be it further resolved that the General Minister and President, on 
behalf of our Church as a whole, write a letter to the President of the 
United States of America, communicating our Church’s interest and 
ministry on behalf of undocumented workers.
 
—Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) General Assembly, “On Minis-
try to and with Undocumented Workers” (2005)
Faith-Based Initiative
Resolved, that the Executive Council of the Episcopal Church, USA . . . 
support our longstanding practice of receiving public funding for faith-
based social service programs so long as such programs:
 
1.  Do not require those seeking services to receive religious 
instruction, worship or proselytizing as part of receiving 
services;
 
2.  Do not discriminate against or give preference to any person 
applying for such services on the basis of religion, as well as 
race, national origin, sexual orientation, age, sex or disability;
 
3.  Do not discriminate or give preference to any employee or 
applicant for employment on the basis of religion, as well as 
race, national origin, sexual orientation, age, sex or disability; 
and
 
4.  Meet professional standards of accounting and conduct consis-
tent with programs similar in scope and nature; and be it further
 
Resolved . . . that the Church strongly supports increased public 
funding for programs addressing critical human needs at the local, 
state, and federal level through both secular and faith-based providers, 
support proposals to use the tax code to create incentives for increasing 
charitable giving, and encourage Episcopalians to be active in support-
ing proposals through advocacy; and be it further
 
Resolved . . . that governments be encouraged to improve their 
delivery of assistance to faith-based and community service providers, 
including timely payment for services rendered, simpliﬁ ed paperwork 
requirements, and appropriate technical assistance. . . .
 
—Episcopal Church, “Executive Council Resolution: Regarding Public 
Funding for Faith-Based Social Service Programs” (June 20, 2001)
The USCCB [United States Conference of Catholic Bishops] has been 
supportive of President Bush’s Faith-Based and Community Initiatives 

proposal because we believe it has potential to put new tools in the hands 
of those struggling daily to overcome the most difﬁ cult problems in our 
communities: persistent poverty, violence, substance abuse, inadequate 
housing, and obstacles faced by those entering the job market. . . .
 
Catholic social teaching and the principle of subsidiarity have long 
stressed the importance of small and intermediate-sized communities 
or institutions in exercising moral responsibility. We support increased 
resources for faith-based and community-based mediating institutions 
that are pursuing creative, responsive and effective solutions with the 
potential to help people gain independence from violence, addiction 
and poverty. Faith-based groups should be allowed to participate in 
federally funded programs to meet social needs on the same terms as 
other groups, without changing their fundamental nature or facing 
discrimination because of their religious identity.
 
—United States Conference of Catholic Bishops Ofﬁ ce of Social 
Development and World Peace, “Faith-Based Initiative” (October 2005)
[We] support the principle that government funding should not com-
promise the identity or the integrity of religious organizations. We don’t 
want this opportunity to distract churches from their basic mission. 
On the other hand, churches should not use these federal funds to pay 
for their worship services or catechesis. The money should be used for 
some broad social beneﬁ t that would serve the whole community. . . .
 
Some big questions remain. For example, will government dollars 
mean that religious organizations will not be free to give preference to 
members of their own faith groups when hiring employees? Will con-
gregations have the stafﬁ ng to handle the inevitable paperwork, or will 
that only be possible for more specialized organizations like Lutheran 
Social Services?
 
While the answers to these question are still unclear, we should put 
the most charitable construction on the idea and work to make it consis-
tent with our understanding of the functional interaction of church and 
state.
 
—H. George Anderson, ELCA presiding bishop, “Faith-Based Initiatives 
and the Church” (March 15, 2001)
Iraq War
Most everyone seems to agree now that Iraq is a mess. But few with the 
power to make policy are saying that the U.S. is wrong. . . . What I fear 
is that there will be no fundamental change in a policy that is mistaken 
at its core, that becomes increasingly immoral, and that cannot succeed. 
That policy is to use military force to establish a democratic government 
capable of uniting Iraq’s various factions, providing for its security, and 
acting sympathetically to U.S. interests in the region.
Documents and Quotations 211

212 Data and Documents
 
President Bush, especially in the mid-term elections, raised the 
rhetorical stakes in this war. The credibility of the U.S. is on the line. We 
need to honor those who have already died. Most of all, we are engaged in the 
front lines of a global battle against terror where our most cherished ideals are 
at stake. If the President believes this, as I’m sure he sincerely does, then 
why should we expect his administration to make any fundamental 
change in policy?
 
In 1968, with elections demonstrating growing discontent toward 
the nation’s involvement in Vietnam, a basic change in direction would 
have been possible. But it would have required admitting that we were 
wrong—wrong in using military force to try to impose an internal 
political solution in Vietnam that was sustainable and to our liking. . . . 
Instead, [President Richard] Nixon made changes that were cosmetic, 
and the immoral tragedy endured.
 
It’s hard, I guess, to ask nations to repent. Power breeds impunity. 
Yet, this is the word we need to speak and to hear at this window of 
national reassessment. This is the wrong war, in the wrong place, for the 
wrong reasons, at the wrong time.
 
Repentance, we know, always opens new possibilities. Admitting 
that we have been wrong is the most important step in deciding what 
we should do next. I wish the Iraq Study Group, and all the others offer-
ing advice to the President, would start there.
 
—Wesley Granberg-Michaelson, general secretary, Reformed Church in 
America. “Bush, Vietnam, and Iraq—Déjà Vu All Over Again.” God’s 
Politics—Jim Wallis blog (November 21, 2006)
Our bishops’ Conference continues to dialogue with U.S. policy makers 
regarding Iraq. In statements, letters and meetings, we have expressed 
grave moral concern regarding “preventive war,” noted the new moral 
responsibilities that our nation has in Iraq, worked to protect religious 
freedom in Iraq, supported ﬁ rm resolve and effective strategies in the 
struggle against terrorism, condemned torture and called for efforts to 
address the abuse of prisoners and detainees, shared the moral elements 
of a “responsible transition,” and sought to contribute to a serious and 
civil discussion regarding ways forward in Iraq.
 
We remain concerned for the safety of the men and women who 
serve generously in the U.S. military. We are grateful for their heroic 
sacriﬁ ces on behalf of the Iraqi people and afﬁ rm the extraordinary 
ministry of military chaplains among them. We are deeply concerned 
for the lives and dignity of the Iraqi people who are also our sisters and 
brothers and deserve our care and solidarity. . . .
 
At this critical time, our nation needs open and courageous dia-
logue to examine where things stand in pursuing justice and peace in 
Iraq, assess what is achievable there, and evaluate the moral and human 

consequences of alternative courses of action. Let us pray for the wis-
dom and courage needed to take steps along the difﬁ cult path toward a 
responsible transition that helps Iraqis build a better future. As Presi-
dent of our Conference of bishops, I make this appeal in the spirit of the 
Beatitudes, which assure us, “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will 
be called children of God” (Matthew 5:9).
 
—William S. Skylstad, president of the United States Conference of 
Catholic Bishops. “Call for Dialogue and Action on Responsible Transition in 
Iraq” (November 13, 2006)
Our view of this war in Iraq is informed by our belief that war is 
contrary to the will of God, and an affront to God’s creation (Genesis 
6:11–12). Some member communions, therefore, including the historic 
peace churches, believe that all war is sin and never justiﬁ ed, and that 
participation by Christians in war cannot be sanctioned, even as others 
might consider it as engagement in a “lesser evil.” Other member com-
munions hold that war can sometimes be justiﬁ ed if certain criteria are 
met. The cause or case for military action must be just, the war must 
be sanctioned by recognized governments, the war must be carried out 
so as to minimize civilian casualties, the destruction and death must 
not exceed in proportion the potential gain of peace and/or justice, 
and the war must be clearly a last resort. Whether one views the war 
in Iraq from the peace church perspective, or from that of the churches 
informed by a “just war” tradition, it is clear to the member churches 
that this war violates the churches’ clear ethical norms. . . .
 
We urge our government to give meaningful support to U.S. 
troops. . . . And we insist that our government begin a process of 
restoring trust in its conduct of foreign policy and multilateral engage-
ment, damaged and undermined by a pattern of deception both in the 
arguments made by the Administration leading up to the war, as well as 
during the conduct of the war.
 
—National Council of Churches USA, “Pastoral Message on the War in 
Iraq” (November 7, 2006)
Science
We recognize science as a legitimate interpretation of God’s natural 
world. We afﬁ rm the validity of the claims of science in describing the 
natural world, although we preclude science from making authoritative 
claims about theological issues. We recognize technology as a legitimate 
use of God’s natural world when such use enhances human life and 
enables all of God’s children to develop their God-given creative poten-
tial without violating our ethical convictions about the relationship of 
humanity to the natural world.
Documents and Quotations 213

214 Data and Documents
 
In acknowledging the important roles of science and technology, 
however, we also believe that theological understandings of human 
experience are crucial to a full understanding of the place of humanity 
in the universe. Science and theology are complementary rather than 
mutually incompatible. We therefore encourage dialogue between the 
scientiﬁ c and theological communities and seek the kind of participa-
tion that will enable humanity to sustain life on earth and, by God’s 
grace, increase the quality of our common lives together.
 
—United Methodist Church, The Book of Discipline (2004)
Abortion
Roe v. Wade has left a trail of broken hearts. Through Project Rachel and 
other ministries, we will continue to help the broken-hearted. Those 
who resort to abortion out of a sense of desperation often ﬁ nd the cruel 
reality of abortion too difﬁ cult to bear. But it is too difﬁ cult only in a 
world without God and therefore without hope. We must reach these 
hearts and give them hope. These are the converted hearts that will at 
last bring an end to abortion.
 
Roe v. Wade cannot stand as the law of this great nation, a nation 
founded on the self-evident truth that all people are created with an 
inalienable right to life. We are committed, no matter how long it may 
take, no matter the sacriﬁ ces required, to bringing about a reversal of 
this tragic Supreme Court decision. We will speak out on behalf of the 
sanctity of each and every human life wherever it is threatened, from 
conception to natural death, and we urge all people of good will to do 
likewise. For, as Pope John Paul reminds us, “it is impossible to further 
the common good without acknowledging and defending the right 
to life, upon which all the other inalienable rights of individuals are 
founded and from which they develop” (The Gospel of Life, no. 10). Roe v. 
Wade must be reversed.
 
—Statement of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops on the 
Thirtieth Anniversary of Roe v. Wade (November 12, 2002)
Our belief in the sanctity of unborn human life makes us reluctant to 
approve abortion. But we are equally bound to respect the sacredness 
of the life and well-being of the mother, for whom devastating damage 
may result from an unacceptable pregnancy. In continuity with past 
Christian teaching, we recognize tragic conﬂ icts of life with life that may 
justify abortion, and in such cases we support the legal option of abor-
tion under proper medical procedures. We cannot afﬁ rm abortion as an 
acceptable means of birth control, and we unconditionally reject it as a 
means of gender selection.
 
We oppose the use of late-term abortion known as dilation and 
extraction (partial-birth abortion) and call for the end of this practice 

except when the physical life of the mother is in danger and no other 
medical procedure is available, or in the case of severe fetal anomalies 
incompatible with life. We call all Christians to a searching and prayer-
ful inquiry into the sorts of conditions that may warrant abortion. . . . We 
particularly encourage the Church, the government, and social service 
agencies to support and facilitate the option of adoption.
 
Governmental laws and regulations do not provide all the guid-
ance required by the informed Christian conscience. Therefore, a 
decision concerning abortion should be made only after thoughtful and 
prayerful consideration by the parties involved, with medical, pastoral, 
and other appropriate counsel.
 
—United Methodist Church, The Book of Discipline (2004)
We believe the Bible teaches the sanctity of human life. Men are given 
the precious gift of life from God and are created in the image of God. 
Therefore, we believe, in principle, that abortion ought not to be prac-
ticed at all. However, in this complex society, where many times one 
form of evil is pitted against another form of evil, there could be excep-
tions. It is our Christian conviction that abortion performed for personal 
reasons to insure individual convenience ought not be permitted. . . .
 
We call on our members to support efforts for constitutional 
changes to provide legal protection for the unborn.
 
—Reformed Church in America, Statement of the General Synod of 1973 
on Abortion
Resolved, the House of Bishops concurring, That this 71st General Con-
vention of the Episcopal Church reafﬁ rms resolution C047 from the 69th 
General Convention which states . . . 
 
We believe that legislation concerning abortions will not address 
the root of the problem. We therefore express our deep conviction that 
any proposed legislation on the part of national or state governments 
regarding abortions must take special care to see that individual con-
science is respected, and that the responsibility of individuals to reach 
informed decisions in this matter is acknowledged and honored as the 
position of this Church; and be it further
 
Resolved, That this 71st General Convention of the Episcopal Church 
express its unequivocal opposition to any legislative, executive or 
judicial action on the part of local, state or national governments that 
abridges the right of a woman to reach an informed decision about the 
termination of pregnancy or that would limit the access of a woman to 
safe means of acting on her decision.
 
—Episcopal Church General Convention, “Reafﬁ rm General Convention 
Statement on Childbirth and Abortion” (1994)
Documents and Quotations 215

216 Data and Documents
Embryonic Stem-Cell Research
[T]he 213th General Assembly (2001) of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) 
afﬁ rms the use of fetal tissue and embryonic tissue for vital research. 
Our respect for life includes respect for the embryo and fetus, and 
we afﬁ rm that decisions about embryos and fetuses need to be made 
with responsibility. Therefore, we believe that the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.) and other faith groups should educate their members in mak-
ing these very difﬁ cult ethical decisions. With careful regulation, we 
afﬁ rm the use of human stem cell tissue for research that may result in 
the restoring of health to those suffering from serious illness. We afﬁ rm 
our support for stem cell research, recognizing that this research moves 
to a new and challenging frontier. We recognize the need for continuing 
informed public dialogue and equitable sharing of information of the 
results of stem cell research. It is only with such public dialogue and 
information sharing that our diverse society can build a foundation for 
responsible movement toward this frontier that offers enormous hope 
and challenge.
 
—213th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), “Ethical 
Guidelines for Fetal Tissue and Stem Cell Research” (2001; reafﬁ rmed by the 
216th General Assembly, 2004)
Whereas, there are currently over 25,000 frozen embryos in IVF (in-vitro 
fertilization) clinics that probably will eventually be discarded, and
Whereas, the NIH [National Institutes of Health] developed guidelines 
regulating federally funded research on stem cells, provided they were 
taken from frozen human embryos derived from in vitro fertilization and 
which would be discarded after the treatment of infertile couples . . . and,
 
Whereas, by banning the research, we foreclose the possibility of 
doing all we can to improve the lot of the living, and in many cases giv-
ing them new life,
 
Therefore, be it resolved that the Twenty-third General Synod of 
the United Church of Christ supports federally funded embryonic stem 
cell research within ethically sound guidelines (including concern for 
justice, privacy, access to the beneﬁ ts of the research for all) and the limi-
tations set forth by the National Institutes of Health, and
 
Be it further resolved that the Twenty-third General Synod requests 
the General Minister and President of UCC to send a letter to the 
President of the United States urging approval of federal funding for 
embryonic stem cell research with NIH guidelines. . . .
 
—United Church of Christ 23rd General Synod, “Support for Federally 
Funded Research on Embryonic Stem Cells” (2001)

End-of-Life Decisions, the Right 
to Die, and Euthanasia
When death is judged to be certain and imminent, we afﬁ rm that grave 
injustice to the respect and memory of persons is rendered if extraordi-
nary technology is applied. Our highest concern is for the total person 
rather than technological curiosity and mechanical performance. We are 
confronted with values of human and personal life in the face of every 
death. . . .
 
Christianity has long taught that suffering can have meaning. 
Through it God can work his grace for the one who suffers and for 
others. Redemptive suffering is meaningful pain. This is markedly dif-
ferent from the dehumanizing and mindless suffering of the artiﬁ cially 
maintained terminally ill. . . .
 
We afﬁ rm that direct intervention to aid the irremediably deterio-
rating and hopelessly ill person to a swifter death is wrong. While direct 
intervention in many cases may appear “humane,” deliberate injec-
tion of drugs or other means of terminating life are acts of intentional 
homicide. This deliberate act is far removed from decisions which allow 
people to die—like shutting off a life-supporting machine or even with-
holding medication. Permission for the normal process of death is an act 
of omission in the spirit of kindness and love within limits of Christian 
charity and legal concerns. Direct intervention to cause death, known 
as direct euthanasia, cannot be permitted. We afﬁ rm there is a distinct 
moral difference between killing and allowing to die.
 
—Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, “Death and Dying: An 
Analysis Offered by Task Force on Ethical Issues in Human Medicine, ALC” 
(1977)
The church afﬁ rms life and has a perspective both on living and on 
dying that is in contrast to that of much of society. Because of that dif-
ference in perspective, the church is called to be prophetic. As always, to 
be a prophet is to speak and act on behalf of the powerless and in a way 
that calls Christians individually and as communities to live the costly 
life which a Christian perspective demands.
 
With regard to physician-assisted suicide, the commission is con-
vinced that the prophetic task of the church is to create a Christian com-
munity of care as described in this paper. The one who suffers and those 
who give care to the sufferer most need a community in which people 
are united by grace, people who afﬁ rm that one has the right to stay 
alive without justifying his or her existence and who can understand the 
deep humanity of situations in which people are tempted to take their 
own lives as an end to suffering. To decry physician-assisted suicide 
Documents and Quotations 217

218 Data and Documents
without offering the loving, caring community which takes away the 
occasion for suicide is to offer law when grace is needed.
 
—Reformed Church in America, Commission on Christian Action, 
“Perspective on Physician Assisted Suicide” (1994)
By euthanasia is understood an action or an omission which of itself or 
by intention causes death, in order that all suffering may in this way be 
eliminated. Euthanasia’s terms of reference, therefore, are to be found in 
the intention of the will and in the methods used.
 
It is necessary to state ﬁ rmly once more that nothing and no one 
can in any way permit the killing of an innocent human being, whether 
a fetus or an embryo, an infant or an adult, an old person, or one suffer-
ing from an incurable disease, or a person who is dying. Furthermore, 
no one is permitted to ask for this act of killing, either for himself or 
herself or for another person entrusted to his or her care, nor can he or 
she consent to it, either explicitly or implicitly.
 
Nor can any authority legitimately recommend or permit such an 
action. For it is a question of the violation of the divine law, an offense 
against the dignity of the human person, a crime against life, and an 
attack on humanity.
 
It may happen that, by reason of prolonged and barely tolerable 
pain, for deeply personal or other reasons, people may be led to believe 
that they can legitimately ask for death or obtain it for others. Although 
in these cases the guilt of the individual may be reduced or completely 
absent, nevertheless the error of judgment into which the conscience 
falls, perhaps in good faith, does not change the nature of this act of kill-
ing, which will always be in itself something to be rejected. The pleas of 
gravely ill people who sometimes ask for death are not to be understood 
as implying a true desire for euthanasia; in fact, it is almost always a 
case of an anguished plea for help and love. What a sick person needs, 
besides medical care, is love, the human and supernatural warmth with 
which the sick person can and ought to be surrounded by all those close 
to him or her, parents and children, doctors and nurses.
 
—United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, Sacred Congregation for 
the Doctrine of the Faith, “Declaration on Euthanasia” (1980)
Environment
Within the United States, public policy should assist industrial sectors 
and workers especially impacted by climate change policies, and it 
should offer incentives to corporations to reduce greenhouse gas emis-
sions and assistance to workers affected by these policies.
 
We encourage all parties to adopt an attitude of candor, concilia-
tion, and prudence in response to serious, complex, and uncertain chal-
lenges. We hope the continuing dialogue within and among the diverse 

disciplines of science, economics, politics, and diplomacy will be guided 
by fundamental moral values: the universal common good, respect for 
God’s creation, an option for the poor, and a sense of intergenerational 
obligation. Since religious values can enrich public discussion, this chal-
lenge offers opportunities for interfaith and ecumenical conversation 
and cooperation. . . .
 
As people of religious faith, we bishops believe that the atmo-
sphere that supports life on earth is a God-given gift, one we must 
respect and protect. It unites us as one human family. If we harm the 
atmosphere, we dishonor our Creator and the gift of creation. The val-
ues of our faith call us to humility, sacriﬁ ce, and a respect for life and the 
natural gifts God has provided.
 
—United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, “Global Climate Change: 
A Plea for Dialogue, Prudence, and the Common Good” (June 15, 2001)
Resolved, that the Executive Council . . . calls on the U.S. Congress and 
Administration to pass meaningful conservation-based energy legis-
lation consistent with the long-standing belief that we are stewards 
of God’s creation, responsible for its care and preservation; and be it 
further
 
Resolved, that the Church urges government and industry to con-
sider raising vehicle fuel economy for all vehicles in the United States, 
increasing funding for mass transit, investing in renewable energy 
research and development, regulating carbon dioxide, increasing energy 
efﬁ ciency for consumer products and increasing funds for the Low 
Income Home Energy Assistance Program, and be it further
 
Resolved, that the Episcopal Church strongly opposes drilling or 
mining in our nation’s dwindling wild lands and places important to 
the traditional cultures of indigenous peoples, including oil and gas 
exploration and drilling in the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge that 
threaten the life and culture of the Gwich’in people
 
—Executive Council, Episcopal Church, “Calling for Responsible Energy 
Policy and Protection of Creation” (February 22–25, 2002)
Capital Punishment
Whereas, the General Assembly of the Christian Church (Disciples of 
Christ) has often spoken in opposition to the death penalty . . . and has 
called for a moratorium on the death penalty . . . and
 
Whereas, a high percentage of people on death row are poor and 
powerless and have often received inadequate defense at their trials; and 
 
Whereas, a disproportionate number of people on death row are 
people of color reﬂ ecting the presence of systemic racism with[in] the 
U.S. criminal justice system; and
Documents and Quotations 219

220 Data and Documents
 
Whereas, the use of the death penalty does not reduce the rate of 
violent crimes in our communities and may encourage additional vio-
lence; and
 
Whereas, an increasing number of nations of the international com-
munity have condemned and abolished the death penalty as cruel and 
unusual punishment . . .
 
Therefore, be it resolved that the General Assembly of the Christian 
Church (Disciples of Christ) . . .
 
1.  Calls upon elected ofﬁ cials to abolish the death penalty in the 
United States; and
 
2.  Encourages Disciples of Christ members and congregations in 
the US and Canada to become advocates for the abolishment of 
the death penalty; and
 
3.  Invites members, congregations, regions and general units of 
the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) to share resources for 
education and advocacy. . . .
 
4.  Calls upon congregations to create ministries to support and 
nurture those who have lost loved ones to violent criminal 
action as well as for families with loved ones on death row.
 
—Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), “Resolution on the Death 
Penalty” (October 2003)
 
Resolved, that the Executive Council commit ourselves, and call 
upon all members of the Church, to strengthen efforts to abolish the 
death penalty, and at the same time ﬁ nd the sensitive capacity to stand 
with the friends and families of murder victims as they struggle to 
redeem this tragedy in their lives, and it is further
 
Resolved, that just as we commit ourselves to work vigorously in 
this effort as we go back to our communities, we call upon the Episcopal 
Church to pursue and work vigorously for an immediate moratorium 
and the subsequent abolition of the death penalty in all states and the 
federal system. . . .
 
The Episcopal Church in the United States of America has long 
opposed capital punishment, and at the most recent General Conven-
tion (2000) reafﬁ rmed the Church’s opposition to the death penalty. In 
our baptismal covenant, we respect the dignity of every human being, 
and commit ourselves to strive for justice and peace among all people. 
The Church will continue to decry the revenge of state-sanctioned 
homicides. We abhor the racism and economic injustices evident in our 
criminal justice system.
 
—Episcopal Church Executive Council, “Recommitment to Abolish the 
Death Penalty” (June 20, 2001)

The United Methodist Church declares its opposition to the retention 
and use of capital punishment and urges its abolition. . . .
 
The death penalty falls unfairly and unequally upon marginal-
ized persons including the poor, the uneducated, ethnic and religious 
minorities, and persons with mental and emotional illnesses. . . .
 
The United Methodist Church cannot accept retribution or social 
vengeance as a reason for taking human life. It violates our deepest 
belief in God as the Creator and Redeemer of humankind. . . .
 
We call upon United Methodists . . . to:
 
work in collaboration with other ecumenical and abolitionist 
groups for the abolition of the death penalty in those states which cur-
rently have capital punishment statutes, and against efforts to reinstate 
such statutes in those which do not;
 
speak out against the death penalty to state governors, state and 
federal representatives;
 
develop educational materials on capital punishment; and
 
oppose all executions through prayer and vigils.
 
—United Methodist Church, Book of Resolutions (2000)
References
Bader, Christopher, Kevin Dougherty, Paul Forese, Byron Johnson, 
F. Carson Mencken, Jerry Z. Park, and Rodney Stark. 2006. Selected 
Findings from the Baylor Religion Survey, American Piety in the 21st 
Century: New Insights to the Depth and Complexity of Religion in the US. 
Waco, TX: Baylor Institute for Studies of Religion.
Djupe, Paul A., and Christopher P. Gilbert. 2003. The Prophetic Pulpit: 
Clergy, Churches, and Communities in American Politics. Lanham, MD: 
Rowman and Littleﬁ eld.
Guth, James L., John C. Green, Corwin E. Smidt, Lyman A. Kellstedt, 
and Margaret M. Poloma. 1997. The Bully Pulpit: The Politics of Protestant 
Clergy. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Kohut, Andrew, John C. Green, Scott Keeter, and Robert C. Toth. 2000. 
The Diminishing Divide: Religion’s Changing Role in American Politics. 
Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Reichley, A. James. 2002. Faith and Politics. Washington DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.
Steinfels, Peter. 2003. A People Adrift: The Crisis of the Roman Catholic 
Church in America. New York: Simon and Schuster.
References 221


223
7
Directory of Organizations
T
his list of organizations represents the wide variety of asso-
ciations within the mainline denominations. Many are associ-
ated ofﬁ cially with the denominations and focus on serving 
the members of the church as well as attempting to beneﬁ t the 
wider society and to encourage public policy changes to bring 
about social, economic, and political reform. Others are dissent-
ing associations that disagree with ofﬁ cial church positions on 
values and doctrine, disapprove of some aspect of church policy, 
or attempt to encourage the church to alter its agenda and assume 
new responsibilities. Given the recent push on sexuality issues 
in many denominations, several of the organizations listed here 
have developed around the status of homosexuals in the church. 
The organizations provide online versions of many of the publica-
tions listed here.
Afﬁ rmation: United Methodists for Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual 
Concerns (AUMLGBC)
P.O. Box 1021
Evanston, IL 60204
www.umafﬁ rm.org
This organization, established in 1976, encourages the open-
ing of the United Methodist Church to all people on an equal 
basis, independent of sexual orientation. The group supports the 
church’s ministry to all persons regardless of race, social standing, 
age, gender, or sexual orientation. Afﬁ rmation attempts to inform 
church members about the organization’s concerns, encourages 

224 Directory of Organizations
ecumenical contacts with other denominations, and assists those 
who claim to be experiencing discrimination. It publishes a quar-
terly newsletter, Afﬁ rmation Newsletter.
American Anglican Council (AAC)
2296 Henderson Mill Road NE, Suite 406
Atlanta, GA 30345-2793
(800) 914-2000
(770) 414-1518 (fax)
http://www.americananglican.org
In June 1996, 75 members of the Episcopal Church, including nine 
bishops, met in Techny, Illinois, to afﬁ rm the authority of scrip-
ture and to renew their commitment to the traditional beliefs of 
the Christian faith and the Anglican Communion. The attend-
ees elected a board of trustees and subsequently incorporated 
as a 501c(3) organization in the District of Columbia. The AAC 
holds that biblical imperatives and Christian ethical principles 
play an essential role in maintaining a well-ordered society. The 
group supports the sanctity of life and chastity in sexual relations. 
The organization cooperates with other renewal groups within 
the Episcopal Church to oppose any teachings or policies of the 
church that they believe contradict scripture and historic Angli-
canism. The council publishes Encompass, a monthly newsletter.
American Baptist Women’s Ministries (ABW)
P.O. Box 851
Valley Forge, PA 19482-0851
(800) 222-3872
(610) 768-2275
www.abwministries.org
The members of this organization, established in 1951, are women 
in the American Baptist Church U.S.A. Participants attempt to reach 
beyond the formal church structure, supporting the various mission 
goals of the church, including local, national, and international social 
concerns. The ABW seeks to determine the needs of communities 
in which congregations are located and develop programs to meet 
those needs, cooperating with other community organizations. The 
organization works to integrate women into the various activities of 
the church and assist women to attain leadership skills. ABW pub-
lishes Vital Woman Magazine three times each year.

Directory of Organizations 225
American Baptists Concerned (ABC)
P.O. Box 3183
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
(925) 439-4672
www.rainbowbaptists.org
Clergy and lay members of the American Baptist Church in the 
U.S.A. established this organization in 1972 to encourage gay per-
sons and their families in the church to unite for mutual support. 
The organization lobbies the ABCUSA to take steps to meet the 
needs of the denomination’s homosexual members. The organiza-
tion publishes Voice of the Turtle, a quarterly newsletter.
Anglican Communion Network (ACN)
535 Smithﬁ eld Street, Suite 910
Pittsburgh, PA 15222
(412) 325-8900
www.acn-us.org
The Anglican Communion Network, more formally known as the 
Network of Anglican Communion Dioceses and Parishes, was 
established in January 2004 following the election of V. Gene Rob-
inson, an openly gay priest, as bishop of New Hampshire. The 
organizational meeting, which included twelve Episcopal bish-
ops, elected Robert Duncan, bishop of the Pittsburgh diocese, to 
a three-year term as moderator and selected a twelve-member 
steering committee. The ACN, which advocates a traditional inter-
pretation of biblical mandates, provides a dissenting voice within 
the Episcopal Church. The organization includes approximately 
800 congregations representing 200,000 members. Fourteen pri-
mates in other countries around the world have expressed their 
support for the ACN. The network is committed to missionary 
activities in North America and in other parts of the world and to 
establishing partnerships with Christians in other churches and 
with other Anglican associations in North America. Although 
the ACN remains within the Episcopal Church, it ultimately 
may prove to be a way station on the path toward ultimate 
separation.
Anglicans United (AU)
P.O. Box 763217
Dallas, TX 75376-3217

226 Directory of Organizations
(972) 293-7443
www.anglicansunited.com
The AU was established in 1987 as Episcopalians United for Refor-
mation, Renewal and Revelation (EU) to perpetuate the traditional 
doctrines of the Episcopal Church. The group has focused much 
of its efforts on maintaining traditional church policy on sexual-
ity. In 1988 the organization mounted a successful effort at the 
Episcopal General Convention to oppose a resolution that would 
have permitted the ordination of practicing homosexuals. At the 
1994 General Convention, EU strongly objected to what its mem-
bers considered a biased sexuality study that the church hierarchy 
had commissioned. In 1993 the organization established Latimer 
Press to provide Christian educational materials for youth and 
adults. Various splinter groups of the Episcopal Church met in 
2002 and 2003, and the name of the organization was changed to 
the Anglican Union to reﬂ ect a broader membership both within 
and outside the United States. The AU publishes United Voice, a 
bimonthly newspaper.
Association for Church Renewal (ACR)
1110 Vermont Avenue NW, Suite 1180
Washington DC 20005
(202) 682-4131
(202) 682-4136 (fax)
www.ird-renew.org
The Association for Church Renewal, closely connected to the 
Institute on Religion and Democracy, is composed of representa-
tives from more than thirty church renewal groups from mainline 
denominations in the United States and Canada. The organiza-
tion asserts that the leadership of mainline denominations as well 
as the World Council of Churches are excessively liberal and out 
of touch with the orthodox beliefs of many of their members. 
The ACR estimates that its mailings regularly reach 2.4 million 
people in the mainline denominations. The association, formed in 
1996, supports church members in promoting orthodox Christian 
doctrine and traditional notions of marriage and the family. The 
organization advocates freedom of religion in the United States 
and around the world, evangelism efforts, and the sanctity of life. 
Those in the association resist trends toward revising traditional 

Directory of Organizations 227
Christian doctrines and any compromise with non-Christian reli-
gious beliefs.
Association for the Rights of Catholics in the Church (ARCC)
P.O. Box 85
Southampton, MA 01073
(413) 527-9929
(413) 527-5877 (fax)
www.arcc-catholic-rights.org
This organization of Catholics advocates fundamental reforms 
within the Catholic Church, including shared decision making 
and greater accountability within the church, the recognition of 
the basic rights of all baptized Catholics through the creation of a 
Charter of the Rights of Catholics in the Church, acceptance of the 
ordination of women and married people, the right of ordained 
persons to choose either celibacy or marriage, and the right of per-
sons who have remarried to receive the sacraments of the church. 
ARCC publishes ARCC Light, a bimonthly newsletter.
Biblical Witness Fellowship (BWF)
P.O. Box 102
Candia, NH 03034
(800) 494-9172
www.biblicalwitness.org
This organization, composed of dissenting clergy and lay mem-
bers of the United Church of Christ, was established in 1978 as the 
United Church People for Biblical Witness. The group assumed its 
present name in 1984. Members of the BWF adhere to the beliefs 
of traditional Christianity as set forth in the Dubuque Declaration 
formulated at a 1983 meeting held in Dubuque, Iowa. Pointing to 
the denomination’s loss of members and congregations since the 
1960s, the organization claims to offer an alternative to what are 
considered the radical social positions of the UCC leadership. The 
BWF proclaims the sacredness of human life from the moment of 
conception and believes that God determined that sexual intimacy 
can be expressed legitimately only in the bond of heterosexual 
marriage. The organization supports local church autonomy from 
the national organization and assists congregations in obtaining 
pastors who are faithful to traditional biblical principles. BWF 
publishes a newspaper, The Witness, two or three times each year.

228 Directory of Organizations
Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights
450 Seventh Avenue
New York, NY 10123
(212) 371-3191
(212) 371-3394 (fax)
www.catholicleague.org
Established in 1973, the Catholic League is a lay organization that 
focuses on defending the rights of Catholics to express their faith 
openly without experiencing discrimination and denigration. The 
league monitors the mass media for possible examples of biased 
portrayals of Catholics and the Catholic Church and encourages 
boycotts against companies that sponsor television programs that 
the organization determines to contain unfair content. The group 
responds to alleged discrimination against Catholic applicants 
to universities or employees and may take part in litigating such 
cases. The league lobbies legislative bodies to ensure that Catholic 
interests are protected in any public policy initiatives. The league 
publishes Catalyst, a monthly journal.
Catholic Legal Immigration Network (CLINIC)
McCormick Pavilion
415 Michigan Avenue NE
Washington DC 20017
(202) 635-2556
(202) 635-2649 (fax)
www.cliniclegal.org
Established in 1988, the CLINIC provides support for the legal 
immigration programs of Catholic dioceses and charities. The 
organization administers legal services projects; manages dioce-
san immigration programs; and assists congregations in attaining 
foreign-born priests, nuns, and other religious workers to meet 
the needs of immigrant communities in the United States. Mem-
bers assist dioceses in providing legal services to low-income and 
impoverished immigrants who wish to attain the reuniﬁ cation 
of families, citizenship, and safety from persecution or violence. 
The organization supports the improvement of U.S. government 
immigration policies and publishes In the Balance, a quarterly 
newsletter.
Catholic Worker Movement (CWM)
Peter Maurin Farm

Directory of Organizations 229
41 Cemetery Road
Marlboro, NY 12542
(845) 236-4774
www.catholicworker.org
More than 185 communities make up the Catholic Worker Move-
ment, each of which provides food, clothing, and shelter for the 
homeless and abandoned. The movement has no central admin-
istrative structure and each community operates independently 
of the others. The address provided above is for one of the com-
munities, situated just north of New York City, which is named for 
one of the movement founders. Dorothy Day, a socialist journalist 
who converted to Catholicism, and Peter Maurin, an immigrant 
from France, established the CWM in 1933. They began publish-
ing The Catholic Worker, a newspaper that the organization still 
distributes. Members of the group voluntarily accept a life of pov-
erty in order to transcend simply providing charity to engage in 
sharing the experience of the poor. Members may seek employ-
ment outside the community or a community may engage in small 
economic enterprises, but donations contribute the major share of 
ﬁ nancial support. The communities support labor unions, human 
rights, and nonviolence. During periods in which the United 
States had a military draft, members became conscientious objec-
tors and several were imprisoned for their refusal to serve in the 
military. During the Vietnam conﬂ ict, the movement played a role 
in stimulating opposition to the war. 
Catholics for a Free Choice (CFFC)
1436 U Street NW, Suite 301
Washington DC 20009-3997
(202) 986-6093
www.catholicsforchoice.org
Established in 1973, Catholics for a Free Choice supports the 
right of individuals and couples, as moral agents, to make fam-
ily planning decisions and have access to contraception and safe, 
legal abortion. The organization advocates legal rights for gays 
and lesbians; freedom from sexual abuse in the family; social and 
economic justice, including access to reproductive health services; 
equal rights for women in government, society, and churches; 
and public policies based on objective research. Among CFFC’s 
campaigns are Condoms4Life, an effort to persuade the Catholic 
Church to lift the ban on condom use; See Change, which calls for 

230 Directory of Organizations
the Catholic Church to have the same status at the United Nations 
as other religions; and Catholic Vote, an initiative to analyze the 
inﬂ uence of the Catholic hierarchy on Catholic voters—especially 
regarding pro-choice elected ofﬁ cials. The organization publishes 
a quarterly journal, Conscience, which covers such topics as child 
care, ﬁ ghting poverty, gender equality, and electoral politics.
Christian Alliance for Progress
P.O. Box 40495
Jacksonville, FL 32203-0495
(888) 381-0108
www.christianalliance.org
The Christian Alliance for Progress, composed of individuals 
from various denominations and religious viewpoints, strives to 
emphasize the core beliefs and values of Christianity in response 
to the contemporary involvement of Christian groups in the search 
for political inﬂ uence and power. The Christian Alliance afﬁ rms 
the separation of church and state, not wanting to control gov-
ernment, but to communicate a message of Christian conscience 
to the public realm. Referring to the Gospel message expressed 
in the life of Jesus, the organization calls for compassion for the 
hungry, the poor, and the sick; opposes human injustice; supports 
equal treatment for all; and invites Christians to become respon-
sible stewards of the natural environment.
Christian Churches Together in the U.S.A. (CCT-USA)
4500 60th Street SE
Grand Rapids, MI 49512
(616) 698-7071
www.christianchurchestogether.org
All nine of the denominations included in this investigation took 
part in establishing Christian Churches Together. In March 2006 
representatives from thirty-four evangelical Protestant, mainline 
Protestant, African American Protestant, Orthodox, and Catho-
lic churches and religious organizations met in Atlanta to adopt 
bylaws and ofﬁ cially establish CCT-USA. Wesley Granberg-
Michaelson, general secretary of the Reformed Church in Amer-
ica, became the organization’s interim moderator. The principal 
goals of the newly formed organization are to encourage increased 

Directory of Organizations 231
interaction and understanding among the member churches and 
Christian groups, to facilitate common action, and to commu-
nicate a uniﬁ ed message to society in promoting the common 
good. Christian Churches Together plans to sponsor national and 
regional forums on various topics, including public policy issues.
Churches Uniting in Christ (CUIC)
475 East Lockwood
Webster Groves, MO 63119
(314) 252-3160
www.cuicinfo.org
In 2002 nine denominations, including the Christian Church (Dis-
ciples of Christ), the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church, 
the United Church of Christ, and the United Methodist Church, 
formed Christians Uniting in Christ. The CUIC became the suc-
cessor to the Consultation on Church Union, which for forty years 
engaged in discussion among mainline denominations regarding 
possible future collaboration. The participating denominations 
in CUIC reached agreement on such basic doctrines as the sacra-
ments of baptism and communion, the incarnation of Jesus, and 
the inspirational role of the Holy Spirit. The organization empha-
sized that the member denominations will combat racism and dis-
crimination within the church and in the larger society and will 
oppose any exclusionary policies based on race, age, gender, class, 
disability, or sexual orientation.
Conference for Catholic Lesbians (CCL)
P.O. Box 436, Planetarium Station
New York, NY 10024
(718) 680-6107
www.cclonline.org
Formed in 1982 by Catholic women who identiﬁ ed themselves as 
lesbians but also afﬁ rmed the signiﬁ cance of the Catholic tradition 
in their lives, the CCL attempts to support lesbian women who 
wish to remain within the Catholic faith. The organization advo-
cates just treatment of women within the church and the larger 
society. The CCL promotes conferences and lectures espousing 
the policy positions of the group and publishes Images, a quarterly 
newsletter.

232 Directory of Organizations
Disciples Justice Action Network (DJAN)
1040 Harbor Drive
Annapolis, MD 21403 (East Coast ofﬁ ce)
(410) 212-7964
www.djan.net
In 1996 approximately 100 individuals, meeting at a church in Chi-
cago, formed the Disciples Justice Action Network to express con-
cerns that members of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) 
have regarding issues of peace and justice. Among its members, 
the organization has 450 individuals and families as well as 42 
congregations and other organizations. DJAN has taken stands on 
various issues, including stem-cell research, the rights of women, 
sexuality, poverty, food stamps, budget cuts, immigration, the 
crisis in Darfur, and the Middle East conﬂ ict. DJAN ofﬁ cials 
participated in the debate over the proposed Federal Marriage 
Amendment, expressing their religious- and constitution-based 
concerns. On the issue of abortion, the organization joined pro-
choice groups in signing an amicus brief in a case before the U.S. 
Supreme Court (Gonzales v. Planned Parenthood) arguing that the 
Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003 did not contain an excep-
tion for the health of the woman. DJAN distributes Call To Justice!, 
a quarterly newsletter containing information about the person-
nel and activities of the organization.
Earth Ministry (EM)
6512 23rd Avenue NW, Suite 317
Seattle, WA 98117
(206) 632-2426
(206) 299-3339 (fax)
www.earthministry.org
Established in 1992, Earth Ministry is composed of more than 
1,400 individual members and 100 congregations located primar-
ily in the northwestern United States. The organization supports 
the position of the National Council of Churches that a major con-
temporary moral issue is environmental degradation. Christians 
are asked to communicate with policy makers, assist friends and 
other church members to become more knowledgeable about 
environmental issues, write opinion pieces for local newspapers, 
and encourage local congregations to pass resolutions on topics 
such a global warming. EM urges Christians to support the poor, 

Directory of Organizations 233
the hungry, and others in need and to oppose warfare and human 
greed.
Ecumenical Advocacy Days (EAD)
c/o Ofﬁ ce of Public Life and Social Policy
United Church of Christ
100 Maryland Avenue NE, Suite 330
Washington DC 20002
(202) 470-0127
www.advocacydays.org
Beginning in 2003 Ecumenical Advocacy Days has held an annual 
four-day conference in Washington DC to encourage support for 
social welfare agendas. The conference participants include theolo-
gians, policy experts, politicians, and grassroots religious activists. 
In 2003 EAD focused on U.S. foreign policy in Africa and the Mid-
dle East; in 2004 the organization expanded the agenda to include 
the poor of the Middle East and Latin America; in 2005 it added 
treatment of the disadvantaged in the United States; and in 2006 the 
conference, titled “Challenging Disparity: The Promise of God—
The Power of Solidarity,” investigated the possible contributions 
that a progressive religious viewpoint could make to U.S. foreign 
and domestic policy. The theme of the March 2007 conference was 
“And How Are the Children?” Following training sessions where 
more than 1,000 people received instruction on advocating poli-
cies in the interest of children, participants visited Capitol Hill to 
speak with congressional representatives. Those religious groups 
sponsoring the conferences include Catholic Relief Services, the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), the Episcopal Church, the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.), the Reformed Church in America, the United Church of 
Christ, and the United Methodist Church.
Episcopal Church Ofﬁ ce of Government Relations
110 Maryland Avenue NE, Suite 309
Washington DC 20002
(800) 228-0515
www.ecusa.anglican.org
The Government Relations Ofﬁ ce of the Episcopal Church acts as 
an advocate for those policies set by the church’s General Conven-
tion, which is held every third year. With a staff of four people, the 

234 Directory of Organizations
organization follows the progress of legislation that is of concern 
to the church, lobbies elected ofﬁ cials, and organizes local sup-
port for and against proposed legislation. The ofﬁ ce took part in 
developing President George W. Bush’s faith-based initiative for 
funding religious organizations that offer social services, opposed 
oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, and supported 
passage of an international religious freedom bill. In addition, the 
organization supported debt relief for poor nations and has advo-
cated assistance for the poor in the United States, including child 
care services and health insurance. The Washington ofﬁ ce works 
in cooperation with the Episcopal Public Policy Network, which 
activates members by sending green postcards alerting them to 
pending votes on legislation and related events.
Episcopal Peace Fellowship (EPF)
637 South Dearborn
Chicago, IL 60605
(312) 922-8628
www.epfnational.org
The Episcopal Peace Fellowship is an independent organization 
afﬁ liated with the Episcopal Church that works to attain peace with 
justice in communities, the church, and the world by promoting a 
Christian response to violence. The EPF began in 1939 as the Epis-
copal Paciﬁ st Fellowship, a group that supported conscientious 
objection to military service. In 1966 the organization assumed its 
present name, hired a full-time staff person, and altered its goal 
to supporting all those who seek peace, whether or not they are 
paciﬁ sts. The EPF has attempted to establish local chapters and 
encouraged discussion of such subjects as the death penalty, gun 
control, nuclear weapons, and conscientious objection. The mem-
bership elects the members of the national executive committee, 
which serves as the organization’s governing board. The commit-
tee meets twice each year to establish policy and maintains con-
tact with the Episcopal Church and other church organizations.
Episcopal Urban Caucus (EUC)
Park West Station
P.O. Box 21182
New York, NY 10025
(212) 699-2998
www.episcopalurbancaucus.org

Directory of Organizations 235
Founded in 1980, the Episcopal Urban Caucus works with the 
Episcopal Church to achieve social justice, including taking action 
to oppose racism, promote peace, and ameliorate the conditions of 
poverty and hunger. The EUC holds an annual assembly at which 
bishops, clergy, and lay members attend workshops, participate 
in forums, and visit actual examples of urban ministry, which is 
the major focus of the group’s activities. Assembly participants 
may approve resolutions that are recommendations to the Epis-
copal Church’s General Convention. EUC participants engage in 
advocacy outside the organization’s members. For instance, at the 
2002 assembly in Los Angeles, members demonstrated along with 
hotel and restaurant union workers in support of higher wages, 
and in 2005 members visited Ellis Island in New York to high-
light concern about immigration issues. A quarterly newsletter, 
The Urban Networker, presents information about assembly events 
and the issues of concern to the EUC.
Faithful America
110 Maryland Avenue NE, Suite 108
Washington DC 20002
(202) 544-2350
(202) 543-1297 (fax)
www.faithfulamerica.org
Faithful America, a program of the National Council of Churches 
in the USA, is an interfaith electronic advocacy group dedicated 
to inﬂ uencing government priorities and creating just and com-
passionate public policy. Members include adherents of various 
faiths, including Christians, Jews, Buddhists, Hindus, and Mus-
lims. The organization claims a membership of more than 100,000. 
Faithful America sends e-mail messages to members offering 
detailed information about public policy issues and provides the 
opportunity to send messages to elected ofﬁ cials and to sign peti-
tions. The organization encourages communication among mem-
bers and with others in their faith community. Members have the 
opportunity to discuss issues through the group’s Weblog (www
.faithfulamerica.blogspot.com).
Gay, Lesbian, and Afﬁ rming Disciples Alliance (GLAD)
P.O. Box 44400
Indianapolis, IN 46244-0400

236 Directory of Organizations
(301) 528-4927 (capital area)
www.gladalliance.org
This organization within the Christian Church (Disciples of 
Christ) strives to have the denomination become more accept-
ing of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered people and calls 
for full inclusion of the organization’s members in the life of the 
church. The organization urges congregations to declare that they 
are “open and afﬁ rming” and that gays and lesbians are welcome 
in the denomination and its leadership. Members of the GLAD are 
organized into seven ministry teams to facilitate the work of the 
group. The alliance holds an annual meeting, which is scheduled 
at the Disciple’s General Assembly in the years that the denomi-
nation convenes. Local chapters of the organization also meet 
periodically. The organization publishes Crossbeams, an occasional 
newsletter.
General Board of Church and Society (GBCS), United 
Methodist Church
100 Maryland Avenue NE
Washington, DC 20002
(202) 488-5600
www.umc-gbcs.org
The General Board of Church and Society, located on Capitol 
Hill in the nation’s capital, has the responsibility of implement-
ing the social policy statements of the United Methodist Church’s 
General Conference. The board’s Washington headquarters was 
opened in 1924 to represent the views of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church. The Board of Temperance, Prohibition and Public Mor-
als moved to the site to inﬂ uence the ﬁ ght for prohibition. How-
ever, when prohibition came into effect, the Methodists found 
other social causes to pursue, such as opposition to gambling and 
obscenity in publications and ﬁ lms. In the following decades, the 
board’s headquarters building became the focus for various social 
causes such as the civil rights movement, opposition to the war 
in Vietnam, support for equal rights for women, and advocacy 
of environmentalism. Among current issues on which the board 
advocates public policy positions are juvenile justice and the 
development of the concept of restorative justice; maintenance 
of basic freedoms of speech, religion, assembly, and privacy; the 
right to basic human needs such as food, clothing, shelter, educa-

Directory of Organizations 237
tion, and health care; elimination of the death penalty; and the use 
of peaceful means to resolve international conﬂ icts. In addition to 
the Washington headquarters, the GBCS maintains a church cen-
ter for the United Nations in New York City.
Good News
P.O. Box 150
308 East Main Street
Wilmore, KY 40309
(859) 858-4661
(859) 858-4972 (fax)
www.goodnewsmag.org
This organization revolves around the magazine Good News, 
which was ﬁ rst published in 1967. The organization and maga-
zine advocate the basic beliefs of evangelicals within the United 
Methodist Church. Good News held its ﬁ rst annual convention 
in 1970. In the late 1960s members of Good News criticized the 
church’s adult study materials, asserting that the curriculum 
lacked a theologically sound biblical foundation. The organization 
has opposed “theological pluralism,” calling for biblically based 
doctrine, and expressed concern for liberal trends in theologi-
cal education within the denomination’s seminaries. The group 
encourages laypeople within the church to become involved in 
the church’s legislative process from the local level to the national 
General Conference in order to maintain the voice of conserva-
tives in the UMC and to elect conservatives to key positions in the 
church organization, including the Judicial Council. Good News 
opposes what the organization considers theological fads and 
objects to attempts to enact a liberal political agenda, including 
alterations of church policy on  human sexuality.
Institute on Religion and Public Policy
1620 I Street NW, Suite LL10
Washington DC 20006
(202) 835-8760
(202) 835-8764 (fax)
www.religionandpolicy.org
Those associated with the Institute on Religion and Public Policy, 
recognizing that many Americans have deep religious convictions, 
believe that religion, ethics, and morality can play a positive role 

238 Directory of Organizations
in the policy-making process at the local, state, national, and inter-
national levels. The institute is an interreligious organization that 
encourages cooperation between policy makers and faith-based 
organizations. In a context of cultural pluralism, the institute pro-
motes “the cooperation of civilizations.” The organization focuses 
on such issues as care for seniors, national security, international 
religious freedom, business practices, and community renewal. 
The institute conducts research on domestic and international 
policy questions, holds lectures and conferences, and publishes 
materials to facilitate communication between the religious com-
munity and policy makers, including weekly reports for members 
on Institute activities and concerns.
Integrity
620 Park Avenue, Number 311
Rochester, NY 14607-2943
(800) 462-9498
www.integrityusa.org
Integrity, an organization of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and trans-
gendered people in the Episcopal Church that was established in 
1974, strives to achieve full acceptance and participation of gay 
persons in the church and the larger society. Integrity encourages 
the study of human sexuality within the church and provides 
educational materials to the clergy and members of the Episcopal 
Church. The organization provides counseling and an AIDS min-
istry. It also publishes The Voice of Integrity, a quarterly magazine; 
Integrity Handbook, a biannual publication, and Integrity—Directory, 
annual publication.
Interfaith Alliance
1331 H Street NW, 11th Floor
Washington DC 20005
(202) 639-6370
www.interfaithalliance.org
The Interfaith Alliance, claiming a membership of 185,000 people 
representing more than 75 religious traditions as well as those 
with no religious afﬁ liation, was founded in 1994 to provide an 
alternative voice to that of the religious right. The alliance states 
that the organization promotes a positive role for religion in public 
life, encourages citizens to participate in the public realm, assists 

Directory of Organizations 239
individuals in becoming politically active in their communities, 
and responds to the political claims of those on the religious 
right. In 2006 the alliance organized an election-year program, 
One Nation, Many Faiths, Vote 2006, to provide a deeper under-
standing of the role that religion plays in elections and to foster a 
relationship between religious groups and government that main-
tains the independence of churches from the interests of political 
candidates. Local alliance organizations work in voter registra-
tion drives, attend candidate forums, write letters to newspa-
pers, and encourage leaders to take to heart the message of the 
group. The Alliance publishes The Light, a quarterly newsletter, 
and offers political guides, including Religion and Politics: A Guide 
for Political Candidates, which provides advice about respecting all 
religions and warnings about the misuse of religion for partisan 
gain; and Religion and Politics: A Guide for House of Worship, which 
assists religious leaders regarding appropriate political activity in 
the church.
Lutheran Services in America (LSA)
122 C Street NW
Washington DC 20001
(202) 626-7932
www.lutheranservices.org
Lutheran Services in America represents the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America and the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod and 
associated health and human services groups that provide such 
assistance as health care, disaster relief, and care for children and 
the elderly. The organization engages in lobbying activities, meet-
ing with members of Congress and the executive branch. LSA rep-
resents the member organizations before the federal government, 
informing Congress and the Department of Health and Human 
Services about the Lutheran services funded through Medicaid. 
LSA advocates the provision of affordable housing for low-income 
families through the Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment. The organization has opposed any policy to reduce the size 
of the federal budget that focuses primarily on cutting entitlement 
programs intended to assist the poor. The organization encour-
ages political participation in support of its objectives and offers 
guidelines regarding the types of political activity in which non-
proﬁ t organizations may engage under Internal Revenue Service 
regulations. Approximately eight times each year, LSA distributes 

240 Directory of Organizations
LSA Washington, a periodical containing reports on the organiza-
tion’s public policy priorities.
Lutherans Concerned/North America (LC/NA)
P.O. Box 4707
St. Paul, MN 55104-0707
(651) 665-0861
(651) 665-0863 (fax)
www.lcna.org
This organization of Lutherans, established in 1974, encourages 
the church to welcome gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered 
people into full participation in the church and the larger soci-
ety. LC/NA is organized into forty local chapters throughout the 
nation. The organization supports the passage of legislation at the 
national level to prohibit discrimination in employment based 
on sexual orientation. LC/NA publishes The Concord, a quarterly 
newsletter.
Methodist Federation for Social Action (MFSA)
212 East Capital Street NE
Washington DC 20003
(202) 546-8806
(202) 546-6811 (fax)
www.mfsaweb.org
The Methodist Federation for Social Action, established in 1907, is 
composed of clergy and lay members who work to attain various 
social reforms, including the rejection of warfare, the elimination 
of nuclear weapons, the development of democratic social and 
economic planning to encourage the formation of a society devoid 
of discrimination, and the defense of civil rights and civil liberties. 
The organization supports human rights as presented in the Bible 
and the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. MFSA also 
publishes Social Questions Bulletin, a bimonthy newsletter that 
contains discussions of religious, social, and political issues.
More Light Presbyterians for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, 
and Transgender Concerns
P.M.B. 246
4737 Country Road
Minnetonka, MN 55345-2634

Directory of Organizations 241
(505) 820-7082
(505) 820-2540 (fax)
www.mlp.org
Established in 1974, More Light Presbyterians strives to voice the 
interests of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered individu-
als within the Presbyterian Church. The organization seeks to 
achieve full membership rights in the church, including marriage 
and ordination, and publishes the More Light Update, a bimonthly 
newsletter.
National Council of Churches USA (NCC)
110 Maryland Avenue NE
Washington, DC 20002
(202) 544-2350
www.ncccusa.org
Member organizations of the NCC are drawn from Protestant, 
Anglican, Orthodox, evangelical, and African American denomi-
nations representing 45 million people and 100,000 local congre-
gations. All the mainline Protestant denominations discussed in 
this book are members of the National Council of Churches. The 
NCC was established in 1950, supplanting the Federal Council 
of Churches. The NCC’s Justice and Advocacy Commission, one 
of ﬁ ve commissions, has the responsibility of pursuing the issue 
agenda of the organization, including racial justice, the rights of 
women, environmental protection, and the problems faced by 
urban areas. Each year, representatives of the member denomina-
tions meet at the General Assembly to consider policy statements. 
Between meetings of the General Assembly, the governing board 
carries out the policies of the organization. The NCC publishes its 
annual Yearbook of American and Canadian Churches, a directory of 
information about member denominations, and EcuLink, a quar-
terly newsletter containing information about the organization’s 
public policy advocacy.
National Ministries, American Baptist Churches USA (NM)
P.O. Box 851
Valley Forge, PA 19482-0851
(800) 222-3872, extension 2455
(800) 768-2470 (fax)
www.nationalministries.org

242 Directory of Organizations
National Ministries, an organization within the American Baptist 
Churches USA, has the mission of disseminating the Christian 
faith, working for social justice, and training Christian leaders. 
The organization maintains an ofﬁ ce in Washington DC, which 
encourages church members to become active politically and 
advocates the public policy preferences of the denomination. 
Members are encouraged to translate their Christian faith into 
political activism, sharing their views with others in the commu-
nity and with legislators. National Ministries supports programs 
that beneﬁ t those who are less advantaged economically. NM 
administers Judson Press, the denomination’s publishing outlet. 
Among the publications distributed are The Christian Citizen, a 
magazine published three times each year that focuses on issues 
of justice; Mission in America, a bimonthly publication covering 
American Baptist home mission activities; and The Pebble, a quar-
terly newsletter that provides information about the needs of chil-
dren in the church and the wider community.
Network: A National Catholic Social Justice Lobby
25 E Street NW, Suite 200
Washington DC 20001-1630
(202) 347-9797
(202) 347-9864 (fax)
www.networklobby.org
In 1971 a group of forty-seven Catholic sisters formed Network 
as a means of communicating with government ofﬁ cials about 
the attainment of justice for all people. The organization repre-
sents the Catholic community in the nation’s capital, attempting 
to inﬂ uence Congress in policies related to peace and social and 
economic justice. Network membership includes both individuals 
and groups. Network claims a total of 100,000 people associated 
with the organization. When the Washington ofﬁ ce decides to 
take a stand on legislation, members are contacted to send letters 
and e-mails to senators and representatives. Among the issues 
the organization has placed on its agenda are immigration policy, 
the provision of affordable housing, universal health care, wage 
equity, the attainment of peace in Iraq, fair international trade, a 
just system of taxation, and retirement security. 
Network publishes Connection, a bimonthly magazine that pro-
vides analyses of issues, legislative updates, and the voting records 

Directory of Organizations 243
of congressional members; monthly legislative updates; weekly 
e-mail legislative updates.
Pax Christi–U.S.A. (PC–USA)
532 West 8th Street
Erie, PA 16502
(814) 453-4955
(814) 452-4784 (fax)
www.paxchristiusa.org
This Catholic organization, established in the United States in 
1972, is dedicated to Christian nonviolence. The Pax Christi move-
ment began in Europe after the Second World War in France and 
Germany and spread to other countries, including Italy, Spain, 
Austria, Switzerland, and Belgium. Pax Christi advocates the idea 
of Christian nonviolence, beginning with personal relationships, 
with the ultimate intent of establishing peace in the community 
and transforming society. The organization rejects warfare and 
other forms of violence and domination and advocates economic 
and social justice and an environmentally sustainable world. The 
United Nations recognizes Pax Christi as a nongovernmental 
organization with advisory status. PC–USA publishes Catholic 
Peace Voice, a bimonthly newspaper.
Presbyterian Washington Ofﬁ ce
100 Maryland Avenue NE
Washington DC 20002
(202) 543-1126
www.pcusa.org/washington
The Washington Ofﬁ ce of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) opened 
in 1946 and acts as an advocacy arm for the denomination’s Gen-
eral Assembly and the social policies dealing with justice and 
peace issues it has enacted. Washington Ofﬁ ce personnel contact 
national policy makers by phone, by letter, and in person. They are 
available to testify before congressional committees and to assist 
church leaders who may be invited to testify. The ofﬁ ce calls on 
denomination members to contact their congressional representa-
tives on such issues as education, the federal minimum wage, the 
Middle East conﬂ ict, and immigration reform. The organization’s 
Web site provides advice to church members who wish to contact 
their public ofﬁ cials about a public policy issue. In election years, 

244 Directory of Organizations
the ofﬁ ce encourages members to discuss issues with candidates 
and to become familiar with the church’s stand on these issues. 
When Congress is in session, the ofﬁ ce holds a two-hour brieﬁ ng 
the second Tuesday of every month to update the status of bills 
related to subjects about which previous General Assemblies have 
made recommendations.
Presbyterian Women (PW)
100 Witherspoon Street
Louisville, KY 40202
(888) 728-7228
(502) 569-8600 (fax)
www.pcusa.org/pw/index.htm
Presbyterian Women was established in 1988, the successor to 200 
years of women’s organizations within the Presbyterian Church. 
The organization provides the opportunity for women to partici-
pate effectively within the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.). The orga-
nization focuses its activities on the rights of the economically and 
politically disadvantaged, including the subjects of child aban-
donment, rape, and divorce, and takes stands on issues of justice, 
peace, and world hunger. PW engages in the educational ministry 
of the denomination and takes part in training church leaders by 
conducting workshops at the local, regional, and national levels, 
and publishes Justice and Peace Links, a newsletter issued three 
times per year.
Presbyterians for Renewal (PFR)
8134 New La Grange Road, Suite 227
Louisville, KY 40222-4679
(502) 425-4630
(502) 423-8329 (fax)
www.pfrenewal.org
A group of ministers and elders of the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.) met in 1988 to consider the formation of a renewal organi-
zation within the denomination. The following year, a conference 
was held in St. Louis to establish Presbyterians for Renewal, the 
successor to two previous renewal organizations: Presbyterians 
United for Biblical Concern and Covenant Fellowship of Presby-
terians. The conference members committed themselves to recog-

Directory of Organizations 245
nizing the Bible as the authority for their faith. In addition, they 
pledged to pursue social justice and to oppose racism and sex-
ism. PFR is involved in the governance of the PCUSA, emphasizes 
the training of lay members for ministry within the church, and 
conducts renewal events for individuals and congregations. PFR 
publishes ReForm, an annual journal.
Presbyterians Pro-Life (PPL)
3942 Middle Road
Allison Park, PA 15101
(412) 487-1990
(412) 487-1994 (fax)
www.ppl.org
Objecting to the position of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) on 
the issue of abortion and the church’s membership in the Religious 
Coalition for Reproductive Choice, Presbyterians Pro-Life, com-
posed of pastors and lay members of the PCUSA, is dedicated to 
protecting the right to life from the moment of conception until 
natural death. PPL holds that the Bible must be accepted as the sole 
and infallible guide for faith and conduct. Organization members 
oppose any action, including abortion, infanticide, and euthanasia, 
that they believe devalues human life.  In addition to a pro-life stand, 
the organization takes the position that the church should support 
a biblical understanding of sexual relationships as restricted  to one 
man and one woman in the covenant of marriage.
Progressive Christians Uniting (PCU)
1501 Wilshire Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90017
(213) 989-1630
www.progressivechristiansuniting.org
George F. Regas and John Cobb, Jr., established Progressive Chris-
tians Uniting in 1996 to provide an alternative to conservative 
Christian groups and individuals such as Jerry Falwell and Pat 
Robertson and to assist progressive Christian congregations and 
individuals in their work in such areas as labor rights, criminal 
justice reform, affordable housing, immigration reform, and fair 
economic and environmental policy. Originally known as the Cla-
remont Consultation, the organization was given its present name 

246 Directory of Organizations
in 2003. PCU’s activities are limited primarily to Southern Cali-
fornia, offering resources to congregations, clergy, and peace and 
justice activists. Among the organization’s projects are Eyes on 
the Future, an educational program to help high school students 
make their concerns known in the wider community, and the Sus-
tainability Project, an effort by Christian organizations to work for 
environmental sustainability and ecological justice.
Protestants for the Common Good (PCG)
77 West Washington Street, Suite 1124
Chicago, IL 60602
(312) 223-9544
(312) 223-9540 (fax)
www.thecommongood.org
This organization, active primarily in the Chicago area, was estab-
lished in 1995 out of a concern that religious right organizations 
had given the mistaken impression that they spoke for all Protes-
tants on public policy issues. PCG advocates an understanding 
of the common good that promotes the conditions for commu-
nity ﬂ ourishing. The organization’s areas of activity include pro-
moting democracy and economic justice, decreasing the poverty 
rate, improving public education, providing affordable housing 
for the poor, reforming the criminal justice system, lobbying for 
campaign ﬁ nance and election reform, and enhancing environ-
mental protection. Among the group’s speciﬁ c initiatives are sup-
port for an amendment to the Illinois Human Rights Act to ban 
housing and employment discrimination on the basis of sexual 
orientation, advocacy of a fair tax system to support public edu-
cation and human services, and opposition to funding reductions 
for Medicare and Medicaid. PCG publishes The Common Good, a 
monthly journal.
Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice (RCRC)
1025 Vermont Avenue NW, Suite 1130
Washington DC 20005
(202) 628-7700
www.rcrc.org
Founded in 1973, the RCRC supports the right of the individual to 
reproductive choice (including the right to abortion) without gov-
ernment involvement and religious freedom generally. The RCRC 
receives signiﬁ cant support from groups in mainline churches, 

Directory of Organizations 247
including the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), 
the United Church of Christ, and the United Methodist Church. 
The movement began in 1967 when Howard Moody, pastor of 
Judson Memorial Church, an American Baptist congregation 
in New York City, led pro-choice clergy in the formation of the 
Clergy Consultation Service on Abortion. In response to the Cath-
olic Church’s pledge to overturn the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision that 
legalized abortion, mainline Protestant and Jewish leaders met in 
Washington DC to plan the formation of the Religious Coalition 
for Abortion Rights. Twenty years later, the organization’s name 
was changed to the Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice, 
indicating the greater breadth of policy concerns, including sex 
education, AIDS, family planning, and contraception. The RCRC 
has supported the Roe decision in the political and legal realms. 
In 2005 the RCRC opposed the nomination of John Roberts as the 
U.S. Supreme Court chief justice.
Society of Catholic Social Scientists (SCSS)
1235 University Boulevard
Franciscan University of Steubenville
Steubenville, OH 43952
(740) 284-5377
(740) 283-6401 (fax)
www.catholicsocialscientists.org
This organization, composed of scholars, professors, researchers, 
and other Catholics engaged in the social sciences, encourages 
cooperation in the investigation of political, social, and economic 
systems in order to develop knowledge that can aid the mission 
of the Catholic Church, assist in the protection of human life, 
and promote recognition of the fundamental rights of human 
beings. The organization’s journal, Catholic Social Science Review, 
has published articles on many subjects relevant to public policy, 
including natural law and American politics, the Catholic study 
of political institutions, the morality of afﬁ rmative action, social 
welfare, dealing with social change, corporate downsizing, Chris-
tianity and democracy, and political economy.
Sojourners/Call to Renewal
3333 14th Street NW, Suite 200
Washington DC 20010
(800) 714-7474
www.calltorenewal.org

248 Directory of Organizations
Each headed by Jim Wallis, Sojourners and Call to Renewal decided 
in 2006 to unite their efforts to reduce poverty in the United States. 
The newly united organization plans to place the issue of poverty 
on the political agenda in future election campaigns. Sojourners/
Call to Renewal has invited individuals and religious organizations 
to endorse A Covenant for a New America, a commitment to pro-
vide families with economic security, to end poverty among chil-
dren, and to support government and economic policies to reduce 
poverty in other nations. Religious organizations are encouraged 
to organize delegations to visit elected ofﬁ cials and to write let-
ters to the editor of local newspapers expressing a moral obliga-
tion to ﬁ ght poverty. Among the organizations that have endorsed 
the Covenant are the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.), the United Methodist Church, and the National Council of 
Churches U.S.A. The organization publishes Sojourners, a monthly 
magazine, and The Call, an occasional newsletter.
Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP)
P.O. Box 6416
Chicago, IL 60680-6416
(877) 762-7432
www.snapnetwork.org
Barbara Blaine established the Survivors Network in 1989 as a 
support group for those claiming to have been sexually molested 
by priests and others in the Catholic Church. The organization has 
no afﬁ liation with the Catholic Church or its ofﬁ cials. SNAP offers 
people counseling in self-help group meetings in local chapters, 
over the phone, online, and at national meetings held twice each 
year. The network urges people to write to state legislators and 
members of Congress asking them to support proposed legisla-
tion to enhance sexual abuse laws in order to provide just settle-
ments for all victims of sexual abuse.
Target Earth International
P.O. Box 10777
Tempe, AZ 85284
(610) 909-9740
(443) 284-2399 (fax)
www.targetearth.org

Directory of Organizations 249
Target Earth is a Christian movement composed of individuals, 
churches, and college groups  dedicated to the care of the environ-
ment and service to the poor. The organization works for the devel-
opment of a sustainable planet that offers justice for all human 
beings. Target Earth engages in environmental activities in ﬁ fteen 
countries. The organization has sponsored a summer institute 
on sustainable development to provide participants with theoret-
ical and practical understanding of economic development that 
does not threaten the ecosystem, and the opportunity to partici-
pate in a local community development project. Target Earth also 
supports the Global Stewardship Study Program, based at Jaguar 
Creek, an education center located in the rain forest of Belize. Par-
ticipants combine the study of environmental subjects with Chris-
tian discipleship.
United Church of Christ Justice and Peace Action Network 
(JPANet)
100 Maryland Avenue NE, Suite 330
Washington DC 20002
(202) 543-1517
www.ucc.org/justice/jpan.htm
The Justice and Peace Action Network informs and activates mem-
bers of the United Church of Christ to advocate public policy in 
accord with the values of the church community. Areas of concern 
for the JPANet include racial and economic justice, peacemaking, 
civil and human rights, global poverty, violence against women, 
stem-cell research, the minimum wage, and setting policy priori-
ties in the federal budget. The organization cooperates with the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) in its various activities. Each 
week that Congress is in session, JPANet provides online descrip-
tions of legislation that can be used in local church bulletins and 
urges members to contact their representatives. JPANet also dis-
tributes an annual issues brieﬁ ng book, which contains summaries 
of policy priorities. The organization presents sample letters that 
can guide members in writing to the appropriate decision mak-
ers. JPANet supports Our Faith Our Vote (OFOV), a Web-based 
campaign to encourage church members to register to vote, attend 
campaign activities, and plan “get out the vote” activities. Noting 
that recent congressional legislation has followed paths contrary 
to those that the UCC General Synod recommended, OFOV offers 

250 Directory of Organizations
resources that explain the legal limits of church involvement in 
political activity.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB)
3211 Fourth Street NE
Washington DC 20017
(202) 541-3000
www.usccb.org
This assembly of the bishops of the Catholic Church is the highest 
church authority in the United States and is responsible for relat-
ing church doctrine to the present circumstances in the overall 
society. In 1917 the U.S. bishops established the National Catholic 
War Council, the precursor of the conference. In 1919, at the urging 
of Pope Benedict XV, the bishops established the National Catholic 
Welfare Council, with headquarters in Washington DC, to address 
questions of social need and justice. In 1922 the National Catho-
lic Welfare Conference was established to deal with such social 
issues as education and immigration. In 1966, on the recommen-
dation of the Vatican, two separate organizations were established: 
the National Conference of Catholic Bishops (NCCB), composed 
exclusively of bishops, and the United States Catholic Conference 
(USCC), with bishops as well as laypeople as members. In 2001 
the NCCB and the USCC combined to form the United States Con-
ference of Catholic Bishops. The USCCB has established several 
departments, many of which deal with questions of public policy, 
including environmental justice, international peace and justice, 
science and human values, and pro-life efforts. The bishops have 
issued statements on various issues, including criticizing the death 
penalty and opposing the construction of a fence along the U.S. 
border with Mexico.
United States Conference of the World Council of Churches
475 Riverside Drive, Room 1370
New York, NY 10115
www.wcc-usa.org
The United States Conference of the World Council of Churches 
functions as a communication channel between the WCC and the 
member churches in the United States. All of the mainline Prot-
estant churches that are the focus of this book are members of 
the WCC. U.S. churches join with other member organizations 
to speak out on such issues as nuclear proliferation, racism, the 

Directory of Organizations 251
AIDS pandemic, and economic and social justice. In 2001 the WCC 
began a program titled the Decade to Overcome Violence (DOV) 
as a means to deal with violence within countries and internation-
ally. In 2005, the DOV theme “The Power and Promise of Peace” 
focused on the United States. The conference publishes Ecumeni-
cal Courier, a quarterly newsletter. At the Ninth Assembly of the 
WCC in 2006, representatives from the United States presented a 
formal letter of apology on behalf of the U.S. conference that stated 
the United States “has done much . . . to endanger the human fam-
ily and to abuse the creation.” The letter declared that the United 
States responded to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, by 
“raining down terror on the truly vulnerable among our global 
neighbors.” Among those supporting the statement were Sharon 
Watkins, president of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) 
and John Thomas, president of the United Church of Christ.
Voice of the Faithful (VOTF)
P.O. Box 423
Newton Upper Falls, MA 02464
(617) 558-5252
(617) 558-0034 (fax)
www.voiceofthefaithful.org
Voice of the Faithful focuses its efforts on the sexual abuse con-
troversy in the Catholic Church. VOTF claims that American 
bishops and the Vatican failed to deal adequately with the cri-
sis and instead became involved in attempts to prevent news of 
the abuse from becoming public. The group serves the needs of 
sexual abuse victims, supports priests who are faithful to their 
vows, and strives to effect structural change within the church 
in order to prevent future abuse. The organization monitors the 
performance of dioceses, including ﬁ nancial management and 
clergy-laity communication. In Boston, VOTF has supported the 
establishment of a fund that will allow contributors to support 
Catholic programs without the possibility that the church hierar-
chy will use the resources for legal settlements and fees. The orga-
nization continues to accept the authority of the Catholic Church 
on other matters, declining to take stands on proposals that other 
groups within the church have made. For instance, it refuses to 
support an end to the celibacy of priests and does not advocate 
the exclusion of nonpracticing homosexuals from the priesthood 
or the ordination of women.

252 Directory of Organizations
Witherspoon Society
1418 Clarendon Drive
Wayzata, MN 55391-2103
www.witherspoonsociety.org
Members of the Witherspoon Society are Presbyterians who 
advocate peace, justice, the preservation of the environment, and 
the involvement of church members in social issues. The society 
produces a quarterly newsletter, Network News, which includes 
commentary on issues of concern to the Presbyterian Church and 
the broader community. The society, which was founded in the 
1970s, attempts to promote the activity of the Presbyterian Church 
toward biblically faithful engagement with society. Among the 
issues about which the group has become concerned and to which 
they wish to bring a biblical perspective are the Palestinian-Israeli 
conﬂ ict, immigrant rights, the use of torture, and the war in Iraq.
Word Alone Network
2299 Palmer Drive, Suite 220
New Brighton, MN 55112
(651) 633-6004
(651) 633-4260
www.wordalone.org
Clergy within the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America 
(ELCA) who were concerned about certain elements of the pro-
posed agreement with the Episcopal Church decided to com-
municate primarily via the Internet to express more effectively 
their understanding of Lutheranism. Although the 1997 ELCA 
Churchwide Assembly rejected the agreement, the 1999 assembly 
approved a revised proposal titled Called to Common Mission. 
Among the concerns of this group of pastors was the Episcopal 
tradition of granting to bishops alone the authority to ordain new 
pastors. The organization has continued to act as a dissenting voice 
in the ELCA, focusing on such issues as the ordination of actively 
gay pastors and the blessing of same-gender unions. At the 2004 
annual convention, network members approved a resolution that 
afﬁ rmed what they considered biblical teaching on sexuality and 
marriage and rejected any revision that contradicted that teaching. 
Other dissenters decided to move further away from the ELCA by 
establishing Lutheran Congregations in Mission for Christ.

253
8
Resources
T
hese resources include books about the mainline denomina-
tions and their traditions, beliefs, organization, and current 
concerns—including internal controversies over the denomi-
nations’ value positions on key policy issues. More general works 
about the policy concerns of these religious organizations are also 
described. Nonprint resources, including videos, DVDs, and Web 
sites, provide additional information about the mainline churches 
and their various value positions on current issues.
Books
Albright, Madeleine. 2006. The Mighty and the Almighty: Reﬂ ec-
tions on America, God, and World Affairs. New York: Harper 
Collins.
Albright, secretary of state under President Bill Clinton, reveals 
that the Clinton administration followed a foreign policy guided 
by political realism that largely ignored religious convictions. With 
the rise of militant Islamist groups, she recommends that realism 
be tempered by religious convictions and values while maintain-
ing tolerance of others’ religious beliefs. Albright urges the State 
Department to nurture among its employees greater knowledge 
of religious movements.

254 Resources
Alexander, J. Neil. 2003. This Far by Grace: A Bishop’s Journey 
through Questions of Homosexuality. Lanham, MD: National 
Book Network.
Writing shortly after the Episcopal Church General Convention 
ratiﬁ ed the election of V. Gene Robinson, an openly gay priest, 
as a bishop, Alexander describes his personal transformation, 
through theological and scriptural exploration, from opposition 
to acceptance of homosexuals in the church.
Allen, Charles L. 1998. Meet the Methodists: An Introduction to the 
United Methodist Church. Revised ed. Nashville, TN: Abingdon.
This brief introduction to the United Methodist Church pro -
vides information about the beliefs of United Methodists, in -
cluding the creeds to which the denomination adheres. Allen 
describes the historical development of the denomination and its 
governing structure and discusses the church’s value positions 
and social concerns, including stands on education, warfare, and 
racial discrimination.
Anglican Communion Ofﬁ ce. 2004. Windsor Report 2004: Lam-
beth Commission on Communion. Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse.
Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams established the Lam-
beth Commission to investigate the theological and legal conse-
quences of the decision of the Episcopal Church in the United 
States to select an actively gay bishop and the new policy of the 
Canadian Diocese of New Westminster to authorize the blessing 
of same-gender unions. This report presents the ﬁ ndings of the 
commission, which takes a conciliatory position on the continued 
association of the various provinces in the Anglican Communion.
Armentrout, Don S., and Robert Boak Slocum, eds. 2005. An 
Episcopal Dictionary of the Church: A User-Friendly Reference 
for Episcopalians. New York: Church Publishing.
This reference work provides extensive information about the 
Episcopal Church, including the denomination’s history, organi-
zational structure, theology, and worship practices. The dictionary 
offers additional information about the Anglican Church around 
the world.

Books 255
Ayala, Francisco J. 2006. Darwin and Intelligent Design. Minne-
apolis: Fortress.
Ayala, a biologist, examines the idea of intelligent design, which 
involves the claim that the theory of evolution cannot explain 
the complex development of individual species. The existence of 
human beings therefore must be the result of a designer, or God. 
The author describes the theory of evolution and its success at 
explaining biological development, examines intelligent design 
as its contemporary proponents present the idea, and offers what 
he considers both its scientiﬁ c as well as theological weaknesses 
as an explanation of the complexities of life.
Balmer, Randall. 1996. Grant Us Courage: Travels Along the 
Mainline of American Protestantism. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Balmer describes his visits to twelve mainline Protestant churches 
that originally were the subjects of a series of articles published in 
Christian Century. The individual depictions suggest possible expla-
nations for the membership losses that such churches have suffered 
at the hands of more fundamentalist and evangelical movements.
Balmer, Randall, and John R. Fitzmier. 1994. The Presbyterians. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Balmer and Fitzmier present the history of the Presbyterian 
Church, including its European origins and its development in 
North America from the colonial period to the denomination’s 
current participation in the ecumenical movement. The authors 
describe the historical divisions within the denomination over 
such issues as church doctrine and slavery. The book includes 
biographical sketches of prominent Presbyterian leaders and a 
chronology of important events.
Balmer, Randall, and Mark Silk, eds. 2006. Religion and Public 
Life in the Middle Atlantic Region: The Fount of Diversity. Lan-
ham, MD: Alta Mira.
The contributors to this volume emphasize the religious pluralism 
in this region of the country, which began in seventeenth-century 
colonial America with such groups as the Quakers in Pennsylva-
nia and the Catholics in Maryland. Individual essays investigate 
Books 255

256 Resources
such topics as the relative inﬂ uence of Protestants and Catholics 
and the religious identiﬁ cation of new immigrants.
Barlow, Philip, and Mark Silk, eds. 2004. Religion and Public 
Life in the Midwest: America’s Common Denominator? Lanham, 
MD: Alta Mira.
This volume of essays investigates religious afﬁ liation in the mid-
western states. The editors note that the beliefs, attitudes, and val-
ues of residents in these states tend to mirror the overall religious 
perspectives of the nation. Individual essays treat such subjects 
as Methodism, the prevalence of Lutheranism in the region, and 
religious afﬁ liation in Chicago.
Barrera, Albino. 2001. Modern Catholic Social Documents and 
Political Economy. Washington DC: Georgetown University 
Press.
Barrera focuses on Catholic social teaching on political economy, 
investigating its transformation from more traditional thinking 
about the just price for goods to the application of social and 
economic theory to postindustrial issues. Among various top-
ics, the author discusses resolving conﬂ icts between labor and 
management.
Bass, Diana Butler, and Joseph Stewart-Sicking, eds. 2006. Main-
line Church Transformation, from Nomads to Pilgrims: Stories 
from Practicing Congregations. Herndon, VA: Alban Institute.
This work provides different accounts of mainline congregations 
that have reversed decline and now are active and growing. Suc-
cess is attributed to discovering, and welcoming, the stranger and 
providing him or her with a connection to the community and to 
worshiping God.
Bates, Stephen. 2005. A Church at War: Anglicans and Homosex-
uality. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Bates discusses the controversy over homosexuality—the ordi-
nation of homosexual priests and the blessing of same-gender 
unions—within the Anglican Communion. Although there are 
an estimated 77 million Anglicans around the world, it is the 
2.3-million-member Episcopal Church in the United States that 
most clearly generated the conﬂ ict with the election of V. Gene 

Books 257
Robinson, an openly gay priest, as bishop of New Hampshire. 
Bates, a journalist, presents an in-depth look at the historical roots 
and the contemporary circumstances of this controversial topic.
Bayer, Charles. 1997. The Babylonian Captivity of the Mainline 
Church. Atlanta, GA: Chalice.
Bayer observes that the mainline churches are situated between 
the secular society on one side and conservative evangelicals on 
the other. The author discusses whether and how the mainline 
denominations can endure in such an unfavorable climate.
Beed, Clive, and Cara Beed. 2006. Alternatives to Economics: 
Christian Socio-Economic Perspectives. Lanham, MD: Univer-
sity Press of America.
Beed and Beed explore a Christian understanding of the economy 
using a biblical perspective. The authors propose an alternative 
to secular social science based on Christian values as a method to 
develop socioeconomic policies.
Benedetto, Robert, Darrell L. Guder, and Donald K. McKim. 
1999. Historical Dictionary of the Reformed Churches. Lanham, 
MD: Scarecrow.
Beginning with a chronology, the authors include entries on the 
geographical areas where the Reformed tradition is strongest, 
signiﬁ cant ﬁ gures within the Reformed tradition from the Refor-
mation to the present, theological terms, church governance, edu-
cation, and commitment to social activism.
Bequette, John P. 2004. Christian Humanism: Creation, Redemption, 
and Reintegration. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Bequette, writing from a Catholic perspective, investigates the 
origins of the Christian humanist world view. The author exam-
ines the importance of Christianity in such areas as literature, race 
relations, economic justice, politics, the rights of women, and the 
sanctity of human life.
Billingsley, Andrew. 1999. Mighty Like a River: The Black Church 
and Social Reform. New York: Oxford University Press.
Billingsley discusses the inﬂ uence that black churches have had 
on shaping American society, particularly as they struggled with 
Books 257

258 Resources
social, economic, and political problems in the African American 
community. The book contains accounts of black men and women 
who helped to found activist African American churches.
Black, Amy E., Douglas L. Koopman, and David K. Ryden. 2004. 
Of Little Faith: The Politics of George W. Bush’s Faith-Based Ini-
tiatives. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
Using interviews with key political and governmental ﬁ gures in 
Washington DC, the authors describe the development of Presi-
dent George W. Bush’s faith-based initiative from the 2000 presi-
dential campaign through the various congressional votes during 
Bush’s ﬁ rst term. The authors focus on the reasons the initiative 
failed to win wide support in Congress, including conﬂ ict among 
competing interests and poor communication.
Blankman, Drew W. 2004. Pocket Dictionary of North Ameri-
can Denominations: Over 100 Christian Groups Clearly and Con-
cisely Deﬁ ned. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press.
Blankman provides descriptions of various churches in the United 
States, including mainline, evangelical, Pentecostal, and African 
American, as well as less orthodox groups.
Bloomquist, Karen L., and John R. Stumme, eds. 1998. The Prom-
ise of Lutheran Ethics. Minneapolis: Fortress.
This work contains contributions from ten Lutheran ethicists who 
investigate the role of a Lutheran approach to ethics in the con-
temporary world as a guide to Christian witness for justice. In an 
exchange, the contributors discuss the possible insights this ethi-
cal approach has for such issues as homosexuality that Evangelical 
Lutheran Church in America members currently are debating.
Booty, John. 1990. What Makes Us Episcopalians? Harrisburg, 
PA: Morehouse.
In this brief volume, Booty presents a synopsis of the history of 
the Episcopal Church in the United States, focusing on the four 
foundational principles of the denomination: tradition, experi-
ence, reason, and scripture.

Books 259
Brackney, William H. 2005. Human Rights and the World’s Major 
Religions. Volume 2. Westport, CT: Praeger.
In this second volume of a ﬁ ve-volume set, Brackney, professor 
of religion and director of the Baptist Studies Program at Baylor 
University, examines the idea of human rights in the Christian 
tradition from its origins to the present. The author provides 
insights into how Christian beliefs can contribute to a contempo-
rary understanding of human rights.
Brondos, David. 2005. The Letter and the Spirit: Discerning God’s 
Will in a Complex World. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress.
Brondos explores the biblical principles that can assist Christians in 
dealing with complex ethical problems in the contemporary world. 
Addressed primarily to Lutherans, the book attempts to guide 
readers in meeting human needs by consulting biblical mandates.
Brubaker, Pamela K., Rebecca Todd Peters, and Laura A. Stivers, 
eds. 2006. Justice in a Global Economy: Strategies for Home, Com-
munity, and World. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox.
The contributors to this volume, including ethicists and theolo-
gians, examine such social issues as land use, immigration, busi-
ness accountability, environmental protection, and economic 
justice. The authors critically evaluate contemporary political and 
economic institutions and provide examples of communities that 
are trying to initiate societal reform.
Brugemann, Walter, ed. 2001. Hope for the World: Mission in a 
Global Context. Minneapolis: Fortress.
The authors of the articles in this collection investigate the minis-
try of the church in the global context, maintaining that in order to 
deal successfully with the crises resulting from political and mili-
tary conditions as well as the globalization of the world economy, 
the church must modify the traditional ways in which it conducts 
its ministry and adjust that ministry to speciﬁ c contemporary 
circumstances.
Bruggink, Donald J., and Kim N. Baker. 2004. By Grace Alone: 
Stories of the Reformed Church in America. Grand Rapids, MI: 
W. B. Eerdmans.
Books 259

260 Resources
Bruggink and Baker present a history of the development of the 
Reformed Church in America from its roots in the sixteenth-
century Reformation to the establishment of a church in New 
Amsterdam (ultimately New York) in 1628 and its mission in the 
new nation. The authors discuss the growth of the church, con-
ﬂ icts that arose, and its missionary efforts. The book contains a 
wealth of photographs and the stories of past and current mem-
bers of the Reformed Church, including popular author Norman 
Vincent Peale and Robert Schuller, long-time pastor of the Crystal 
Cathedral in Garden Grove, California.
Bullock, Robert H., ed. 2006. Presbyterians Being Reformed: 
Reﬂ ections on What a Church Needs Today. Louisville, KY: West-
minster John Knox.
The contributors to this volume, representing various theologi-
cal perspectives, investigate the present status of the Presbyterian 
Church (U.S.A.), the values of the denomination, and what each 
author considers to be its most signiﬁ cant commitments. 
Campolo, Tony. 1995. Can Mainline Denominations Make a 
Comeback? Valley Forge, PA: Judson Press.
Although many have concluded that the mainline denominations 
are becoming obsolete, Campolo argues that if these churches can 
adjust to past and future social changes, they may arrive at a sat-
isfactory equilibrium between their traditional religious mission 
and an appropriate response to the nation’s social problems.
Campolo, Tony. 2003. Revolution and Renewal: How Churches 
Are Saving Our Cities. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox.
Campolo recounts the experiences of men and women of faith 
who did not leave urban communities but instead remained com-
mitted to renewing the social and religious life of cities.
Campolo, Tony, and Michael Battle. 2005. The Church Enslaved: 
Spirituality for Racial Reconciliation. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Campolo and Battle urge Christian churches to take the lead in rec-
tifying the effects of racial segregation. The authors examine racial 
divisions within churches and call for black and white churches 
to prevail over past conﬂ icts. They argue that churches that have 

Books 261
resolved such racial issues can help to bring about needed change 
in the larger society.
Carey, Patrick W. 1993. The Roman Catholics. Westport, CT: 
Greenwood.
Carey presents a summary of the history and development of 
the Catholic Church in the United States from the colonial period 
to the post–Vatican II events that brought signiﬁ cant change to 
the denomination. The author includes biographical sketches of 
leaders and other signiﬁ cant Catholic ﬁ gures and a chronology of 
important events.
Carey, Patrick W. 2004. Catholics in America: A History. Lan-
ham, MD: Praeger.
Carey examines the history of the Catholic community in Amer-
ica, discussing Catholics’ involvement in civic, political, social, 
and cultural activities. The author identiﬁ es the people and events 
that helped determine the basic characteristics of Catholicism in 
the United States.
Carroll, Jackson W. 2000. Mainline to the Future: Congregations 
for the 21st Century. Phoenix, AZ: Westminster John Knox.
Carroll focuses on the success of nontraditional churches and 
proposes ways in which mainline denominations might learn 
from these churches and apply their tactics in order to reverse the 
downward trend in membership. The author recommends that 
a balance must be struck between the value of tradition and the 
reality of change.
Chalker, William H. 2006. Science and Faith. Louisville, KY: 
Westminster John Knox.
Although distinguishing the different truth claims that science and 
religion make, Chalker explains how the two realms can be seen 
to be compatible. The author argues that scientiﬁ c knowledge and 
religious knowledge speak to different human needs and therefore 
there is no necessary conﬂ ict between the two ways of thinking. 
Chestnut, Robert A. 2000. Transforming the Mainline Church: 
Lessons in Change from Pittsburgh’s Cathedral of Hope. Phoenix, 
AZ: Westminster John Knox.
Books 261

262 Resources
Chestnut, who became pastor of East Liberty Presbyterian Church 
in Pittsburgh in 1988, describes how the church reversed a long 
decline, increasing membership, expanding the church’s ministry, 
and improving ﬁ nances. The author suggests that other churches 
can do the same by accepting diversity, supporting innovative 
leadership, and paying attention to the religious concerns of a 
younger generation rather than focusing on narrow denomina-
tional issues.
Childs, James M., Jr., ed. 2003. Faithful Conversation: Christian 
Perspectives on Homosexuality. Minneapolis: Fortress.
In the ﬁ ve essays contained in this volume, the authors discuss 
the various issues of homosexuality that have intensiﬁ ed contro-
versy in the church, including proposals for the ordination of gays 
and lesbians and the blessing of same-gender unions. The con-
tributors engage in a forum to discuss how these questions are 
affecting churches.
Cimino, Richard, ed. 2003. Lutherans Today: American Lutheran 
Identity in the 21st Century. Grand Rapids, MI: W. B. Eerdmans.
The authors of this group of essays chart the territory established 
by the various Lutheran denominations in the contemporary 
American Christian landscape and speculate about the future of 
Lutheranism. Individual chapters deal with the “Lutheran left,” 
the Word Alone movement within the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America, megachurches in the ELCA, the social theol-
ogy of Lutheran pastors, and multiculturalism in the church.
Cleary, Edward L., and Allen D. Hertzke, eds. 2005. Representing 
God at the Statehouse. Blue Ridge Summit, PA: Rowman and 
Littleﬁ eld.
The nine essays in this volume examine the lobbying activities of 
Christian churches and other religious groups at the state level. 
Each essay focuses on the motivations of different denominations 
to engage in political activity and the varying interests involved, 
particularly those related to welfare policy.
Cnaan, Ram A., with Stephanie C. Boddie, Charlene C. McGraw, 
and Jennifer Kang. 2006. The Other Philadelphia Story: How 

Books 263
Local Congregations Support Quality of Life in Urban America. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
The authors present ﬁ ndings of a study of 1,392 congregations 
in the Philadelphia area, examining the churches’ involvement 
in providing social services and support for other organizations. 
The authors conclude that nearly every congregation takes part 
in providing care for others, indicating the presence of an ethic of 
responsibility to help others in the community.
Cobb, John B. 1997. Reclaiming the Church: Where the Mainline 
Church Went Wrong and What to Do About It. Phoenix, AZ: 
Westminster John Knox.
Describing the decline of the mainline denominations from their 
once inﬂ uential position, Cobb argues that in order to survive, 
these churches must engage the present social conditions, moving 
away from the margins of society.
Cobb, John B. 2003. Progressive Christians Speak: A Different 
Voice on Faith and Politics. Phoenix, AZ: Westminster John 
Knox.
Cobb argues that religion should play a crucial role in solving 
major social problems, urging Christian churches to become 
active in confronting such issues as hunger, the burgeoning world 
population, the welfare system, illegal drug use, human rights, 
immigration, pollution, and abortion.
Cochran, Clarke E., and David Carroll Cochran. 2003. Catholics, 
Politics, and Public Policy: Beyond Left and Right. Maryknoll, 
NY: Orbis.
The authors examine various issues from the perspective of Cath-
olic social teaching, including education and welfare, health care 
policy, warfare and nuclear weapons, the criminal justice system, 
and protection of the environment and the sanctity of life.
Cooey, Paula M. 2006. Willing the Good: Jesus, Dissent, and 
Desire. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Recognizing that traditional Christian groups have tended to dis-
approve of dissent, Cooey argues that disagreement has been an 
Books 263

264 Resources
important aspect of Christianity from the beginning and played 
an important role in the Reformation. The author claims that a 
willingness to dissent can beneﬁ t the church and contribute to a 
more relevant Christian theology and ethics.
Crew, Louie, compiler. 2003. 101 Reasons to Be Episcopalian. 
Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse.
Crew, a member of the Executive Council of the Episcopal Church, 
compiled this list of reasons for being an Episcopalian from the 
responses he received from his online invitation to Episcopalians 
to answer the question, “What do you like about the Episcopal 
Church?” The responses, although not the result of a scientiﬁ c 
poll, provide insights into the beliefs, customs, and disagreements 
among members of the Episcopal Church.
Cromartie, Michael, ed. 2005. Religion and Politics in America: A 
Conversation. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld.
This series of conversations, which grew out of six conferences 
hosted by the Ethics and Public Policy Center beginning in 1999, 
touches on various aspects of religious involvement in the public 
realm. Individual chapters focus on such topics as the social and 
political status of Catholics in the United States, the voting behav-
ior of the faithful, and the effects of religion on public discourse.
Cummins, D. Duane. 2003. A Handbook for Today’s Disciples in the 
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). 3rd ed. Atlanta: Chalice.
This brief volume contains basic information about the Christian 
Church (Disciples of Christ), including a history of the denomination 
from its formative years from 1800 to 1830 to its establishment as a 
more formal denomination in the 1960s, the beliefs of denomination 
members, sacraments and worship practices, denomination posi-
tions on moral and ethical issues, and the structure of the church.
Curran, Charles E. 2006. Loyal Dissent: Memoir of a Catholic 
Theologian. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
A Catholic priest and theologian, Curran recounts his disagree-
ments with the Vatican over such issues as contraception, homo-
sexuality, divorce, and abortion that led in 1986 to his losing the 
right to teach as a Catholic theologian—he was ﬁ red from his 

Books 265
teaching position at the Catholic University of America. Curran 
also describes his disagreements with the Vatican over the per-
missibility of dissent and with the Catholic University of America 
over academic freedom.
D’Antonio, William V., Dean R. Hodge, and James D. Davidson. 
2001. American Catholics: Gender, Generation and Commitment. 
Berkeley, CA: Alta Mira.
Using survey results from 1987, 1993, and 1999, the authors inves-
tigate the attitudes of U.S. Catholics toward the church hierarchy, 
the priest shortage, and the basic teachings of the church, as well 
as toward such social and political issues as capital punishment 
and military spending. The authors note that gender and genera-
tion differences, as well as different levels of commitment to the 
Catholic Church, tend to inﬂ uence attitudes on such issues.
Davies, Susan E., and Sister Paul Teresa Hennessee, eds. 1998. 
Ending Racism in Church. Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim.
This work contains four case studies of church and community 
organizations that have worked to ameliorate racism. The con-
tributors discuss the ways in which racism inﬂ uences behavior, 
promotes hatred, and distorts the gospel message.
De Gruchy, John W. 2002. Reconciliation: Restoring Justice. 
Minneapolis: Fortress.
De Gruchy argues that Christianity can contribute to the recon-
ciliation of people and nations torn by conﬂ ict and violence. He 
claims Christians have a role to play in maintaining the environ-
ment, achieving justice, encouraging interreligious ecumenism, 
and establishing international peace.
Dionne, E. J., Jr., Kayla Meltzer Drogosz, and Jean Bethke 
Elshtain, eds. 2004. One Electorate Under God? A Dialogue on 
Religion and American Politics. Washington DC: Brookings 
Institution.
The contributions to this volume focus on two essays, one written 
by former New York Governor Mario Cuomo, a liberal Catholic, 
and Marc Souder, a congressman from Indiana and a conserva-
tive evangelical. Contributors present their understanding of how 
Books 265

266 Resources
religious convictions inﬂ uence the political views of public ﬁ g-
ures and contribute to the democratic process.
Djupe, Paul A., and Laura R. Olson. 2003. Encyclopedia of Amer-
ican Religion and Politics. New York: Facts on File.
This book contains more than 600 entries dealing with religion 
and politics in the United States, from the nation’s founding to 
the recent rise of the conservative Christian movement. Entries 
treat such topics as religious leaders, historical events, court cases, 
religious denominations, and political issues such as prayer in the 
public schools and abortion.
Dorrien, Gary. 2006. The Making of American Liberal Theology: 
Crisis, Irony, and Postmodernity, 1950–2005. Louisville, KY: 
Westminster John Knox.
While observing that liberal theology has been in dire straights for 
the last ﬁ fty years, Dorrien claims that its supporters have brought 
about a recent creative renewal. Liberal theology in all its diver-
sity and complexity, he contends, offers an alternative perspective 
to orthodoxy as well as secularism.
Dreisbach, Daniel, Mark David Hall, and Jeffry H. Morrison, 
eds. 2004. The Founders on God and Government. Lanham, MD: 
Rowman and Littleﬁ eld.
The essays in this volume investigate nine of the founders of the 
nation and the relationship between their religious convictions 
and political views. Among those treated in individual essays are 
George Washington, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, and James 
Madison, as well as lesser-known ﬁ gures such as John Wither-
spoon, John Carroll, and James Wilson.
Edgar, Robert. 2006. Middle Church: Reclaiming the Moral Val-
ues of the Faithful Majority from the Religious Right. New York: 
Simon and Schuster.
A former member of Congress and an ordained elder in the 
United Methodist Church, Edgar urges more moderate Christians 
and adherents of other faiths to take part in shifting the political 
agenda away from such religious right issues as homosexuality 
and abortion and emphasize instead eliminating poverty, achiev-

Books 267
ing peace, and protecting the environment—issues he considers 
central to Jesus’s ministry.
Ellingson, Stephen. 2007. The Megachurch and the Mainline: 
Remaking Religious Tradition in the Twenty-ﬁ rst Century. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Ellingson examines the efforts of several mainline Lutheran 
churches in the San Francisco Bay Area to alter basic worship 
practices, blending the evangelical character of megachurches 
with the contemporary focus on pragmatism and consumerism. 
The author describes the changes congregations have introduced, 
including the substitution of traditional hymns with rock music 
and clerical robes with casual clothing.
Ellison, Marvin Mahan. 2004. Same-Sex Marriage? A Christian 
Ethical Analysis. Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim.
Ellison examines the arguments for and against same-gender 
marriage and makes proposals for updating Christian sexual eth-
ics. The author calls for basic justice in the way the contemporary 
culture regards varied sexual relationships.
Fackre, Gabriel. 2005. Believing, Caring, and Doing in the United 
Church of Christ. Cleveland, OH: United Church Press.
Fackre, an ordained minister in the United Church of Christ, 
emphasizes three aspects of the UCC mission: the beliefs of 
denomination members, including the 1913 Kansas City Statement 
of Faith; ecumenical outreach to other denominations, including 
the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America; and the activities of 
the church in such areas as education and evangelism.
Fahey, Joseph J. 2005. War and the Christian Conscience: Where 
Do You Stand? Maryknoll, NY: Orbis.
Fahey examines the various traditional Christian stands on war, 
including paciﬁ sm, just war doctrine, the ethics of nuclear warfare, 
and the possibility of world community. The author offers guide-
lines for anyone attempting to decide which approach to accept.
Felder, Cain Hope. 2002. Race, Racism, and the Biblical Narra-
tives. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Books 267

268 Resources
Felder investigates the notion of race as expressed in the Bible, iden-
tifying subsequent misuses of biblical passages such as the “curse 
of Ham,” which was used to support slavery and racial discrimina-
tion. The author urges church members to reexamine scripture in 
order to come to a deeper understanding of racial attitudes.
Fialka, John J. 2002. Sisters: Catholic Nuns and the Making of 
America. New York: St. Martin’s. 
Fialka argues that Catholic nuns, as the nation’s ﬁ rst group of 
professional women, were also feminists. The author recounts the 
contributions nuns made to shaping the nation during the nine-
teenth century, including establishing hospitals and schools and 
providing assistance to the needy. Fialka notes that although there 
were over 180,000 nuns in the United States in the late 1960s, the 
total number today is less than 81,000.
Fisher, James T. 2000. Catholics in America. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Beginning with the ﬁ rst Spanish exploration of Florida in 1528, 
Fisher surveys the Catholic experience in American history and 
the organization’s involvement in the political process, including 
local politics and the abortion controversy. The author focuses on 
the roles that various Catholics have played, including Cardinal 
John J. O’Connor, Father Charles Coughlin, Dorothy Day, and 
Philip and Daniel Berrigan.
Flinders, Carol Lee. 2006. Enduring Lives: Portraits of Women 
and Faith in Action. New York: Penguin.
Flinders examines the lives of four women of faith who have min-
istered to others. Each had mystical experiences that led them to 
take active roles in the larger society. Helen Prejean, a Catholic 
nun who has worked with prison inmates, calls for the elimina-
tion of the death penalty; Jane Goodall, a primatologist, has led 
efforts to protect the habitat for chimpanzees and to preserve the 
general environment; Tenzin Palmo, a Buddhist nun, has called 
for the ordination of other Buddhist nuns; and Etty Hillesum, a 
Jewish woman killed by the Nazis in 1943, in her journals rejected 
the Nazi doctrine of hatred.

Books 269
Fowler, Robert Booth, Allen D. Hertzke, Laura R. Olson, and 
Kevin R. den Dulk. 2004. Religion and Politics in America: Faith, 
Culture, and Strategic Choices. Jackson, TN: Westview.
The authors deal with the general nature of the relationship 
between religion and politics in the United States, examine in 
greater detail the major religious traditions, and investigate the 
conﬂ icting constitutional understandings of the role of religion in 
public life.
Fryer, Kelly A. 2003. Reclaiming the “L” Word: Renewing the 
Church from Its Lutheran Core. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress.
This book, meant for Evangelical Lutheran Church in America 
congregations, is intended to assist church members in renewal 
efforts by focusing on the basic principles and teachings of the 
church. The author attempts to identify just what it means to be 
a Lutheran and stresses the importance of being a member of the 
denomination.
Gingerich, Ray C., and Ted Grimsrud, eds. 2006. Transforming 
the Powers: Peace, Justice, and the Domination System. Minne-
apolis: Fortress.
The contributors to this volume, theologians and students of eth-
ics, examine such subjects as economics, politics, war and peace, 
ecological problems, and the attainment of social justice.
Grifﬁ n, David Ray. 2006. Christian Faith and the Truth Behind 
9/11: A Call to Reﬂ ection and Action. Louisville, KY: Westmin-
ster John Knox.
Employing various accounts of the September 11, 2001, terrorist 
attacks, Grifﬁ n analyzes the events from a Christian perspective. 
The author compares the ancient Roman Empire to contemporary 
America and uses the teachings of the gospel to evaluate the pres-
ent administration in Washington DC. He recommends what he 
considers appropriate responses of Christian churches to the ter-
rorist threat.
Grifﬁ n, David Ray, John B. Cobb, Jr., Richard A. Falk, and Cath-
erine Keller. 2006. The American Empire and the Commonwealth 

270 Resources
of God: A Political, Economic, Religious Statement. Louisville, 
KY: Westminster John Knox.
The authors offer a critique of the expansion of U.S. power around 
the world. Considering U.S. international action imperialistic, 
they claim the United States is responsible for ecological damage, 
destructive economic policies, the misuse of military force, and 
the unfair distribution of wealth.
Gritsch, Eric W. 1994. Fortress Introduction to Lutheranism. 
Minneapolis: Fortress.
Recognizing that Lutherans themselves have differing under-
standings of their identity, with some focusing on its origins as a 
reform movement, others emphasizing the primary importance of 
denominational theology, and yet others accentuating the strains 
of conﬂ ict, Gritsch presents an overview of the history and basic 
beliefs and teachings of Lutheranism. 
Hamm, Richard L. 2007. Recreating the Church: Leadership for 
the Postmodern Age. Atlanta: Chalice Press.
Hamm, past general minister and president of the Christian 
Church (Disciples of Christ), discusses the origins of the crisis 
mainline denominations presently face and offers advice to the 
churches for adapting to a postmodern culture.
Hart, D. G., and Mark A. Noll, eds. 1999. Dictionary of the Pres-
byterian and Reformed Tradition in America. Phillipsburg, NJ: 
P & R Publishing.
This volume contains entries on a wealth of various topics rel-
evant to the Presbyterian and Reformed tradition, including 
information about historical and contemporary ﬁ gures, church 
organizations and movements, denominational controversies and 
agreements, worship practices, and signiﬁ cant events such as the 
American Revolution and the Civil War.
Hayes, Jeffrey, ed. 2005. The Politics of Religion—A Survey. Flor-
ence, KY: Routledge.
This work deals with the relationship between religion and poli-
tics in various cultures around the world and contains lengthy 

Books 271
entries on such topics as the separation of church and state, reli-
gious fundamentalism, religion and democracy, and religion and 
terrorism. The book provides a context in which to study the role 
religious denominations in the United States play in public policy 
making.
Heclo, Hugh, and Wilfred M. McClay, eds. 2003. Religion Returns 
to the Public Square: Faith and Policy in America. Washington 
DC: Woodrow Wilson Center.
The contributors to this volume explore the ways in which reli-
gious institutions traditionally have engaged in American politics 
and their current activity in such policy areas as abortion, school 
prayer, the death penalty, and stem-cell research. They investigate 
the prospects for future interaction between religion and politics. 
Hein, David, and Gardiner H. Shattuck. 2003. Episcopalians. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Hein and Shattuck provide a history of the Episcopal Church from 
its roots in the sixteenth century to the formation of the Anglican 
Church in the colonies, the establishment of the Episcopal denom-
ination following the American Revolution, expansion during the 
nineteenth century, and the issues and conﬂ icts that arose dur-
ing the twentieth century. The authors investigate the Episcopal 
Church’s interaction with other denominations and the changing 
status of women and minorities within the church.
Hessel, Dieter T., and Larry L. Rasmussen, eds. 2001. Earth 
Habitat: Eco-Injustice and the Church’s Response. Minneapolis: 
Fortress.
This volume contains the presentations of theologians who par-
ticipated in the 1998 conference, “Ecological Earth,” which was 
held at Union Theological Seminary. The contributors investigate 
ways in which Christians can transform their thinking and their 
churches, becoming justice oriented in order to deal more effec-
tively with the ecological crisis. 
Hoge, Dean R., Benton Johnson, and Donald A. Luidens. 1994. 
Vanishing Boundaries: The Religion of Mainline Protestant Baby 
Boomers. Phoenix, AZ: Westminster John Knox.
Books 271

272 Resources
Employing the results of a survey of 500 respondents as well as 
forty in-depth interviews, the authors investigate the decline of 
mainline Protestant denominations since the 1960s. The respon-
dents were members of the Presbyterian Church classiﬁ ed as part 
of the baby-boomer generation (those between thirty-three and 
forty-two years of age in 1989). The authors examine the respon-
dents’ religious faith and the reasons they offer for either leaving 
or remaining in the church.
Holmes, David L. 1994. A Brief History of the Episcopal Church. 
Harrisburg, PA: Continuum International.
Holmes traces the history of the Episcopal Church in North Amer-
ica from Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607 to the late twentieth cen-
tury. The author describes the development of the church after 
the American Revolution, including such topics as evangelizing 
efforts among Native Americans, the religious beliefs of slaves 
and slave owners, the development of the social gospel, debates 
over the ordination of women, and the effects of immigration on 
the church.
Inskeep, Ken, and Bob Bacher. 2005. Chasing Down a Rumor: 
The Death of Mainline Denominations. Minneapolis: Augsburg 
Fortress.
Responding to claims that the mainline denominations continue a 
nonstop decline, the authors argue that these denominations play 
a signiﬁ cant role in American society and have the opportunity to 
continue doing so.
Jacobsen, Dennis A. 2001. Doing Justice: Congregations and 
Community Organizing. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Jacobsen presents advice about organizing community ministries 
based on his fourteen years of experience. The author combines 
biblical and theological authority with practical techniques and 
Saul Alinsky’s organizational principles to promote justice in the 
public realm in support of the poor and disadvantaged.
Jarl, Ann-Cathrin. 2003. In Justice: Women and Global Econom-
ics. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Jarl explores the dangers of global economic trends and the mean-
ing of economic justice, focusing particularly on the condition 

Books 273
of women. Concentrating on feminist critiques of neoclassical 
economic theory, the author emphasizes meeting fundamental 
human needs as the basic measure of economic justice.
Jefferts Schori, Katharine. 2007. A Wing and a Prayer: A Message 
of Faith and Hope. New York: Morehouse.
Jefferts Schori, who was elected by the 2006 General Convention 
of the Episcopal Church as the ﬁ rst woman primate in the his-
tory of the Anglican Communion, presents her views on the need 
for reconciliation and peace. As the bishop of Nevada before her 
election as presiding bishop, Jefferts Schori ﬂ ew her own plane to 
reach distant locations in the diocese.
Joh, Wonhee Anne. 2006. Heart of the Cross: A Postcolonial 
Christology. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox.
Although not abandoning entirely the notion of the cross’s con-
nection to pain and suffering, Joh uses postcolonial and feminist 
understandings of the world to emphasize love as the fundamen-
tal notion supporting Christianity. The author employs the Korean 
concept of jeong to refer to love and commitment.
Johnson, Ben Campbell, and Glenn McDonald. 1999. Imagining 
a Church in the Spirit: A Task for Mainline Congregations. Grand 
Rapids, MI: W. B. Eerdmans.
The authors argue that the crucial problem facing the mainline 
denominations is lack of vision rather than simply declining 
membership and changing social loyalties. They suggest ways 
in which pastors can reinvigorate their ministries based on an 
appropriate vision.
Jones, Alan. 2006. Common Prayer on Common Ground: A Vision 
of Anglican Orthodoxy. Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse.
Recognizing the divisions within the Episcopal Church and the 
Anglican Communion, especially over the issue of homosexual-
ity, Jones explores an avenue for reconciliation through an ortho-
dox perspective that he hopes can subdue the divisions within the 
denomination.
Kelly, David F. 2004. Contemporary Catholic Health Care Ethics. 
Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
Books 273

274 Resources
From the perspective of Catholic moral theology, Kelly examines 
the ethical and legal dilemmas found in the U.S. health care sys-
tem. Among the topics covered is the dilemma of allocating ﬁ nite 
health care resources.
Kennedy, Sheila Suess, and Wolfgang Bielefeld. 2006. Charita-
ble Choice at Work: Evaluating Faith-Based Job Programs in the 
States. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
The authors investigate various aspects of faith-based initiatives, 
including the movement’s historical development and the con-
stitutional issues raised, especially the principle of separation of 
church and state. They analyze qualitative and quantitative data 
to assess the performance of faith-based initiatives compared to 
secular programs in Massachusetts, Indiana, and North Carolina.
Kew, Richard. 2001. Brave New Church: What the Future Holds. 
Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse.
Examining the status of the church at the beginning of the twenty-
ﬁ rst century, Kew focuses on nine challenges, including accelerat-
ing globalization, the Internet, and demographic changes such as 
the “graying” of the church. The author explains how such chal-
lenges can become opportunities for the church.
Killen, Patricia O’Connell, and Mark Silk, eds. 2004. Religion 
and Public Life in the Paciﬁ c Northwest: The None Zone. Lan-
ham, MD: Alta Mira.
In this region of the United States, a higher proportion of survey 
respondents than in any other part of the country state “none” 
when asked about religious afﬁ liation. Various denominations, 
including Evangelicals, mainline Protestants, Catholics, and other 
groups share inﬂ uence over the issues that concern the residents 
of the region.
Kirby, James E., Russel E. Richey, and Kenneth E. Rowe. 1996. 
The Methodists. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
The authors present various aspects of the Methodist church, 
including the denomination’s origins in England and development 
in the United States to becoming the nation’s largest Protestant 

Books 275
group by the middle of the nineteenth century; its organization 
and leadership; and the controversies that occurred over such 
issues as race and the place of women in the church.
Killinger, John. 1995. Preaching to a Church in Crisis: A Homi-
letic for the Last Days of the Mainline Church. Lima, OH: CSS 
Publishing.
Recognizing that for many years the mainline churches formed 
the nation’s political, social, and spiritual norms, Killinger asserts 
that these denominations now face a crisis resulting from major 
societal transformations. The author notes that the crisis, perhaps 
the greatest in Christianity since the Reformation, could have sig-
niﬁ cant consequences for American society. In the last portion of 
the book, Killinger recommends ways in which mainline pastors 
still can preach effectively.
Kirk-Duggan, Cheryl A. 2000. Reﬁ ner’s Fire: A Religious Engage-
ment with Violence. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Kirk-Duggan investigates the role religion has played in either 
encouraging or ameliorating violence. The author examines bibli-
cal violence; the history of slavery; the civil rights movement; and 
current trends in violence, particularly among youth.
Kleiderer, John, Paula Minaert, and Mark Mossa, eds. 2005. Just 
War, Lasting Peace: What Christian Traditions Can Teach Us. 
Maryknoll, NY: Orbis.
This book is the outcome of a meeting among several theologians, 
peace activists, military persons, and public policy analysts who 
discussed just war doctrine and its application to current conﬂ icts 
such as the violent conﬂ ict in Iraq. The participants presented their 
thoughts on the role that religion can play in bringing about peace.
Kosmin, Barry, and Ariela Keysar. 2006. Religion in a Free Mar-
ket: Religious and Non-Religious Americans—Who, What, Why 
and Where. Ithaca, NY: Paramount Market Publishing.
Basing their analysis on the 2001 American Religious Identiﬁ ca-
tion Survey, the authors provide a detailed description of religious 

276 Resources
belief and afﬁ liation in the United States and discuss religion in 
the context of such variables as economics, politics, and gender.
Krason, Stephen M. 2006. Catholic Makers of America: Bio-
graphical Sketches of Catholic Statesmen and Political Thinkers 
in America’s First Century, 1776–1876. Lanham, MD: University 
Press of America.
Krason discusses several little-known Catholic ﬁ gures in the ﬁ rst 
century of America. The author emphasizes these individuals’ 
contributions to American politics and political thought.
Lagerquist, L. DeAne. 1999. The Lutherans. Westport, CT: Green-
wood.
This volume traces the development of Lutheran churches from 
their origin in the sixteenth-century Reformation, describing the 
development of various Lutheran groups in America from colonial 
times to the establishment of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in 
America in 1988. The author provides biographical entries on key 
Lutheran leaders and a chronology of important dates.
Lindsey, William, and Mark Silk, eds. 2005. Religion and Pub-
lic Life in the Southern Crossroads: Showdown States. Lanham, 
MD: Alta Mira.
The contributors to this volume describe the frequent religious con-
ﬂ icts called the culture wars that are characteristic of this region, 
composed of Arkansas, Louisiana, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Texas. 
The presence of signiﬁ cant numbers of Baptists, Methodists, Pen-
tecostals, and Catholics, as well as various ethnic groups, contrib-
utes to confrontations over differing social agendas.
Linn, Jan G. 2006. Big Christianity: What’s Right with the Reli-
gious Left. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox.
Linn, a Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) pastor, rejects the 
leadership of those on the religious right, opting instead for what 
she calls “big Christianity,” a faith sufﬁ ciently large to include and 
accept all people. The author argues that the Christian faith can-
not be limited to a particular nation, race, or social class.
Lippy, Charles H. 2006. Faith in America: Changes, Challenges, 
New Directions. Westport, CT: Praeger.

Books 277
In this three-volume work, Lippy examines the status of organized 
religion in the United States; the issues, such as abortion, embry-
onic stem-cell research, and end-of-life decisions, that involve reli-
gious responses; and the important role that religious belief plays 
in individual lives and American culture
Lull, Timothy F. 2005. On Being Lutheran: Reﬂ ection on Church, 
Theology, and Faith. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress.
This collection of articles by Lull, which appeared over several 
years in The Lutheran magazine, deals with such topics as the con-
fessional beliefs of Lutherans, the ability of Lutheranism over time 
to withstand adversity, what it means for Lutherans to be evan-
gelical, reestablishing Lutheran piety, and the future prospects for 
Lutheranism in the United States.
Lynn, Barry W. 2006. Piety and Politics: The Right-Wing Assault 
on Religious Freedom. New York: Crown.
Lynn, a United Church of Christ minister and executive director of 
Americans United for Separation of Church and State, challenges 
the agenda of the religious right, arguing for an open marketplace 
for religious groups that is devoid of government involvement in 
order to maintain tolerance and religious freedom.
Maeker, Nancy E., and Peter Rogness. 2006. Ending Poverty, A 
20/20 Vision: A Guide for Individuals and Congregations. Min-
neapolis: Augsburg Fortress.
The authors urge people of faith to investigate the issue of pov-
erty and become committed to providing justice for those in pov-
erty and those who are experiencing class prejudice. They employ 
speciﬁ c examples to offer a deﬁ nition of poverty, explore the 
dynamics of class, and help the reader to recognize that all people 
ultimately belong to one community.
Magnani, Laura, and Harmon L. Wray. 2006. Beyond Prisons: A 
New Interfaith Paradigm to Our Failed Prison System. Minne-
apolis: Fortress.
The authors examine the history and characteristics of the U.S. 
prison system, offering a critical moral evaluation of that system. 
They provide an alternative basis for a criminal justice system 
Books 277

278 Resources
based on reconciliation and make several suggestions for imme-
diate change.
Manuel, Paul Christopher, Lawrence C. Reardon, and Clyde 
Wilcox, eds. 2006. The Catholic Church and the Nation-State: 
Comparative Perspectives. Washington, DC: Georgetown Uni-
versity Press.
This work contains case studies from sixteen countries that por-
tray the complex nature of Catholic Church involvement in and 
inﬂ uence on diplomatic and political activity in various contexts.
Mapp Alf, Jr. 2005. The Faith of Our Fathers: What America’s 
Founders Really Believed. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld.
Mapp describes the religious beliefs of eleven of the nation’s 
founders, including Benjamin Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, 
Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, John Marshall, and George 
Washington. The author investigates the ways in which religious 
beliefs inﬂ uenced the values, political understandings, and public 
acts of these men.
Marlin, George F. 2004. The American Catholic Voter: Two Hun-
dred Years of Political Impact. Fort Collins, CO: Ignatius. 
Marlin recounts the history of Catholic political and electoral par-
ticipation from the founding of Maryland to the election of George 
W. Bush as president. The author emphasizes the signiﬁ cance of 
Catholic involvement in politics at the local, state, and national 
levels.
Marshall, Ellen Ott, ed. 2005. Choosing Peace Through Daily 
Practices. Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim.
The contributors to this volume, all of whom are on the faculty 
of Claremont School of Theology, suggest methods of achieving 
peace in a world ﬁ lled with violence and injustice. They describe 
daily practices that individuals can employ in the work environ-
ment as well as in personal relationships to promote peace.
Martin, Dale B. 2006. Sex and the Single Savior: Gender and Sex-
uality in Biblical Interpretation. Louisville, KY: Westminster 
John Knox.

Books 279
Investigating scripture to determine ancient conceptions of sexu-
ality, Martin focuses especially on references to homosexuality in 
Paul’s letters contained in the New Testament. The author con-
cludes that the modern world’s focus on what is appropriate in 
sexual relationships does not reﬂ ect the original gospel message.
Mathisen, Robert R., ed. 2006. Critical Issues in American Reli-
gious History. 2nd ed. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press.
This extensive volume contains original documents and current 
essays on the history of religion in the United States. Chapters 
deal with such topics as religion in early America, the era of the 
Great Awakening, the inﬂ uence of religious belief on the Ameri-
can Revolution, slavery and religion, the impact of religion on the 
Civil War, the religious response to scientiﬁ c developments in the 
late nineteenth century, fundamentalism versus modernism in 
the Protestant denominations, and religious inﬂ uences on the rise 
of the civil rights movement.
McKim, Donald K. 2003. Presbyterian Beliefs: A Brief Introduc-
tion. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox.
McKim, the academic and reference editor of Westminster John 
Knox Press, presents an introduction to the basic beliefs of the 
Presbyterian Church. The author arranges topics into three sec-
tions: “The God Who Reveals, Creates, and Guides,” “The Christ 
Who Saves People Like Us,” and “The Church Where Faith Begins, 
Is Nourished, and Grows.”
McKim, Donald K. 2004. Presbyterian Questions, Presbyterian 
Answers. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox.
Intended primarily for Presbyterians who wish to gain a deeper 
knowledge of the denomination’s theology and the Christian 
faith, this book contains answers to questions on such topics as 
the Presbyterian stance on the doctrine of predestination, the 
interpretation of the Bible, and the purpose of life for a Christian.
Meacham, John. 2006. American Gospel: God, the Founding 
Fathers, and the Making of a Nation. New York: Random House.
Meacham explores the place of religion in the history of U.S. 
public life, including the colonial era and the writing of the Con-
stitution as well as more recent events such as the civil rights 
Books 279

280 Resources
movement and the ﬁ ght against terrorism. The author perceives 
a complementarity between the private sphere where individu-
als may exercise freedom of religion as they wish, and the pub-
lic arena where religious belief has been a basic ingredient in the 
governing system.
Moe-Lobeda, Cynthia D. 2004. Public Church: For the Life of the 
World. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Moe-Lobeda examines the meaning of the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church in America’s claim that the denomination plays a role in 
public life. The author explores the signiﬁ cance of being a public 
church; the advantages, obstacles, costs, and dangers of playing 
this role; and the possibilities for church members to provide pub-
lic leadership.
Monsma, Stephen V., and J. Christopher Soper. 1997. The Chal-
lenge of Pluralism: Church and State in Five Democracies. Lan-
ham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld.
The authors compare and analyze the status of church-state rela-
tions in the United States, the Netherlands, Australia, Germany, 
and England. They note that in the United States, emphasis on the 
establishment clause of the First Amendment denies faith-based 
organizations access to government assistance that other organi-
zations enjoy.
Monsma, Stephen V., and J. Christopher Soper. 2006. Faith, 
Hope, and Jobs: Welfare-to-Work in Los Angeles. Baltimore: 
Georgetown University Press.
Monsma and Soper present the results of a study of seventeen 
welfare-to-work programs in Los Angeles County, including 
those operated by faith-based organizations. The authors examine 
the assessments clients made of the programs, the development 
of attitudes conducive to ﬁ nding employment, and the actual 
success of gaining jobs. Monsma and Soper conclude with rec-
ommendations for public policy makers and social service orga-
nization managers.
Moore, Peter C., ed. 1998. Can a Bishop Be Wrong? Ten Scholars 
Challenge John Shelby Spong. Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse.
Ten Episcopal scholars and bishops respond to John Shelby 
Spong’s writings that challenge church teachings on the author-

Books 281
ity of the Bible, the virgin birth of Jesus, Jesus’s bodily resurrec-
tion, sexuality, and the nature of sin. Although respecting Spong’s 
convictions, the authors offer defenses for the core beliefs of the 
Christian tradition.
Mount, Eric, Jr. 1999. Covenant, Community, and the Common 
Good: An Interpretation of Christian Ethics. Cleveland, OH: 
Pilgrim.
Mount discusses the positive effects that the notions of covenant 
and the common good can have on the renewal of various com-
munities, including the family, the workplace, and the larger inter-
national realm. The author observes the need to initiate personal 
as well as more general social renewal.
Nessan, Craig L. 2003. Give Us This Day: A Lutheran Proposal 
for Ending World Hunger. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress.
Nessan focuses on the tradition of justice he sees expressed in the 
Bible, especially regarding care for the hungry. Referring to the 
Lord’s Prayer (“Give us this day our daily bread”), the author 
notes that Jesus’s teachings expressed concern for the hungry. 
With this biblical background, Nessan urges Christian churches 
to respond to the crisis and end world hunger.
Nessan, Craig L. 2003. Many Members, Yet One Body: Committed 
Same-Gender Relationships and the Mission of the Church. Min-
neapolis: Fortress.
In this brief book, Nessan discusses the controversial issues sur-
rounding the church’s stand on homosexuality and same-gender 
unions. The author’s objective is to encourage discussion speciﬁ -
cally in the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and help to 
prevent the question from dividing the church.
Oden, Thomas C. 2003. The Rebirth of Orthodoxy: Signs of New 
Life in Christianity. New York: Harper Collins.
Perceiving lay church members who are rediscovering the ancient 
truths of the Christian faith, Oden claims that the mainline 
denominations and the Catholic Church, as well as evangelicals, 
are returning to orthodoxy. Oden describes his own move away 
from liberalism to orthodoxy and claims that such modern secu-
lar perspectives as Darwinism, communism, and psychoanalysis 

282 Resources
have failed and that Christians must look to their traditional roots 
for truth.
Oden, Thomas C. 2006. Turning Around the Mainline: How 
Renewal Movements Are Changing the Church. Grand Rapids, 
MI: Baker.
Oden presents the history of evangelical and orthodox renewal 
movements within mainline denominations. He details the dif-
ﬁ culties that these denominations are facing, the basic beliefs and 
biblical teaching of the renewal movements, and the question of 
local church property ownership in mainline churches for con-
gregations that may be contemplating separation from the central 
denomination.
Oldmixon, Elizabeth Anne. 2005. Uncompromising Positions: 
God, Sex, and the U.S. House of Representatives. Washington 
DC: Georgetown University Press.
Oldmixon investigates how legislators attempt to resolve policy 
conﬂ icts, such as abortion, gay marriage, and prayer in the public 
schools, that have signiﬁ cant religious and cultural content. The 
author argues that participants in such cultural conﬂ icts depend 
on religious values that tend to restrict the possibility of political 
compromise. Oldmixon recommends that House members cease 
resorting to the short-term temptation to appeal to ideological 
allies and instead focus on discovering workable solutions.
Olson, Carl E. 2003. Will Catholics Be “Left Behind”? Fort Col-
lins, CO: Ignatius.
Olson provides a Catholic perspective on the fundamentalist 
notion of the rapture, that moment when Christ supposedly will 
return to take the righteous from the world before the “great tribu-
lation” described in the Book of Revelation. The author discusses 
the biblical, theological, and historical bases of this notion that 
plays a crucial role in Tim LaHaye and Jerry Jenkins’s Left Behind 
series of novels.
Ottati, Douglas F. 2006. Theology for Liberal Presbyterians and 
Other Endangered Species. Louisville, KY: Geneva.
Ottati presents an interpretation of the basics of liberal theo-
logical thought as an alternative to the conservative evangelical 

Books 283
approach. Focusing on such issues as the ordination of homosexu-
als and the war on terrorism, the author urges liberal Protestants 
to engage in a revision of traditional beliefs in light of the realities 
of the contemporary world.
Patterson, Eric, ed. 2003. The Christian Realists: Reassessing the 
Contributions of Niebuhr and His Contemporaries. Lanham, MD: 
University Press of America.
The contributors to this volume discuss the contributions that 
theologian Reinhold Niebuhr and such public ﬁ gures as John 
Foster Dulles, secretary of state under President Dwight D. Eisen-
hower, made to politics and political theory. Christian realists 
gained wide inﬂ uence among U.S. government ofﬁ cials and the 
intellectual elite from the 1930s through the early era of nuclear 
weapons development.
Prendergast, William B. 1999. The Catholic Voter in American 
Politics: The Passing of the Democratic Monolith. Washington 
DC: Georgetown University Press.
Prendergast traces the voting behavior of American Catholics, 
focusing on the shift of many such voters from the Democratic 
party to the Republican Party in recent decades. Among the 
explanations for this change in partisan loyalties that the author 
entertains are the passing of ﬁ rst-generation immigrants, the 
effects of Vatican II, and the greater receptiveness to Catholics in 
the Republican Party.
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.). 2006. The Presbyterian Handbook. 
Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox.
This guide to the Presbyterian Church contains a historical 
account of the development of the church in the United States and 
a detailed explanation of Presbyterian beliefs and the denomina-
tion’s understanding of the Christian life.
Prichard, Robert W. 1999. History of the Episcopal Church. 
Revised ed. Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse.
Prichard explores the 400-year history of the Episcopal Church, 
including the denomination’s development during such major 
events as the Great Awakening of the early eighteenth century, the 
American Revolution, the Civil War, the First and Second World 

284 Resources
Wars, and major social changes that occurred during the postwar 
era. The author treats the church’s challenges during the 1990s, 
including the renewal movement involving dissenters within the 
denomination, the issue of homosexuality, and the alterations in 
leadership.
Ratzinger, Joseph. 2006. Christianity and the Crisis of Cultures. 
Fort Collins, CO: Ignatius. 
Writing before his election to the papacy, Ratzinger discusses the 
crisis of culture he perceives in Europe and the rest of the West-
ern world. Among the dangers he associates with this crisis are 
threats to security, poverty, and genetic engineering. Ratzinger 
argues that the solution to the nihilistic secularism of the West is 
not politics but spiritual renewal.
Ratzinger, Joseph. 2006. Values in a Time of Upheaval. Fort Col-
lins, CO: Ignatius.
Ratzinger, who in 2005 became Pope Benedict XVI, discusses the 
relationship among religion, morality, culture, and politics in the 
contemporary world, defending the role that traditional Christian 
values still play in a multicultural era. The author covers such 
topics as morality in democratic societies, bioethics, and human 
rights and responsibilities.
Ratzinger, Joseph, and Marcello Pera. 2006. Without Roots: The 
West, Relativism, Christianity, Islam. Fort Collins, CO: Igna-
tius. 
In this dialogue, Ratzinger and Pera, president of the Italian sen-
ate, discuss whether a civilization can survive without a sense of 
the sacred. In May 2004 Ratzinger addressed the Italian senate, 
and Pera presented a lecture at the Lateran Pontiﬁ cal University. 
Both arrived at similar conclusions regarding the spiritual, cul-
tural, and political crises confronting Western civilization.
Ray, Darby Kathleen. 2006. Theology that Matters: Ecology, 
Economy, and God. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Ray argues that Christianity can contribute to resolving the prob-
lems of an increasingly global economy. The author investigates 
topics relevant to Christians as they relate to an increasingly secu-

Books 285
larized world, the globalization of economic activity, and threats 
to the environment.
Ray, Stephen G., Jr. 2002. Do No Harm: Social Sin and Christian 
Responsibility. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Ray contends that Christians must recognize the possible evil that 
their own theologies may unintentionally encourage. According 
to the author, theologians may describe socially relevant sin in 
racist, sexist, or anti-Semitic ways, thus exposing the social evils 
in their own thought and language. He examines the work of such 
Christian thinkers as Reinhold Neibuhr, Martin Luther, and John 
Calvin to illustrate the strengths as well as the weaknesses of tra-
ditional theological approaches.
Reichley, A. James. 2002. Faith in Politics. Washington DC: 
Brookings Institution.
Reichley provides an excellent overview of religious belief and 
political action in the United States. Individual chapters deal with 
differing value systems, the intentions and expectations of the 
founders, interpretations of the free exercise and establishment 
clauses of the First Amendment, the political engagement of vari-
ous religious groups in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, 
and the signiﬁ cance of religion to a democratic state.
Rogers, Jack. 2006. Jesus, the Bible, and Homosexuality: Explode 
the Myths, Heal the Church. Louisville, KY: Presbyterian Pub-
lishing Corporation.
Rogers argues that the church should be willing to ordain gays 
and lesbians and that homosexuals in American society should 
have equal rights. The author claims that—just like women, 
people of color, and divorced people—gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgender persons will gain a place within the church. Claim-
ing that the Bible does not condemn homosexuality, Rogers notes 
that, just as the church once used the Bible to justify slavery and 
the subordination of women, some today employ the scriptures to 
deny equal rights to gays and lesbians.
Roof, Wade Clark, and Mark Silk, eds. 2005. Religion and Public 
Life in the Paciﬁ c Region: Fluid Identities. Lanham, MD: Alta 
Mira.

286 Resources
The contributors to this volume emphasize the religious diversity 
of the region, which encompasses California, Nevada, and Hawaii. 
California is the home of Robert H. Schuller’s mega church, the 
Crystal Cathedral. Although afﬁ liated with the Reformed Church 
in America, Schuller is perhaps more representative of the vari-
ous innovative religious movements that characterize the region. 
Residents frequently shift religious afﬁ liation, often combining 
varied religious identities.
Roustang, François. 2006. Jesuit Missionaries to North America: 
Spiritual Writings and Biographical Sketches. Fort Collins, CO: 
Ignatius. 
Between 1632 and 1637, Jesuit missionaries arrived in North 
America, and for twenty years they brought the Catholic faith to 
the local population. Roustang provides accounts of eight men, 
presenting their backgrounds, personality traits, and missionary 
work, portraying them as heroes for withstanding the harsh con-
ditions of eastern Canada.
Schaller, Lyle E. 2005. A Mainline Turnaround: Strategies for Con-
gregations and Denominations. Nashville, TN: Abingdon.
Arguing that the structures of the mainline denominations were 
established for conditions that not longer exist, Schaller offers 
suggestions for these denominations to restructure themselves in 
order to respond to circumstances in a different era.
Sekulow, Jay Alan. 2005. Witnessing Their Faith: Religious Inﬂ u-
ence on Supreme Court Justices and Their Opinions. Blue Ridge 
Summit, PA: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld.
Sekulow, lead attorney for the American Center for Law and Jus-
tice, a conservative Christian legal advocacy group, investigates 
major Supreme Court cases that shaped the legal foundations of 
church-state relations, focusing on the religious beliefs and prac-
tices of the justices who ruled on each case.
Shattuck, Gardiner H. 2000. Episcopalians and Race: Civil War 
to Civil Rights. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
Shattuck investigates the post–Civil War relations between black 
communities and the white leadership of the Episcopal Church. 

Books 287
Focusing primarily on the 1950s and 1960s, the author discusses 
the effects of the civil rights movement on the denomination, 
especially in the Southern states, and contrasts the ofﬁ cial posi-
tion of the church hierarchy with actual practice.
Shipps, Jan, and Mark Silk, eds. 2004. Religion and Public Life 
in the Mountain West: Sacred Landscapes in Transition. Lanham, 
MD: Alta Mira.
The contributors to this volume note three fundamental religious 
inﬂ uences in this region: Catholicism, Mormonism, and pluralism, 
each having dominance in a portion of the region. For instance, 
in Arizona and New Mexico, Catholicism dominates the public 
expression of religion, and in Utah, Mormonism prevails. In other 
parts of the region, no religious group holds sway.
Smidt, Corwin E. 2004. Pulpit and Politics: Clergy in American 
Politics at the Advent of the Millennium. Waco, TX: Baylor Uni-
versity Press.
Based on data collected from the 2000 election, Smidt explores 
religious beliefs and political activities of U.S. clergy, includ-
ing mainline Protestant and Catholic clerics as well as religious 
leaders from African American, Baptist, and Jewish groups. The 
author investigates the reasons why religious leaders engage in 
political activity and how they do so.
Solomon, Lewis D. 2003. In God We Trust? Faith-Based Orga-
nizations and the Quest to Solve America’s Social Ills. Lanham, 
MD: Lexington Books.
Solomon examines faith-based organizations, religious groups 
to which the George W. Bush administration is offering grants to 
conduct various social welfare programs. The author investigates 
the constitutional law questions that have arisen over separation 
of church and state, the effectiveness of such organizations, and 
methods of funding and stafﬁ ng. He analyzes the arguments pre-
sented by opponents of faith-based funding.
Spong, John Shelby. 1998. Why Christianity Must Change or 
Die: A Bishop Speaks to Believers in Exile. New York: Harper 
San Francisco.

288 Resources
Spong presents a liberal Christian perspective on such topics as 
biblical interpretation, theism, understandings of Jesus, and moral-
ity. The author calls for critical thinking rather than blind faith and 
love rather than judgment as the necessary bases for a rejuvenated 
Christianity that can survive in the contemporary world.
Spong, John Shelby. 2005. The Sins of Scripture: Exposing the 
Bible’s Texts of Hate to Reveal the God of Love. New York: 
Harper San Francisco.
Spong, the retired Episcopal bishop of Newark, New Jersey, and 
a longtime advocate of liberal Christian beliefs, discusses biblical 
passages that he notes have been used to condemn, oppress, and 
discriminate against others. For instance, Spong declares that the 
Bible was used to support the divine right of kings, slavery and 
ultimately segregation, treating women as second-class citizens, 
and currently discrimination against gay and lesbian people.
Spong, John Shelby. 2007. Jesus for the Non-Religious. New 
York: Harper Collins.
Spong continues his attempt to revise traditional Christian beliefs, 
arguing for an understanding of Jesus that he hopes will tran-
scend narrow religious notions and appeal to people in differing 
cultural circumstances. The author rejects the accuracy of much of 
the biblical account of Jesus, including the miracle stories.
Steinfels, Peter. 2004. A People Adrift: The Crisis of the Roman 
Catholic Church in America. New York: Simon and Schuster.
A Catholic layman, Steinfels argues that the Catholic Church must 
institute fundamental reforms or else face serious decline. Point-
ing to well-known indicators such as the erosion of the number 
of priests and nuns, as well as the widespread sex abuse scandal, 
the author identiﬁ es a lack of strong leadership to maintain the 
church’s vital public role and to initiate internal change.
Stewart, Carlyle Fielding, III. 2003. Reclaiming What Was Lost: 
Unlocking Spiritual Vitality in the Mainline Church. Nashville, 
TN: Abingdon.
Discussing the difﬁ culties faced by mainline Protestant denomi-
nations, Stewart offers suggestions to congregations with regard 

Books 289
to involving laypeople in leadership, extending the church’s mis-
sion into the community, and presenting the biblical message to a 
skeptical population.
Strommen, Merton P. 2001. The Church and Homosexuality: 
Searching for a Middle Ground. Minneapolis: Kirk House.
Strommen suggests that churches adopt a compromise solution to 
the controversy over homosexuality in which individuals avoid 
extreme positions and instead engage in a discussion that both 
recognizes biblical authority and expresses love for those who 
have been discriminated against.
Swaine, Lucas. 2006. The Liberal Conscience: Politics and Prin-
ciple in a World of Religious Pluralism. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Focusing on the challenge that fundamentalist theocratic groups 
pose for liberal societies, Swaine attempts to demonstrate how 
such societies can develop political institutions that recognize 
the signiﬁ cance of freedom of conscience. The author suggests a 
legal standard that provides theocratic communities with a level 
of sovereignty within liberal democracies.
Taylor, Mark Lewis. 2001. The Executed God: The Way of the 
Cross in Lockdown America. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Noting that the prison population in the United States has 
increased to more than 2 million, Taylor decries the abuses and 
injustices he observes in the U.S. justice and prison system—
including racism, capital punishment, prison rape, and coercive 
policing techniques—and calls for effective and compassionate 
Christian action to transform the system.
Thistlewaite, Susan, ed. 2001. A Just Peace Church. Cleveland, 
OH: Pilgrim.
This volume resulted from the work of the Peace Theology Team, 
a group commissioned by the General Synod of the United Church 
of Christ to investigate the theological, political, and practical foun-
dations of becoming a church dedicated to peace. The contributors 
suggest ways in which the church can make the transformation.

290 Resources
Toulous, Mark G. 2006. God in Public: Four Ways American 
Christianity and Public Life Relate. Louisville, KY: Westminster 
John Knox.
Toulouse, a professor of American religious history at Brite Divin-
ity School, Texas Christian University, has investigated religious 
periodical literature and key events in U.S. history to clarify the 
varied modes of interaction between Christianity and public life 
in the United States. 
Townsend, Craig D. 2005. Faith in Their Own Color: Black Epis-
copalians in Antebellum New York City. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Townsend presents the history of St. Philip’s Church, the ﬁ rst 
African American Episcopal church in New York City. Founded 
in 1809, the church experienced the violence of antiabolitionists 
and the discrimination of the Episcopal Church before the congre-
gation ﬁ nally received ofﬁ cial recognition from a reluctant Episco-
pal Diocese of New York convention in 1853.
Trent, Mary Alice, Trevor Grizzle, Margaret Sehorn, Andrew 
Lang, and Elsa Rogers, eds. 2006. Religion, Culture, Curriculum, 
and Diversity in 21st Century America. Lanham, MD: University 
Press of America.
The ﬁ fteen essays in this volume explore issues of policy making 
with regard to diversity, including race, ethnicity, and disabilities, 
at institutions of Christian higher education. The contributors 
examine hiring practices as well as recruitment and retention poli-
cies for minority students and faculty.
Trexler, Edgar. 2003. High Expectations: Understanding the 
ELCA’s Early Years, 1988–2002. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress.
Trexler examines the ﬁ rst fourteen years of the Evangelical 
Lutheran Church in America, which was formed from the merger 
of three separate Lutheran bodies. Based on ofﬁ cial church docu-
ments, personal interviews, and published materials, this book 
contains discussions of the church’s efforts to establish its identity 
and to deal with such issues as ecumenism and sexuality.
Varacalli, Joseph A. 2006. The Catholic Experience in America. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood.

Books 291
Varacalli provides an overview of the Catholic Church in the 
United States, including discussions of Catholic theology and for-
mal organization; historical evolution of the church; difﬁ culties, 
including the sex abuse scandal, that the church currently faces; 
the diverse groups within the denomination; and key events such 
as the Second Vatican Council, which met in Rome from 1962 to 
1965. Appendixes include a glossary, a list of voluntary organiza-
tions, and a discussion and list of key church documents.
Wald, Kenneth D., and Allison Calhoun-Brown. 2006. Religion 
and Politics in the United States. 5th ed. Blue Ridge Summit, 
PA: Roman and Littleﬁ eld.
Wald analyzes the role religion plays in U.S. society and politics, 
detailing the relationship between religious beliefs and political 
issues, how religious groups and individuals have inﬂ uenced 
the development of the so-called culture war, and how religious 
beliefs affect political values.
Walker, Randi J. 2005. Evolution of a UCC Style. Cleveland, OH: 
Pilgrim.
From the varied origins of the United Church of Christ, including 
the heritage of the Reformation, the Enlightenment, and pietist 
inﬂ uences, Walker focuses on the guiding characteristics of the 
church as they have developed over time, as well as the tensions 
that remain.
Wall, John N. 2000. A Dictionary for Episcopalians. Revised ed. 
Cambridge, MA: Cowley.
This brief reference work includes explanations for the basic ter-
minology associated with the Episcopal Church, including the 
traditional creeds, church structure, ofﬁ cials and leaders, gover-
nance, interdenominational relations, worship practices, Chris-
tian symbolism, and church year festivals.
Walsh, Andrew, and Mark Silk, eds. 2004. Religion and Public 
Life in New England: Steady Habits, Changing Slowly. Lanham, 
MD: Alta Mira.
The contributors to this volume focus primarily on the tensions 
between the Protestant establishment, which traces its roots back 
to the colonial era, and the present Catholic majority. Catholics 

292 Resources
began immigrating to the region in the 1840s and soon came to 
challenge the traditional Protestant dominance. The authors dis-
cuss the possible future evolution of religious afﬁ liation in this 
region.
Webber, Christopher L. 1999. Welcome to the Episcopal Church: 
An Introduction to Its History, Faith, and Worship. Harrisburg, 
PA: Morehouse.
Webber, a parish priest in the Episcopal Church, presents a gen-
eral introduction to the denomination, including the following 
topics: historical development, worship traditions, fundamental 
beliefs, the signiﬁ cance of scripture, the organizational structure 
of the church, and its mission and outreach activities.
Wee, Paul A. 2006. American Destiny and the Calling of the 
Church. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress.
Wee discusses the historical background to the church’s contem-
porary role of criticizing the nation’s ideological understanding of 
its global status. Recognizing that the United States has assumed 
world leadership following the end of the Cold War and the ter-
rorist attacks of September 11, 2001, Wee argues that members of 
the church should provide an understanding of that role in the 
context of biblical and theological principles. The author focuses 
on the primary importance of the gospel, the role of the church 
in ministering to the world, and the need for the nation to act 
responsibly in the international realm.
Weigel, George. 2005. The Cube and the Cathedral: Europe, Amer-
ica, and Politics Without God. New York: Basic Books.
Weigel contrasts the traditional European civilization of the 
“cathedral” (represented by Notre Dame in Paris) with the mod-
ern secularized society represented by the “cube” (the Great Arch 
of La Défence, also in Paris). The future of European democra-
cies is threatened by the lack of religious presence in the public 
square. The author contrasts the condition of the United States 
with Europe, but argues that Americans ultimately may face simi-
lar threats to democratic values.
Weigel, George. 2005. God’s Choice: Pope Benedict XVI and the 
Future of the Catholic Church. Fort Collins, CO: Ignatius. 

Books 293
Weigel, biographer of Pope John Paul II, discusses the rise of Joseph 
Ratzinger as the new pontiff, Benedict XVI. Using interviews with 
those close to the new pope, he provides a personal account of 
Benedict and evaluates the status of the Catholic Church in the 
contemporary world and the role it will play in the future.
Welch, Sharon D. 2000. A Feminist Ethic of Risk. Revised ed. 
Minneapolis: Fortress.
Welch proposes a religious perspective for the attainment of 
social justice that can deal effectively with such problems as 
environmental degradation and racism. The author contrasts her 
approach of a feminist ethic to that of other current treatments of 
religious ethics.
West, Traci C. 2006. Disruptive Christian Ethics: When Racism 
and Women’s Lives Matter. Louisville, KY: Westminster John 
Knox.
West discusses racism and sexual aggression against women as 
violations of ethical, moral, and theological principles. She maps 
a course to fundamental social change through a detailed intel-
lectual examination of those principles. West provides concrete 
examples of women who have suffered prejudice and violation.
Westerhoff, John H., III. 2002. A People Called Episcopalians: A 
Brief Introduction to Our Peculiar Way of Life. Harrisburg, PA: 
Morehouse.
Westerhoff, an Episcopal priest, presents a short introduction to 
the Episcopal Church, explaining to Episcopalians themselves 
the nature of their denomination. The author investigates basic 
Episcopalian identity, including authority within the church, the 
Anglican Communion, spirituality, and the Episcopal political 
structure.
Wiehe, Philip. 2001. Ten Dumb Things Churches Do and How to 
Avoid Them. Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse.
Wiehe, an Episcopal priest for twenty-ﬁ ve years and subsequently 
a consultant to congregations, presents advice to local churches 
to assist them in becoming more effective representatives of the 
gospel message. The author focuses on ten “dumb things,” or 

294 Resources
mistakes, that congregations can make, including failing to con-
duct strategic planning, making poor decisions, and allowing 
internal conﬂ icts to arise.
Wilcox, David R. 2004. God and Evolution: A Faith-Based Per-
spective. Valley Forge, PA: Judson.
Wilcox argues that scripture and the natural world cannot conﬂ ict 
because both result from God’s actions. The author claims that 
the strong disagreement over evolution results from neglecting 
the boundaries of science and theology, and that no one needs 
to choose between God and science. Instead, people of faith can 
accept science as part of God’s divine plan for the universe.
Wilke, Richard B. 1986. And Are We Yet Alive? The Future of the 
United Methodist Church. Nashville, TN: Abingdon.
Citing loss of membership and a precipitous decline in church 
school attendance, Wilke claims that the United Methodist Church 
is a denomination in crisis. The author proposes steps that can be 
taken to reverse the trend, including examining the church’s value 
system, instituting more long-term pastorates, and restructuring 
the denominational organization.
Williams, Rowan. 2004. Anglican Identities. Cambridge, MA: 
Cowley.
Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams discusses the differ-
ing approaches to scripture, authority, and the Christian tradition 
of such Anglican ﬁ gures as William Tyndale, Richard Hooker, 
George Herbert, and B. F. Westcott. Williams notes the rich diver-
sity of these individuals, but also deals with the troubling ques-
tion of when such differences lead to the serious divisions.
Wilson, Charles Reagan, and Mark Silk, eds. 2005. Religion and 
Public Life in the South: In the Evangelical Mode. Lanham, MD: 
Alta Mira.
In this region of the United States, Christian evangelicals and 
more conservative congregations of the mainline churches tend to 
dominate. From the mid-nineteenth century to the present, evan-
gelicals, drawing from their interpretation of scripture, have often 
inﬂ uenced public policy. Although other religious groups com-

Books 295
pete for political and social inﬂ uence, the generally conservative 
nature of religious belief inﬂ uences the public debate of political 
issues.
Wimberly, Edward P. 2006. African American Pastoral Care and 
Counseling: The Politics of Oppression and Engagement. Cleve-
land, OH: Pilgrim.
Wimberly, an ordained elder in the United Methodist Church, 
contends that African American pastoral care and counseling are 
inherently political activities. The author discusses engaging in 
such counseling as a means of liberating individuals to become 
better able to act more effectively in their personal lives and in 
politics.
Wink, Walter, ed. 1999. Homosexuality and Christian Faith: Ques-
tions of Conscience for the Churches. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Protestant and Catholic as well as evangelical and mainline church 
leaders contribute to this volume about fundamental moral ques-
tions regarding homosexuality. The contributors, including Paul 
Egertson, William Sloane Cofﬁ n, and James A. Forbes, Jr., discuss 
such issues as biblical authority and the nature of homosexuality.
Winter, Gibson. 1996. America in Search of Its Soul. Harrisburg, 
PA: Morehouse.
Concerned with the level of violence in the United States, Winter 
urges the church to play a role in saving young people from the 
dangers of violence. The author delves into the history of violence 
in the United States, including slavery, the treatment of Native 
Americans, and participation in various wars. Winter investigates 
the activities of several religious movements that have attempted 
to ameliorate the consequences of violence.
Witte, John, Jr., and Frank S. Alexander. 2005. The Teachings of 
Modern Christianity on Law, Politics, and Human Nature. 2 vols. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
This volume contains the writings of twenty major Christian think-
ers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries—including Dorothy 
Day, Reinhold Niebuhr, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Pope John 
Paul II—and analyses of those writings. The editors have divided 

296 Resources
the work into three sections: the Roman Catholic tradition, the 
Protestant tradition, and the Orthodox tradition.
Wuthnow, Robert. 2005. America and the Challenges of Religious 
Diversity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Employing data from a nationwide survey, including many in-
depth interviews, Wuthnow investigates the ways in which 
Christians are adapting to the new diversity in American society. 
The author identiﬁ es three orientations for Christian beliefs and 
practices: “spiritual shopping,” involving the willingness to bor-
row from various traditions; “Christian inclusivism,” maintain-
ing Christian beliefs but respecting other religious traditions; and 
“Christian exclusivism,” rejecting the validity of other religions.
Wuthnow, Robert, ed. 2006. Encyclopedia of Politics and Reli-
gion. 2 Volumes. Washington DC: CQ Press.
This extensive two-volume work of more than 1,000 pages pre-
sents a wealth of information about the relationship between reli-
gion and politics in various cultures around the world. The entries 
examine the history of that relationship and contemporary topics 
such as creationism versus evolution, the conservative Christian 
movement in the United States, and European Islam. An appendix 
contains documents relevant to the relationship between religion 
and politics. The book is helpful in providing a context in which 
to study religion and politics in the United States.
Yamane, David. 2005. The Catholic Church in State Politics: 
Negotiating Prophetic Demands and Political Realities. Blue 
Ridge Summit, PA: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld.
Yamane examines the history of the political advocacy efforts of 
American Catholic bishops at the state and local levels. Focusing 
on thirty-three states and Washington DC, the author details the 
activities of Catholic organizations and the strains created between 
religious principles and the demands of secular politics.
Yrigoyen, Charles, Jr., and Susan E. Warrick, eds. 2005. Histori-
cal Dictionary of Methodism. 2nd ed. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow.
This book contains more than 400 entries on various aspects of the 
Methodist denomination in the United States and around the world, 

including the social and charitable activities of the church and the 
denomination’s involvement in the ecumenical movement.
Periodicals
The following periodicals primarily represent the communication 
between the mainline denomination organizations and the mem-
bers. These publications offer information and articles regarding 
church activities, theological and biblical interpretation, Christian 
ethics, and issues of concern both within the denomination and in 
the society generally.
America
106 West 56th Street
New York, NY 10019-3803
(800) 627-9533
www.americamagazine.org
Weekly. $48.
This Catholic periodical contains current news stories on such 
topics as the activities of the pope, the continuing terrorist threat 
that Al Qaeda poses, and the debate over the use of torture. The 
magazine also includes articles on religious topics, editorials on 
current public policy, and reviews of books related to religion.
The Christian Century
104 S. Michigan Ave.
Suite 700 
Chicago, IL 60603
(312) 263-7510
www.christiancentury.org
26 issues per year. $49.
Founded in 1884 as The Christian Oracle, a Disciples of Christ 
publication, and renamed in 1900, The Christian Century became 
an independent magazine supporting the progressive Christian 
perspective. Today the magazine remains the major nondenomi-
national publication reﬂ ecting the views of mainline Protestant 
denominations. The magazine publishes articles on political and 
cultural topics as well as theology.
Periodicals 297

298 Resources
Church Herald
4500 60th Street SE
Grand Rapids, MI 49512
(616) 698-7071
www.herald@rca.org
11 times per year. $20.
The Reformed Church in America sends the Church Herald to 
each member household. The magazine reports on and promotes 
the ministries of the RCA, provides information to encourage 
Christian leadership and educate readers about the mission of 
the church, and offers a forum for discussion of the policies and 
actions of the RCA within the church and in the larger society.
Crisis
1814 ½ N Street NW
Washington DC 20036
(800) 852-9962
www.crisismagazine.com
10 issues per year. $24.97.
This magazine reports on and interprets contemporary political 
and cultural events from the perspective of the Catholic tradition 
and is dedicated to offering a Christian humanist answer to the 
problems of the modern world.
Disciples World
6325 North Guilford Avenue, Suite 213
Indianapolis, IN 46220
(317) 375-8849
www.disciplesworld.com
10 issues per year. $25.
A publication of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), this 
journal includes news items, opinion pieces, commentary on such 
topics as church history and current issues of faith, book reviews, 
and Bible study.
Ecumenical Courier
United States Conference for the World Council of Churches
475 Riverside Drive, Room 1371
New York, NY 10115

www.wcc-usa.org
Quarterly. Available online.
This publication of the United States Conference for the World 
Council of Churches provides information about the involve-
ment of member denominations in the United States in the World 
Council of Churches, reporting on highlights of U.S. Conference 
meetings.
Episcopal Life
P.O. Box 2050
Voorhees, NJ 08043-8000
www.episcopal-life.org
Monthly. $18.
This publication of the Episcopal Church contains articles on the 
activities of various groups within the denomination, the church’s 
mission in the United States and around the world, and plans for 
the future of the Episcopal Church.
First Things
P.O. Box 401
Mt. Morris, IL 61054
(877) 905-9920
www.ﬁ rstthings.com
10 issues per year. $39.
This journal is published by the Institute on Religion and Pub-
lic Life, a nondenominational and nonpartisan research institute 
dedicated to promoting a religiously oriented public philosophy 
relevant to a well-ordered society. The publication contains arti-
cles on such topics as immigration, international relations, and 
religious freedom.
Journal of the Academy of Religion
Oxford University Press
2001 Evans Road
Cary, NC 27513
www.jaar.oxfordjournals.org
Quarterly. $159.
Each issue of this journal contains scholarly articles on subjects 
dealing with various religions around the world. Recent articles 
Periodicals 299

300 Resources
have dealt with such topics as the Catholic Worker Movement, the 
Pledge of Allegiance, liberal humanism, and religion and violence.
The Lutheran
Augsburg Fortress Press
P.O. Box 1553
Minneapolis, MN 55440-8730
www.thelutheran.org
Monthly. $15.95.
This magazine, published by the Evangelical Lutheran Church 
in America, “nurtures awareness of Christ’s presence in our lives 
and the world, shares stories of God’s people living their faith, 
connects us with the global Christian community, provides an 
open forum for discussion, [and] challenges us to bring God’s 
grace and care to all.” Among the columns is a regular contribu-
tion by the ELCA presiding bishop.
Lutheran Partners
8765 West Higgins Road
Chicago, IL 60631
www.elca.org/lutheranpartners
Bimonthly. $12.50.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America publishes this 
magazine for the denomination’s pastors and lay leaders. The 
magazine includes articles on such topics as methods of church 
outreach and evangelism, Christian education, and applying faith 
to the world. Also included are book and video reviews.
Lutheran Quarterly
www.lutheranquarterly.com
Four times per year. $30.
This journal of the Evangelical Lutheran Church offers discus-
sions of historical and theological topics. Contributors focus on 
the Christian faith from the Lutheran perspective, apply Lutheran 
principles to the problems of society, and promote understanding 
between Lutherans and other Christian denominations.
National Catholic Register
www.ncregister.com
Biweekly. $24.95.

This periodical provides news reporting from a Catholic perspec-
tive. Stories covered have included the aftermath of Hurricane 
Katrina, the Terri Schiavo case in the context of the debate over 
euthanasia and assisted suicide, the U.S. invasion of Iraq, and 
homosexuality among Catholic priests. The magazine also con-
tains reports on the arts and book reviews.
Presbyterians Today
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.)
100 Witherspoon Street
Louisville, KY 40202
www.pcusa.org/today
Monthly. $19.95.
This publication of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) contains 
articles on such topics as religious art, the activities of the church 
to alleviate the effects of hunger and violent conﬂ ict around the 
world, and ecumenical outreach. Also included are reports on 
church meetings and a question-and-answer column dealing with 
biblical and theological topics.
Prism
United Church Press
Cleveland, OH
www.unitedchurchpress.com
Twice each year. $12.
This periodical, issued by the United Church of Christ, provides 
a forum for discussing theological questions. Contributors offer 
diverse viewpoints on questions of faith and the mission and min-
istry of the denomination.
Religion in the News
Leonard E. Greenberg Center for the Study of Religion 
in Public Life
Trinity College
300 Summit Street
Hartford, CT 06106
http://www.trincoll.edu/depts./csrpl/default.htm
Three times each year. Free on request.
This quarterly publication provides summaries of news accounts 
that have relevance to religious organizations and activities. 
Periodicals 301

302 Resources
Authors present the views of news outlets on such recent topics 
as the controversy over the election of an openly gay bishop in the 
Episcopal Church and the election of Joseph Ratzinger as Pope 
Benedict XVI.
Review of Faith and International Affairs
Council on Faith and International Affairs
Institute for Global Engagement
P.O. Box 14477
Washington DC 20044
www.cﬁ a.org
Quarterly. $25.
This journal is devoted to investigating the interrelationship 
between religion and international relations. Articles deal with 
such topics as the relevance of religious belief and values to for-
eign aid, liberal democracy, and peacemaking. The publication 
includes reviews of books on religion and foreign policy.
U.S. Catholic
205 West Monroe
Chicago, IL 60606
(800) 328-6515
www.uscatholic.claretians.org 
Twelve issues per year. $12.
This magazine is published by the Claretians, a Catholic religious 
community of priests and brothers. The publication attempts to 
provide guidance to Catholics by discussing the religious tradi-
tion of the denomination in the context of the difﬁ culties of con-
temporary life.
Audiotapes, Videotapes, 
CDs, and DVDs
Bill Moyers on Faith and Reason
Type: 
DVD
Length: 
7 hrs.
Cost: 
$959.95
Date: 
2006

Source: 
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
 
P.O. Box 2053
 
Princeton, NJ 08543-2053
 
(800) 257-5126
 
www.ﬁ lms.com
In this twelve-part presentation, Bill Moyers discusses the impact 
of religion on the contemporary world with such noted writers 
as Salman Rushdie, Colin McGinn, Jeanette Winterson, Margaret 
Atwood, Richard Rodriguez, and John Houghton.
Call Me Malcolm
Type: 
DVD
Length: 
90 min.
Cost: 
$39
Date: 
2004 
Source: 
United Church Press
 
Cleveland, OH 
This ﬁ lm explores the discovery of personal identity and trans-
gender issues by presenting an account of Malcolm E. Himschoot, 
a United Church of Christ seminary student who struggles with 
his faith and gender identity.
Christianity in World History Series
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
200 min.
Cost: 
$319.95
Date: 
2002
Source: 
Teacher’s Media Company
 
P.O. Box 9120
 
Plainview, NY 11803-9020
 
(800) 262-8837
 
www.teachersmediacompany.com
This series of eight videos explores the history of Christianity 
from its origins to the present. Individual tapes treat Christianity 
in medieval Europe; European developments from the Reforma-
tion to the twentieth century; and traditions in North America, 
Asia, and Africa. 
Convictions: Prisoners of Conscience
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
20 min.
Audiotapes, Videotapes, CDs, and DVDs 303

304 Resources
Cost: 
$14.95
Date: 
2004
Source: 
Maryknoll Productions
 
Walsh Building, Box 308
 
Maryknoll, NY 10545-0308
 
(914) 941-7636, ext. 2558
 
www.maryknollmall.org
This video presents the story of those who protested the Pentagon-
supported School of the Americas during an annual vigil outside 
Fort Benning, Georgia, in November 2003. The protesters objected 
to U.S.-supported militarization in Latin America.
Dealing with Tough Issues as Christians
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
58 min.
Cost: 
$19.95
Date: 
2006
Source: 
Augsburg Fortress
 
P.O. Box 1209
 
Minneapolis, MN 55440-1209
 
(800) 328-4648
 
 www.augsburgfortress.org/store/item.asp?clsid
=184396&productgroupid=0
This video is meant to encourage discussion of issues, such as abor-
tion and homosexuality, about which congregation members are 
likely to disagree. The program is organized into four segments: 
sharing experiences, searching for common understanding, seek-
ing biblical guidance, and acting on conclusions. Intended for use 
in small groups, the video includes a leader guide.
Faith and Community: Models of Metropolitan Ministry
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
N/A 
Cost: 
$34.95
Date: 
2003
Source: 
Augsburg Fortress
 
P.O. Box 1209
 
Minneapolis, MN 55440-1209
 
(800) 328-4648
 
www.augsburgfortress.org

This program explores the ways in which U.S. congregations are 
creating metropolitan networks in novel ways in cooperation with 
other congregations and organizations. Emphasis is placed on 
selecting the most appropriate model for speciﬁ c circumstances.
Faith, Politics, and Tradition
Type: 
DVD and VHS
Length: 
26 min.
Cost: 
$129.95
Date: 
2003
Source: 
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
 
P.O. Box 2053
 
Princeton, NJ 08543-2053
 
(800) 257-5126
 
www.ﬁ lms.com
This program explores the possibility of conforming religious 
belief with contemporary society. Archbishop of Canterbury 
Rowan Williams holds that religion must alter the mode of com-
municating its message in order to reach a modern audience, 
while conservative historian Jonathan Clark recommends oppos-
ing the trends of modernity. Shaykh Hamza Ysuf, Islamic adviser 
to President George W. Bush, contends that, despite Muslims’ tol-
erance toward Christianity, the West refuses to accept Islam.
Faultlines: The Search for Political and Religious Links—U.S.A.
Type: 
DVD
Length: 
34 min.
Cost: 
$159
Date: 
2003
Source: 
Insight Media
 
2162 Broadway
 
New York, NY 10024-0621
 
(800) 233-9910
 
www.insight-media.com
John McCarthy examines the relationship between religion and 
politics in the United States, focusing on such issues as faith-based 
initiatives and the establishment clause of the First Amendment.
Interfaith Listening Pilot Project
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
37 min.
Periodicals 305

306 Resources
Cost: 
$9.95
Date: 
2002
Source: 
 Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) Multimedia 
Resources
 
100 Witherspoon Street
 
Louisville, KY 40202
 
(888) 728-7228, ext. 5210
 
www.btrinkle@ctr.pcusa.org
This video recounts the 2002 Interfaith Listening Pilot Project, in 
which eighteen Christians and Muslims from around the world 
visited the United States to meet in two-member teams with U.S. 
congregations to hold discussions and encourage interfaith listen-
ing as a way of promoting peace.
Introduction to the Word Alone Network
Type: 
DVD, VHS
Length: 
30 min.
Date: 
2005
Cost: 
$10 (DVD); $8 (VHS)
Source: 
Word Alone Network
 
2299 Palmer Drive, Suite 220
 
New Brighton, MN 55112
 
(888) 551-7254
 
www.wordalone.org
Mark Chavez, an Evangelical Lutheran Church in America 
(ELCA) pastor and director of the Word Alone Network (WAN), 
explains why a group of Lutheran pastors decided to form the 
WAN. Chavez afﬁ rms that the purpose of the organization is to 
return the ELCA to the confessional Lutheran foundations of the 
sixteenth-century Reformation, which he considers threatened by 
more recent trends in the denomination, including the approval in 
1999 of a full communion agreement with the Episcopal Church.
John Paul II: The Millennial Pope
Type: 
DVD, VHS
Length: 
150 min.
Cost: 
$19.98 (DVD); $14.95 (VHS)
Date: 
1999
Source: 
PBS Video
 
2100 Crystal Drive
 
Arlington, VA 22202-3785

 
(800) 344-3337
 
www.shopPBS.com
This program highlights the great inﬂ uence that Pope John Paul II 
had over the Catholic Church and world leaders on human rights 
and social justice issues, tracing his life from the Second World 
War to the fall of communism (for which he is given some credit) 
and beyond.
One Lord, One Faith . . . Many Churches: The Search 
for Christian Unity
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
55 min.
Cost: 
$39.95
Date: 
N/A 
Source: 
 Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) Multimedia 
Resources
 
 
100 Witherspoon Street
 
 
Louisville, KY 40202
 
 
(888) 728-7228, ext. 5210
 
www.btrinkle@ctr.pcusa.org
Produced for adult study groups, this video, in ﬁ ve twelve-min-
ute segments, examines how various denominations may come to 
agreement on the issues that continue to divide them. The video 
package includes a study guide containing an overview of the 
content and suggested discussion questions.
The Politics of Gay Marriage and Abortion Rights
Type: 
DVD and VHS
Length: 
22 min.
Cost: 
$89.95
Date: 
2004
Source: 
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
 
 
P.O. Box 2053
 
 
Princeton, NJ 08543-2053
 
 
(800) 257-5126
 
www.ﬁ lms.com
Broadcast prior to the 2004 presidential election, this ABC News 
program investigates the controversy over same-gender mar-
riage in Massachusetts and then reports on a Catholic bishop in 
Colorado who announced that anyone who votes for an abortion 
Audiotapes, Videotapes, CDs, and DVDs 307

308 Resources
rights or gay marriage supporter should refrain from participat-
ing in the sacrament of communion.
Pope John Paul II: Builder of Bridges
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
58 min.
Cost: 
$2.99
Date: 
2005
Source: 
The Video Collection
 
 
P. O. Box 2284
 
South Burlington, VT 05407-2284 
The video recounts the many peacemaking trips that Pope John 
Paul II made in order to mend the conﬂ icts between the Catho-
lic Church and other Christian as well as non-Christian religions. 
The pontiff visited England to meet with Anglican Church lead-
ers, traveled to Eastern Orthodox countries, entered a mosque 
to open a conversation with Muslims, and visited German con-
centration camps and the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem in order to 
improve Christian-Jewish relations.
The Presbyterians Part II: History and Tradition
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
55 min.
Cost: 
$19.95
Date: 
N/A
Source: 
 Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) Multimedia 
Resources
  
100 Witherspoon Street
  
Louisville, KY 40202
  
(888) 728-7228, ext. 5210
  
www.btrinkle@ctr.pcusa.org
This second installment in a ﬁ ve-part series examines the origins 
and development of the PCUSA from immigration from Scotland 
to North America through the American Revolution and the cre-
ation of the United States to recent ecumenical efforts and chal-
lenges for the future.
The Presbyterians Part IV: Polity
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
17 min.
Cost: 
$19.95

Date: 
N/A
Source: 
 Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) Multimedia 
Resources
 
100 Witherspoon Street
 
Louisville, KY 40202
 
(888) 728-7228, ext. 5210
 
www.btrinkle@ctr.pcusa.org
This video examines the governing structure and activities of 
the PCUSA. Viewers are shown scenes from various denomina-
tional meetings, including the General Assembly, to demonstrate 
how the church members interact and make decisions about the 
PCUSA’s mission.
Religion, War, and Violence: The Ethics of War and Peace
Type: 
DVD and VHS
Length: 
91 min.
Cost: 
 $159.95 (DVD); $169.95 (VHS); $79.98 (Digital 
On-Demand)
Date: 
2002
Source: 
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
 
P.O. Box 2053
 
Princeton, NJ 08543-2053
 
(800) 257-5126
 
www.ﬁ lms.com
The segments in this program, selected from Religion and Ethics 
Newsweekly, include discussions among scholars and religious 
leaders from various religious communities on such topics as 
terrorism and its causes, just war doctrine, holy war, and paci-
ﬁ sm. Interspersed with the panel discussions is footage of actual 
conﬂ icts.
Sacred Covenants, Faithful Conversations
Type: 
DVD
Length: 
N/A 
Cost: 
$20
Date: 
2005
Source: 
United Church Press
 
Cleveland, OH
Based on the resolution, “Equal Marriage Rights for All,” passed 
at the twenty-ﬁ fth General Synod of the United Church of Christ, 
Audiotapes, Videotapes, CDs, and DVDs 309

310 Resources
this presentation explores the meaning of Christian marriage, the 
role of the church and the state in marriage, and the blessing of 
unions of same-gender couples.
Shalom: A Study of the Biblical Concept of Peace
Type: 
CD-ROM
Length: 
N/A
Cost: 
$19.95
Date: 
2003
Source: 
Augsburg Fortress
 
P. O. Box 1209
 
Minneapolis, MN 55440-1209
 
www.augsburgfortress.org
Maintaining the primary importance of peacemaking for the 
church in the contemporary world, Old Testament scholar Donald 
E. Gowan explores the meanings of peace within a biblical con-
text and the notion’s relevance today. The program includes study 
guidelines, questions for discussion, and issues for further study.
So Send I You: A Mission Yearbook Video
Type: 
DVD
Length: 
20 min.
Cost: 
$14.95
Date: 
2006
Source: 
Presbyterian Distribution Service
 
100 Witherspoon Street
 
Louisville, KY 40202
 
(800) 524-2612
 
www.pcusa.org/media/socialjustice.htm
Intended as a teaching tool about the mission of the Presbyterian 
Church (U.S.A.), this video documents the church’s congregations, 
presbyteries, and synods, and General Assembly involvement in 
various assistance projects in the United States and around the 
world.
200 Years of Presbyterian Women
Type: 
VHS
Length: 
55 min.
Cost: 
$19.95
Date: 
N/A 

Source: 
 Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) Multimedia 
Resources
 
100 Witherspoon Street
 
Louisville, KY 40202
 
(888) 728-7228, ext. 5210
 
www.btrinkle@ctr.pcusa.org
This video offers an introduction to the history of women in the 
Presbyterian Church, beginning 200 years ago when Presbyterian 
women ﬁ rst met for prayer and to contribute money for church 
activities.
Wrap Up: General Synod 25
Type: 
DVD
Length: 
N/A 
Cost: 
$19.95
Date: 
2004
Source: 
United Church Press
 
Cleveland, OH
The program offers various views of the United Church of Christ’s 
twenty-ﬁ fth General Synod meeting. Among the events treated 
are the plenary session discussion and vote on a marriage equal-
ity resolution and John Thomas’s statement at a press conference 
following the session.
Internet Sources
Advocacy
www.elca.org/advocacy
The Web site, maintained by the Evangelical Lutheran Church in 
America, contains updated material regarding events and issues of 
concern to the denomination, such as immigration reform, efforts 
to end poverty, assistance to U.S. farmers, and the Arab-Israeli 
conﬂ ict. The site offers advice to congregations regarding political 
activities in which they lawfully can engage.
beliefnet
www.beliefnet.com
This site contains information for people of many faiths, includ -
ing Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Buddhism, and Hinduism. 
Internet Sources 311

312 Resources
In formation is provided about religious doctrine and practices, 
inspiration, news, interviews with public personalities, and advice 
about personal relationships.
The Catholic Goldmine
www.catholicgoldmine.com
The site provides links to many other Catholic-afﬁ liated sites, 
including those dealing with pro-life advocacy, general news, his-
tory, education, and church affairs.
Catholic.net
www.catholic.net/index.phtml
This Web site contains various news accounts relevant to Catho-
lics, including such topics as Pope Benedict’s overtures to Muslim 
leaders, the mass media, the political activity of Catholics, and 
pro-life commitments.
Church Herald
www.herald.rca.org
The Reformed Church in America maintains the Church Herald 
Web site to communicate news that is of interest to RCA mem-
bers and to provide the opportunity to discuss issues facing the 
church. The site provides an archive of articles from the print ver-
sion of the magazine. 
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America Electronic Bookshelf
www.elca.org/library/bookshelf/index.html
This site provides links to various Internet sites on such topics as 
Christian ethics, religious journals, creeds and confessions of vari-
ous Christian denominations, sources of research on religion, and 
materials on the world religions.
For Denominations
www.forministry.com/proﬁ le/ChurchSearch.cfm
This site is a directory of various religious denominations in the 
United States, including the mainline churches.
Journal of Lutheran Ethics
www.elca.org/jle

This online publication of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in 
America is dedicated to the study and discussion of Christian 
ethics from a Lutheran perspective. Topics include the biblical 
and theological basis and history of ethics; contemporary ethical 
issues; the church’s role in social witness; and living a life appro-
priate for a Christian calling as a family member, citizen, worker, 
and church member or pastor.
Lutheran Partners
www.elca.org/lutheranpartners/archives
This site contains archived articles from the periodical Lutheran 
Partners. Among the topics indexed are church history, death and 
dying, poverty and hunger ministries, sexuality, science and tech-
nology, community development, and sexual abuse prevention.
Ofﬁ cial Denominational Web Sites–Hartford Institute for 
Religion Research
www.hirr.hartsem.edu/org/faith_denominations_homepages
.html
This site contains an extensive list of denominations in the United 
States, with links to individual churches within each denom ination.
Papal and Episcopal Documents Relating to Catholic Social 
Justice Teaching
www.justpeace.org/docu.htm
This site provides access to statements that popes, church coun-
cils, national bishops’ conferences, and individual bishops have 
made on questions of social justice. Included are the speeches and 
encyclicals of Pope John Paul II.
Religion Databases
www.berkleycenter.georgetown.edu/database
These four databases (Religious Perspectives, Religion and Devel-
opment, Faith 2008, and World Events) , made available through 
the Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs at 
Georgetown University, provide a wealth of sources on the ethi-
cal approaches of different religious traditions.
Religion On-Line
www.religion-online.org
Internet Sources 313

314 Resources
This site provides access to more than 5,700 articles and book 
chapters on religion and its relation to the larger society. Among 
the topics listed are capitalism versus communism, ecology and 
the environment, pornography, public education, death and dying, 
ecumenism, abortion, economic justice, civil rights, and liberalism 
and conservatism.
Routledge Religion Resources
www.reference.routledge.com/public
The Taylor and Francis Group makes this resource available 
online for a base charge of $1,350. The site includes more than 
14,000 entries included in encyclopedias on such topics as religion 
and war, ethics, religious freedom, Protestantism, the papacy, and 
African American religion.
UMNS Weekly Digest
www.umns.umc.org
The United Methodist News Service maintains this site to pro-
vide a digest of news items relevant to the members and clergy 
of the United Methodist Church. News stories treat such topics as 
ecumenical contacts between the UMC and other denominations, 
missionary activities in the United States and other parts of the 
world, and statements on public policy issues.
Virtual Religion Index
www.virtualreligion.net/vri
This resource provides a wealth of links to other Web sites on vari-
ous topics relevant to the study of religion, including academic 
sites, religious organizations, ethics and moral values, the history 
of Christianity, philosophy and theology, and the psychology of 
religion.
Wabash Center Guide to Internet Resources
www.wabashcenter.wabash.edu/resources/guide_headings
.aspx
This site provides an annotated guide to Internet resources for 
those engaged in the study of religion. Among the topics listed 
are religion and science; women and religion; various religions 
around the world; the history of Christianity; religion and 

politics; social issues such as abortion, capital punishment, vio-
lence, and the environment; and ofﬁ cial Web sites of religious 
organizations.
Web Links, Department of Religious Studies, Saint Mary’s 
College
www.saintmarys.edu/~incandel/funweb.html
This site offers links to various Catholic Web sites, including 
those focusing on Catholic beliefs, theology, religious education, 
the Vatican and papal encyclicals, and U.S. foreign policy in the 
Middle East.
Internet Sources 315


317
Glossary
Anglican Communion The international group of churches that are 
associated with the Church of England under the spiritual guidance of 
the Archbishop of Canterbury. Every ten years, each member church 
sends representatives to the Lambeth Conference.
bioethics The ethical, moral, and theological evaluation of biologi-
cal research and medical treatment in the context of personal as well as 
col lective political and legal decision making. Mainline denominations 
have devoted attention to various aspects of medical research and proce-
dure, including embryonic stem-cell research and its promise of provid-
ing treatments for debilitating and fatal diseases, abortion, euthanasia 
and physician-assisted suicide, and the best use of limited health care 
resources. An important question within such investigations is whether 
ethical questions can always be resolved or whether there can be ethical 
dilemmas in which no one morally best solution arises.
Called to Common Mission The agreement of full communion between 
the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the Episcopal 
Church, which went into effect in 1999. The two denominations reached 
accord on doctrines of faith, recognition of each other’s churches and 
clergy, and sharing in the ordination of future bishops. Dissenters in the 
ELCA who opposed the agreement quickly formed the Word Alone Net-
work to express their continuing dissent.
capital punishment Also referred to as the death penalty, this public 
policy involves the execution of a person convicted of certain serious 
crimes such as murder. Several mainline denominations have stated ofﬁ -
cially their opposition to capital punishment, although it appears that 
the rank-and-ﬁ le membership of these churches are more divided on the 
issue, with greater proportions supporting the death penalty, particularly 
for especially heinous crimes. The United States Conference of Catholic 
Bishops, emphasizing the “seamless garment of life,” opposes any action 
that devalues the worth of human life, and other mainline denomina-

318 Glossary
tions support demonstrations against capital punishment at the time of 
scheduled executions.
catholic This word, meaning “general” or “universal,” when capital-
ized usually refers to the church governed spiritually by the pope in the 
Vatican. When not capitalized, the term refers to the notion of a univer-
sal Christian church. In mainline church creeds, such as the Apostle’s 
Creed, reference is made to the “catholic church,” which signiﬁ es what 
the church always has believed and should continue to believe.
celibacy Within the Catholic Church, the vow taken by men and women 
entering professional church service as priests or nuns that they will 
refrain from marriage or sexual intercourse. In contrast, the main line 
Protestant churches require that pastors limit sexual intimacy to mar-
riage between one man and one woman, although some denominations 
have considered broadening this limitation to “committed relationships” 
that include two people of the same gender. Those Catholics critical of 
the celibacy rule note that it has reduced the pool of candidates, becom-
ing the single most important variable determining who will enter the 
priesthood.
charismatic movement A phenomenon in Catholic and mainline 
Prot estant churches begun in the 1960s that emphasizes such divinely 
inspired gifts (charisms) as speaking in tongues and faith healing. 
Adher ents believe that, like early Christians, God blesses believers 
today with these abilities, which are described in the New Testament 
(I Corinthians 12:4-11). Some in mainline denominations have frowned 
on these practices, saying that they can cause divisions within congrega-
tions between those who claim to have the gifts and those who do not.
civil disobedience The public and nonviolent refusal to obey laws con-
sidered to be unjust or immoral. During the civil rights movement in the 
1950s and 1960s, many mainline Protestant pastors, Catholic priests, and 
laypeople engaged in civil disobedience in the effort to bring an end to 
segregation and achieve equal treatment for all people. During the Viet-
nam War era many mainline church members engaged in protest dem-
onstrations. Notable ﬁ gures such as Daniel and Patrick Berrigan, both 
Catholic priests, and William Sloane Cofﬁ n, Jr., a Presbyterian minister 
and chaplain at Yale University, took part in such demonstrations, invit-
ing arrest. These and other religious ﬁ gures later became involved in a 
campaign against the production of nuclear weapons that involved civil 
disobedience. Following the Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade (1973) 
legalizing abortion, many Catholics and evangelical Christians took part 
in demonstrations at abortion clinics and invited arrest.
civil religion The term involves the use of religious symbolism to 
explain and justify national objectives and purpose. Civil religion in the 

Glossary 319
United States provides an overall set of values to people of varying beliefs 
that supports such goals as justice and equal regard for all. However, a 
nationalistic version of civil religion can involve identifying God with 
the country and hence provide support for intolerance of differing beliefs 
within the nation and aggressive actions internationally.
classis Originating in the Latin word for “ﬂ eet,” a term used in the 
Reformed Church in America to refer to several churches in a geographic 
territory, each one containing at least one minister and one elder who 
have an equal vote in all deliberations. The classis has jurisdiction over 
the work of the church in its geographic boundary, including the calling 
and dismissing of ministers.
culture war The conﬂ ict over differing perceptions of American society 
beginning in the 1960s and intensifying in subsequent years. Disagree-
ments, distinguished generally between more conservative and more lib-
eral elements of society, revolved around such issues as feminism, how 
homosexuality is to be regarded, afﬁ rmative action policies, curriculum 
in the public schools and higher education, and political correctness. The 
culture war raged not only between mainline denominations and more 
conservative evangelical churches but within the mainline denominations 
over such issues as the blessing of same-gender unions; the ordination of 
women and gay pastors; and public policy positions on such issues as 
military spending, environmentalism, economic justice, and abortion.
diocese Within the Catholic and Episcopal churches, the geographical 
area consisting of several local parishes that constitutes the basic unit 
of church organization. A bishop oversees each diocese. In the Catho-
lic Church, the pope appoints bishops, but in the Episcopal Church, a 
dio cesan convention elects a bishop who is then ratiﬁ ed by vote at the 
General Convention, held every three years. In the Catholic Church, 
especially large or historically important dioceses are designated arch-
dioceses and are headed by an archbishop.
double effect The doctrine that an action that brings about some harm, 
foreseen but not intended, is permissible as the consequence of achiev-
ing some good result. One example of the double effect is administering 
drugs to terminally ill patients that alleviate pain but that also hasten 
death. Theologians and philosophers have debated the adequacy of the 
principle in explaining why certain actions are considered permissible.
ecumenism Derived from the Greek word oikoumene, which means 
“inhabited world,” this term refers to efforts, especially prevalent in the 
mainline denominations, to achieve greater unity of understanding and 
doctrine among Christian churches. The push toward ecumenism has 
resulted in several interdenominational organizations, including the 
World Council of Churches, founded in 1948; the National Council of 

320 Glossary
Churches, founded in 1950; and Christian Churches Together in the 
U.S.A., formed in 2006. More conservative churches tend to avoid engag-
ing in ecumenical dialogue with other denominations.
embryonic stem cells Undifferentiated cells from fertilized embryos 
that have been donated from in vitro fertilization clinics to be used in 
medical research. Researchers are enthusiastic about the possibility that 
stem cells, which can develop into various types of cells in the human 
body, can be used in medical procedures, including the treatment of 
deadly and debilitating diseases. Mainline denominations have expressed 
concern about the use of embryonic stem cells in research because the 
embryos from which they are derived are destroyed. Although the Cath-
olic Church, which believes that life begins at conception, considers the 
destruction of embryos as equivalent to taking a life, other denominations 
have decided that the potential beneﬁ ts for human beings are signiﬁ cant 
enough to permit well-regulated use of stem cells in medical research.
encyclical A letter from the pope to all people in the Catholic Church 
communicating his thoughts and judgments on doctrine, morals, or dis-
cipline. Only since the late nineteenth century have popes frequently 
issued such letters. Examples are Pope John XXIII’s Pacem in Terris (1963) 
stating the Catholic principle that government has the purpose of pro-
moting the common good for the total person, body and soul, and Pope 
John Paul II’s Evangelium Vitae (1994) calling on Catholics to promote life 
at all stages of the life cycle. 
episcopal The Greek word for bishop, episcopos means “overseer.” Hence, 
the name of the Episcopal Church refers to being governed by bishops.
euthanasia The practice of ending a person’s life for reasons, includ-
ing extreme pain or deformity, that are considered merciful. Mainline 
denominations hold that the value of human life prohibits euthanasia. 
However, some denominations have issued statements that recognize the 
appropriateness of withholding extraordinary medical treatment in cases 
of extreme suffering and imminent death.
evangelical Derived from the Greek word for “good news,” this term 
originally was used to refer to Lutherans who stressed the authority 
of the Bible, especially the four gospels of the New Testament. In the 
nineteenth century in the United States, evangelicals tended to empha-
size personal devoutness as well as social reform. Today, evangelical 
churches, generally distinguished from the mainline denominations, 
emphasize a personal conversion experience and take conservative 
stances on social issues, emphasizing personal responsibility rather than 
social transformation.
faith-based initiative A term used to refer to various proposals to per-
mit religious organizations to receive federal funding in order to provide 
social services. Following his inauguration in January 2001, President 

Glossary 321
George W. Bush announced the creation of the White House Ofﬁ ce of 
Faith-Based and Community Initiatives in ﬁ ve cabinet departments. 
Although mainline denominations expressed interest in participating in 
a program of faith-based funding, they also voiced concern for maintain-
ing independence from secular government regulation.
fundamentalism A term used to refer to those who adhere to what con-
servative Christians in the early twentieth century, responding to liberal 
trends within the church, identiﬁ ed as the essential beliefs, or funda-
mentals, of Christianity, including biblical inerrancy, the deity and virgin 
birth of Jesus, and the second coming of Christ. Today, the terms “funda-
mentalist,” “evangelical,” and “conservative Christian” are used inter-
changeably. Controversies still rage in the mainline denominations on 
such issues as the ordination of gay ministers and the blessing of same-
gender unions between those who adhere to a more literal reading of 
scripture and those who contend that the Bible must be interpreted in the 
context of the present culture.
heterodoxy A synonym for heresy, this term refers to any opinion or 
doctrine that departs from established beliefs or traditions. Conservative 
dissenters within the mainline denominations in effect are charging their 
leaders with failing to uphold fundamental Christian doctrine. Evangeli-
cal and fundamentalist churches demonstrate far less willingness than 
mainline denominations to engage in ecumenical associations for fear of 
compromising orthodox Christian beliefs.
higher criticism The scholarly examination of the Bible with the use of 
information about the history and culture of the period in which speciﬁ c 
books were written. For instance, retired Episcopal Bishop John Shelby 
Spong, in The Sins of Scripture, engaged in higher criticism, pointing to 
attitudes and behavior recounted in the Bible that people today would 
reject. Because this approach raises questions about the factualness of 
scripture as history and hence as an inerrant source of faith, conservative 
Christians have tended to reject higher criticism as a threat to the author-
ity of the scriptures.
humanism The belief that all human beings have basic worth, are able 
to distinguish between right and wrong, possess the ability to reason, 
and can improve their condition here on earth. Although conservative 
Christians consider humanism to be non- or antireligious, or a religious 
competitor to Christianity, referring to the philosophy as secular human-
ism, humanistic assumptions can be identiﬁ ed as well in traditional reli-
gious movements, including mainline denominations.
intelligent design The belief that scientiﬁ c theories of the physical 
world cannot provide an exhaustive explanation of the origins of the uni-
verse and of human beings. Some conservative Christians offer intelligent 
design as an alternative scientiﬁ c theory to that of Darwinian evolution. 

322 Glossary
Mainline denominations have remained largely aloof from this conten-
tion. In 2006 the Vatican newspaper, L’Osservatore Romano, published an 
article by Fiorenzo Fachini, a professor of evolutionary biology at the 
University of Bologna, which stated that although human beings, beyond 
the empirical realm, are not the product of chance or necessity, intelligent 
design is not science and hence insisting on its teaching along with evo-
lutionary theory can only create confusion.
just war doctrine Among the traditional criteria for engaging in a war 
justly (jus ad bellum) are that only a legitimate authority may wage war, 
the cause must be just, there must be a sufﬁ ciently high probability of 
success, the good to be achieved must outweigh the destruction caused 
by the use of force, and all nonviolent alternatives must have been tried. 
With the development of nuclear weapons following the Second World 
War, many church leaders and theologians agonized over whether a just 
nuclear war could be fought. Prior to the U.S. invasion of Iraq, several 
mainline church leaders questioned whether preemptive military action 
could be defended on just war principles. Given the lack of evidence of 
weapons of mass destruction and extended ﬁ ghting in Iraq, denomina-
tional leaders continued to express their ethical and theological reserva-
tions regarding continuing the conﬂ ict, which appeared to violate the 
principles of conducting a just war (jus in bello), in particular the principle 
of discrimination, which holds that force must target combatants and not 
innocent civilians.
Lambeth Conference The meeting of bishops in the Anglican Com-
munion, chaired by the Archbishop of Canterbury, which is held every 
ten years. The bishops gather at Lambeth Palace in London or at the Uni-
versity of Kent in Canterbury. The conference provides the opportunity 
for bishops to cultivate relationships among the various churches, to 
investigate issues of mutual concern, and to agree on policy.
liberation theology A movement, largely within the Catholic Church, 
that ﬂ ourished following the Second Vatican Council in the 1960s. Often 
considered a version of Christian socialism, it rejected traditional coop-
eration with the established authority, emphasizing instead the inevita-
bility of political conﬂ ict in which the church must play a role in favor 
of the poor. This radical Catholic movement, concentrated primarily in 
Latin America, did not receive encouragement from the Vatican and in 
more recent years has declined. However, some liberal Protestant groups 
still consider it an important theology of social action.
mega churches Religious institutions having 2,000 or more worship-
ers each week that provide members with the opportunity to take part 
in groups and engage in a wide variety of activities touching all aspects 
of their lives. In the United States, more than half of these large congre-
gations are nondenominational, and approximately 20 percent are asso-

Glossary 323
ciated with the Southern Baptist Convention. One of the older mega 
churches is Robert Schuller’s Crystal Cathedral in Garden Grove, Cali-
fornia, which is nominally associated with the mainline denomination 
Reformed Church in America. Mega churches have the opportunity to 
exercise inﬂ uence in the local community and to raise funds for activities 
outside the church.
modernism The adaptation of traditional religious beliefs to con tem p-
orary cultural trends and the optimistic conviction that human beings are 
capable of improving their environment and social institutions in a pro-
gression toward a godly kingdom here on earth. This view differs from 
the conservative Christian belief that human beings, tainted by original 
sin, are basically depraved and incapable by themselves of improving 
their condition.
partial-birth abortion An abortion procedure, technically termed 
dilation and extraction, in which the fetus is partially delivered before 
the fetus’s head is punctured. Although many mainline denominations 
recognize circumstances in which abortion might be justiﬁ ed, they uni-
formly condemn this procedure in all cases except when the life of the 
mother is involved. In 2003 Congress passed and President George W. 
Bush signed legislation banning the procedure.
physician-assisted suicide The provision to an individual by a medi-
cal doctor of equipment, medication, or information about the use of 
available means to end the person’s life. Mainline denominations have 
uniformly rejected any positive actions that would bring about a per-
son’s death, whether or not the individual has requested such actions. 
Jack Kevorkian, a medical pathologist and avid advocate of the right to 
die, was convicted of second-degree murder and imprisoned in 1999 for 
helping a terminally ill patient poison himself. In 1997 Oregon enacted 
the Death with Dignity law, which permits terminally ill patients to end 
their lives through the self-administration of lethal drugs prescribed by 
a physician. The Oregon Department of Human Services reported that 
in 2006, 46 people used the law to end their lives, most of whom were 
cancer patients.
presbytery The local organizational unit of the Presbyterian Church 
(U.S.A.). Each church is overseen by presbyters, or elders. Regional orga-
nizations of presbyters are called presbyteries.
primate A term used in the Church of England and the Anglican Com-
munion to refer to the chief bishop of a national church. In the United 
States, the primate of the Episcopal Church is referred to as the presiding 
bishop.
renewal movements Organizations within mainline denominations 
that claim the church has fallen away from the traditional teachings of 

324 Glossary
Christianity. Members of these groups object to what they consider chal-
lenges to biblical authority and theological orthodoxy. Denominational 
leadership is considered to have wandered from the truths of Christian-
ity and therefore the movements are geared to return the church to tradi-
tional beliefs and concerns.
schism A contentious division or split in a religious denomination or 
movement. Although members of renewal movements state that their 
purpose is to provide a voice for those who disagree with the dominant 
trend within the organization, ultimately they may become divisive or 
schismatic, depending on whether a separation of some or all of the dis-
senters ultimately occurs.
school vouchers A school funding system by which government pro-
vides ﬁ nancial aid to individual families rather than to public school dis-
tricts. The families may then select either a public or private school for 
their children to attend and have the tuition paid. The Catholic Church 
stands to gain signiﬁ cantly from a broadening system of school vouch-
ers. The number of parochial schools has declined signiﬁ cantly since the 
1960s, given the decline in services available from sisters and priests and 
the decreasing ability of parishes to subsidize schools. Claiming that par-
ish schools provide a major subsidy to the public school system, the Cath-
olic Church argues that fairness requires ﬁ nancial assistance in the form 
of vouchers. Other mainline denominations and evangelical churches 
that provide educational services also would beneﬁ t from school voucher 
systems.
seamless garment of life A reference to Jesus’s garment, which was 
“seamless, woven in one piece from the top” (John 19:23), which the sol-
diers hesitated to tear. This expression has become a call, especially in 
the Catholic Church, for a consistent policy regarding the protection of 
human life that includes not only opposition to abortion but also to the 
death penalty, euthanasia, nuclear warfare, and the so-called culture of 
death in general. The phrase also involves support for programs to assist 
children, pregnant women, and the impoverished.
social gospel A movement among American liberal Protestants begin-
ning during the late nineteenth century that emphasized Christians’ 
responsibility to ameliorate the social ills attributed to industrialization 
and urbanization. Proponents argued that the gospel included a mes-
sage of social reform as well as personal redemption. Concerned about 
a neglect of personal responsibility and what they considered the true 
message of Christianity, many conservative Christians objected to the 
social gospel. The movement continues today in the various social wel-
fare programs and public policy recommendations of mainline Protestant 
denominations.
social services Various assistance programs for the needy provided by 
local, state, and federal government as well as private institutions, including 

Glossary 325
foster care, housing, transportation, in-home care, food assistance, health 
care, day care for children, employment assistance, and disaster relief. Sev-
eral mainline denominations traditionally have engaged in social service 
programs, supporting professional organizations (for instance, Catholic 
Charities and Lutheran Social Services) that receive government subsi-
dies for their services.
subsidiarity The Catholic doctrine, expressed by Pope Pius XI in the 
1931 encyclical Quadragesimo Anno, that a good society should have inter-
mediate social institutions by which citizens can engage in civil society 
and that decisions should be made at the most local level feasible. Such 
institutions prevent the monopolization of power by the state or other 
institution.
synod Within the Lutheran tradition, an administrative region similar 
to a diocese. A bishop, who is elected by the synod assembly, oversees the 
operation of the synod.


327
INDEX
Adams, Gerry, 81
Afﬁ rmation: United Methodists 
for Lesbian, Gay, and 
Bisexual Concerns 
(AUMLGBC), 223–224
African Americans, 20
African Methodist Episcopal 
Church, 20
African Methodist Episcopal Zion 
Church, 20
Ajami, Faoud, 87
Albright, Jacob, 20
American Anglican Council 
(AAC), 27, 40, 224
American Baptist Church in the 
USA (ABC), 2, 13–15
 membership of, 13, 35
 organizational structure of, 
14–15
 origin of, 13–14
 support of for church/state 
separation, 14
American Baptist Evangelicals 
(ABE), 29
American Baptist Missionary 
Union, 14
American Baptist Women’s 
Ministries (ABW), 224
American Baptists Concerned 
(ABC), 225
American Lutheran Church 
(ALC), 9
 position of on end-of-life 
decisions, 50
Anderson, George, 55
Anderson, John, 95, 97
Anglican Church of Canada, 41
Anglican Communion Network 
(ACN), 225
Anglican Consultative Council, 
41
Anglicans United (AU), 225–226
Ansgarious, 99
Asbury, Francis, 19
Association for Church Renewal 
(ACR), 226–227
Association for the Rights of 
Catholics in the Church 
(ARCC), 227
Augsburg Confession, 99
Aulén, Gustaf Emanuel 
Hildebrand, 101–102
Baptist Home Mission Society, 14
Barrett, Ellen Marie, 4
Baylor Institute for Studies of 
Religion, 196–198
Benedict XVI (pope), 38, 94–95
Berrigan, Daniel, 147–149
Bible, 12
 inerrancy of, 1, 7
Biblical Witness Fellowship 
(BWF), 227
Boehm, Martin, 20

328 Index
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich, 89
Border Protection, Antiterrorism, 
and Illegal Immigration 
Control Act (2005), 56
Brown, Antoinette, 15
Bruno, Jon, 58
Bush, George W., 45–46
 and faith-based initiatives 
during his administration, 
52–53
Calvinists, 78, 83
 killings of in France, 84
Campbell, Alexander, 11, 16
Campbell, Thomas, 11
Catherine of Aragon, 77
Catholic Alliance for the 
Common Good, 30
Catholic Church, 2, 22–25, 66
 advocacy of social reform by, 
22
 and anti-Catholic sentiment in 
the United States, 24
 and the authority of the pope, 
24
 decline in the number of priests 
and nuns in, 23, 195–196
 educational resources of, 25
 and faith-based initiative, 
53–54
 and the ﬁ nancial costs of 
settling sexual abuse cases, 
37–38
 growth of in England, 80–81
 hierarchy of, 24–25
 homosexuality within, 38
 illegality of in the colonial New 
World, 24
 membership of, 2, 23, 35, 
194–195
 number of priests charged 
with sexual abuse by 
parishioners in, 37
 organizational structure of, 
22–23
 position of on capital 
punishment, 44
 position of on embryonic stem-
cell research, 46
 position of on immigration 
issues, 56
 religious orders of, 25
 and the selection of bishops, 
24–25
 sexual abuse issues within, 
36–38
 See also Catholic Church, in 
France
Catholic Church, in France, 
83–87
 and baptism, 85–86
 decline in the number of priests 
in, 83
 and democracy, 85
 during the French Revolution, 
84
 during the Restoration, 84–85
 relations of with the French 
government, 85
 and secularization within 
French society, 85–86
Catholic League for Religious 
and Civil Rights, 228
Catholic Legal Immigration 
Network (CLINIC), 228
Catholic Worker Movement 
(CWM), 228–229
Catholics for a Free Choice 
(CFFC), 229–230
Cavour, Camillo Benso di, 91
Charity Aid, Recovery and 
Empowerment Act 
(CARE), 53–54
Charles Albert (king of Savoy), 
91
Charles IX (king of Sweden), 99
Chavez, Mark, 28
Chittister, Joan, 147, 149–151
Christian Alliance for Progress, 
230

Index 329
Christian Church (Disciples 
of Christ [CCDC]), 2, 6, 
11–13, 15, 16
 basic messages of, 11
 controversy of over proper 
interpretation of the Bible, 
12
 formation of, 11–12
 membership of, 12, 35
 organizational structure of, 
12–13
 position of on capital 
punishment, 44–45
 position of on the Iraq War, 
60–61
 presidents afﬁ liated with, 12
Christian Churches Together in 
the U.S.A. (CCT-USA), 
230–231
Christian Reformed Church, 18
Christianity, 30
 mocking of in popular culture, 
74
“Christophobia,” 3, 74
Church of England, 76–83
 attendance numbers, 82
 and the British government, 
81
 challenges to, 78–80
 controversies surrounding, 
82–83
 organizational structure of, 
81–82
 origins of, 76–78
 tolerance displayed by, 79–80
 use of Catholic traditions and 
ritual in, 79
Church of Scotland, 79
Churches Uniting in Christ 
(CUIC), 231
Civil Rights Act (1964), 3
Clement VIII (pope), 76–77
Clinton, Bill, 52
Cofﬁ n, William Sloane, Jr., 
151–152
Conference for Catholic Lesbians 
(CCL), 231
Conference on Christian 
Politics, Economics, and 
Citizenship (1924), 79
Congregational Christian 
Churches, 15, 16
Cumberland Presbyterian 
Church, 6
Dammann, Karen, 42
Danforth, John Claggett, 152–154
Darwin, Charles, 79
Day, Dorothy, 155–156
Declaration and Address (T. 
Campbell), 11
DeLay, Tom, 49
denominations, Christian 
mainline, 1–3, 35–36
 and abortion, 62–66
 and capital punishment, 44–45
 and embryonic stem-cell 
research, 45–48
 and end-of-life decisions, 48–52
 and faith-based initiatives, 
52–55
 and immigration issues, 55–59
 and the Iraq War, 59–62
 mutual confession of Christ as 
Savior and Lord by, 2
 and public policy, 30–31, 66–67
 renewal movements in, 26–30
 and the sanctuary movement, 
58–59
 sexual issues within, 36–43
 See also denominations, 
mainline Christian, 
worldwide perspective on; 
denominations, mainline, 
data and documents 
concerning
denominations, mainline 
Christian, worldwide 
perspective on, 73–76, 
104–105
Index 329

330 Index
denominations, continued
 England, 76–83
 France, 83–87
 Germany, 87–90
 Italy, 90–95
 Poland, 95–98
 Sweden, 98–104
denominations, mainline, 
data and documents 
concerning, 193–194
 data overview of mainline 
denominations, 194–196
 data regarding religious beliefs 
and policy preferences, 
196–202
 documents regarding abortion, 
214–215
 documents regarding capital 
punishment, 219–221
 documents regarding end-of-
life decisions, 217–218
 documents regarding the 
environment, 218–219
 documents regarding equality 
and poverty, 202–203
 documents regarding faith-
based initiative, 210–211
 documents regarding 
immigration issues, 
208–210
 documents regarding the Iraq 
War, 211–213
 documents regarding mainline 
political engagement, 
205–206
 documents regarding public 
schools, 203–205
 documents regarding science 
issues, 213
 documents regarding sexuality 
issues, 206–208
 documents regarding stem-cell 
research, 216
Disciples Justice Action Network 
(DJAN), 232
Djupe, Paul A., 198–199, 201
Dobson, James, 49
Donovan, Mark, 94
Doyle, Thomas, 37
Duncan, Robert W., 40
Earth Ministry (EM), 232–233
Ecumenical Advocacy Days 
(EAD), 233
Edgar, Robert W., 156–157
Ekklesia, 28
Elizabeth I (queen of England), 
77–78
Enabling Act (1919), 80
England. See Church of England
Episcopal Action, 30
Episcopal Church, 2, 3–5
 and the American Revolution, 
3–4
 composition of, 5
 derivation of the term episcopal, 
3
 effect of the American 
Revolution on, 3–4
 Episcopalians as “Episcocrats,” 
3
 and faith-based initiative, 54
 governing body (General 
Convention) of, 4–5
 membership of, 35
 policy issues concerning the 
clergy of, 198–199, 
201–202
 position of on abortion, 65
 position of on embryonic stem-
cell research, 47–48
 position of on end-of-life 
decisions, 50
 position of on immigration 
issues, 58
 presidents afﬁ liated with, 4
 separation of from the Church 
of England, 3
 sexual issues within, 38–42
 tolerance of, 3

Index 331
Episcopal Church Ofﬁ ce of 
Government Relations, 
233–234
Episcopal Peace Fellowship 
(EPF), 234
Episcopal Urban Caucus (EUC), 
234–235
Evangelical Alliance, 79
Evangelical Association, 20
Evangelical Lutheran Church in 
America (ELCA), 2, 8–10, 
28–29
 Churchwide Assembly of, 10
 early presence of in North 
America, 9
 membership of, 8, 35
 organizational structure of, 10
 policy issues concerning the 
clergy of, 198–199, 201–202
 position of on abortion, 64–65
 position of on immigration 
issues, 57
 publications of, 10
Evangelical Lutheran National 
Church (Sweden), 98–99, 
103–104
 separate theological paths of 
in the nineteenth century, 
101–102
Evangelical and Reformed 
Church, 15, 16
Evangelical Synod of North 
America, 15, 16
Evangelical United Brethren, 19
evangelicals, 1, 196–198
Evangelium Vitae, 63
Executive Council of the 
Episcopal Church, 54
Faith in Public Life, 30
Faithful America, 30, 235
Fallaci, Oriana, 75, 95
Federal Council of Churches, 12
Filmore, Millard, 24
Finland, 103
Firoenza, Joseph A., 46
First World War, 79, 80
Forbes, James A., Jr., 157–159
Forward in Faith America, 28
Fosdick, Henry Emerson, 147, 
159–160
France. See Catholic Church, in 
France
fundamentalists, 1
Garibaldi, Giuseppe, 90–91
Gay, Lesbian, and Afﬁ rming 
Disciples Alliance (GLAD), 
235–236
General Board of Church and 
Society (GBCS [United 
Methodist Church]), 
236–237
Geoghan, John, 37
German Reformed Church, 15
Germany, 87–90
 church/state relationship in, 87
 difﬁ culty of accepting religious 
pluralism in, 90
 division of after the Second 
World War, 90
 during the Nazi regime, 89
 during the Weimar Republic, 
89
 and the “higher criticism” 
movement, 88–89
 and the Peasant’s War (1524–
1525), 88
 uniﬁ cation of, 89
Gilbert, Christopher P., 198–199, 
201
Good News, 29, 237
Granberg-Michaelson, Wesley, 
160–161
Great Depression (1929), 80
Gregory, Wilton, 60, 161–163
Griswold, Frank, 40, 41, 163–164
Guth, James L., 193–194
Gustavus II Adolphus (king of 
Sweden), 100

332 Index
Hain, Peter, 81
Hamm, Richard L., 60–61
Hammer, Karl Gustav, 99
Hanson, Mark S., 9, 61, 164–166
Heidinger, James, 29
Henry IV (king of France), 84
Henry VII (king of England), 77
Henry VIII (king of England), 
76–77
 as “Defender of the Faith,” 77
 excommunication of, 77
Hervieu-Léger, Danièle, 73
Hinson, William, 43
Hollon, Larry, 49
Holy Club, 78
Huguenots, 83–84
Humanae Vitae, 63
Hussein, Saddam, 59
Institute on Religion and 
Democracy (IRD), 29–30
Institute on Religion and Public 
Policy, 237–238
Integrity, 238
Interfaith Alliance, 238–239
Italy, 90–95
 Catholic Church’s authority in, 
92–93
 and the Christian Democratic 
Party (DC), 92–93, 94
 church/state relationship in, 
93
 development of into a uniﬁ ed 
nation, 90–91
 and the Italian Popular Party, 
94
 opposition to the Communist 
Party in, 92, 94
 Protestants in, 91
 under Mussolini, 90–91
Jefferts Schori, Katherine, 42, 147, 
166–167
John XXIII (pope), 22
John Paul II (pope), 37, 63, 74, 
94, 96
Johnson, Elizabeth A., 167–169
Jones, Abner, 16
Kaczynski, Lech, 97–98
Kaczynski, Jaroslav, 97–98
Kant, Immanuel, 89
Kennedy, John F., Jr., 24
Kevorkian, Jack, 51
Keysor, Charles W., 29
Kirkpatrick, Clifton, 57
Kohut, Andrew, 199
Konolige, Frederica, 2, 3
Konolige, Kit, 2, 3
Lambeth Conferences, 79
Lateran Treaty (1929), 90–91
Law, Bernard (cardinal), 37
Lawrence, D. H., 80
Leland, John, 14
Leo XIII (pope), 85
Louis XIII (king of France), 84
Louis XIV (king of France), 84
Luther, Martin, 88
Lutheran Church–Missouri 
Synod (LCMS), 8, 10
Lutheran Council, 2
Lutheran Services in America 
(LSA), 239–240
Lutherans Concerned/North 
America (LC/NA), 240
Lynn, Barry W., 169–171
Mahoney, Roger Michael, 56, 147, 
171–172
Mahoning Baptist Association, 11
mainline denominations. See 
denominations, mainline 
Christian
Maistre, Joseph Marie de, 85
Martin, David, 74, 75
Marty, Martin E., 172–174, 194
Massacre of St. Bartholomew, 84

Index 333
McHugh, James, 63
Medley, A. Roy, 174–176
Methodist Episcopal Church, 20
Methodist Episcopal Church, 
South, 20
Methodist Federation for Social 
Action (MFSA), 240
Methodist Protestant Church, 
20
Moore, Paul, Jr., 4
More Light Presbyterians for 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and 
Transgender Concerns, 
240–241
Murchison, William, 73
Muslims, 75, 90, 94–95
 in France, 86–87
Mussolini, Benito, 91–92
National Council of Churches of 
Christ in the United States 
of America (NCC), 2, 
25–26, 241
National Lutheran Commission 
(NLC), 9
National Ministries, American 
Baptist Churches USA 
(NM), 241–242
National Right to Life 
Committee, 63
Network of Anglican 
Communion Dioceses and 
Parishes, 40, 41
Network: A National Catholic 
Social Justice Lobby, 
242–243
Network of Spiritual 
Progressives, 30–31
New England Convention of 
Christians, 16
Nicoson, Bill, 29
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 16, 147, 
176–178
Niebuhr, Richard, 16
Norway, 103
Norwegian Lutheran Church of 
America, 9
Nygren, Anders, 100–101
O’Kelley, James, 15–16
O’Malley, Sean Patrick, 178–180
Otterbein, Philip William, 20
Paisley, Ian, 81
Paul VI (pope), 63
Pax Christi-U.S.A. (PC-USA), 243
Peale, Norman Vincent, 180–181
Percy, Walker, 74
Pike, James, 4
Pius IX (pope), 91
Pius X (pope), 85
Pius XI (pope), 92
Pius XII (pope), 92
Pleijel, Hilding, 100
Poland, 95–98
 inﬂ uence of the communist era 
on, 98
 invasion of to begin the Second 
World War, 96
 opposition to communism in, 
95, 96–97
 relations of with the Vatican, 
96
 Solidarity movement in, 96–97
Presbyterian Church of Canada, 
18
Presbyterian Church U.S.A. 
(PCUSA), 2, 5–8, 28, 30
 conservatives in, 7
 effect of the American Civil 
War on, 6
 and faith-based initiative, 54
 formation of, 6
 liberals in, 6–7
 membership of, 35
 mission activities of, 8
 New School Presbyterians, 6
 Old School Presbyterians, 6

334 Index
Presbyterian Church U.S.A., 
continued
 organizational structure of, 7–8
 position of on abortion, 65
 position of on capital 
punishment, 44
 position of on embryonic stem-
cell research, 46–47
 position of on end-of-life 
decisions, 50
 position of on immigration 
issues, 57
 and the Presbyterian General 
Assembly, 6, 8, 57
 sexual issues within, 43
Presbyterian Washington Ofﬁ ce, 
243–244
Presbyterian Women (PW), 244
Presbyterians Pro-Life (PPL), 245
Presbyterians for Renewal (PFR), 
244–245
Progressive Christians Uniting 
(PCU), 245–246
Protestant Reformation, 83, 87, 99
Protestantism (American), “two-
party system” of, 194, 
196–198
Protestants for the Common 
Good (PCG), 246
Reformation. See Protestant 
Reformation
Reformed Church (France), 86
Reformed Church in America 
(RCA), 2, 15, 17–19
 assistance of to Dutch 
immigrants, 18
 association of with other 
mainline denominations, 
19
 membership of, 36
 organizational structure of, 
18–19
 origin of, 17–18
 position of on abortion, 63–64
 position of on capital 
punishment, 45
 position of on end-of-life 
decisions, 51
 position of on immigration 
issues, 57–58
Reformed Protestant Dutch 
Church, 18
Regas, George F., 182–183
Reichley, A. James, 14, 23, 66, 195
Religious Coalition for 
Reproductive Choice 
(RCRC), 246–247
renewal movements, 26–30
Robinson, V. Gene, 4, 27, 40, 41, 
202
Roe v. Wade (1973), 62–63
Salvatierra, Alexia, 58
Schiavo, Terri, 48–50
Schuller, Robert H., 19, 183–185
Second Great Awakening, 6, 11, 
14, 20
Second Vatican Council, 22–23, 95
Second World War, 80, 96 
Semler, Johann Salomo, 88
Shaw, George Bernard, 80
Sheen, Fulton J., 185–187
slavery, 20
“social gospel,” 1
Society for the Propagation of the 
Gospel in Foreign Parts, 78
Society of Catholic Social 
Scientists (SCSS), 247
Sojourners/Call to Renewal, 
247–248
Southern Baptist Convention, 14
Southern Christian Association, 
16
Spahr, Jane, 43
Spong, John Shelby, 4, 147, 
187–189
Steinfels, Peter, 24, 195

Index 335
Stone, Barton W., 11, 16
Survivors Network of those 
Abused by Priests (SNAP), 
248
Sweden, 98–104
 arrival of Christianity in, 99
 church/state relationship in, 
100
 formal state acceptance of 
religious freedom in, 
102–103
 free churches in, 100–101
 Lutheranism in, 98–99, 103–104
 membership numbers of 
various denominations in, 
103–104
 as the “nation of empty 
churches,” 98
Swedish Mission Covenant, 
100–101
Target Earth International, 
248–249
Task Force on Ethical Issues in 
Human Medicine, 50–51
Ten Commandments, 13
Thirty Years War, 88
Thomas, John H., 189–190
United Church of Christ, 2, 
15–17
 formation and organization of, 
15–16
 General Synod of, 17
 organizational structure of, 17
 position of on embryonic stem-
cell research, 47
United Church of Christ Justice 
and Peace Action Network 
(JPANet), 249–250
United Free Church of Scotland, 
79
United Lutheran Church in 
America (ULCA), 9
United Presbyterian Church of 
North America, 7
United Presbyterian Church 
in the United States of 
America (UPCUSA), 7
United Methodist Church (UMC), 
2, 19–22, 29
 administrative leaders of, 
21–22
 and faith-based initiative, 55
 formation of, 19–21
 membership of, 20, 21, 35, 
42–43
 organizational structure of, 21
 origins of in England, 78
 position of on abortion, 65–66
 position of on capital 
punishment, 45
 position of on embryonic stem-
cell research, 48
 position of on the Iraq War, 
61–62
 sexual issues within, 42–43
 social service activities of, 22
United States, 74, 76, 86, 91, 93, 
105
United States Conference of 
Catholic Bishops (USCCB), 
2, 22, 25, 250
 concerns of over the Iraq War, 
60, 62
 and faith-based initiative, 
53–54
 position of on capital 
punishment, 44
United States Conference of 
the World Council of 
Churches, 250–251
Vatican II. See Second Vatican 
Council
Voice of the Faithful (VOTF), 30, 
38, 251
von Herder, Gottfried, 88

336 Index
Waldenses, 91
Waldenström, Peter, 100–101
Walesa, Lech, 96
Watkins, Sharon E., 147, 190–191
Weigel, George, 74, 75, 76
Wenski, Thomas, 62
Wesley, Charles, 19, 78
Wesley, John, 19, 78
Wesleyan Methodist Church, 78
Whiteﬁ eld, George, 78
Wielgus, Stanislaw, 98
Williams, Roger, 13–14
Williams, Rowan, 39, 83
Wimberly, Don, 42
Winkler, James, 48, 54
Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran 
Synod, 8
Witherspoon Society, 252
Word Alone Network (WAN), 
28, 252

About the Author
Glenn H. Utter, professor and chair of the Political Science Depart-
ment at Lamar University, was educated at Binghamton Univer-
sity, the University of Buffalo, and the University of London. 
Utter specializes in modern political theory and American politi-
cal thought. He wrote Encyclopedia of Gun Control and Gun Rights 
(2000); coedited American Political Scientists: A Dictionary (1993, 
2002); and cowrote Campaign and Election Reform (1997), Religion 
and Politics (2002), Conservative Christians and Political Participation 
(2004), and The Religious Right (1995, 2001, 2007). He has written 
several articles for political science journals and other scholarly 
publications.

