MUSIC • TOYS • ROCKETS • FOOD • HOME  
TOOLS • OUTDOORS • ROBOTS • LEDS
SIEGE WEAPONS • ARDUINO AND MORE!
BUILD YOUR OWN
3D PRINTER!
PLUS: How Kits
Drive Innovation
PLUS: How Kits
Drive Innovation
kits.makezine.com 
SPECIAL ISSUE: ULTIMATE KIT GUIDE
9.99
$
$9.99  DISPLAY UNTIL FEB. 15, 2012
LOCAL MOTORS:
BUILD THIS CAR! 
(NOT CHEAP) 

In a simple coil-oscillator circuit, the frequency 
of the oscillations depends on the coil’s size 
and how many turns it has. More turns make 
current in the coil slower to reverse, lowering 
the frequency. Moving metal objects close to 
the coil also lowers the frequency, because it 
adds more electrons sloshing back and forth 
in the coil’s constantly reversing magnetic ﬁeld.
So a coil circuit will change its frequency in close 
proximity to metal, but the change is usually too 
small to hear. To make it more obvious, a second 
oscillator circuit with a manually tunable coil can 
act as a reference oscillator. Tune the reference 
to match the detector. Very slight changes in the 
detector frequency will result in an easily heard beat 
frequency, as the two tones cyclically reinforce and 
cancel each other out. (The beat frequency equals 
the difference between the two frequencies.)
a celebration of amazing creations 
and the parts that made them possible.

Connect headphones or a speaker, add a handle 
for moving the detector over the ground, and you’re 
ready to hit the beach in search of treasure.
To make your own treasure ﬁnder, you need plywood, 
a broom handle, some electronic components and 
a few other easily sourced parts.
By Paul Spinrad & Steve Hobley
See how it’s made at:  
RadioShackDIY.com/TreasureFinder.
Snap connector 
for 9V Battery
Capacitors 0.01µF
SPST 
Toggle Switch
22-Gauge Hookup Wire
SCAN THIS QR CODE TO LEARN MORE 
ABOUT THIS PROJECT
9V Battery
Transistor
To submit your own creation, explore 
other great creations and get the 
hard-to-find parts you need, visit 
RadioShack.com/DIY

welcome
2
Make: kits.makezine.com
This special issue of MAKE is all 
about kits, and the promise behind 
each kit that you can make some-
thing cool. Why? 
Kits are the gateway DIY project. 
Words can’t describe the pride 
a 9-year-old feels when he glues 
the final piece atop the enormous 
Apollo Saturn V moon rocket model 
he built with his dad (Thanks, Dad!) 
and takes it to show-and-tell at 
school. I made this!
	 For many of us, a kit is the first 
thing we remember making — 
whether Lego or Erector sets (see 
page 18), needlepoint or paint-by-
number, or model planes and cars 
from Testors and Revell. The excite-
ment can be enough to set us on a 
path of creative making for life. Who 
knows what doors you’re opening 
when you put a kit in the hands of a 
beginner?
	  Kits teach skills. When you 
make a kit, somebody has done you 
a great service — designed it, gath-
ered parts, illustrated instructions — 
so you can focus on the good stuff: 
mastering the skills required to 
make the thing, and understanding 
how it works. 
	 Handmade beats store-bought. 
Pink Snuggie blankets come and go, 
but Grandma’s crocheted afghan is 
forever. Psychologists call this the 
Ikea Effect — adding our personal 
labor just makes the thing more 
valuable. 
	
Making something is more fun  
than buying it. Kits quick-start the fun. 
Why Are We Crazy  
for Kits?
By Keith hammond
	 Kits are exciting and myste-
rious. If you don’t know how to 
make it from scratch, then the kit 
is your path into the unknown, to 
new knowledge that’s empowering, 
maybe even dangerous (just ask 
Wile E. Coyote about ACME kits). 
	 Like Alice’s “Drink Me” bottle or 
Neo’s red pill, the kit is a portal to an 
experience you may or may not be 
ready for. And if it’s mysterious to 
you, imagine how deliciously mys-
tifying it must be to those around 
you. What is he building in there?
	 Kits are great for sharing. Kids 
and parents can build a starter kit 
on an equally clueless footing, learn-
ing together.
	 Kits open up community. Build 
a kit and you’re joining a group of 
people who’ve built it too, and are 
no doubt trading tips and showing 
off their builds online. You’re smart-
er thanks to the pack, and you’re 
meeting makers who share your 
excitement.
	 Kits drive innovation. When 
a kit sells well, suddenly there 
are people in every town building 
newfangled TV sets (remember 
Heathkit? they’re back, see page 24) 
or aerial Arduino robots (check out 
DIY Drones, page 26). Like seeds in 
the wind, those kits switch on thou-
sands of new makers, who become 
a community of innovators, excited 
and hungry for more advanced kits 
and products, in an upward spiral. 
	 MIT’s Michael Schrage looks into 
the phenomenon (page 8) and finds 
that kit-makers have driven the 
great technology upheavals, from 
Boulton & Watt’s steam kits in the 
Industrial Revolution, to Woz and 
Jobs’ Apple I kits in the computer 
revolution (build a replica, page 41).
	 I remember my dad’s excitement 
building kit computers in the 1970s, 
little boxes programmed in hex 
code via a 10-key pad, no video, just 
7-segment red LEDs for a readout. 
A kit in the mail challenged him to 
build his skills, raised his expecta-
tions of computers, and fired his 
imagination about what could be 
done with them. Once he’d mas-
tered a kit, he wanted the next most 
advanced kit, and then the first 
home computers (Apples, Ataris, 
Commodores), and so on.
	 Multiply that fired-up kit maker by 
thousands and you’ve got a smart, 
skilled, hungry community experi-
menting with new technology, and 
bringing along their friends (and 
their kids — my sibs and I were 10, 
11, and 13, programming in BASIC).
	 History repeats. Today we’re 
watching the same innovation explo-
sion unfold in 3D printing, DIY robot-
ics, and microcontrollers, as skilled 
amateurs build kits and hack them, 
egg each other on, and teach those 
around them. 
	 The next Steve Jobs is out there, 
building kits. 
Keith Hammond is Projects Editor of MAKE. He 
wanted to be an astronaut.

©2011 Corning Incorporated. All rights reserved.
As durable as it is beautiful, Corning® Gorilla® Glass makes your
sleek designs tough enough for real-world mobility. It already
helps protect millions of the world’s coolest smartphones and
tablets from the scratches, drops, and bumps of everyday use.
Where will it go next?
                                   Start innovating at CorningGorillaGlass.com
Tough,
yet versatile.

4
Make: kits.makezine.com
Juan Leguizamon
kit crazy
2	 Welcome! 
Why we’re so crazy for kits.
6	Bringing the Best 
Maker Shed brings the best kits 
to makers. We’re looking for more.
8	Kits and Revolutions 
Kits drive tech innovations, 
from Watt to Woz and Jobs. 
Who’s next?
Features
13	 Comic Book Kits 
That Suck Robbing kids of their 
nickels and dimes.
14	 Local Motors You build 
(and design) your dream car.
18	 Erector Sets 
A.C. Gilbert’s can-do toy. 
20	Medical Kits Saving 
money and lives, DIY style.
24	Heathkits The kits that 
launched 10,000 engineers.
26	 Hardware the Hard Way 
Kit-maker lessons from DIY 
Drones’ Chris Anderson.
30	Kit Maker’s Manifesto 
By the Arduino team.
96	Most Dangerous Kits 
Build at your own risk!
kit reviews
31	 What We Like In a Kit
32	 Robots
36	 Electronics & Controllers
42	LEDs
45	R/C Vehicles
48	Tools & Workshop
52	 Outdoor & Sport
56	 Clocks
60	Home & Shelter
62	 Science
65	 Toys & Games
68	Craft
72	 Siege & Ballistics
74	Wheels
76	 Rockets
78	Kit Party!
80	Food
83	Beverages
86	Audio Gear
89	Musical  Instruments
175+DIY KITS
REVIEWED
Special Issue
ULTIMATE

5
Follow us @make
founder & PUBLISHER
Dale Dougherty
dale@oreilly.com
Maker-in-Chief
Sherry Huss 
sherry@oreilly.com 
senior Sales Manager
Katie Dougherty Kunde
katie@oreilly.com
Sales Manager
Cecily Benzon
cbenzon@oreilly.com
Sales manager
Brigitte Kunde
brigitte@oreilly.com
Client Service Manager
Sheena Stevens
sheena@oreilly.com
Editor-in-Chief 
Mark Frauenfelder 
markf@oreilly.com
Executive EDITOR
Paul Spinrad
pspinrad@oreilly.com
Managing Editor
Melissa Morgan
melissa@oreilly.com
projects editor
Keith Hammond
khammond@oreilly.com
senior Editor
Goli Mohammadi 
goli@oreilly.com
EDITOR AT LARGE 
David Pescovitz
Please Note: Technology, the 
laws, and limitations imposed by 
manufacturers and content owners are 
constantly changing. Thus, some of 
the projects described may not work, 
may be inconsistent with current laws 
or user agreements, or may damage or 
adversely affect some equipment. 
	
Your safety is your own responsibil-
ity, including proper use of equipment 
and safety gear, and determining 
whether you have adequate skill and 
experience. Power tools, electricity, 
and other resources used for these 
projects are dangerous, unless used 
properly and with adequate precau-
tions, including safety gear. Some 
illustrative photos do not depict safety 
precautions or equipment, in order to 
show the project steps more clearly. 
These projects are not intended for 
use by children. 
	
Use of the instructions and sug-
gestions in MAKE is at your own 
risk. O’Reilly Media, Inc., disclaims 
all responsibility for any resulting 
damage, injury, or expense. It is your 
responsibility to make sure that your 
activities comply with applicable laws, 
including copyright.
MAKE CARES
MAKE is printed on recycled, process-chlorine-free, acid-free 
paper with 30% post-consumer waste, certified by the Forest 
Stewardship Council and the Sustainable Forest Initiative, with 
soy-based inks containing 22%–26% renewable raw materials.
“When I was a kid, both my dad 
and the Heathkits made me 
believe I could build anything.”
—Steve Jobs
MAKE SPECIAL ISSUE: Ultimate Kit Guide 2012 is a supplement to MAKE magazine. MAKE (ISSN 1556-2336) is published quarterly by O’Reilly Media, Inc. in the months of January, April, July, and October. O’Reilly 
Media is located at 1005 Gravenstein Hwy. North, Sebastopol, CA 95472, (707) 827-7000. SUBSCRIPTIONS: Send all subscription requests to MAKE, P.O. Box 17046, North Hollywood, CA 91615-9588 or subscribe 
online at makezine.com/offer or via phone at (866) 289-8847 (U.S. and Canada); all other countries call (818) 487-2037. Subscriptions are available for $34.95 for 1 year (4 quarterly issues) in the United States; 
in Canada: $39.95 USD; all other countries: $49.95 USD. Periodicals Postage Paid at Sebastopol, CA, and at additional mailing offices. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to MAKE, P.O. Box 17046, North 
Hollywood, CA 91615-9588. Canada  Post Publications Mail Agreement Number 41129568. Canada Postmaster: Send address changes to: O’Reilly Media, PO Box 456, Niagara Falls, ON  L2E 6V2
CUSTOMER SERVICE 
cs@readerservices.
makezine.com
Manage your account online, 
including change of address:
makezine.com/account
866-289-8847 toll-free 
in U.S. and Canada
818-487-2037, 
5 a.m.–5 p.m., PST
Follow us on Twitter:
@make
@craft 
@makerfaire
@makershed
On Facebook: makemagazine
Web Producer 
Jake Spurlock
jspurlock@oreilly.com
EDITOR AT LARGE
Phillip Torrone
pt@makezine.com
Community Manager
John Baichtal
Associate Publisher & GM, 
e-commerce
Dan Woods
dan@oreilly.com
DIRECTOR, retail marketing 
& operations
Heather Harmon Cochran
operations MANAGER
Rob Bullington
director, 
product development
Marc de Vinck
Maker shed evangelist
Michael Castor
program director
Sabrina Merlo
SENIOR ART DIRECTOR
Jason Babler
jbabler@oreilly.com
Designer
Katie Wilson
PRODUCTION designer
Gerry Arrington
Photo editor
Kathryn Roach
Associate Photo editor
Gregory Hayes
STAFF editor
Arwen O’Reilly Griffith
assistant editor
Laura Cochrane
PUBLISHING
editorial
PUBLISHed by
online
O’Reilly MEDIA, INC. 
Tim O’Reilly, CEO 
Laura Baldwin, President
Copyright © 2011 
O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights 
reserved. 
Reproduction without permission 
is prohibited. Printed in the USA by 
Brown Printing Co.
Visit us online: 
makezine.com
Comments may be sent to: 
editor@makezine.com
director of digital media
Shawn Connally
shawn@oreilly.com
editor-in-chief
Gareth Branwyn
gareth@makezine.com
senior video producer
Becky Stern
becky@oreilly.com
contributing editors
William Gurstelle, Mister Jalopy, 
Brian Jepson, Charles Platt
CONTRIBUTING writers
Thomas Arey, Kirk Demerais, 
Natalie Zee Drieu, Wesley Faler, 
Mark Forwalter, Lew Frauenfelder, 
Lucas French, Vicky Glisson, 
Jose Gomez-Marquez, I-Wei Huang, 
Stefan Jones, Adam W. Kempa, 
Bob Knetzger, Dean Knudson, 
George Krewson, John Krewson, 
Steve Lodefink, Ben Lowe, 
Benjamin J. Mansi, Gordon McComb, 
Steve McDonald, Brookelynn Morris, 
Amanda Nix, Ryan O’Horo, Ken Olsen, 
Meara O’Reilly, Tom Owad, 
Ryan Pederson, Jay Rogers, 
Michael Schrage, Damien Scogin, 
Bruce Shapiro, Carla Sinclair,  
L. Abraham Smith, Will Stone,  
Michael Una, Robert M. Zigmund
contributing artists
Gabriela Hasbun, Juan Leguizamon, 
Garry McLeod, Sam Murphy, 
Damien Scogin, Ed Troxell, 
Nat Wilson-Heckathorn
online contributors
John Baichtal, Chris Connors,  
Collin Cunningham, 
Adam Flaherty, Matt Mets, 
John Edgar Park,  
Sean Michael Ragan, 
Matt Richardson, Marc de Vinck
interns
Nick Raymond (coordinator),  
Eric Chu (engr.), Michael Colombo 
(vid.), Craig Couden (edit.), Max 
Eliaser (engr.), Brian Melani (engr.),  
Tyler Moskowite (engr.), Paul 
Mundell (engr.), Lindsey North 
(edu.), Daniel Spangler (engr.)
MAKE Technical Advisory Board
Kipp Bradford, Evil Mad Scientist Laboratories, Limor Fried, Joe Grand, 
Saul Griffith, William Gurstelle, Bunnie Huang, Tom Igoe, Mister Jalopy, 
Steve Lodefink, Erica Sadun, Marc de Vinck

MAKER SHED
6
Make: kits.makezine.com
BACK IN OUR FIRST YEAR, the 
Maker Shed shipped more than 
25,000 kits. Not a bad start, but 
after years of steady growth, we 
shipped 105,000 units last year.
 Why this upswing in kit interest? 
Part of our success is the result of a 
smart team that uncovers beautiful 
kits that resonate with our audience 
of makers and science 
enthusiasts. However,
I think the data is also
telling us about the
value we all derive from
a good hands-on project.
 Perhaps it’s focusing on some-
thing we can control when so much 
around us is uncontrollable. Maybe 
it’s the satisfaction of picking up 
a new skill, dusting off an old one, 
or simply learning how something 
works (or doesn’t). Maybe it’s the 
memories that live on long after 
you’re done. 
 And there’s definitely something 
intrinsically satisfying about pass-
ing along skills to a younger maker. 
What kid doesn’t enjoy a work-
bench, a few tools, and a good proj-
ect on a rainy day? 
 Economically, times are tough, 
but our basements and backyards 
are coming alive with experiments, 
tinkering, and the maker spirit. So 
this holiday season, whether you 
provision a project from materials 
lying around the house, or decide 
to buy a project kit from the Maker 
Shed or elsewhere, give yourself and 
someone you care about the gift of 
making something together. 
Bringing the
Best Kits to Makers
BY DAN WOODS
LOOK FOR OUR “MAKER MADE” 
SEAL OF RECOGNITION FOR 
OUTSTANDING KITS
After years of combing the planet 
for awesome kits created by inde-
pendent makers, we decided to 
create our own form of recognition.  
We’re excited to announce MAKE’s 
very own “Maker Made” seal of 
recognition for kits that the 
MAKE staff find particularly 
awesome. Whenever you see 
this badge next to a kit, just 
know it was created by an 
independent maker, and we 
think it deserves special props. 
LOOKING FOR A FEW 
GOOD KIT MAKERS
Meanwhile, we’re expanding our line 
of kits — and we want to meet new 
kit makers. 
 Ever had a cool idea for a kit but 
weren’t sure how to bring it to mar-
ket? Or maybe you’re already selling 
kits but you’d like to expand your 
reach. Breaking into the market can 
be daunting for independent makers. 
 We love to help makers get 
started with kit making and bring-
ing them to market. We’re willing to 
take risks on promising small runs, 
often hand-assembled by makers in 
their own workshops. This is how we 
started, how we built our business, 
and what keeps us different. If you 
have a kit you’re about to launch 
or even a kit design you’re not sure 
how to develop, we’d love to hear 
from you.
 We curate kits for a range of
TOP-SELLING 
MAKER SHED 
KITS IN 2011
1. MINTRONICS SURVIVAL
PACK MSTIN2
2. MAKERSHIELD KIT MSMS01
3. MAKE: ELECTRONICS 
COMPONENT PACK 1 MECP1
4. GETTING STARTED WITH 
ARDUINO KIT MSGSA
5. LEARN TO SOLDER SKILL 
BADGE KIT MKLS01
Available at: makershed.com
interests and experience levels, 
and are particularly interested in 
robotics, electronics, microcon-
trollers, ballistics and aeronautics, 
servos and motors, smart materials, 
crafts, and anything that engages 
kids. We love kits that work well in 
classrooms, camps, hackerspaces, 
even birthday parties! Ideal kits are 
inspirational, educational, include 
everything you need to get started 
with helpful documentation, and 
encourage exploring more than one 
outcome.
 Interested in getting your kit in 
front of millions of makers? Send a 
note to kits@makezine.com and tell 
us what you have in mind. We keep 
the process friendly, down to earth, 
and straightforward. 
Dan Woods is MAKE’s associate publisher and 
general manager of e-commerce. When he’s not 
finding cool new stuff, he likes to hack and build 
barbecues, smokers, and outdoor grills.
ELLING
R SHED 
N 2011
RONICS SURVIVAL

Consultant Ed Brown was retained by the Minimalist Electronics Society
(MES) to design an electronic intercom that would allow the group's 
president and secretary to speak to one another between the two tiny 
structures that served as their offices. The only condition was that the 
intercom must be as minimalist as possible. A conventional intercom 
would require a pair of conductors, which was one too many. The soil 
under the offices was desert gravel and much too dry for linking the 
offices with a single wire and a ground at each end. Cell phones or radio? 
No way. Their signals would be sprayed everywhere, thereby violating 
minimalism. Power line link? No. Each office was powered by its own 
roof top solar panel. Brown finally thought of a solution. What's yours? 
Go to Jameco.com/unknown12 to see if you are correct.
Order Your Free Jameco Catalog!
Jameco.com/catalog
1-800-831-4242

essay
8
Make: kits.makezine.com
The Industrial Revolution began with kits. In 1763, Glasgow 
University’s scale model Newcomen steam engine broke, so the physics pro-
fessor asked the school’s resident mechanic to fix it. A talented instrument 
maker, this university employee didn’t just get the machine working again, he 
figured out a clever way to improve the design by turning a surgical syringe 
into a piston and condenser.¶ That Scottish mechanic was James Watt, and 
he partnered with Birmingham, England’s Matthew Boulton to commercial-
ize the design. But rather than producing finished steam engines for the coal 
mines and breweries that used steam power, they sold engineering “kits” — 
with extensive instructions — that required on-site assembly. Boulton & Watt 
made a killing, and transformed their age. 
	 This rough template has fore-
shadowed technological revolution 
ever since. Whether in radio, auto, 
aircraft, electronics, or personal 
computers and the internet, com-
munities of kit-building talented 
amateurs — not credentialed elites 
— have disproportionately influ-
enced early innovation. The prolif-
eration of cheap kits better signals 
a market sector ripe for revolution 
than the presence of expensive 
“cutting-edge” products.
	 In other words, “kitonomic” inno-
vation doesn’t follow the money; the 
money follows the kits. Although 
government research funding and 
industrial investment undeniably 
matter, they shouldn’t eclipse the 
importance of bottom-up mecha-
nisms for human capital formation, 
such as kits. 
	 Talented amateurs don’t just 
build kits; kits help build talented 
amateurs. And healthy innovation 
cultures — and successful innova-
tion economies — need the human 
capital that their talent embodies. 
Kits and 
Revolutions
An MIT economist’s lesson 
in Kitonomics 101. By Michael Schrage
kits as catalysts
James Watt’s early steam engine kits, circa 
1776, sparked the industrial revolution. In 1910, 
Popular Mechanics featured the first-ever free 
airplane plans (by Alberto Santos-Dumont). 
Henry Ford’s early models became platforms 
for customization and upgrades. 
Kits are integral, indispensable,  
and invaluable ingredients for new 
value creation.
Electronics, Airplanes, 
and Automobiles
The great book on kits, their  
economic impact, and their techno-
cultural appeal has yet to be written. 
But history strongly suggests that 
the more pervasive a technology,  
the likelier its origins are traceable  
to a homebrew/hobbyist ethos  
built around (and with) kits. As  
deliberately unfinished engines of 
innovation, kits inspire improvisation-
al ingenuity, insight, and investment.
	 So while there may be no “Steve 
Jobs of Kits” yet, there is surely no 
Steve Jobs without kits. There’s no 
Bill Gates or Akio Morita without kits 
either. Their market-transforming 
entrepreneurial leaps all emerged 
from kit-enabled cottage indus-
tries. The two Steves — Jobs and 
Wozniak — literally built Apple from 
kits. Gates and Paul Allen started 
Microsoft as a software systems 

9
Follow us @make
AP Photo/Kyodo News
plane plans in the June 1910 Popular 
Mechanics).
	 Henry Ford’s Detroit likewise 
evolved from homebrew subcultures 
of internal combustion and steam-
powered hackers. Pre-industrialism, 
automobile DIYers relied on quasi-
interchangeable parts and tools 
to craft their horseless carriages. 
Mass production was Ford’s great-
est innovation. But his breakthrough 
created more than a mass-market 
automobile; his Model T’s and 
A’s became kitonomic platforms 
for customization and technical 
upgrades. The general public — not 
just hobbyists — bought kits to 
make their Fords better, as docu-
mented by Kathleen Franz in her 
book Tinkering: Consumers Reinvent 
the Early Automobile.
	 Indirect “kitfluence” is compa-
rably powerful. Adolescent model 
airplane competitions, for example, 
led Paul MacCready into aeronauti-
cal engineering and the creation of 
1977’s human-powered Gossamer 
Condor. The 1931 Grunau Baby 
glider construction kits proved 
essential to Nazi Germany’s efforts 
to rebuild its aviation industry. And 
in the late 50s and 60s, MIT’s Tech 
Model Railroad Club helped inspire 
DIY computing’s “hacker” ethos, 
according to Steven Levy’s Hackers. 
All of the most intriguing narratives 
of industrial innovation feature kits 
as either essential props or compel-
ling plotlines. 
Kits for Green Tech 
and Biotech?
Looking back is easy. Looking 
around — and forward — to evaluate 
potential kitonomic influences is the 
greater challenge. To what extent 
do contemporary kits meaningfully 
anticipate future transformations? 
Does an absence or scarcity of kit-
powered innovation communities 
stifle market development? 
	 Government agencies and venture 
capitalists in America and Europe 
have been infatuated with “green 
tech” investments and “greenova-
tion” markets. But neither breakout 
products nor breakthrough entre-
preneurs have yet redefined the 
category. No Heathkits or Altairs of 
eco-sustainable kits have emerged 
to capture the hearts, minds, or 
imaginations of “human capital,” 
and government subsidies and 
regulations appear to be the domi-
nant market force. Might that help 
explain the sector’s ongoing eco-
nomic challenges?
	 Biotechnology invites the same 
argument. For years, many high-
tech observers (myself included) 
have wondered if bio-hackers and 
“bathtub biotech” would drive bio-
innovation. Might bundling low-cost 
recombinant DNA reagents, gene 
guns, and DIY PCR machines into 
kits make “re-engineering life” irre-
sistible to hobbyists? If bio-hacking 
kits had attracted even 10% of the 
community that homebrew comput-
ing did, would pharma, veterinary 
from kits to commercial giants:
Sony’s founders Akio Morita and Masaru Ibuka 
showing their early radio conversion kits (AM to 
shortwave). 
“kitonomic” innovation doesn’t 
follow the money; the money 
follows the kits.
supplier for DIY computer kit build-
ers. Morita and Masaru Ibuka 
launched Sony with kits to turn AM 
radios into shortwave receivers. 
From the prewar “cat’s-whisker” 
playfulness of crystal radio kits to 
postwar floods of surplus electron-
ics, kits became a medium, mecha-
nism, and marketplace for next-
generation invention.
	 Kit sensibilities, which value inter-
changeable parts and amateur tin-
kerability, enabled other revolutions 
as well. Aviation innovation, from 
the Wright Brothers’ wind-tunnel 
experiments through Lindbergh’s 
Spirit of St. Louis, reflects diligent 
amateur contributions as much as 
sophisticated engineering. Serious 
analysis of early aircraft production 
affirms that its earliest pioneers 
explored modifiable kits as much 
as finished planes (Alberto Santos-
Dumont offered the first free air-

essay
10
Make: kits.makezine.com
medicine, agriculture, bio-materials, 
or bio-informatics have become 
more vibrant? 
	 These questions are no more 
hyperbolic or science fiction-y than 
extrapolating the iPad from the  
Apple I or even anticipating cheap 
mobile telephony from germanium 
crystal wireless kits. Quite the con-
trary: the mix of kits and talented 
amateurs encourages such specula-
tion. Just as the presence of kit cul-
ture signals greater things to come 
in a field, its absence limits vitality 
and diversity.
	 Consider autonomous vehicles. 
Progress in the field crawled along 
for decades while the Pentagon 
was funding the problem through 
its usual contractor process. But 
then in 2004, the first DARPA Grand 
Challenge invited student groups 
and talented amateurs into the field. 
Through this and two successive 
competitions (the last in 2007),  
the winning vehicles leaped from 
being incapable of staying on an 
empty desert road to completing an 
urban course while obeying all traf-
fic laws and avoiding other vehicles. 
And all for mere peanuts in defense 
budget terms.
	 Along these lines, don’t Dean 
Kamen’s FIRST Robotics compe-
titions and Wired editor Chris 
Anderson’s DIY Drones venture  
(see page 26), both of them DIY  
and kitonomic, suggest robotics 
futures more varied and “out of  
control” than anything envisioned 
inside the Pentagon?
Mass Interoperability
The ultimate kits — meta kits — 
emerge when people develop their 
kit building blocks to work with each 
other. You see this with open source 
hardware like Arduino as well as the 
ongoing “appification” of software 
and digital services. Popular open 
standards and protocols subvert tra-
ditional business models, giving rise 
to global DIY R&D that enjoys far 
more brainpower than any company 
department, no many how many 
hot-shot engineers and designers 
it has hired. Perhaps this is why 
Microsoft — despite intense internal 
political battles — decided to turn 
Kinect into a DIY kit platform.
	 Consequently, the most exciting 
mass production consumer sectors 
increasingly defer to Web 2.0-ified 
economies of mass interoperability. 
As serial entrepreneur Joe Kraus 
brilliantly observed, “The 20th-
century mass-production world was 
about dozens of markets of millions 
of people. The 21st century is all 
about millions of markets of dozens 
of people.” 
	 Yes, it is. Remarkable, isn’t it, that 
kit mindsets and methodologies 
appear critical to both? The modu-
larity, hackability, and improvis-
ability that have made individual 
kits successful in the past become 
even more valuable when linked to 
higher-bandwidth swirls of wiki-ed 
and networked information. Higher-
bandwidth and broader interactions 
between people facilitate higher-
bandwidth and broader interoper-
ability between kits. As tool chains 
and other innovation ecosystems 
evolve to be more kitlike, kits evolve 
into hardier innovation ecosystems. 
	 And as (relatively) accessible 
GAME CHANGERS
(clockwise from top): The Steves, Wozniak and 
Jobs, proudly show their Apple I kit; the first 
homebrew Apple  computer; Microsoft’s first 
software was for the Altair 8800b kit computer
(Oppostie) MakerBot Industries is revolu-
tionizing desktop 3D printing as the Arduino 
microcontroller is making physical computing  
accessible to all.
DB Apple/dpa/Corbis (Woz and Jobs); Ed Uthman (Apple 1)

11
Follow us @make
technologies ensure the diffusion, 
dispersion, and development of 
technical knowledge and skills, the 
most talented of amateurs won’t 
just “follow the instructions.” They’ll 
advance well beyond them, and 
invent possible futures. The technol-
ogies may be new, but the patterns 
of human behavior are not. 
	 Academic thought leaders from 
Berkeley’s Henry Chesbrough to 
MIT’s Eric von Hippel celebrate 
“open innovation” as a profound 
paradigm shift in value creation.  
For Chesbrough, open innovation 
revitalizes stale innovation process-
es in established enterprise. For  
von Hippel, greater openness pro-
motes a “democratization of  
innovation” worldwide. 
Toward a Strategic 
Kit Initiative
Following this model, IP shifts from 
“intellectual property” to “innovation 
populism”. What better instantiates 
open innovation than a kit, which 
entwines innovative components, 
innovative bundling, and, of course, 
innovative documentation and col-
laborative support?
	 But the transcendent issue is not 
whether open, proprietary, or “walled 
garden” kits represent the optimal 
format. It’s that — no matter what 
regime is chosen — kitonomics 
appears to play an increasingly  
vital role.
	 If kits can influence and even  
drive sustainable innovation, then 
commercial and not-for-profit  
organizations alike should be  
asking what their SKIs (strategic  
kit initiatives) should look like.
	 Already we’ve begun to see these 
concerns materialize in NGOs 
and philanthropies in emerging 
markets (see “‘Design for Hack’ 
in Medicine,” page 20). A growing 
number of development experts 
such as NYU’s Bill Easterly believe 
customizable kits represent a better 
aid format than finished products. 
(Victor Papanek’s classic Design 
for the Real World — more than E.F. 
Schumacher’s Small Is Beautiful 
manifesto — best articulated this 
“appropriate technology” design 
emphasis.) 
	 The smart money — are you lis-
tening, Gates Foundation? — would 
be on kits as mission-critical ingre-
dients for dramatically stimulating 
quality-of-life and standard-of-living 
innovations in the world’s poorer 
populations. After all, history  
indicates that kits are how emerging 
markets emerge.
	 And now, desktop fabrication 
and manufacturing literally bring 
another material dimension to what 
kits can be. The ability to integrate 
and interoperate digitally designed 
atoms and bits, to share physical 
objects remotely with download-
and-print ease, can’t help but trans-
form design — and by extension, 
everything else.
	 What happens when the same 
hobbyist/homebrew subculture 
that spawned a Gates, a Jobs, and 
a Michael Dell grows around kit-built 
3D printers in Brazil’s favelas and 
India’s public housing? How might 
microentrepreneurial design col-
laborations in Guangzhou yield high-
impact kits inexpensive enough to 
seed talent and innovation through-
out the world?
	 No meaningful answers to those 
questions yet exist. But we can 
be sure that the future of innovation 
is inextricably linked to the future 
of kits. 
Michael Schrage is a research fellow at MIT’s 
Sloan School Center for Digital Business and 
London’s Imperial College Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship Group. He explores how 
organizations use models, prototypes, and 
experiments to manage innovation.
the more pervasive 
a technology, the likelier 
its origins are traceable 
to a homebrew/ 
hobbyist ethos.
MakerBot Industries (top)

COLUMNS
12
Make: kits.makezine.com
1927
Charles Lindbergh’s
trans-Atlantic flight sparks 
craze for model airplane 
kits and competitions.
1975
Bill Gates and Paul Allen 
launch Microsoft with 
software for the Altair 
8800 kit computer.
2007
DIY Drones community 
and kits founded by
Wired editor-in-chief
Chris Anderson.
1930s
Schneider Grunau Baby glider 
kits help Nazi Germany rebuild 
its aviation program.
KIT TIMELINE
1776
Boulton & Watt
produce kits and
plans for commercial
steam engines.
1909–1967
A.C. Gilbert Co. develops 
science, chemistry,
and magic kits, train 
sets, and Erector
construction toys.
1913–1939
Motorists use aftermarket 
kits to customize Ford 
Model A’s and T’s.
1910
Alberto Santos-Dumont offers first free 
airplane plans in Popular Mechanics.
1945
Akio Morita and 
Masaru Ibuka launch 
Sony with kits to
turn AM radios into 
shortwave receivers.
1906–1940
Aladdin Company, Sears 
Roebuck, and others sell
kit houses by mail.
1926–1992
Heathkits are the lead-
ing line of kits in the U.S., 
from aircraft to TVs to 
computers.
1926–1931: Heath Parasol 
is the sole kit airplane 
licensed by FAA.
1947: First electronics kit: 
O1 Oscilloscope for $40.
1977: H8 computer kit, 
$379, leads to H89 
in 1989.
1982: Hero-1 robot kit.
1992: Heath Co. closes 
Heathkit line.
2011
RadioShack begins 
selling MAKE-
branded DIY kits.
1775
1895
1835
1955
1805
1925
1865
1985
1790
1910
1850
1970
1820
1940
1880
2000
2015
2011
Heathkits back by popular demand.
1940–1989
Things of Science program 
delivers hands-on science kits 
to mailboxes across America.
1992
FIRST Robotics Competition
debuts, challenging students
to build unique robots from
standardized kits.
2009
MakerBot, RepRap, and 
other 3D printer kits 
become widely available. 
2008
RepRap 3D printer
can produce copies
of over half its own 
components.
1975–1976
The Altair 8800 personal computer kit 
from MITS kicks off the PC revolution 
in DIY style. (MITS was sold to Pertec 
in 1976.)
2005
Arduino microcontroller debuts.
1976
Steve Jobs and Steve 
Wozniak develop Apple I 
computer as a kit. Only 
200 are made before they 
go on to develop Apple II.
Damien Scogin

13
Follow us @make
For his book Mail Order Mysteries, Kirk Demarais 
scoured eBay and collectors’ websites to purchase 
novelties and kits that had been advertised in comic 
books in the 1960s and 70s. 
	 These kits appealed to the imaginations of kids 
who grew up in a popular culture full of flying saucers 
and monster movies, but they were nearly useless. 
Demarais writes, “For me the collection represents so 
many things: a series of hard-earned revelations, my 
remaining sense of wonder, and the coming-of-age 
discovery that even kids need to be shrewd as ser-
pents lest we get bit by one.” His picks for the worst:
Build Your Own Monster Plans $1
We imagined: Everything needed to assemble a 
monster, a weapon, and a friend.
They sent: What are quite possibly the doodles of 
a middle school student. The Abracadabra Magic 
Shop offered the “plans” for this illusion, which is 
intended to give the impression that a table full of 
parts springs to life after being assembled before 
an audience. The secret is a set of diagonal mirrors 
that conceal a person hidden within the chest.
Customer satisfaction: You’ll feel empty inside.
9-Foot Hot Air Balloon $2
We imagined: A hot air balloon, definitely large 
enough to carry you and a friend.
They sent: Some string, some wire, and a whole lot 
of colored tissue paper. First, you follow the cryptic 
instructions on how to glue together the tissue to 
form a giant balloon. Next, you build a fire and fun-
nel the hot air through a stovepipe (not supplied), 
Comic Book Kits 
that Suck
Robbing kids of their nickels and dimes.
A BOOK REVEALS THE disappointing 
truth behind fantastic-sounding 
products such as X-Ray glasses, 
voice throwers, remote control 
monsters, and secret spy scopes.
By Kirk Demarais
Kirk Demarais
though it’s not likely that many kids ever made it 
to step two.
Customer satisfaction: Tempers will rise.
Build a Working Laser Pistol $2
We imagined: Schematics detailing construction of 
a sophisticated laser weapon, an essential device in 
every spy’s arsenal — or in anyone’s, really.
They sent: A booklet outlining how to project a 
harmless light beam from a toy gun using wire, glue, 
copper tubing, a mirror, flash cubes, batteries, and 
a plastic lasing rod. The task appears challenging 
for even a devout Popular Mechanics subscriber, let 
alone a kid. The laser’s inability to disintegrate is a 
blow, considering the ad’s boast that it’s “used by 
the Argonne National Laboratory (Home of the 
Atomic Bomb).”
Customer satisfaction: Zaps you in the wallet. 
Kirk Demarais is an artist, designer, animator, filmmaker, and author 
of Mail Order Mysteries and Life of the Party, a visual history of the S.S. 
Adams Pranks and Magic Co. kirkdemarais.com
SWINDLED BY MAIL: Just of few of the lame kits that cheated a generation.

FEATURES
14
Make: kits.makezine.com
 My older brothers bet I would never finish it, but 
I might as well have been glued to our playroom 
table because I didn’t get up for three days that 
summer until the entire model was finished and 
gleaming. And I had just as much fun organizing my 
workspace, tools, glue, and paint as I did building the 
model. It was my first man-cave, the first little place 
in my life that my sister didn’t want to mess with. 
The whole experience of car creation just seemed to 
be so essentially satisfying. I was hooked.
 Thirty years later, I’m still at it. Only this time the 
cars are real, and I’ve learned to share the love with 
thousands of fans on the internet as together we 
design the cars that we’re going to build together.
 I run Local Motors in Chandler, Arizona, which is 
the first collaborative car design and engineering 
business wrapped up with the world’s first micro-
factory production facility. Here, customers are 
invited — no, required — to join us in the build of 
their car.
 We recently began manufacturing our first car, the 
Rally Fighter. Designed by one of our 20,000-plus 
community members, Sangho Kim, it’s a premium, 
authentic, off-road vehicle that’s also on-road legal. 
Building a Rally Fighter at our micro-factory is the 
ultimate kit experience, priced at $74,900. 
BUILD YOUR DREAM CAR
At Local Motors, enthusiasts create what big 
automakers won’t.
I BUILT MY FIRST CAR MODEL WHEN 
I WAS 8. IT WAS A DUESENBERG 1934 
COUPE CHAUFFEUR. MAGNIFICENT. 
BODY PIECES THAT SNAPPED TOGETHER, 
METAL PANELS, CHROME INTERIOR 
DETAILS, GLASS WINDOWS THAT FOLDED 
DOWN, REAL FASTENERS, BURGUNDY 
INTERIOR FABRIC, RUBBER TIRES WITH 
WHITE-WALL SIDING, METAL SPOKES, 
CABLES, AND A MINIATURE MOTOR. 
BY JAY ROGERS
Courtesy of Local Motors
OPEN DESIGN
Here’s how it works. Local-motors.com hosts the 
open collaboration space Local Forge, where people 
can post their ideas on anything automotive. Most of 
what’s there is free exploration, but the discussions 
always come back to the essential question: “What 
would it look like if I were to make it real?” This is not 
a fantasy picture site, but a place where engineers, 
designers, and enthusiasts collaborate on stuff that 

Sangho Kim’s drawing of the Rally Fighter concept.
Kim working on the orthographic drawing.
“YOU CAN DREAM ANYTHING YOU WANT HERE, but to see it 
come alive, you must also justify your ideas to your peers and 
accept guidance from our engineering team.”
15
Follow us @make
the big automakers wouldn’t dare to. You can dream 
anything you want here, but to see it come alive, 
you must also justify your ideas to your peers and 
accept guidance from our engineering team.
 We also design for simple assembly. Our cus-
tomers aren’t trained auto workers, and we can’t 
assume their level of expertise, so we steer designs 
to ensure the customer’s capability and enjoyment 
as they build in our micro-factory. Each car must be 
buildable by two people in 12 days, from a clear set 
of instructions that the team develops on a wiki. 
 This open source ethos promotes understand-
ing and sharing by all stakeholders, which eases 
manufacturing and service later. The result is that 
our build process accommodates all comers, from 
13-year-old Iowa Boy Scouts to 85-year-old busi-
nessmen from Kazakhstan.
 Our cars are literally open source. The build wiki is 
accessible and modifiable by anyone. Each build is 
broken down into day-by-day instruction sets, each 
with a text listing and photos of all the required parts 
and tools, and YouTube videos taking you through 
the entire build step. We build our cars here, but 
there is no part of a Local Motors car’s assembly 
that someone can’t study and replicate elsewhere. 

features
 Scale mockup.
Customers at work.
Body panels in construction.
16
Make: kits.makezine.com
The Rally Fighter
Sangho Kim was a young professional industrial 
designer who dreamed that Group B-inspired Dakar 
racing coupes like the Fiat Enduro, Porsche 959, and 
Lancia Stratos needed a younger brother available 
to the common man. He posted his concept draw-
ings of a high-waisted, desert-running, P-51 fighter 
airplane-inspired, off-road car that could also work 
on the road. Kim’s simple side views and gestural 
drawings from several angles described the feeling 
and stance of his Rally Fighter idea, which immedi-
ately caught fire in the Local Motors community.
	 In the next stage, the community discussed initial 
concepts of how to fit the necessary components 
inside the Rally Fighter. For this, we made ortho-
graphic packaging drawings, where the original 
concept is flattened into 2D planes from the side, 
top, and front and then the major systems (wheels, 
engine, transmission, driveshaft, axles, seats, steer-
ing, etc.) are placed in their proper orientation. 
	 The result: the Rally Fighter would have a light-
weight space frame, composite aerodynamic pan-
els, 20-inch shock absorbers, and a mid-mounted 
engine with rear-wheel drive. 
	 This exercise is effectively ground truth for the 
engineers focused on function, but any changes to 
the 2D orthographic views to accommodate gear 
can also alter the 3D appearance of the car in unex-
pected ways. To realign the space requirements with 
the original vision, we snap the orthographic lines 
back out into a 3D surface, add highlights, grav-
ity effects, and texturing, then render the revised 
design. With the Rally Fighter, the community’s gut 
reaction to the renderings was still powerful and 
positive. We had the makings of a potential car. 
	 The next step was open development to get the 
Rally Fighter ready for micro-factory production. 
This is a grand effort, because with each car built, 
we have to train our “build force” (our customers) 
anew, so we’ve got to make the process as clear and 
supportive as possible. 
The Factory
At our facility, people equipped with only hand tools 
and desire, in a 10-by-15-foot concrete build bay, go 
from a box of parts to their finished machine over 
the course of two weeks. Our amazing architect 
worked round the clock on a minimalist plan that 
accommodated everything Local Motors needed in 
our 40,000-square-foot space, from our offices and 
“R&D cage” to the materials fabrication area, where 
chassis are welded and composites are formed. 
	 We use scanners and 3D printers for fluid, rapid 
prototyping, and fabrication equipment like water jet 
cutters for rapid manufacturing. We limited the fixed 
machinery and put everything else on wheels so we 
can move it around. If you think a rolling crosscut 
saw is a bad idea, think again.
	 Our ten build bays are stacked together on the 
build floor so that customers can eyeball each other 
in a friendly game of “I can build to standard better 
than you can.” Competition is an amazing motivator. 
If it works in Dearborn, it should work here.
	 The crown jewel of the build bay is your very own 
tool cart, which contains exactly what you need and 
nothing you don’t. This cart disproves the common 
notion that you need every tool under the sun in 
order to build a car. Actually you only need a few; 
they just have to be the right few. Each bay also has 
a web-enabled screen to consult the all-important 
build instructions, which can be updated on the fly 
with new build-floor wisdom on the open wiki.
	 Finally, since we demand ten-hour days or more 
in this car-building boot camp, we include a kitchen 
and refreshment area managed by a local Arizona 
Culinary graduate who comes prepared to keep the 
troops well fed. A happy belly is a productive mind.
	 That’s how we roll here, and if you breathe auto-
motive and style, I invite you to visit local-motors.
com and engage in real-time auto evolution: design, 
buy, build, and love the car of your dreams. 
Jay Rogers is the president, CEO, and co-founder of Local Motors.

If you can imagine it, you can MAKE it.
makezine.com
»
Subscribe now 
and save 42%* 
“The kind of magazine 
that would impress 
MacGyver.”
—San Francisco Chronicle
You’ll get a total of 4 issues for $34.95 
(Price includes U.S. shipping. For Canada please add $5.
Add $15 for all other countries.)
*
Go to: makezine.com/subscribe
Enter promotion code: G0ASUB
»{
}
Act now! 
speciAl
offer
TSUB
ACT NOW!
SPECIAL 
OFFER
ACT NOW!
SPECIAL
OFFER

features
18
Make: kits.makezine.com
 Daniel had a magician-like patter for each item he 
showed me: the cylindrical Edison phonograph, the 
mutoscope, and the hidden camera inside a silver 
pocketwatch that was used by boxing reporters to 
take forbidden ringside photos. These inventions 
were the predecessors of devices and toys we use 
today, and Daniel wants the current generation to 
see that inventions don’t come out of the blue. 
 On a table in his living room sat open a large red 
Erector Set, a construction toy I remember getting 
in the 1960s. Daniel’s set was older and well worn. 
The manual said the Erector Set was “Developed 
at the Gilbert Hall of Science.” I realized how little 
I knew about this toy from my childhood. 
 Located in midtown Manhattan, the Gilbert Hall of 
Science was a multi-story museum created in 1941 
by the Erector Set’s inventor, A.C. Gilbert, to show-
case educational toys. Gilbert was born in Salem, 
Ore., and went East to get a Yale medical degree that 
he never used. He said he was interested in three 
things: “athletics, sleight-of-hand, and scientific 
experiments” and those interests would define him. 
He won the pole vault in the 1908 Olympics, hav-
ing invented the box that catches the pole on the 
ground (before then, it had a spike at the end).
 Gilbert’s first business was making Mysto Magic 
kits. It was barely profitable, but while making train 
trips from New Haven, Conn., to New York, he was 
Gilbert’s Girders
How 30 million Erector Sets became tools  
for children to teach themselves.
By Dale Dougherty
inspired by the steel-girder construction of bridges 
and skyscrapers to create a new kind of educational 
toy. He produced the first Erector Set in 1913, the 
year the classic The Boy Mechanic books debuted 
from Popular Mechanics. It was an immediate suc-
cess, the right product at the right time.
 Each Erector Set box was filled with steel girders, 
wheels, pulleys, and in larger sets, a battery-powered 
motor that brought the models to life. Different sets, 
numbered from 0 to 8, provided the parts for mak-
ing specific models such as a train bridge or Ferris 
wheel. In the 1920s, the #8 Erector Set cost $70 and 
weighed a staggering 150 pounds; it included all the 
parts for building a 5-foot zeppelin.
 Gilbert saw the Erector Set as an ideal toy for the 
ideal boy, which he defined as competitive, clever, and 
curious, like himself. His biographer Bruce Watson 
argues that Gilbert didn’t just invent educational toys, 
he transformed the popular image of the American 
boy from problem child to problem solver, from delin-
quent to constructive contributor.
 Perhaps the first to create advertising that spoke 
The Museum of Interesting Things  
is crammed into every inch of  
the ninth-floor New York City 
apartment of Denny Daniel, the 
sprite-like curator of an eclectic 
collection of inventions, toys,  
and gadgets.

19
Follow us @make
directly to young people, Gilbert’s ads opened with 
his characteristic “Hello Boys.” His slogans for the 
Erector Set included “Young Boy’s Paradise,” “1000 
Toys in 1,” and “The World’s Greatest Toy.”
 Gilbert believed children will educate themselves if 
you give them the right tools — an idea shared more 
recently by technologists like Seymour Papert of 
MIT. In an age when most learning was rote memo-
rization, Gilbert saw the importance of creative play 
and exploration. He made learning fun. 
 From 1913 to 1966, 30 million Erector Sets were 
sold. The toy’s popularity spanned the technologi-
cal era from the Model T and electrification to the 
age of aerospace, and it evolved to keep pace with 
these developments. It reflected the can-do spirit 
of the American Century, a society that was rapidly 
gaining new abilities to solve problems and do ambi-
tious projects thanks to science and technology. The 
Erector Set was an invitation for any boy to partici-
pate in that future. 
 Erector’s decline followed Gilbert’s death in 1961, 
and the A.C. Gilbert company went bankrupt in 
Francois Lauginie (TheVeryMany)
1967. The brand was bought by Meccano, an English 
company whose comparable construction kits grew 
in parallel to Erector. Lego became the educational 
construction toy for the video game generation, and 
today, Gilbert’s image of the American boy seems 
almost corny, like a Normal Rockwell painting. Still, 
we recognize him in ourselves and in our kids.
 What will be the Erector Set of the 21st century? 
What construction systems will reflect the methods 
and personalities of a more diverse group of builders 
that includes girls and a more global perspective?
 Maybe we’re already seeing key components
in Arduino, MakerBot, and Kinect, all of which
represent new ideas about how to build things and 
interact with them. Perhaps a new generation will 
build custom construction sets, as does architect 
Marc Fornes (see above), designing and cutting 
pieces to order. I see Maker Faire and MAKE as
successors to the Gilbert Hall of Science, inviting 
kids to build a future for themselves. 
Dale Dougherty is founder and publisher of MAKE.
Erecting the Future: Marc Fornes and TheVeryMany
In an old bank building in Brooklyn, irregular strips of brushed aluminum 
about a yard long are spread on the floor. Two people bend them to fit a 
tubular structure and pop-rivet them in place. Each piece is numbered; 
the builders consult a computer to learn how they fit together. It looks 
like a giant coral made from metal.
 This is the sculpture Fibulae by architect/computer scientist Marc 
Fornes and his team TheVeryMany (theverymany.com). He designed it 
using Rhino3D, and wrote scripts to create 2D patterns for the strips, so 
each one could be custom-cut on a CNC machine. Perhaps, instead of 
starting with standardized components, the Erector Set of the future will 
begin with design tools for creating the parts.
A 1950 Erector Set: “The World’s Greatest Toy.”
With Erector toys, A.C. Gilbert made kids a part of America’s can-do society.

features
20
Make: kits.makezine.com
Medical aid is a good story. We’ve all seen articles 
about well-meaning groups donating X-ray machines 
and incubators to needy clinics in the developing 
world. What we don’t see are those same devices 
when they fail as little as six months later — or even 
dead on arrival — because they weren’t designed to 
operate in these environments. 
	 About 90% of medical technology that reaches 
poor countries is hand-me-down equipment 
designed for first-world facilities. Expecting it to 
keep working is like expecting a used Rolls-Royce to 
survive the Paris-Dakar Rally. And after it malfunc-
tions, it’s usually junked.
	 In response, some designers have felt that we need 
to send over cheaper versions of the high-end equip-
ment, the equivalent of economy cars. But what 
these clinics really need are Land Rovers — devices 
designed to be rugged, accessible, and easily repair-
able in the field. 
	 Fortunately, increasing numbers of professionals in 
the medical equipment industry are becoming inter-
ested in applying this different design philosophy to 
devices aimed at developing countries. My lab at MIT, 
Innovations in International Health (IIH), is taking this 
approach even further, by getting everyday makers 
around the world to design and maintain their own 
medical technology.
MacGyver Health Care
In developed countries, we rarely think of modifying 
medical devices. Isn’t that the job of a professional? 
But in most of the developing world, doctors, nurses, 
and health care workers tinker with failing medical 
“Design For Hack” 
in Medicine
MacGyver nurses and Legos are helping us make 
MEDIKits for better health care.
Clinics in the developing world need 
Devices designed like Land Rovers:  
rugged, accessible, and easily 
repairable in the field.
By Jose Gomez-Marquez
Jose Gomez-Marquez
technology every day to fix it or make it work better.
	 These health hackers are often secretive about 
their solutions, however. The first time we saw a 
medical hack, it took us two hours to convince the 
nurse, Daniela Urbina, to show us how she had fixed 
the cracked diaphragm of her stethoscope. A young 
woman from central Nicaragua, she had experiment-
ed with various plastics to replace it, and settled on 
leftover overhead transparency material cut into a 
circle and taped inside. It wasn’t pretty, but it worked. 
We quickly dubbed her a MacGyver nurse.
	 It’s tragic that Daniela wasn’t proud of her inno-
vation. But in the IIH lab at MIT, we’re developing 
MEDIKits (Medical Education Design and Invention 
Kits), construction sets designed to encourage inven-
tion among doctors and nurses in the field.
MEDIKits: Designed for Hacking
Our MEDIKits currently come in five flavors: Drug 
Delivery, Lateral-Flow Diagnostics, Lab-on-Chip, Vital 
Signs, and Agricultural Prosthetics. The kits started 
as boxes of parts assembled to familiarize MIT stu-
Using the Drug Delivery MEDIKit in Nicaragua.

21
Follow us @make
dents with medical devices, and evolved to include 
linear components that you can assemble like Lego 
bricks into a final device. Through the process, we 
developed a modular design language to help users 
see the underlying logic to connecting the parts, and 
added physical stops to keep some components 
within safe ranges of operation.
	 Nothing beats field experimentation to understand 
whether a kit works. In our case, we would run across 
the river to the Boston hospitals and share the kits 
with colleagues, and then fly to Nicaragua, open the 
box, and see what people would do with them. Each 
kit provided us with insights into the design of an 
invention space — which ultimately is what you want. 
	 The Drug Delivery Kit was our first experiment. 
It’s divided into core devices: syringes, nebulizers, 
inhalers, transdermal patches, pills, and several other 
items you might find at your local pharmacy. Then 
we added modifier elements: color coding, shape 
coding, couplings, extenders, springs, plungers, com-
pressors, tilt sensors, buzzers, timers, bicycle pumps, 
and template cutters. These items let users couple 
and change the functionality of the core devices 
within specific degrees of freedom. Finally, we added 
a healthy amount of consumable general-purpose 
materials: zip ties, velcro, adhesives, paper and plas-
tic sheeting, tubing, needles, and respiratory masks. 
The last thing you want is for your users to start 
compromising the modifier’s safety limits because 
they ran out of tape.
	 We designed the limits of our early kits carefully, 
but when users began to snap on, extend, and test 
their creations, something emerged that we did not 
anticipate: they hacked our kits. It starts with some-
one asking permission to simply cut a piece of tubing 
and bypass our carefully designed coupling. Or tak-
ing a part they find in one kit and using it for another, 
for example, adding diagnostic tubing into a mecha-
nism to disable syringes for safety. As users take 
ownership of a kit, you as the kit designer become 
less involved in training people how to use it.
	 So for the kit to be successful, you have to Design 
for Hack. And while it’s impossible to predict every 
type of device a kit can produce, you can start with 
	
	
	
	
  The PuzzleDx kit’s diagnostic puzzle pieces.  
The Drug Delivery kit. 
An Agricultural Prosthetics kit in use.
The PuzzleDx kit design for Lateral-Flow Diagnostics.

features
22
Make: kits.makezine.com
a core set, add degrees of freedom to that core, and 
then anticipate and design areas in which those 
degrees will be hacked. 
	 Our Agricultural Prosthetic MEDIKit is a good 
example. Some great organizations such as Jaipur 
Foot provide affordable prosthetics, but if you’re a 
farmer in the developing world today, and you have 
the misfortune of losing an arm, you’ll probably be 
given a plastic hand that’s aimed at looking good but 
not very functional (and there’s no way you’ll be able 
to afford a sensor-laden robot hand).
	 The Agricultural Prosthetic MEDIKit uses a univer-
sal gripper made from PVC, bicycle inner tubes, and 
a soda bottle to attach most farm tools onto the arm 
or forearm of an amputee farmer. Each part of the kit 
follows the same three principles: core device, modi-
fier device, and consumables. 
	 Since the price of all three is so small, users have 
no problem in modifying the core components to 
make them work better. One person did away with 
the MIT-designed inner tube, and simply cut a notch 
in the PVC joints to let the excess tubing out of the 
way, creating a sling to carry the whole thing. And 
instead of using the shorter parts provided, they 
quickly attached long pieces such as broomsticks 
and telescoping fruit pickers.
Languages of Design
If you’ve ever tried to explain over the phone some-
thing like how to replace a headlamp in a foreign car, 
you know how frustrating it is to lack a language of 
design. “The little plastic knob with screws … yes I 
understand there are four knobs, try the first one….” 
	 We realized that many of the components we 
included in the kit might be foreign to their users: 
English-language labels, injection-molded parts, tiny 
inhaler mechanisms, reagent combinations. To avoid 
confusion, we created a Language of Design, a way 
of color-coding each component in a logical manner 
so that people can identify its function immediately, 
and share their designs simply by describing the 
sequence of coded parts, and not the often-intricate 
mechanisms themselves.
	 Our PuzzleDx kit does that in a fun way for 
Lateral Flow Diagnostics, the class of absorbent 
paper-based diagnostics that includes pregnancy 
tests. These tests contain three components: a 
sample, a reagent pad, and a paper pad that collects 
excess fluid. We knew we couldn’t give users a crash 
course in chemical diagnostics so they could pipette 
their own reagent combinations on blank pieces of 
reagent paper. But we could get them to put together 
puzzle pieces in a sequence that would make sense.
	 So we color-coded different puzzle pieces accord-
ing to the reagent paper contained within and cut 
slots in the pieces to connect the sample collection 
and reagent papers when the puzzle pieces were 
joined. By sharing the types of color combinations 
and the order in which they’re connected (which can 
be as easy as snapping a picture on a cellphone), 
users can easily re-create experiments without hav-
ing to publish a formal protocol.
	 By using Languages of Design, you encourage 
communication across your user communities, facili-
tate understanding, crowdsource patterns of inven-
tive behavior, and allow recognition of those patterns. 
If the Flickr MEDIKit group is getting filled with pic-
tures of prototype combinations with the Yellow, 
Green, and Blue reagent blocks, it may mean that 
manufacturing engineers should really start looking 
at mass-producing glucose, ketones, and human 
chorionic gonadotropin combinations. 
	 When was the last time your pregnancy test  
did that?
  The modular Lab-on-Chip kit.
Lab-on-Chip microfluidics modules on Lego bases.

23
Follow us @make
IF YOU’RE A MAKER THINKING ABOUT HACKING HEALTH, or someone 
in healthcare thinking about creating something tangible, I invite you 
to try it.
Toys: Local and Globally Available Materials
A toy helicopter has a rack and pinion mechanism. 
A toy Ferris wheel turned on its side is an excellent 
centrifuge. A scrapbooking vinyl cutter is a pretty 
good CNC machine for making microfluidic channels. 
Makers have made repurposing materials a competi-
tive sport, and health hacks are no exception. While 
many of the parts in our kits come prepackaged, 
we’ve also seen our users find and invent locally 
available replacements and accessories from toys.
 Now, when we go into a toy store, we see a mecha-
nism paradise. Toys make up an amazing supply 
chain of cheap plastic and electronic mechanisms 
with fairly good tolerances for most medical applica-
tions. Early on, our team was intrigued by what we 
call the glucometer and the Gameboy paradox. Both 
of these devices have equally complex electronics 
and comparable retail price points, but dramatically 
unequal distribution. I can find a handheld game 
console almost anywhere around the globe, even 
in very small towns in the developing world, but in 
Estelí, Nicaragua, 16 different clinics had to share a 
single glucometer. 
An Invitation
As skyrocketing healthcare costs converge with the 
democratization of making, many more people will 
hack health. Whether it’s putting RFID stickers on 
pill bottles to help patients take their pills on time, or 
hacking bike pumps and scrapbook cutters, health is 
filled with fantastic challenges. You can make a differ-
ence whether or not you work in healthcare.
 Medical devices are very tangible things. One of 
the reasons I got into the field is because I knew
I could create things that you can hold in your hand, 
give to someone else, and make a positive difference. 
If you’re a maker thinking about hacking health, 
or someone in healthcare thinking about creating 
something tangible, I invite you to try it. Start with a 
kit or a toy, and you’ll find a community that is eager 
to embrace your creations. We might even hack 
them, and we might even heal someone. 
Jose Gomez-Marquez hacks health for the developing world in his lab 
at Innovations in International Health at MIT (iih.mit.edu). He is the 
founder of LDTC+Labs (ldtclabs.com) and can often be found in toy 
stores around the world or at jfgm@mit.edu.
 Instead of trying to change the global supply chain 
for medical devices, we have learned to embrace the 
existing one for toys. Go to your toy store, and you’ll 
see the same $2 toy gun that a Nicaraguan nurse 
spotted and hacked into an alarm for an IV fluid bag, 
after harvesting the electronics and adding a simple 
trip mechanism. Lego blocks have very precise toler-
ances for creating modular microfluidic components. 
On the way out, toward the bicycle section, pick up a 
bike foot pump so you can power your nebulizer for 
$5 instead of paying $75 for the electric compres-
sor sold in medical supply catalogs. Bonus feature: 
when there’s an asthma emergency in the middle 
of nowhere, you won’t need electricity to save the 
patient. 
Trickle-Up Innovation
Places like Nicaragua have some of the poorest 
areas on the continent. But what about Nebraska? 
What about healthcare at home? For years, health 
technology has been shielded from tinkering and DIY 
invention because of the perceived barriers to entry: 
you’re not a doctor, you’re not a biomedical engineer, 
you require professional supervision. Health equip-
ment has to be safe and rigorously tested, first
and foremost.
 All true, but along the way, that message got 
blurred with professional requirements that are not 
answering our need to make healthcare affordable. 
Try to buy a simple pillbox that lets you know when 
grandma took her pills: some are several hundred 
dollars. Makers build bird feeders that have the same 
functionality for a fraction of the cost. A surgical ster-
ilizer costs $1,000–$8,000. But Anna Young got the 
same functionality by hacking a $30 pressure cooker 
and adding some DIY solar technology. A $30,000 
incubator? Dr. Kris Olson made an incubator out of 
car parts for about $1,000.
 Medical invention kits have the potential to lower 
many of these barriers and put health hacking back 
into the hands of users and of patients — the people 
who have the most to gain from affordable and 
elegant innovations. As the developing world gets 
a head start on DIY medical technologies, we’ll see 
many of those user-generated inventions make their 
way back to richer countries.

features
24
Make: kits.makezine.com
 “You have to understand the whole experience of 
a Heathkit,” Nurse said. “It began with the catalog, 
which became part of my dreams and fantasies.” 
Once he had placed an order, he would count the 
days until his Heathkit box arrived at his home in 
New Jersey. “Finally you’d get the package in the 
post box, after all this anticipation.” 
 Electronics weren’t readily accessible in the 1950s. 
The only place Nurse could see electronic compo-
nents was at a local TV repair shop, which he hung 
around. The Heathkit catalog opened a door to the 
new worlds of hi-fi components, electrical test equip-
ment, ham radios, and television sets. His first build 
was a ham transmitter, the DX-40.
 Nurse recalls the joy of opening up the Heathkit 
box. “First, you’d see the Heathkit manual, which 
was the heart of the kit.” Then he’d find the capaci-
tors and resistors in brown envelopes. A transformer 
came wrapped in spongy paper, a predecessor of 
bubble wrap. “Before you did anything, you had to go 
through the errata that came with the kit.” Then he’d 
inventory the parts and sort them in a muffin tin.
 “After all this waiting and preparation, you’d begin 
to assemble the parts,” he said. “You started by 
attaching a few components, and then you got to 
solder, which was really fun.” When you finished and 
tried it out, often it didn’t work. This, too, was part of 
the process of understanding electronics and learn-
ing to fix problems.
 Nurse eventually got an insider’s view of Heathkit. 
The soul of 
an old Heathkit
A generation grows up building DIY kits.
Howard Nurse built hundreds of 
Heathkits. As a kid, he loved to  
go to sleep reading the catalog —  
a window into the world of  
electronics and a wish list of 
things he wanted to build.
By Dale Dougherty
Courtesy of Terry A. Perdue
In 1964, his father, David W. Nurse, joined the com-
pany as vice president, just as Howard was going off 
to college. He was promoted to president in 1966 and 
remained in that position until he retired in 1980. 
 The Heathkit Company got its start in the 1920s 
as the Heath Aeroplane Company. Founder Eddie 
Heath developed do-it-yourself aircraft kits; his most 
famous was the Heath Parasol, with an overhead 
wing. Unfortunately, he was killed in 1931 in an air-
plane accident. 
 An engineer named Howard Anthony bought the 
company from Heath’s widow in 1935. After World 
War II, Anthony bought a large stock of surplus 
wartime electronic parts, among them 5" CRTs 
(the legend is that he ordered a case but a carload 
arrived). He designed an oscilloscope kit for $39.50 
and began to sell it through mail order. It took ten 
years to go through the original CRT shipment. 
According to an excerpt from the Heathkit Catalog 
found on heathkit-museum.com, Anthony’s success 
was based on “the premise that anyone, regardless 
of technical knowledge or skills, could assemble a kit 
Howard Nurse’s first Heathkit was the DX-40 ham radio transmitter (far left).

25
Follow us @make
himself, and save up to 50% over comparable fac-
tory built models. All that would be required were a 
few simple hand tools and some spare time.”
 In 1951, Anthony also died in an airplane crash. The 
company changed ownership several times, but con-
tinued to produce innovative kits, including a color 
TV set in 1964. Heathkit did $100 million in annual 
sales in the 70s on a wide variety of kits, including 
furniture and satellite TV receivers.
 “The Heathkit philosophy,” said Nurse, “was that 
they didn’t invent new products; they looked for 
products that were already successful in the mar-
ket,” then turned them into kits for the DIY market.
 Nurse believes he may have had a role in persuad-
ing Heathkit to undertake its first digital computer. 
In 1975, the cover of Popular Electronics featured 
the MITS Altair 8800, which originally sold as a kit 
that required the user to solder and assemble the 
components. Noticing that it was selling well, he told 
his father that there should be a Heathkit computer. 
In 1977, Heathkit launched the H8 Digital Computer, 
and it proved to be extremely successful. Based on 
the Intel 8080, the H8 came with 4K of RAM and a 
cassette-tape-based operating system. It had a key-
pad on the front and a nine-digit display. Nurse wrote 
a radio Teletype software program for the H8 and 
started his own business selling it.
 In the 80s, interest in DIY electronics declined, and 
the Heathkit Company stopped making kits. The old 
Heathkits live on as memorabilia exchanged on eBay, 
and in enthusiast websites and Yahoo! groups. 
 “I’ll bet that every engineer in this country over the 
age of 50 grew up building Heathkits,” said Nurse. 
“Heathkits were special. The best way I can explain it 
is,” and he paused. “A Heathkit had a soul.”  
The TX-1 “Scratchy Apache” transmitter is still in use.
The H8 Digital Computer, a huge hit, rocked 4K of RAM in 1977.
UPDATE: HEATHKITS ARE BACK!
In September 2011 Heathkit resumed selling kits 
for the DIYer. Look for new home electronics kits 
— Garage Parking Assistant, Wireless Swimming 
Pool Monitor — and soon, tube-driven audiophile 
gear and amateur radio kits. heathkit.com
Dale Dougherty (dale@oreilly.com) is founder and publisher of MAKE.
“You have to understand the whole experience of a Heathkit,” 
he said. “It began with the catalog, which became part of my 
dreams and fantasies.”

features
26
Make: kits.makezine.com
 Collaborating at diydrones.com, in 2008 the 
group revolutionized amateur robotics by creating 
a drone autopilot based on the cheap, open source 
Arduino microcontroller (see MAKE Volume 19). The 
ArduPilot turns any R/C plane or copter into a fully 
autonomous UAV. 
 Anderson sees a future where robotic aviation is 
ubiquitous. He created the first DIY kits using the 
ArduPilot, then founded 3D Robotics, a company 
making parts, kits, and ready-to-fly UAVs. We asked 
him what he’s learned.
You’re a DIY robot enthusiast who became a  
hardware manufacturer and kit maker. Any  
lessons to share with aspiring kit makers?
Well, I created exactly one kit myself: the robot 
blimp, on the dining room table, with my children 
doing the packing. That was a horrible mistake —  
do not put a 5-year-old in charge of packing. 
 The biggest lesson is that I should not be creating 
kits. The DIY Drones community is developing amaz-
ing technologies like the ArduPilot. We’ve created a 
business with several large factories creating kits, 
and they do it much better than me and my kids.
 I’m chair of 3D Robotics, which makes the 
ArduCopter kit brain, and we work with others who 
make their own kits. We’ve got more than 120 
Hardware 
the Hard Way
How not to make a kit: 
lessons from  Chris Anderson 
of DIY Drones.
Aside from helming Wired MAGAZINE, 
Chris Anderson is Well Known to 
makers as co-founder of the  
DIY Drones community of unmanned 
aerial vehicle enthusiasts. 
Interview by Keith Hammond
www.buildyourowndrone.co.uk
different SKUs. It’s a multimillion-dollar operation 
now; some are kits, some are just boards.
What tipped your decision to sell UAV kits, rather 
than just share designs? 
Three or four years ago I built the Blimpduino. I had 
the idea that you could have an autonomous blimp 
that would fly around in schools, and it would be 
great for teaching kids about robotics.
 So we designed the board, and we put the 
Eagle files up, and said here’s a link to SparkFun’s 
BatchPCB, here’s the parts list to buy from Mouser 
and Digi-Key, and here are the instructions for put-
ting it all together. 
 That’s when we realized it was too hard — people 
just weren’t going to do it. We had to build the 
board for people.
 I made about three boards and said, “I’m 
never doing that again.” So we got a contract 
manufacturer, and found out that you really have 
to order at scale to get pricing. We got the money 
together to buy 500 boards — you have to make a 
leap of faith, take some capital risk to get the vol-
ume. It was a little scary.
 Then we realized that sourcing the other parts 
is also hard. Regular folks have no experience in it. 
I spent a ridiculous amount of time learning the 
economics of mylar balloons. The learning curve 
is steep and expensive. 
 Kitting it was the only way to really get it into 
people’s hands.
What did it take to make that first kit?
The blimp envelope, the laser-cut parts, the motors 
— it was the same process sourcing these. We had 

“If you really want to make a kit 
that lots people will enjoy and 
you’ll continue to sell over the 
years, it will quickly get too big 
for the kitchen table.”
27
Follow us @make
to work with Chinese manufacturers through Alibaba 
to get the motors. It took months to get all the boxes 
of components. This meant volume ordering from a 
dozen different suppliers, getting samples, building 
test boards — all before we could sell the first kit.
 Eventually we got all the parts, got the boards built 
and tested, the firmware loaded, labels printed, and 
at that point I bribed the children for $1 an hour. We 
labeled all the parts and set up an assembly line on 
the dining room table. I was doing quality control, 
but in the end, despite all our efforts, about half the 
kits were missing a part. I spent months sending 
out extra Lego parts or motors to people. I think it’s 
cute that a 5-year-old forgot to put in a part, but the 
customer might not be as charmed.
 Now we have factories in San Diego, Tijuana, and 
Bangkok, running professional assembly and pack-
ing operations so we can keep the customer happy 
and actually keep these things in stock.
What lessons did you learn the hard way? 
Sourcing parts is expensive. You have to buy whole-
sale to sell retail, which means buying in volume — 
in the thousands to get decent pricing — and that’s 
capital risk, especially if you make a design mistake. 
You have to make a bet that you’re going to sell a 
lot of them. You have to explain to your wife or hus-
band why you just put $10,000 on the credit card.
 Hand assembly means you’re in the assembly 
line business, and you’ll spend a lot of time making 
sure everything gets into the kit.
 Often, worse than failing is succeeding. This is not 
a one-time exercise — if you create 1,000 kits and 
succeed, you’ve got to do it again! The third time, 
I had to pay the kids way more than $1 an hour. As 
a kit maker you may discover that the worst thing 
that can happen is that these things become popu-
lar: “Oh no, we can’t keep them in stock!”
 Don’t forget to sell it for a profit.
What would you do differently?
I wouldn’t do it myself next time; that’s why we
started the company. Lines of credit, efficient sourc-
ing, anti-static procedures, dealing with holidays
in China ... 
 If you really want to make a kit that lots of people 
will enjoy and you’ll continue to sell over the years,
it will quickly get too big for the kitchen table. Find

features
ArduCopter Hexa with camera mount, by jDrones and Chris Anderson.  An assembled DIY Drone with parts totaling about $300.
Amateur assembly: Anderson’s kids.  Pro assembly: Arturo in the San Diego factory.  An ArduPilot Mega board is born.
28
Make: kits.makezine.com
a commercial partner that really cares about quality 
control. It’s a real business involving paid profession-
als doing quality assurance, answering customer 
support calls, ensuring that this thing is good and 
stays in stock. As enticing as it is to create a kit, it 
quickly becomes unfun if it’s successful.
	 Also, the tech support on kits is a nightmare. It 
imposes a huge aftermarket burden: you’ve got to 
help people fix it, or take back kits. 
In this issue, MIT’s Michael Schrage says that kit 
makers like DIY Drones suggest a robotics future 
“more varied and ‘out of control’ than anything 
envisioned inside the Pentagon.” 
	 Do you see amateur UAVs getting out of con-
trol? (I’m thinking of the so-called drone terrorist 
arrested by the FBI.) 
First off, there’s no evidence that that guy had GPS 
or anything other than an R/C plane. 
	 We don’t control the use of this technology; our kits 
are not locked down. If you buy a commercial auto-
pilot you can lock it from going to certain places, but 
that’s antithetical to our vision of openness. We have 
really strong guidelines to ban and report any activity 
using UAVs in dangerous ways or as weapons. 
	 Openness means most people will use it for good, 
and some will use it for bad, but that’s true of any 
tool: computers, cellphones, even hammers. There 
are those who want to ban technology and ban the 
maker instinct. 
So what’s the future of UAVs in the hands  
of amateurs?
We started with kits, but we’re very quickly 
moving toward Plug and Play — there’s two orders 
of magnitude difference in the sizes of those 
markets. If you have to put two parts together, 
you’ve eliminated half your market — and if you 
have to solder something, you’ve eliminated 99.9 
percent of your potential market! 
Chris Anderson is a father of five, editor-in-chief of Wired magazine, 
chairman of 3D Robotics, founder of GeekDad, and author of the tech-
future books The Long Tail, Free, and an upcoming book on the new 
industrial revolution.
Jani Harvinen (hex); John Snyder (plane); courtesy of Chris Anderson

Get Started Making Today!
Our 60+ kits featured in this issue are on sale at MakerShed.com/kitspecial 
Take 10% OFF all Maker Shed kits in this issue with coupon code KITSPECIAL*
* Valid while supplies last through 12/31/2011
Hundreds of our 
favorite kits in 
one store: 
makershed.com
Ultimate Microcontroller Pack   MSUMP   $120
MakerShield Kit   MSMS01   $16.95
Pendulum Challenge Kit   MSPC01   $25.99
Make: Electronics 
Components Packs
The Dice Kit   MKSKL09   $19.95
EZ Expander Shield   MKNTD1   $13.95
PumLantern Kit   MKSB009   $29.95
ted Making Today!
ur
m
Make: Electronics
omponents Packs
MECP2   $129.99
MECP1   $109.99

30
Make: kits.makezine.com
A  K i t  M a k e r ' s
manifesto
Rules for Creating an Open Source Community, by the team at Arduino
 1.	 Don’t make something you 
don’t use yourself.
 2.	 Know who you are making 
it for. 
 3.	 Know what you want out  
of it.
 4.	 Make projects, not platforms.
 5.	 Respect the intelligence 
of the beginner.
 6.	 Experts are not the best 
advisors when you want to 
make tools for beginners. 
 7.	
If nobody complains, you’re 
doing something wrong.
 8.	 Everything is a spring  
(i.e., in mechanical systems, 
all parts will deform  
under load).
 9.	 Including people is hard 
(but necessary).
10.	 Good hardware, good 
software, good explana-
tions, and generous users 
make a great project.
11.	 If you’re not prepared to 
have someone adapt,  
improve, clone, or trash  
your work, don’t share it.
12.	 Open source software 
doesn’t necessarily translate 
into a business model. Open 
source hardware must.
13.	 Expect resistance … and 
conspiracy theories.
14.	 Don’t let the fact that you 
don’t know what you’re  
doing stop you.

31
Follow us @make
Our favorite kits 
are ones that:
	Save money when 
compared to buying 
a finished product, and 
make something of 
equal or higher quality.
	Are easy to fix when 
they break, because you 
know where every nut, 
bolt, and component is 
and how they fit together.
	Are fun to build, and 
teach you during the 
building process.
	Elicit admiration when 
you tell people you built 
it yourself.
	(Most importantly) push 
the limits of what you 
thought you were capable 
of, giving you a great feel-
ing of accomplishment.
What We Like In A Kit 
What’s the ideal kit? For starters, it should be 
well designed, made, and documented. You can 
read our criteria for rating those qualities below. 
Beyond this, it depends on you — your interests 
and abilities, and where you want to take them. 
MAKE Ultimate 
Kit Guide 
Rating System
By Keith Hammond and Paul Spinrad
About the Ratings
To give our reviews a common basis 
for comparison, we asked reviewers 
to subjectively rate each kit on a 1–5 
scale for five qualities. Kits without a 
reviewer byline were previously tested 
and approved to sell in the Maker 
Shed store (look for the Shed logo).
Complexity (1=Easy, 5=Difficult)
Is the kit easy, moderate, or challeng-
ing to build for its most likely target 
audience? Kits clearly aimed at 
children would, for example, be rated 
differently from microcontroller kits.
 
Component Quality  
(5=Highest quality)
How nice are the components in 
terms of materials, design, fit, and 
other qualities? Well-made circuit 
boards, computer-cut plastic and 
metal parts, and other precision 
components add to the experience.
NEW: 
MAKE: Kit Reviews 
— Your Trusted 
Source Online
Welcome to the world’s best 
source for the inside scoop on 
kits. We've created a curated 
collection of the coolest kits in 
every category known to man — 
hundreds of kits, hand-picked 
and reviewed by makers like you, 
who’ve built, tested, and rated 
them all. We break the flimsy 
parts, curse the bad instructions, 
and crush crappy kits to bring 
you only the best.
Want to find a quality kit? 
Visit MAKE: Kit Reviews at
kits.makezine.com
Documentation Quality  
(5=Highest quality)
How clear, complete, and polished 
is the documentation? Some of the 
best instructions, like from Makey 
award-winner Lego, don’t use words, 
so they can be understood by anyone. 
Community (5=Most community)
How much of a community is there 
around the kit? Are there builder 
groups, online forums, circles, and 
meetups? Is the kit used in class-
rooms or after-school programs? 
Do the kit makers or builders have a 
presence at events like Maker Faire?
 
Completeness (5=Most complete)
How complete is the kit? Plans only? 
That rates a 1. Parts bundles and kits 
rate 2–5, depending on whether it’s 
just key components, almost every-
thing, or absolutely everything you 
need, including any unusual tools.

KIT REVIEWS
32
Make: kits.makezine.com
1. DFRobotShop Rover
DFRobot and RobotShop.com $90
robotshop.com
Here’s an easy-to-build 
robot base that com-
bines a custom Arduino 
development board with 
inexpensive motors and 
tank-style tracks. It even comes with its 
own lithium polymer power pack and 
self-charging circuit, so you don’t need to 
add batteries.
 
To construct the DFRobotShop Rover 
you have to first assemble the twin motor 
gearbox and rubber treads  — both are
pre-packaged products from Tamiya. 
Then it’s just a handful of screws and 
plastic rivets. Total build time is about an 
hour. Tip from me: use only your fingers 
when assembling the rubber treads; 
sharp tools can tear the rubber.
 
The Rover’s electronics are essentially 
an Arduino with a motor driver circuit. I 
recommend adding a bare-bones Arduino 
prototyping shield, and with some velcro 
tape, the shield will also work as a slip-
proof shelf for the LiPoly battery.
 
To make the robot truly autonomous 
you’ll want to add sensors, like a Ping 
ultrasonic distance ranger. Pre-drilled 
holes at the front of the Rover accept 
Lynxmotion Servo Erector Set parts, and 
RobotShop promises that on the next 
version (available Fall 2011), they’ll add
a prototyping area on the front end.
 
A final word of advice: consider swap-
ping out the 3V motors included with 
the Tamiya gearbox kit for more efficient 
6V versions (RobotShop #RB-Sbo-50); 
they’re under $2 each.
ROBOTICS
BY GORDON MCCOMB,
FATHER OF HOBBY ROBOTICS
3. Wind Up Workshop Robots
Faber-Castell $15
creativityforkids.com
Who would have 
thought a company that 
makes pencils and pens 
could come up with such 
a cool robotics kit for 
all ages! Inside the box are five windup 
mechanisms, plus various arts and crafts 
goodies to make a veritable army of whir-
ring and walking mechanical denizens. 
 
You get some pre-cut stiff paper to 
construct the robot body — these bots are 
made of squares and cylinders, and you 
can combine parts to suit your fancy. Add 
stickers, pushpins, and googly eyes, then 
mix in a highlight or two from the assort-
ment of colored pens so thoughtfully 
stashed in the kit.
 
With enough parts to make five fully 
autonomous wandering robots, this one’s 
great for a whole family — cold or rainy 
day optional. Good for kids 7 and up, 
with adult supervision recommended 
for younger children. 
2. Mr. General Mobile Platform
Arexx / Dagu $67
robotshop.com
Mr. General is a
solderless breadboard 
on wheels — one of 
my favorite ways to 
play with robotics. Mr. 
General puts it all on a sturdy frame, 
throws in a nifty servo-operated object 
detector, and even 140 colored wires. You 
supply the microcontroller; I recommend 
a small all-in-one board, like the BASIC 
Stamp, Boarduino, or Arduino Mini Pro. 
 
The circuit board provides power to the 
four servomotors included in the kit: two 
for the wheels, and two smaller motors 
for a pan/tilt turret, where you mount the 
“compound eye” proximity sensor.
 
This kit requires extensive soldering, 
and a build time of 4–6 hours. Using 1.2V 
rechargeable batteries, you can power a 
5V microcontroller without a voltage reg-
ulator. For controllers that need 7V, use
a boost circuit like the Pololu Adjustable 
Boost Regulator (pololu.com #799), but 
power the motors from the batteries.
1
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
1
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
2
Completeness 
5
There’s almost 
no limit to what 
a well-designed 
robot can do.
1

33
Follow us @make
4. QuadBot
Dagu Electronics $50
robotshop.com
Eight mini servo motors 
and an assortment of 
acrylic pieces combine 
to create the QuadBot, 
a low-cost, four-legged 
robotic pet you can assemble in under an 
hour. The kit doesn’t come with brains 
or batteries; add those yourself. Each 
leg uses two servos, making this a 2DOF 
(two degrees of freedom) walkerbot.
 
Exercising a bit of overkill, I tried out 
my QuadBot using a Dagu Spider control-
ler, which can run up to 48 servos. For 
a less expensive option, try an Arduino 
Uno coupled with a servo shield.
 
QuadBot is tricky to program, but its 
designer, Russell Cameron, provides 
numerous examples on letsmakerobots.
com under the username OddBot.
 
As with other walking robots, you 
should watch battery weight. Use small 
NiMH cells, not alkalines. I got 15 minutes 
of playtime with two 3×AAA packs wired 
in series on the underside of the robot.
5. MadeUSA Robot Base Full Kit
Parallax $880 
parallax.com
Around my house I’ve 
renamed my MadeUSA 
“Big Bruiser” for the 
black and blue marks 
it leaves on my ankles 
when it runs into me during program-
ming tests. Chalk it up to an occupational 
hazard. And besides, I got these bruises 
while having fun.
 
This bot, which is strong enough to 
cart around a full-grown person balanc-
ing on its ⅝"-thick HDPE deck, runs on a 
pair of automotive power window motors 
and pneumatic rubber wheels.
 
The kit comes with motor drivers and 
ten (count ’em!) Ping ultrasonic rangers 
that ring the base and give the robot its 
mythological Medusa look. You supply the 
battery, switches, fuses, and microcon-
troller — I’ve used both an Arduino Mega 
2560 and a Parallax Propeller. The motor 
drivers are controlled via serial commands, 
and their position encoders let you specify 
travel distances before a stop or turn.
6. Boe-Bot Robot and Gripper
Parallax $160 and $56 
parallax.com
I bought my first Boe-
Bot over 10 years ago. 
I’ve dropped it, stepped 
on it, even lost it behind 
the couch for three 
months. Nothing seems to faze this thing.
 
The Boe consists of an aluminum 
frame, upon which two servomotors, 
a battery holder, and a BASIC Stamp 2 
microcontroller board are mounted. 
 
Over the years Parallax has developed 
numerous add-ons. One I like best is the 
servo-operated gripper, which makes 
the Boe-Bot look like a nasty pincher 
bug. The gripper can lift small objects 
like chess pieces and ping pong balls, but 
it won’t fetch a beer — unless it’s a very 
small beer from a very short fridge.
 
Suitable for first-time builders, the 
Boe-Bot takes about 2 hours to build. The 
gripper kit requires a bit more skill; plan 
on another hour. Other nifty accessories 
include a six-legged walker kit and an 
infrared line-following module.
5
4
Complexity 
1
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
5
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
6
3
2
A SOLDERLESS BREADBOARD ON WHEELS —
ONE OF MY FAVORITE WAYS TO PLAY
WITH ROBOTICS. 

KIT REVIEWS
34
Make: kits.makezine.com
7
8
7. 3-in-1 All Terrain Robot
OWI $50 
owirobot.com
I’ve been building OWI 
robot kits since the 
mid-1980s. Some have 
been good, a few not 
worth the box they 
came in. Every once in a while, OWI does 
a kit that’s great — their 3-in-1 All Terrain 
Robot (ATR) is one of these.
 
This entertaining kit, suitable for kids 
12 and up, lets you build three different 
tracked robots. You start by assembling 
separate modules, then snap the modules 
together to create a rover, forklift bot, or 
gripper crawler. You can always unsnap 
the modules and reconfigure them for 
another style. I built the forklift version, 
spending about three hours while watch-
ing reruns of Star Trek. The assembly 
manual is clear and concise, with great 
3D pictures to show how things go 
together.
 
The robots are motorized using a wired 
control box. Two motors operate the left- 
and right-side tracks, while a third motor 
operates an extended mechanism — the 
forklift goes up and down, for example, 
and the gripper opens and closes. 
 
The ATR is immensely hackable, 
thanks to its modular design. Unplug the 
4-pin connector from the control box, 
and substitute your own microcontroller. 
Looks like there’s just enough room on 
top for an Arduino, a motor shield, and 
some LiPoly batteries. Seems like I’ll be 
watching more Trek episodes!
Herbie the 
Mousebot
Maker Shed $40
makershed.com MKSB001
I built this 
Mousebot with my 
son, who had just 
turned 10. At first, 
I had to show him 
how to solder and helped him align 
the sides (not too easy), but by the 
end he was doing all the work him-
self and enjoying the “toughness” of 
the assembly. This kit is simple, but 
it demands attention to detail. The 
fun directions include jokes for kids 
and adults. All in all, this is a great 
starter kit, but you’ll need a nice 
soldering iron.
 
To get Herbie to work, we did 
have to change a few things from 
the directions. They tell you to use 
double-sided foam tape (provided) 
to attach the motors. However, 
when we did that, we couldn’t fit 
the battery in. We just removed the 
tape, reheated the solder to move 
the motor closer to the board, and 
glued it on with Sumo Glue. We
also discovered that Herbie will not 
follow LED flashlights; they just 
don’t put out enough infrared.
—Ryan Pederson
8. AL5B Robotic Arm Combo Kit
Lynxmotion $311 
lynxmotion.com
Ready for a challenge? 
Try one of the robotic 
arms from Lynxmotion. 
I got their AL5B arm kit, 
which sports a 5oz lift 
capacity, five joints, and a reach of 7½ 
inches. I assembled it in one evening, and 
I’ve been having a blast with it ever since. 
 
All arms in the product line are based 
on the company’s Servo Erector Set 
parts. These are prefab aluminum pieces 
designed to mate with standard R/C 
servomotors. You can buy SES parts sepa-
rately, too, for your own arm designs, or 
to modify one of the stock arm models.
 
The AL5B is for experienced builders. 
The hardware comes in numerous bags, 
and it can be a trick keeping track of 
everything. I suggest you open each bag 
only when you need it, and keep a mea-
suring tape nearby to check the length 
of screws. Study the online assembly 
instructions ahead of time while you 
wait for your kit to arrive. The kit doesn’t 
require soldering, but needs a base you 
supply. I used a piece of ½"-thick plastic.
 
Included in the AL5B kit is 
Lynxmotion’s SSC-32 servo controller 
board. Connect it to your PC (via serial 
cable or USB-to-serial adapter), and run 
the free FlowArm software to control
the motion of each joint. Record
complex motions and play
them back with the click
of a button.
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
5
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
5
ROBOTICS

35
Follow us @make
 10
treads. On the software side, an image 
editor now lets you convert your own 
images to fit the LCD display, and a sound 
editor records and converts sound clips,
to play through the speaker. 
 
Most useful of all, a remote control 
menu offers direction and speed control 
for two motors and an action button to 
control one motor independently. This 
lets you test motors without having to 
program anything!
 
I’d like to see more programmable
storage memory, but overall this is a nice 
refresh for Mindstorms NXT. It’s an excel-
lent kit for budding robot enthusiasts and 
also a great gift for veterans.       —Eric Chu
12. Metabots
EnjoyMobil $6–$20
amazon.com
The box contains noth-
ing more than a few 
sheets of die-cut foam-
core, a dozen plastic ball 
joints, and instructions. 
But what they create, after some punch-
ing out and slotting together, are some of 
the coolest-looking posable robot action 
figures on the market today. Available in 
an all-white “prototype” version ripe for 
customization.            —Sean Michael Ragan
10. Sumovore Mini-Sumo 
Robotics Platform
Solarbotics $99
solarbotics.com
This is one of the most 
satisfying kits I’ve ever 
built, and the Sumovore 
it creates will be eligible 
for official RoboGames 
Mini-Sumo competitions, in which robots 
vie to push each other out of the ring.
 
This is not a project for beginners, 
but thanks to clear documentation and 
well-organized components, anyone with 
moderate soldering skills and sufficient 
patience shouldn’t have much trouble. 
It ships with analog “discrete brain” cir-
cuitry, but “brainboard” kits let you add 
popular microcontrollers. 
—Gareth Branwyn
11. Lego Mindstorms NXT 2.0
Lego Mindstorms $280
makershed.com JM2082644
This latest version 
of Lego’s popular 
Mindstorms robotics kit 
includes a new 3-in-1 
color and light sensor 
with LEDs; a new ball shooter; and tank 
9. Topobo
Topobo $149
topobo.com
My living room looks 
like Darwin’s laboratory. 
A three-legged creature 
writhes on the floor. My 
daughter pulls off a leg 
and connects it to its face. My son teach-
es it to walk. It’s really moving now! This 
is how you play and learn with Topobo.
 
Topobo is part construction toy, part 
kinetic memory robot. By combining 
solid parts with active motor/brain hubs 
(learning servos) you can spend hours 
creating unlikely creatures with even 
more unlikely forms of locomotion. 
 
My young kids immediately got how 
to record and play back the motion of 
their creations; press a button, perform 
a few poses, press the button again, and 
it’s alive! I wanted to save movements 
between sessions, but my kids under-
stood before I did that Topobo is about 
exploring novel methods of movement, 
not reproducing past creations.
 
Our only complaints: the Lego 
Technic-compatible connectors are hard 
to remove, and we’d prefer batteries 
to being tethered to the wall with the 
power supply wire.           —John Edgar Park
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
1
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
1
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
i
9
 11
 12
MY LIVING ROOM
LOOKS LIKE
DARWIN’S
LABORATORY. 

KIT REVIEWS
36
Make: kits.makezine.com
ELECTRONICS & CONTROLLERS
SNAP CIRCUITS 
PRO
Elenco $90
makershed.com MKEL11
The award-winning 
Snap Circuits Pro 
500 Experiments kit 
contains more than 
75 parts and detailed 
project books that allow you to build 
over 500 snap-together circuits — no 
tools required. You can assemble a musi-
cal doorbell, laser gun, race game, lie 
detector, electronic kazoo, mind reading 
game, telegraph, AM/FM radio, and so 
many more projects. For ages 8 and up; 
student/teacher guides are available at 
snapcircuits.net. 
LITTLEBITS 
STARTER KIT
littleBits $130
makershed.com MKLB1
The littleBits kit is 
like Lego for basic 
circuits. Each “bit” is 
a small circuit board 
that enables a single 
electronics component or electronic 
function, like a potentiometer, light 
sensor, LED, or motor. The bits snap 
together magnetically with edge con-
nectors that are color-coded to indicate 
their general role within a circuit; for 
example magenta means input, green 
means output, and blue means power. 
The magnets are oriented so that you 
cannot connect the bits the wrong way, 
and three spring-loaded contacts in 
each connector carry voltage, signal, 
and ground from bit to bit. This clever 
design makes experimenting with 
series circuits easy and “wireless.”
—Paul Spinrad
LEARN TO SOLDER 
SKILL BADGE 
Maker Shed $3
makershed.com MKLS01
Thousands of people 
mastered soldering 
for the first time at 
this year’s Maker Faire 
events in the Maker 
Shed’s “Learn to Solder” tents, with 
the helpful coaching of Mitch Altman, 
Jimmie Rodgers, and dozens of other 
hackerspace volunteers. Participants 
left the Maker Shed with smiles on their 
faces, new skills, increased confidence, 
and a cool flashing LED badge to show 
for it. It’s the perfect gateway project 
kit for groups, after-school classes, or 
just for yourself.                        —Dan Woods
See the build at:
makeprojects.com/project/m/82
Complexity 
1
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
5
BUILD OVER 500
SNAP-TOGETHER CIRCUITS!
LIKE LEGO FOR BASIC CIRCUITS.
THE PERFECT GATEWAY KIT.
BEGINNER
& INTERMEDIATE

37
Follow us @make
HD2COMBO REMOTE 
CONTROL RELAY
Carl’s Electronics $30
electronickits.com
Don’t tell the co-op 
board, but I now use 
this RF fun relay kit to 
get into my apartment 
building wirelessly and 
keylessly, by hacking into its intercom 
system, which lets you buzz people into 
the front door.
 
The kit consist a small printed cir-
cuit board and a key fob remote. After 
enclosing the PCB in a small project box, 
I simply wired one of its two relays to 
my intercom’s two Door terminals. 
 
After powering the board up and per-
forming the learning procedure for the 
remote, the system was ready to go. 
 
My apartment is on the second floor 
directly above the entry, so the 250-
foot range on the transmitter fob is not 
an issue. 
 
And there you go: a keyless entry. 
I just buzz myself in. And it’s a rolling 
code transmitter, so no, not just anyone 
with a remote can activate the relay.
—Ryan O’Horo
TV-B-GONE KIT
Adafruit Industries $25
makershed.com MKAD4
Tired of all those TVs 
everywhere? Want a 
break from advertise-
ments while you’re 
trying to eat? Want 
to zap screens from across the street? 
The TV-B-Gone kit is what you need. 
The new v1.2 works worldwide, turning 
off virtually any TV by running 230 TV 
power codes for Asian/North American 
and European IR remote standards. 
Built by Adafruit in co-operation with 
TV-B-Gone inventor Mitch Altman, this 
kit is a great way to build something 
truly useful. Check out the excellent 
tutorials and forums at adafruit.com.
 
MAKE Disclaimer: “Please use 
your TV-B-Gone for good and not evil 
(unless it’s funny, and even then we 
don’t necessarily condone it).”
See the build at: 
makeprojects.com/project/t/637
Solder or snap together devices that do things,
control gadgets, and improve your life.
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
1
Completeness 
4
KIT
ADAFRUIT 
INDUSTRIES
LIMOR FRIED
adafruit.com
Adafruit Industries was founded 
in 2005 by electrical engineer 
Limor Fried. Based in New 
York City, Adafruit makes fun 
and educational open source 
electronics kits with superb 
documentation. Big hits include 
a backup iPhone charger called 
the Minty Boost, and TV-B-Gone, 
a universal remote that powers 
down nearby television sets.
 
Because Adafruit publishes all 
source files and documents its 
kits well, an active community 
has grown around it, with partici-
pants constantly sharing deriva-
tive designs. Adafruit also hosts 
a weekly streaming video show, 
“Ask an Engineer,” where Fried 
fields electronics questions and 
shows off new kits.
 
Limor received a Pioneer 
Award from the Electronic 
Frontier Foundation (EFF) in 
2009, and in April 2011 she was 
featured on the cover of Wired 
magazine’s “How to Make Stuff” 
issue.                               —Becky Stern
KIT MAKER
GET INTO YOUR APARTMENT
WIRELESSLY AND KEYLESSLY.
ZAP SCREENS
FROM ACROSS THE STREET.

KIT REVIEWS
KIT REVIEWS
38
Make: kits.makezine.com
INTERMEDIATE & 
ADVANCED ARDUINO
EZ-EXPANDER 
SHIELD
Nootropic Design $14
makershed.com MKNTD1
When working with 
the Arduno Uno, 
I often find myself 
needing more output 
ports than it’s got. 
Instead of having to trade my Uno 
for an Arduino Mega, I just plug in an 
EZ-Expander Shield, which plugs into 
three I/O ports and furnishes 16 — 
instantly providing 13 more I/Os. While 
each added pin can only safely consume 
about 6mA, this is still enough to drive 
LEDs or operate transistors. The docu-
mentation of this kit is extremely well 
done, with clear directions and photos. 
Assembly was a breeze. And with the 
provided libraries, you only have to add 
one line of code to your sketch to use 
your new expansion pins.                      —TM
GETTING STARTED 
WITH ARDUINO KIT 
V3.0
Maker Shed $65
makershed.com MSGSA
The world of Arduino 
microcontrollers can 
be a challenge to break 
into — but not if you’re 
equipped with this 
kit, which includes all of the hardware 
you need to work through each of the 
experiments in Getting Started with 
Arduino, the popular introductory book 
by Arduino project co-founder Massimo 
Banzi. To make it even easier, all of the 
components are solder-free, except 
for the DC plug and battery pack — just 
plug, play, and learn. Not only does the 
book go over all of the Arduino’s fea-
tures, it also gives a good overview of 
basic electronics. After completing this 
kit, I found myself ready to take on all 
sorts of physical computing projects. 
—Tyler Moskowite
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
MICROCONTROLLERS
PROTOSNAP 
PRO MINI
SparkFun Electronics $45
makershed.com MKSF8
The ProtoSnap Pro 
Mini is one of the more 
interesting Arduino 
kits. Manufactured 
on a single PCB, it 
includes a preassembled Arduino Pro 
Mini (0.7"×1.3") and snap-off accessory
boards like an FTDI Basic Breakout 
board, buzzer, RGB LED, light sensor, 
pushbutton, and a general-purpose
protoboard for wiring up your own
custom components. Snap off each 
piece, and you’ll see there are holes to 
solder pins, wires, or however it needs 
to connect. Then you can load your 
project’s sketch onto the Pro Mini imme-
diately to start testing. Finally, the 
documentation is concise, for those just 
getting started with Arduino, and even 
enjoyable to read. This is a great kit for 
Arduino lovers of all experience levels. 
—TM
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
A GREAT KIT FOR ARDUINO LOVERS 
OF ALL EXPERIENCE LEVELS.
ADD NEW I/O’S TO YOUR 
ARDUINO UNO.
LER
ADD NEW I/O’S TO YOUR 
ARDUINO UNO.
JUST PLUG, PLAY, AND LEARN.

39
Follow us @make
VOICE
SHIELD
Spikenzie Labs $46
makershed.com MKSKL3
The Voice Shield is an 
analog audio shield for 
Arduino and compat-
ible boards that allows 
you to play audio files 
saved in WAV format, whether short 
sound bites or entire operas. It lets you 
easily add audio to your next micro-
controller project, thanks to a unique 
and very user-friendly way to access 
different sound clips. Use this shield to 
build devices that talk, sing, play music, 
or have sound effects.
MINTRONICS BUNDLE: 
MINTDUINO + 
SURVIVAL PACK
Maker Shed $45
makershed.com MSBUN24
The Mintronics Bundle 
from the Maker Shed 
is a great way to get 
started with Arduino 
and electronics. It 
includes a MintDuino — a mint tin 
containing all the components you 
need to build a full-featured Arduino-
compatible microcontroller — plus the 
Mintronics Survival Pack, another 
tin containing over 60 über-handy 
components you can use for quick 
fixes or complete electronics projects. 
(To upload your programs onto the 
ATmega328P microprocessor, you’ll
also need an FTDI programmer like
the FTDI Friend.)
See the build at: 
makeprojects.com/project/t/608
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
ARDUINO ADK 
TINKERKIT
Arduino $359
makershed.com MKSP10
Android rocked the 
physical computing 
landscape last spring 
when it announced 
the Android Open 
Accessory Development Kit (ADK), an 
Arduino-based platform that combines 
the brains and connectivity of the 
Android with Arduino’s wealth of open 
source wares for controlling physical 
devices. The ADK presents almost limit-
less potential for projects. 
 
Now the ADK TinkerKit unleashes 
this potential with the new Arduino 
Mega ADK (also sold separately for 
$85), which interfaces with an Android 
device via a USB host, and a multi-
tude of modules such as LEDs, relays, 
joysticks, potentiometers, touch and 
temperature sensors, and many more. 
One caveat: the documentation on how 
to work with this technology, which 
bridges the Arduino and Android envi-
ronments, is still sparse, and working 
with this kit is not for the faint of heart. 
—TM
Complexity 
5
Components 
4
Documentation 2
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
USE FOR QUICK FIXES OR COMPLETE 
ELECTRONICS PROJECTS.
BUILD DEVICES THAT TALK,
SING, OR PLAY MUSIC.
LIMITLESS POTENTIAL
FOR PROJECTS.
ALL ITEMS 
THIS PAGE

KIT REVIEWS
KIT REVIEWS
40
Make: kits.makezine.com
ELECTRONICS & CONTROLLERS
OVER 100 COMPONENTS
COVERING ALL THE BASICS.
ULTIMATE 
MICROCONTROLLER 
PACK
Maker Shed $120
makershed.com MSUMP
You can find an
endless number of 
cool microcontroller 
projects and tutorials 
online these days. The 
tricky part is finding one that matches 
the components you already have or 
sourcing what you need to tackle that 
awesome project you’re dying to sink 
your teeth into. So the MAKE staff 
designed this pack with everything 
they wanted for their own microcon-
troller projects. From the Maker Shield 
prototyping shield to an LCD screen; 
breadboards to force resistors; tilt
sensor to mini DC motor, and pretty 
much every resistor, capacitor, and 
basic LED, this pack has over 100 com-
ponents covering all the basics and the 
fun stuff too. It’s an awesome pack for 
both beginners and advanced users, 
which is why it’s available with Arduino 
Uno, Netduino, Netduino Plus, or no 
microcontroller at all.                               —DW
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
4
Completeness 
5
NFC/RFID 
CONTROLLER 
BREAKOUT BOARD
Adafruit Industries $50
adafruit.com
In the next few years 
there’s going to be an 
influx of a not-so-new 
technology called Near 
Field Communication 
(NFC), which is very similar to RFID, and 
enables small devices to read passive 
tags and communicate with each other 
in close proximity. Card readers use it, as 
do phones that do payment processing. 
 
Adafruit’s PN532 NFC/RFID controller 
breakout board v1.3 can do it all with 
NFC and RFID, reading types 1 to 4 of 
both standards. The board provides 
read and write communication though 
3.3V TTL UART at any baud rate, I2C, 
or SPI, and is supported by the open 
source general NFC library libnfc. The 
device-specific Arduino library provided 
by Adafruit currently only supports a 
read function, but there are plans to 
expand it.                                                         —TM
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
3
FREESCALE TOWER 
MICROCONTROLLER 
SYSTEM
Freescale Semiconductor $99
freescale.com/tower
Got a project to pro-
totype? Freescale’s 
Tower system 
with its Real Time 
Communications Suite 
(RTCS) offers greater processing power 
and more programming resources than 
Arduino, although it takes longer to 
learn.
 
The basic kit consists of the 32-bit 
microcontroller board with USB and 
RS-232 interfaces, accelerometer, four 
display LEDs, switches, and a potenti-
ometer. Additional modules include dif-
ferent microcontrollers, LCD display, and 
sensor, wi-fi, and prototyping boards.
 
After trying the tutorials, I wired a 
solderless breadboard with light and 
temperature sensors to the Tower’s side 
expansion port, then modified the code 
to read the sensors via the internet. No 
soldering! Freescale’s documentation 
makes development easy, and the com-
munity at towergeeks.org can help you 
over the bumps.          —L. Abraham Smith
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
5
FEEL THE TOWER’S POWER.
DO IT ALL WITH
NFC AND RFID.

41
Follow us @make
retrocomputing
Apple I 
Replica Kit
Briel Computers $149
brielcomputers.com
Hobbyists are 
rediscovering the 
appeal of classic 
microcomputers from 
the 70s and early 
80s, eager to tinker with computers 
at their fundamental level.
	
Vince Briel designed the Replica I 
with permission from the Apple I’s 
original creator, Steve Wozniak. He 
sells it assembled ($199), as a kit 
($149), or just the motherboard and 
specialized chips ($79). (Alternatively, 
the schematic, PCB layout, and fab-
rication documents — enabling you 
to build a system from scratch — are 
included with my book Apple I Replica 
Creation.)
	
The Replica I is built around the 
same 6502 microprocessor used in the 
Apple I, Apple II, Commodore 64, Atari 
2600, and NES. The design has three 
parts: processor section, video section, 
and PS/2 interface. (The PS/2 interface 
is peripheral; an ASCII keyboard works 
just as well, and can be connected 
directly to the processor section.)
	
The processor section consists of 
the 6502 processor, a 6821 periph-
eral interface adapter that controls 
all the I/O, a 32KB RAM chip, an 8KB 
ROM chip, and three TTL chips. The 
keyboard provides ASCII input to the 
6821, which passes it along to the pro-
cessor. To display text on the screen, 
the processor sends ASCII to the 6821, 
which in turn passes it (as ASCII) to 
the video section. 
	
The Apple I had no graphics support 
and was unable to edit text once it 
was sent to the video section, which 
served as a dumb terminal. The Replica 
I uses a Parallax Propeller to send 
video to TV, and there are hacks to 
redirect video output to a printer 
or teletype.
	
The Apple I is about as simple as 
an 8-bit microcomputer can get, and 
hacks and projects for it abound. 
Larry Nelson has ported a floating 
point BASIC to the Apple I. Vince Briel 
designed a serial interface card, ported 
the classic 70s game Star Trek, and 
recently added user firmware updates 
to the Replica I — no need to send in for 
new chips. Ken Wessen added a full-
blown assembler to the EPROM, letting 
the user assemble 6502 programs 
right on the Replica I without a PC. 
	
Mike Willegal (willegal.net) sells a 
replica Apple cassette interface kit for 
loading programs from tape (he also 
sells an all-vintage Apple I clone called 
the Mimeo 1 for, yes, $666.66). Others 
are replacing cassettes with iPods.
	
The Apple I Owners Club (apple 
fritter.com/apple1) serves as the 
meeting place for retrocomputing 
enthusiasts. Ideas are exchanged, 
hardware is built, and software is 
written. If you’re interested, I hope 
you’ll join us.                              —Tom Owad
Egg-Bot
Evil Mad Science $195 to $220
evilmadscience.com
The Egg-Bot is an 
art robot designed 
by Bruce Shapiro 
that’s fun to watch 
as it draws intricate 
designs on eggs or any other round 
objects 3cm–10cm in diameter, includ-
ing ornaments, golf balls, and light 
bulbs. You design the patterns in  
the free app Inkscape, and the bot 
draws them using fine-point Sharpies, 
engraving tools, or other implements. 
The decorated eggs come out so beauti-
ful that people have asked whether 
using an Egg-Bot is “cheating.” A 
healthier attitude is to think of the  
Egg-Bot as one more tool in the egg 
decorator’s arsenal. 
	
This kit includes the fiberglass 
chassis, all stepper and servomotors 
and other parts, and the fully assem-
bled and tested USB motor driver board; 
you provide computer, egg, and pen. A 
deluxe kit adds shiny brass hardware, 
no-slip egg gripper, and a ball driver.
—PS
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
one more tool in the egg 
decorator’s arsenal.
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
5
Completeness 
4

kit reviews
42
Make: kits.makezine.com
LEDs
Add human ingenuity, and you 
get countless simple, hackable circuits 
that do amazing things with bright, 
colorful “das blinkenlights.”
Wayne and 
layne
wayneandlayne.com 
Adam Wayne Wolf and Matthew 
Layne Beckler met in 6th grade 
and quickly began collaborat-
ing over such geeky pursuits as 
K’Nex logic gates and microcon-
trollers. They were roommates 
at the University of Minnesota, 
earning degrees in computer 
engineering before moving on 
to grad school. Eventually, their 
friendship evolved to include a 
business partnership.
	
Their first product was the 
Tactile Metronome Kit. “After 
selling our first batch of kits, and 
even making a profit, we decided 
to turn our business experiment 
into an actual business in the 
spring of 2009,” Wolf says.
	
Their next kit, the Video 
Game Shield, turns an ordinary 
Arduino into a video game 
machine. As an open source proj-
ect, users can create and share 
their own games for the shield.
	
Since then, W&L have come 
out with a line of innovative kits 
and plan to do some work with
Android and Arduino in the 
future, as well as add features to 
their Blinky kits. Stay tuned!
—John Baichtal
kit makers
1. Red Blinky POV
Wayne and Layne $16 
makershed.com MKWL03
This kit is amazingly 
cool and easy to use. 
POV (persistence of 
vision) displays show 
words or patterns that 
seem to float in mid-air; if you’ve ever 
seen one, you know what a great effect 
it is. A line of LEDs flashes the Y com-
ponent of what you’re displaying, and 
you provide the X by moving across the 
field of view — now you see it, now you 
don’t. With the Red Blinky POV, you don’t 
need to do any programming to set the 
message you want to display: just enter 
your text into a dedicated web page and 
hold the Blinky up to your monitor. The 
onboard pre-programmed microcontroller 
and light sensors on the back eliminate 
the need for a programming cable.
—Paul Spinrad
2. Conway’s Game of Life
Adafruit Technologies $18
makershed.com MKAD3
Our family reunions 
have become quite an 
affair now that my 
mother can tally 21 
grandkids. Aged from 1 
to 20, keeping them busy is a challenge. 
At last year’s reunion I brought a small 
LED craft project for the little kids, but I 
needed something more challenging for 
the older ones. Luckily, I came across this 
Game of Life Kit. 
	
The Game of Life, as proposed by John 
Conway in 1970, is not really a game, but 
it’s fun to watch. From an initial pattern 
on a grid, it dictates simple rules that 
govern the life or death of each square. 
Through successive iterations, amazing 
shapes evolve, and the larger the grid, 
the more elaborate the patterns. 
	
At the reunion, I pulled kids aside two 
at a time, gave them a brief lesson on 
soldering, and then let them try their 
hand at it. Then, as each kit was finished 
and tested, we attached it to the boards 
that were already assembled, where 
they communicated with one another, 
allowing more elaborate patterns to form. 
We wound up with ten boards all work-
ing together, and the assembly was as 
mesmerizing as the campfire. As each 
family prepared to leave at the end of the 
reunion, I gave each kid their board to 
take home.	
	
   —Ken Olsen
3. Meggy Jr RGB Game Console
Evil Mad Science $75
evilmadscience.com
This pixel-scale, 
portable Meggy Jr game 
platform is fun for any 
gamer, especially those 
who know their way 
around an Arduino. About the size of a 
VHS tape, it offers an 8×8 matrix of RGB 
LEDs and a lot of functionality with very 
little setup. It comes pre-programmed 
with Attack of the Cherry Tomatoes, a 
side-scrolling pixel shooter, and its USB-
TTL interface lets you program your own 
rockin’ pixel game. As with most Evil 
Mad Science products, a dedicated wiki 
provides all the documentation to hack, 
mod, or customize your handheld any 
way you like.                       —Tyler Moskowite
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
5

43
Follow us @make
6
2
3
4
5
Amanda Nix (6)
1
4. Octolively
Evil Mad Science $35 
evilmadscience.com
The Octolively is one 
of the most entertain-
ing kits I have built in a 
while. It’s an interactive, 
tileable LED module that 
carries eight huge (10mm) LEDs arranged 
on its 4"×8" board. Its sensors detect 
nearby movement using both infrared 
and visible light, and the LEDs, which 
come in a variety of colors, respond with 
eight preprogrammed behaviors you 
select with a button. You can also use 
an AVR programmer to program custom 
behaviors or install firmware updates. 
The Octolively modules run off 5V DC and 
can be installed almost anywhere.     —TM 
5. Mignon Game Console
Mignon €52 (about $69) 
mignongamekit.com
Although 5×7 pixels 
aren’t a lot to work with, 
it’s easy to get lost in 
Olaf Val’s Mignon Game 
Kit. This minimalist 
handheld gaming system is hands-on in 
more ways than one. The first step is to 
put it together; second is to hack code 
for the Atmel ATmega8 microcontroller 
that powers it; and third, you get to play 
with it. With a four-way directional pad 
and two function buttons, the Mignon is 
ready for some serious, if extremely basic, 
gaming.
	
The Mignon is complex enough to be 
interesting, but not so complex that a 
child would have trouble with it. It’s a 
perfect microcontroller kit for hardware 
hackers of all ages (provided you’ve got 
the appropriate supervision for the sol-
dering at the lower end of that age scale). 
But with just over 100 solder joints, make 
sure to set aside a few hours for assem-
bly, especially if this is your first major 
soldering endeavor.
	
There are two games stored in the 
ATmega8’s nonvolatile RAM, Maze Driver 
and Min Pong, which hopefully will 
get overwritten soon with your own 
programs.
	
For programming, use any compiler 
that supports the ATmega8; BASIC and 
C are popular choices. You access the 
bootloader through a 9-pin D-Sub serial 
port, so computers lacking USB will need 
a serial adapter. Like the Mignon as a 
whole, its programming interface is 
extremely simple and does not require 
any tricky-to-use separate hardware 
programmer.                                  —Brian Jepson
6. Rainbow Cube
Seeed Studio $60
seeedstudio.com
The Rainbow Cube is 
a nerdy but gorgeous 
accent light consisting 
of a 4×4×4 cube of 
red-green-blue LEDs. 
Depending on how it’s programmed, 
colors appear to move, pulse, or wash 
through the cube in all directions, which 
is fascinating to watch. The LEDs connect 
to the PCB base via an ingenious struc-
ture consisting of thin PCB supports. I 
only had a little bit of experience solder-
ing before I made this kit, but I was able 
to successfully solder it in two hours.
	
The cube comes preprogrammed with 
a simple gradient, but there are a lot of 
fun, full-motion programs online, and 
of course you can write your own. To 
make the cube work, you’ll also need a 
Rainbowduino LED driver board ($20), 
which attaches to the cube to control 
the colors.
—Amanda Nix
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
5
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
Nerdy but gorgeous 
accent light.

kit reviews
44
Make: kits.makezine.com
9. Peggy 2LE
Evil Mad Science $75 
makershed.com MKEMS3
Peggy 2LE provides a 
quick, easy, powerful, 
and efficient way to 
drive a lot of big, bright 
LEDs — up to 625 — in a 
matrix. With it, you can make an LED sign 
for your window, a geeky valentine for 
your sweetie, one badass birthday card, 
the next generation of low-pixel-count 
video games, or even outdoor signs that 
(as has been shown) can freak the holy 
bejesus out of the city of Boston. Your 
call. The display can run off batteries or 
the included AC adapter, and is designed 
to drive as many LEDs as you care to 
solder into its holes, any colors, standard 
3mm or 5mm sizes. LEDs not included.
10. LED Art Kit
Murphlab $20 
makershed.com MKKM2
This easy-to-assemble, 
no-solder kit lets you 
create your own unique 
LED light show. The only 
tool needed is a pair of 
pliers for crimping the wire connectors. 
The RGB (red-green-blue) LEDs create a 
slow, ever-changing, multicolored glow 
that’s perfect for setting the mood of any 
room. Makes a great nightlight, too!
7. Trippy RGB Waves
Cornfield Electronics $10 
makershed.com MKCE4
Do you like interactive 
art? Imagine a bunch of 
little lights on a table, 
each about the size of a 
chess piece, each inde-
pendent of the others. Arrange them any 
way you want. Each light continually and 
slowly changes colors on its own — but 
when you wave your hand over them, 
they create waves of colors that follow 
your hand. Trippy!
	
To go deeper, a 6-pin ICSP interface lets 
you use an AVR programmer or Arduino 
to reprogram each light’s behavior. To 
sense proximity, the lights use an infra-
red LED and IR detector. This is another 
awesome and affordable kit from Mitch 
Altman, the creator of the TV-B-Gone  
and the Brain Machine.
7
9
8
10
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
5
8. LED Video Light
ProdMod $35 
makershed.com MKPM3
Have you tried taking 
video using your digital 
camera but never seem 
to have enough light? 
Does your camera have 
trouble focusing in the dark? LEDs are 
cheap, and so are resistors, so why not 
make your own LED Video Light? With 
this second-generation kit from ProdMod, 
you’ll transform a simple battery holder 
into a fully functional mini LED floodlight 
that you can attach to your digital, film, 
or video camera. It runs more than seven 
hours with three AA batteries, and it’s so 
slim that you can slip it into your pocket 
or purse and use it as a wide-angle 
flashlight.
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
2
Complexity 
1
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
2
Completeness 
5
leds 
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
1
Completeness 
4
Transform a simple battery holder into a fully functional 
mini LED floodlight.

45
Follow us @make
In my opinion the 
coolest innovation in 
R/C vehicles is the 
crawler. As the name 
implies, crawlers are 
incredible crawling machines that are 
super fun to build and to run. Like a 
good video game, they’re easy to pick 
up but hard to master. Crawlers are 
built to climb over serious terrain, and 
some are built as scale trucks that 
look as realistic as possible (while still 
being monster crawlers). There’s no 
shortage of stuff to climb, from back-
yard rocks to your living room couch.
	 RC4WD’s Killer Krawler is one of 
the biggest such models in the world. 
At 1/5 scale, it has a fully 
CNC-machined aluminum chassis, 
an articulation angle of 90°, nearly 6 
inches of center ground clearance, 
and an over 22-inch wheelbase. 
	 As with all crawlers, this one is four-
wheel-drive, with locked differentials. 
It has two motors, one on each axle, 
aka MOA (motor on axle). The gears, 
along with everything else on this 
beast, are all billet aluminum, so it’ll 
withstand anything you can throw at 
it. The 30:1 gear ratio ensures high 
torque for precise crawling. Two ESCs 
(electronic speed controllers), two 
motors, a radio system, servo, and 
a battery are required to complete 
this kit. 
	 The giant scale of the chassis 
kit makes it attractive as a potential 
robotics platform, able to handle 
extremely rough terrain and big 
enough to carry a truckload of sen-
sors and hardware. RC4WD has 
hundreds of options and parts to 
choose from — wheels, tires, chassis, 
shocks, axles, transmissions, and 
electronics — to help you easily 
customize a truck of your choice.   
—I-Wei Huang
Killer Krawler
RC4WD $700 chassis kit, $1,300 ready to run rc4wd.com
From extreme rock crawlers to autonomous quad 
copters, the state of the art in radio-controlled vehicles 
is available to any maker in these great kits.
Radio-controlled Vehicles 
Complexity	
3
Components	
5
Documentation	 2
Community	
3
Completeness	
3

KIT REVIEWS
46
Make: kits.makezine.com
3. 66-inch Indoor Blimp
Mobile Airships $347
rcguys.com
Who doesn’t love 
blimps? They’re quiet 
and slow but leave a 
huge impression. This 
kit goes together easily 
using basic hand tools and the included 
directions, and has almost everything 
you need to get airborne; you supply R/C 
gear, servo, battery, and helium. 
 
The vinyl balloon can be decorated 
with paints or computer-cut graphics, 
which is perfect for sporting events, 
trade shows, or just for fun. 
 
Add a few coins for ballast, and you 
can fly the blimp indoors with precision 
by using a gentle hand on the controls. In 
flight it looks amazing, just like a smaller 
version of the real thing. 
1. ArduCopter 3DR Quadcopter
DIY Drones $589
store.diydrones.com
Quadcopters rely on 
computer stabilization 
to fly. They can be radio 
controlled, but with 
an onboard computer, 
why not let it fly itself? The community 
at DIY Drones (see page 26) developed 
the open source ArduPilot Mega (APM), 
an Arduino-based autopilot that lets you 
control multi-rotor (and other) aircraft 
autonomously, or via R/C. 
 
The ArduCopter 3DR Quad Kit with 
Electronics includes everything to build 
your own quad UAV, except radio gear 
and batteries. Directions are easily
downloaded, and assembly is relatively 
painless; just take care to put thread-
locker on all screws, and balance the 
props. A wiki walks you through the 
Mission Planner software, firmware 
installation, and calibration of the APM 
board, sensors, and speed controls. 
 
In autonomous mode, the ArduCopter 
takes off, follows GPS waypoints, and 
lands unassisted. In manual mode you 
fly it by the remote and make it hover 
(“loiter”) by flipping a switch. The DIY 
Drones community is there to help and 
they’ll push you to expand — add video or 
use a ground control station to wirelessly 
upload new coordinates  — so you’ll never 
tire of your ArduCopter. 
2. T-IFO Indoor Trainer
Wild R/C $54 and up 
wildrc.com
This unique, rugged R/C 
trainer is assembled 
by bending carbon 
fiber rods, binding 
with Kevlar thread, 
and then covering with polyester fabric. 
The build takes an evening or two; add a 
radio, servos, and batteries, and enjoy a 
remarkably good airplane for beginners 
and experienced pilots. Plus, it folds flat, 
so you can take it anywhere!  
BY MICHAEL CASTOR, 
MAKER SHED EVANGELIST 
R/C VEHICLES
3. 66-inch Indoor Blimp
d 
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
1
2
3
THE DIY DRONES COMMUNITY 
IS THERE TO HELP AND THEY’LL 
PUSH YOU TO EXPAND.

47
Follow us @make
4. Trail Finder Truck
RC4WD $300
rc4wd.com
This 1/10 scale kit has 
amazing realism and 
performance, with alu-
minum and steel chassis 
and body components 
like those of a full-sized vehicle. You’ll feel 
like a mechanic building it. You add motor, 
speed control, radio, servo, and battery.
5. R/C Superhero
Rcsuperhero.com $365
This wild-looking R/C 
plane is life-sized (78” 
tall) and can take off 
vertically! The kit makes 
a superhero-shaped 
fuselage; you add R/C gear. Directions are 
clear, and the laser-cut parts go together 
smoothly, but it’s a bit tricky — a fun and 
unique kit for experienced builders that 
will definitely command attention! 57” 
hero plans are just $10. 
6. Align T-REX 450 Sport
Super Combo
Align RC $500 
rcplanet.com
The Align T-REX 450 
Sport is a terrific, well-
supported copter that 
will satisfy trained 
beginners and advanced 
pilots. The Super Combo package includes 
all but the transmitter, receiver, batteries, 
and blade pitch gauge. The comprehen-
sive manual advises that you rebuild the 
pre-assembled parts, checking align-
ment, using thread-locker on all screws 
and bolts, and lubricating where required. 
 
The machined aluminum, carbon fiber, 
and plastic parts ensure a rigid, stable 
airframe capable of precise 3D aerobatics. 
The electronics (servos, speed control, 
brushless motor, and gyro) are perfectly 
suited to the copter, so most pilots won’t 
want to upgrade. Simulator training or 
prior experience is highly recommended 
before flying.
7. Engel Submarine
Type 212A
Alexander Engel KG $800
engel-modellbau.de
The high-quality Engel 
Type 212 submarine kit 
is perfect if you’re into 
scale models, history, 
and realism. Modeled 
after the German Navy’s advanced Type 
212 sub, this functional 1/70 scale model 
goes together smoothly using cast-resin, 
CNC’ed ABS plastic, brass, and stainless 
steel components. Engel’s innovative 
Tech Rack mounting ensures that your 
electronics stay dry, and multiple elec-
tronic safeties make sure you don’t lose 
your boat in the event of a mishap. 
 
In the water, the sub looks incred-
ible and dives, surfaces, and turns just 
like the real thing! Great for beginners 
and advanced hobbyists alike. Expect 
to finish it in a week or so (although the 
manual says it can be done in a weekend, 
which isn’t likely).
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 2
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
4
Components 
3
Documentation 3
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
4
5
6
7

kit reviews
kit reviews
MakerBot 
Thing-O-Matic Kit 
with Stepstruder MK7 
MakerBot Industries $1,299 
makershed.com DSMB01
If you want to get into 3D printing but don’t know where to 
start, the MakerBot Thing-O-Matic Kit is the way to go. It’s 
a complete kit, so you need no additional parts, and a large 
user community can back you up if problems pop up (not 
to mention Thingiverse, where you can find awesome open 
source designs). It took me about 20 hours to build the Thing-O-Matic and 
start printing, and I improved its accuracy with more tuning, calibrating, and 
tinkering with settings in the ReplicatorG software. If you have any trouble, 
read the discussion at the bottom of every build step. I’ve since 3D-printed 
many fun and handy things (everyone loves a 3D-printed gift!) and the 
MakerBot is now by far the most-used machine at MAKE Labs.         —Eric Chu
48
Make: kits.makezine.com
The 
Phlatformer
Phlatboyz, LLC $300 
phlatboyz.com
The Phlatformer is 
a hobby vacuum- 
forming machine 
that quick-melts 
10" square plastic 
sheets into form-hugging shapes. 
Originally built for R/C modelers to 
make identical, lightweight body 
parts, it has many uses; for exam-
ple, I plan to form custom holders to 
display my raygun collection. The 
kit’s parts and thoughtful extras 
never skimp on quality, and include 
everything except a vacuum cleaner 
and a hot plate — I use a Rival S11P 
11" skillet from Wal-Mart ($20). 
The DVD build guide can be supple-
mented with the active forum at 
phlatforum.com, and although 
there are lot of parts, most of them 
are self-indexing and more or less 
impossible to assemble incorrectly.
—Sean Michael Ragan
See the project build at: 
makeprojects.com/project/t/1203
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
tools & workshop
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
5
Completeness 
5

49
Follow us @make
49
MicroRax
Twintec, Inc. Starter Kit $80; Pro Kit $180 
microrax.com
Need miniature alu-
minum girders for 
your next robot? Look 
no further than the 
lightweight MicroRAX 
building system. Parts include 10mm 
aluminum beams and braces, plates, 
brackets, and other connectors. 
They’ve even developed adapter plates to attach your ’RAX to VEX and NXT 
constructs, allowing you to merge multiple building media. The beams are 
sold in 900mm lengths you can cut to size (precut lengths are also available), 
which is eminently sensible — forget pawing through a box of wrong-sized 
ones, and hack your own. You’ll be surprised at what you can build: anything 
from mundane shelving to robots to computer enclosures. It even comes  
in ninja-black anodized aluminum!                                    	
  —John Baichtal
RoadTech H3 Toolkit
CruzTools, Inc. $83
cruztools.com
Most hobbyists neglect to get the good basic pieces you 
need to work on everyday machinery like counterfeit printing 
presses, getaway cars, and the trap doors on elevator ceilings. 
Instead, they get the $20 all-in-one checkout-line kit featuring 
tools made from an alloy of sawdust, soda cans, and rat drop-
pings. RoadTech H3 tools absolutely don’t break; every tool in the roll is solid 
and dependable, from the combination wrenches to the flashlight to the lovely, 
jewel-like ¼-inch palm-sized ratchet. 	
	
	
 —John Krewson
Complexity 
x
Components 
x
Documentation 
x
Community 
x
Completeness 
x
cnc fusion
michael & 
shelley 
rodgers
cncfusion.com
Machining high-quality conver-
sion parts, CNC Fusion started 
in 2004 when Michael Rodgers, 
a machinist by trade, wanted to 
build a CNC machine but realized 
that he couldn’t build the parts 
he’d designed for it without first 
owning … a CNC machine. 
	
That initial desire led Michael 
to design and fabricate CNC 
conversion kits for small manual 
mills and lathes. The Rodgers’ 
household garage has been 
converted into a shop where 
Michael machines the majority 
of the kit components using a 
huge five-axis CNC mill, while his 
wife, Shelley, runs the massive 
CNC lathe to machine the ends 
of the ball screw threads sold 
with their kits. 
	
Popular around the globe —­ 
40% of CNC Fusion production is 
shipped to overseas customers 
— Michael and Shelley are known 
for providing quality equipment 
and customer support second  
to none. 
—Nick Raymond
kit makers
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation  n/a
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
5
Components 
5
Documentation  n/a
Community 
3
Completeness 
5

kit reviews
kit reviews
50
Make: kits.makezine.com
3-Axis Monster Mill Stepper 
Motor Driver Kit 
Probotix $350 (as tested $624)
probotix.com
Probotix offers several kits that add com-
puter numeric control (CNC) to the X2 
Mini Mill. I used their 3-Axis Monster Mill 
Stepper Motor Driver kit, plus a Ready-to-
Run bundle that includes some additional 
components required to get it operational. For the  
computer itself, I used my old ThinkPad, but if your laptop 
is too new to have a parallel port, Probotix offers USB  
and PBX-RF breakout boards. Once the electronics are  
mounted and connected, you just need to install and  
configure CNC software, such as Mach3 or EMC2. 
	 As a final step, you can fine-tune the machine and 
install limit switches and emergency buttons, which, 
although not included or required, are a safety feature 
that will inevitably prevent you from crashing your 
machine someday. Then, if you did everything correctly, 
you should be able to design and automatically mill your 
own precise and identical custom parts.	
	
—NR
50
Tools & workshop
x2 Mini Mill 
CNC kit #2  
with X-Y-Z BALLSCREWS 
CNC Fusion $579 (as tested $696)
cncfusion.com
What to do when you want to machine 
precise custom parts but don’t have 
room or funds for a professional CNC? 
Invest in a manual mill that can convert 
into a CNC. Considered a great tool for 
the price, the X2 Mini Mill is the kit builder’s top choice, 
and Probotix offers complete conversion kits (see 
below) to give it computer control. The platform has 
an active community, and the folks at CNC Fusion are 
known for great service (see profile on page 49). The 
conversion is straightforward and almost completely 
reversible, in case you decide to switch back — but 
why would you?	                                       —Nick Raymond
Complexity	
3
Components	
5
Documentation	 3
Community	
4
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
4
Components	
4
Documentation	 5
Community	
3
Completeness	
4

51
Follow us @make
51
FireBall V90 CNC Router  Kit 
Probotix $990 with additional 3-Axis ProboStep Motor/Driver Kit
probotix.com
Although the V90 is an entry-level machine, 
it’s decidedly not a toy. The way it functions is 
complicated — a platform carries the tool hold-
er; a larger gantry moves the tool back and 
forth; the frame positions the gantry; and  
it’s all driven by a motor turning the screw 
interposed between two shafts. Indeed, 
this three-axis Cartesian robot is probably the most complex 
machine I’ve ever built, and I had expected it to be correspond-
ingly difficult to assemble; however, quite the contrary — it’s 
easier than many common bike repairs. A thriving community 
actively updates the online build guide, and all the materials 
were very helpful during my own build.     —Sean Michael Ragan
See the project build at:  
makeprojects.com/project/p/1314
micRo-cnc kit
Lumenlab $699
lumenlab.com
Despite all of the well-documented, homebuilt 
CNCs out there, I couldn’t get the momentum 
to build one, so I decided to start with a kit. 
The micRo looks great (in a NASA sort of way), 
and with a working area of about 12"×10"×4", 
it’s big enough to be useful to the hobbyist, small enough to be 
stowed under a workbench, and stout enough to cut aluminum 
and hard plastic. The only things I had to procure were the wir-
ing and enclosure for the driver boards and an old PC, and the 
basic assembly offered almost no opportunities for mistakes. 
Documentation resides at lumenlab.com, and the companion 
forums are quite active. I’ve got some CAD learning to do before 
I can start making my own robot parts, but tinkering with this 
desktop CNC feels good, and I’m really glad I started with a kit.
—Steve Lodefink
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
4
Completeness 
2
Zen Toolworks CNC 12×12 
Complete Package
Zen Toolworks $1,082
zentoolworks.com
This awesome three-axis CNC kit is a 
must-have for small projects such as circuit 
boards, engraving, or machining various small 
parts out of plastic or wood. Everything you 
need is included, except for a few hand tools, 
a vise, and a computer with a parallel port for running the 
software. The documentation contains clearly described steps 
alongside high-resolution photos, which makes the build pro-
cess easy to follow. Zen Toolworks also has a large community 
backing their products, which is ideal for learning how to use a 
CNC machine, figuring out how to set up the software, or get-
ting help with upgrades and attachments.
—Brian Melani
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
4
Completeness 2-5
depending on 
options

kit reviews
52
Make: kits.makezine.com
Outdoor & Sport
Surfboard Shaping 
Starter Kit 
Greenlight Surfboard Supply $365 and up greenlightsurfsupply.com
Traditional surfboards are fragile, plus they’re made of 
toxic goo — polyurethane foam and polyester resin — 
that ends up as landfill. This deluxe starter kit has all the 
tools and materials you need to make a tougher, green-
er epoxy board using expanded polystyrene (EPS) foam 
that’s recyclable. And Greenlight’s lamination technique, using bamboo 
fabric instead of fiberglass cloth, is easier and safer.
	 The funky but comprehensive instructional videos show you the 
entire process — monkey-see, monkey-do — far better than a manual 
could. Greenlight provides a variety of board and fin templates to down-
load and print, and they’re generous with email advice on esoterica like 
fin placement.
	 You can shape a board in a weekend, but plan on a week or two to 
glass it. I learned a ton and ended up with the fastest board in my quiver. 
—KH
See the build at: makeprojects.com/project/g/39
Wood Surfboard Kits
Grain Surfboards $520 and up
grainsurfboards.com
Surf pioneer Tom Blake built the first 
hollow wood surfboards in the 1920s, 
but the technology was sidelined 
when polyurethane foam boards 
arrived mid-century. It’s been revived 
in these beautiful boards from Grain 
Surfboards of Maine (see MAKE 
Volume 21, page 40). They’re built like 
boats with a central spar, ribs, and 
decking. For the DIYer, Grain sells com-
plete kits and also teaches classes, 
so bust out your spokeshave.
	
Greenlight Surfboard Supply of New 
Jersey has also gotten into the game, 
selling CNC-cut wood frames starting 
at $129; you’ll have to head to the lum-
beryard to get the decking, but this 
looks like a cost-effective way to go.
—Keith Hammond
Complexity	
4
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
2
Completeness	
5
Sam Murphy (top)

53
Follow us @make
Backcountry  
Super Cubs
Anyone who knows me well can tell you about my secret 
lust for Piper Cubs: bright yellow, fabric-covered, two-seater, 
tail-dragger airplanes from my youth, designed for low and 
slow flying with relatively few instruments and no comput-
ers. So when we began working on this issue, I immediately 
volunteered to cover my favorite fantasy kit of all time: the 
Super Cub Kit by Backcountry Super Cubs. When the youngest 
of my three kids graduates from college a few years down 
the road, this is what I’m saving up for. 
	
Wayne Axelson, co-owner and general manager of 
Backcountry Super Cubs, took some time to talk homebuilt 
aircraft kits with me. First, as kits go, there’s no getting 
around the fact that this one’s expensive. From start to fin-
ish expect to pay somewhere around $100,000 to $110,000. 
But, as airplanes go, that’s roughly half what you’d pay for a 
factory-built Super Cub replica. And if you were to sell it as a 
new homebuilt, you’d likely net $50,000 profit. That’s if you 
didn’t factor in your time. But hey, it’s a labor of love, right?
	
Exactly how much labor and love can you expect to put 
into one of these? Axelson estimates about 800 to 1,000 
hours. “If you’re a really smart engineer, it’ll take you longer,” 
he says. “If you’re a corn farmer from Iowa, you’ll finish in a 
lot less time.” These kits are designed to be completed by the 
average person with no special skills, no welding or sophisti-
cated machinery, nothing more than common hand tools. The 
biggest obstacle for some folks is that they overthink it and 
make it more complicated than it is.
	
Not surprisingly, Axelson said they consider documenta-
tion to be the most important part of their kits. 
	
“Most of our customers have never built an aircraft kit 
before, and when they look at the unassembled kit, it can 
seem like a Space Shuttle,” he says. “But when they get into 
it, they quickly begin to understand that it’s actually easy 
and fairly straightforward.” 
	
And for support, the large and well-established Super Cub 
Club at supercub.org is an extremely active community of 
owners, builders, and kit makers who are quick to share tips 
and answer questions for fellow builders. 
—Dan Woods
I chose this kit airplane 
because it has great perfor-
mance, but even better, it’s 
designed for builders who 
don’t have a ton of tools. Only 
common hand tools are needed — no fiber-
glass work or welding. The fuselage comes 
pre-welded, and the wings fully assembled, so 
I only needed to assemble and wire the plane, 
add the engine and propeller, then cover and 
paint it. You can buy all components not in 
the kit (engine, instruments, radios, etc.) from 
supercub.com at open-market prices. 
	 My assembly nearly complete, I can hap-
pily say the components, fit, and finish have 
not disappointed. My SQ2 has gone together 
smoothly and I can hardly wait to go flying.
—Mark Jaeger
kit maker
Mackey SQ2 Super Cub
Backcountry Super Cubs $54,725 supercub.com
supercub.com
designed for builders who don’t have 
a ton of tools.
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
3

KIT REVIEWS
KIT REVIEWS
54
Make: kits.makezine.com
Using the book 
Kayaks You Can Build
by Ted Moores and 
Greg Rossel, I built 
my first Coho, a 
stitch-and-glue plywood sea kayak. 
I considered kits from Redfish, 
Chesapeake Light Craft, Waters 
Dancing, and One Ocean, but I settled 
on Pygmy because other builders
touted how accurate their CNC
router-cut parts are. Plus I had seen
a lot of Cohos out there over the 
years, which seemed to imply the 
design would be pretty well nailed 
down and refined by now. I was right.
 The eight panels in the hull of the 
Coho make it a multi-chine boat, sort 
of halfway between a strip construc-
tion and a four-panel hull. I really 
like the way the deck fits elegantly 
onto the hull — no screws or nails 
through the deck. I also like the more 
modern vertical stern and the clas-
sic Greenland bow shape. The hull 
is not too wide, but very stable, and 
the deck’s extra two panels create a 
shape that reduces the knocking of 
your knuckles when paddling. 
 The staff at Pygmy are very friendly 
and helpful, and the kit comes with 
a manual and all materials, including 
epoxy, fiberglass, and tape. I took a 
leisurely approach and spent 300 
hours building it. 
 The Coho’s response and perform-
ance are impeccable. The only prob-
lem is that six people a day will stop 
and ask you questions about it. It can 
actually delay your leaving the beach!
—Mark Forwalter
Reprinted from Cool Tools, kk.org/cooltools
Pygmy Coho Kayak Pygmy Boats $995 pygmyboats.com
OUTDOOR & SPORT
MINIMA VEST 
Thru-Hiker $53 and up thru-hiker.com
Though making your own techni-
cal outdoor gear may seem out 
of reach, all it takes is a good 
pattern, solid instructions, techie 
fabrics, and some sewing skill. 
Thru-Hiker puts the pieces in your hands;
you add the skill and patience. This vest kit is
a good one to tackle for starters, and includes
a toasty layer of Primaloft, Momentum90 pre-
mium ultralite ripstop outer layer, zipper, pull, 
and the flexibility to sew slim fit or regular.
  
 
 
     —Goli Mohammadi
Where are the DIY 
outdoor gear kits? 
Paul Nanian started 
Thru-Hiker 11 years 
ago out of love for the 
community and an 
appreciation of how 
a well-designed kit 
teaches complex skills. 
He’s nearly alone in this 
realm of kits. Why? 
“The economics of sell-
ing kits is not nearly 
as favorable as selling 
finished gear.”
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
4
4
4
2
4

55
Follow us @make
55
I’ve built several boat kits from Chesapeake Light Craft (CLC). 
I’d recommend the Wood Duck kayak with the okoume deck to 
start out with, but all of the kits have been very complete (just 
add sandpaper, paint, and varnish) and have gone together 
just as the straightforward, illustrated manuals say they 
should. In addition, there are two venues for problem solving: CLC phone  
support during business hours and the Builder’s Forum on their site. There  
are a lot of seasoned builders there who love sharing their experiences. 
—George Krewson
Wood Duck 10 Kayak
Chesapeake Light Craft $799 clcboats.com
This straightforward kit provides the parts to convert your 
snowboard into a backcountry splitboard capable of skinning 
deep into the wintry wonderland. All the heavy-duty hardware 
to mount the components to the board is included. You supply 
marine epoxy and the gumption to saw your trustworthy deck 
in half. 
	 The process is simple but time-consuming, mostly in keeping tolerances 
tight and adding layers of epoxy since materials and connections need to be 
burly. The extra labor makes the rewards of slicing through an untracked 
powder stash in the glittering backcountry all the more earned.
—Damien Scogin
See the build at: makeprojects.com/project/b/70
Voilé Splitboard Kit
Voilé USA $160 voile-usa.com
Chesapeake 
Light Craft
John Harris
clcboats.com 
It wasn’t long ago that a small 
boat built at home from a kit 
looked more like a floating 
sandbox than a boat. But this is 
rapidly changing. John Harris, 
owner of CLC, points to advanced 
panel-expansion software and 
accessible CNC machines as key 
factors. Harris says there’s been 
more innovation in small boat 
building in the last five years 
than in the prior 13. Today’s 
boat kits are easier to build, 
more sophisticated, and bet-
ter performing. CNC machines 
also enable CLC to offer a broad 
selection of boat designs (over 
84). When a customer orders 
a design, they effectively cut, 
pack, and ship a custom kit. 
	
CLC’s primary focus is helping 
first-time boat builders over-
come the natural trepidation of 
building a kit boat. And Harris 
takes pride in their documenta-
tion, support, and online forums. 
“I think an open forum builds 
confidence with your custom-
ers — and they need confidence 
before they drop a grand on a 
boat kit and set aside weeks or 
months of their time.”
 —Dan Woods
kit maker
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 2
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
4

KIT REVIEWS
56
Make: kits.makezine.com
EVIEWS
CLOCKS
YOU MIGHT NOT WANT TO 
BRING THIS CLOCK TO THE 
TERMINAL. 
Defusable Clock 
Nootropic Design $35 nootropicdesign.com
This fully functional alarm clock lets you practice defusing simulated explosives. When the red button
is pressed, the clock starts a scary countdown like bombs in Hollywood movies. There are four wires 
across the top of the clock, and you have ten seconds to choose the correct wire to cut. Programmed 
with the Arduino IDE, so hack away! Fake explosives not included.                                        —John Baichtal
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
REAL TIME CLOCK KIT
Maker Shed $40 makershed.com JMBUN01
The Real Time Clock Kit Parts Bundle 
includes everything but the casing to 
build the PIC-based clock designed by 
Sparkle Labs and featured in MAKE 
Volume 09. Be sure to read the article for 
detailed explanations of how the PIC, Real Time Clock, and 
LED driver all work together to make a functioning clock.
 —Marc de Vinck
MINTYTIME CLOCK
WickedDevice $23 makershed.com MKWD03
The MintyTime Clock Kit is a fun way
to add a binary clock to almost any
container. It’s intended to be housed in
a mint tin, such as the classic Altoids tin, 
but it looks great in almost any container, 
from a custom-designed, laser-cut enclosure to an old 
wooden recipe box.                                                                             —MdV
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
3
Components 
3
Documentation 3
Community 
2
Completeness 
3

57
Follow us @make
ARDUINO-Based 
1. Chronulator PM2V
ShareBrained Technology $49
sharebrained.com/chronulator
Alternative time-telling 
devices are compelling, 
but only if they’re easy 
to read. Building a kit 
can be satisfying, but 
only if it leaves room for creativity. The 
Chronulator clock kit fits the bill on both 
counts. Solder it together, and you’ve got 
a microcontroller-based clock that con-
verts time to current, displaying hours 
and minutes on two analog panel meters. 
Print out the supplied clock face tem-
plates, or customize the meters. 
	
No housing is supplied, and this is 
where it gets interesting. I mounted my 
panels into a cigar box, and put the circuit 
board on top, its exposed wires lending to 
the retro-tech design. (I also considered 
using an old Mac G4 Cube case, or mount-
ing it naked to the wall in a PanaVise.) 
Based on an Arduino-compatible Atmel 
ATmega168 chip, the Chronulator lets you 
download and modify the source code, 
connect to a computer via a USB-to-serial 
adapter, and display any kind of data. 
Would it be crass to have a “Number of 
People in My Facebook Friend Requests 
Purgatory” meter?
	
The Chronulator runs on a minimum 
of 1.8 volts and about 200 milliamps, so 
it’d be easy to power it from a small solar 
cell and a super capacitor. Then we’d have 
green time!                              —John Edgar Park
2. ArduiNIX ANX-1.0 Board
Robot Pirate $45
arduinix.com/main/store.htm
Old-fashioned Nixie 
tubes are beautiful, but 
driving them in a circuit 
can be complicated since 
they often require volt-
ages as high as 250V DC. The ArduiNIX 
board for Arduino makes it easy to add 
standard clock functions to your next 
project. Just be sure to design an enclo-
sure that will keep those high voltages 
safe. I tested mine with various Nixie 
tubes I had in my studio, but I’m still 
looking for that perfect set to build the 
ultimate clock.                                                —MdV 
3. DS1307 Real Time Clock 
Breakout Board
Adafruit Industries $9
makershed.com MKAD19
Need to add a clock 
function to your next 
Arduino project? This 
Real Time Clock (RTC) 
breakout board kit is 
your answer. Based on a DS1307 RTC and 
equipped with an onboard battery and 
crystal, this kit is simple to solder togeth-
er, works well, and is easy to use thanks 
to Adafruit’s online documentation. It’s a 
great starting point for building your own 
clock, or even just time-stamping any 
data your project is gathering.
—MdV 
2
3
1
Need to add a clock function to your next 
Arduino project?
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
4

kit reviews
58
Make: kits.makezine.com
clocks
6. Ice Tube Clock
Adafruit Industries $85
makershed.com MKAD16
The heart of the Ice 
Tube Clock is a distinc-
tive, vintage, Russian 
vacuum fluorescent 
display (VFD) housed 
in a transparent, laser-cut enclosure. The 
clock features a precision watch crystal, 
alarm function, and battery backup. The 
build quality and online instructions are 
excellent, as is the completeness of the 
kit. Anyone who stops by my studio is 
always impressed with the VFD display, 
and the conversation usually steers 
towards reminiscing about old radios and 
VCRs from the 70s and 80s that used 
similar displays, albeit in not-so-similar 
laser-cut enclosures.                                  —MdV
7. Monochron Clock
Adafruit Industries $80
makershed.com MKAD17
The Monochron is an 
extremely rewarding 
kit to build. Not only is 
it fun, but the finished 
clock adds retro flair to 
any home. As with all Adafruit kits, 
the instructions are clear and well 
thought out. The clock features an alarm 
function, custom laser-cut case, and 
several different display modes to suit 
your mood or decor. It’s completely open 
source, and free-download variations of 
the software display the time using a sim-
ple modern font, Dali-esque animations, 
or retro arcade numerals. Feeling more 
adventurous? Program your own custom 
clock functions and fonts. Just don’t forget 
to share your code!                                      —MdV
See the project build at: 
makeprojects.com/project/a/491
RETRO/VINTAGE
4. IN12 6 Tube Nixie Clock Kit
Peter J. Jensen, LLC $180
tubeclock.com
Nixie tubes, beautiful 
relics of early com-
puting, display their 
numerals with a quivery 
orange glow. Peter J. 
Jensen makes Nixie tube clock kits, and 
it was a joy to put one of them together, 
thanks to the clear step-by-step instruc-
tions and parts envelopes labeled with 
corresponding numbers.
	
Jensen designed the clock and circuit 
board himself, and his elegant sense of 
aesthetics became apparent to me as I 
assembled the board and mounted it and 
the tubes into the handsome metal case. 
The finished clock looks like the creation 
of some famous mid-century modern 
designer. I plan to buy more of Jensen’s 
clock kits to make and give as gifts.     
—Mark Frauenfelder
5. Edo-Style Clock
Gakken $50
makershed.com MKGK29
I had a great time 
building the Edo-Style 
clock kit from Gakken, 
and was amazed at its 
accuracy over several 
months of use. The kit is well designed, 
durable, and fun. The included picture-
based directions are easy to follow, even 
if you don’t know Japanese, but if you 
plan to make one, you can also refer to 
my step-by-step tutorial for tips and 
tricks I learned during my build.    —MdV
See the project build at: 
makeprojects.com/project/b/485
LED CLOCKS
8. Solder: Time
Spikenzie Labs $35
makershed.com MKSKL12
Solder: Time was a 
perfect father-daughter 
project: my 8-year-old 
assembled the compo-
nents and I soldered. 
Afterwards, she had a chunky blue 
wristwatch that her cousin admired long-
ingly, so we made another one for her. 
Now their friends are asking for them. 
I think we’ve started a trend!                   —MF
9. Wise Clock 3
Wise Time With Arduino $62
timewitharduino.blogspot.com
The Wise Clock 3 is an 
easy and highly custom-
izable driver for a 32×16 
RGB LED matrix display 
(included). Its default 
program includes several different clock 
modes, but it can also display the date 
and temperature, or any message. Check 
out all the different clock faces, including 
Pong and Pac-Man.                                  —MdV
10. Bulbdial Clock
Evil Mad Scientist Laboratories $90
makershed.com MKEMS8
The Bulbdial Clock 
displays analog time, 
without any motor, 
movement, or screen. 
The 72 LEDs cast 
shadow hands across its face, with red, 
green, and blue for hours, minutes, and 
seconds. It’s a beautiful effect, and the 
kit is not difficult to assemble, thanks to 
incredibly well-done instructions.     —MdV
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
2
Completeness 
2
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
5

SPIKENZIE LABS
MARK 
DEMERS
spikenzielabs.com
Mark Demers is no newcomer
to the culture of makers; he was 
raised by them, including his 
father, mother, brothers, uncles, 
grandparents, babysitter, you
get the picture. Always the 
entrepreneur, in his teenage 
years, he built a silk-screening 
setup and sold custom shirts to 
local teams and clubs. Combining 
his maker sense and his busi-
ness sense led to the logical next 
step of starting his kit business, 
Spikenzie Labs.
 
Demers strives to make kits 
that not only look good, but work 
well, always imagining how 
people will interact with them 
and where folks may run into 
snags. “A good kit is one that is 
designed properly, works well 
when built, and does something 
that the person building the kits 
wants or needs it to do.” Demers 
takes pride in his work, down 
to tracing the circuit boards by 
hand, choosing the best parts, 
and providing superior instruc-
tions and photos. 
—Goli Mohammadi
KIT MAKER
59
Follow us @make
5
9
Andrew Harrow (1); Marc de Vinck (4, 9, 10) 
6
4
10
8
7
THE FINISHED CLOCK
LOOKS LIKE THE CREATION
OF SOME FAMOUS MID-CENTURY 
MODERN DESIGNER. 

kit reviews
60
Make: kits.makezine.com
Home & shelter
Fun kits for the 
backyard and  
living room. 
Shelter
1. YurtDome Kits
Shelter Systems $518 and up
shelter-systems.com
I’ve thought of building 
a dome for years, and 
when I was looking for 
a quick and relatively 
inexpensive place to put 
my workshop for the winter, this kit from 
Shelter Systems seemed like just the 
ticket. Based in Santa Cruz, Calif., Shelter 
Systems is still using the same non-punc-
turing “grip clip” technology they used in 
the 80s to make mod-friendly yurt-dome 
hybrid structures (panels are shingled 
together and easily replaceable). 
	
These things are adaptable for snow 
and woodstoves, and they’re great for 
greenhouses (they also come with trans-
lucent panels). The tent was surprisingly 
easy and fun to set up (we actually had 
to fight off volunteers who wanted to 
help), and we got it standing in about 30 
minutes. Let it rain! 
—Meara O’Reilly
2. Eskimold Igloo Building Kit
Tundra North Manufacturing $24
webstore.eskimold.com
This is loads of fun — a 
way to get the kids out 
of the house during the 
winter, or make a cheap 
little ice fishing house 
that’s disposable. 
	
Any type of snow can be compacted 
into this nifty device to quickly create 
hundreds of perfectly formed, slanted, 
stackable igloo building blocks. The 
Eskimold differs from other snow block 
kits in that one block edge is concave, 
the other is convex, allowing them to 
fit together end to end. The blocks also 
curve inward slightly (picture an igloo’s 
interior walls). The last block on each row 
has to be trimmed, since the igloo gradu-
ally leans in as it’s built, and the diameter 
shrinks with each row. The included plas-
tic snow saw works well. 
	
A skilled builder could mimic the tradi-
tional hemisphere igloo design, while the 
casual builder will end up with a taller, 
pointier beehive design, which you can 
actually stand up in. You can make the 
blocks in advance, let them freeze over-
night on a scrap of plywood, stack them 
on a sled, then haul them to your  
building spot.
	
My teenage son slept in his own igloo 
creation one night, and was comfortable 
in –15°F weather. If you have a couple of 
kids, get two Eskimolds to avoid fighting. 
These plastic buckets are durable, and 
will last for years. 
—Dean Knudson 
Reprinted from Cool Tools, kk.org/cooltools
home
3. SunMod Remote Kit
Sparkle Labs $18
makershed.com MKSL03
In MAKE Volume 25, 
Sparkle Labs showed 
how to hack your TV 
remote control to make 
it solar powered. Just 
add a tiny solar panel and rechargeable 
batteries. It works with any AA- or AAA-
powered remote. 
See the project build at: 
makeprojects.com/project/s/969. 	
	
Now they’ve put together this easy kit: 
a flexible 4.8V solar cell with soldered 
leads and connector pads, and double-
sided tape. NiMH batteries not included.
—KH
4. Chofu Wood-Fired Hot Tub
Island Hot Tub Company $863
islandhottub.com
The Chofu is a very 
simple, and very beauti-
ful, DIY wood-fired hot 
tub heater. It looks like 
a potbellied stove with 
an Eastern aesthetic, and it comes from 
Japan. Any container that’ll hold water 
can be the hot tub (metal stock tanks are 
a great choice). The stove is connected 
to the tub by two openings. The lower 
opening allows cold water to fill the 
stainless steel water jacket that makes 
up the Chofu’s round sides and top. As 
the water is heated by the fire, hot water 
rises to the top and pours out the upper 
opening into the tub, and colder water 
from the tank is drawn back in. This is 
the power of a thermo-siphon; no pump 
is needed. The Chofu naturally circulates 
the water, letting you have a hot soak 
completely off-grid. 
	
We got our Chofu in the mail, and set-
ting it up was easy; the hardest part is 
connecting the stovepipe parts together. 
It can all be done in under an hour. Stoke 
the fire every 45 minutes, stir the water 
too, and in 4 hours, a 250-gallon tank will 
be close to 104°F. 
	
The Chofu setup is very open to mods: 
employ a lid to keep your tub cleaner, 
longer, without the use of chemicals, or 
insulate the tub to increase efficiency. It 
also appeals to the budget-minded.
	
While the stove ($863 plus shipping) 
and tank ($200 locally) will certainly set 
you back, it’s a fraction of the cost of a 
new manufactured hot tub, and it’ll never 
cost you a penny in electricity. It’s a must 
for the modern homestead.
—Brookelynn Morris
Complexity	
2
Components	
5
Documentation	 3
Community	
4
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
1
Components	
4
Documentation	 2
Community	
1
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
1
Components	
3
Documentation	 4
Community	
3
Completeness	
3
Complexity	
2
Components	
5
Documentation	 5
Community	
5
Completeness	
4

61
Follow us @make
1
5
7
2
3
4
6
Brookelynn Morris (4)
MORE FUN HOME KITS
5. ElectroPUFF Craft Lamp 
Dimmer Kit
International Fashion Machines $30 
ifmachines.com
This soft, whimsical 
pompom connects to 
any incandescent lamp 
and controls light levels 
with just a gentle tap. 
IFM’s patented electronic textiles are
the magic behind it. Conductive yarns 
that sense your touch are combined with 
recycled carpet fibers to form the soft 
switch. This kit appeals to kids, grandmas,
science geeks — anyone who enjoys crafts 
or technology. 
—Arwen O’Reilly Griffith
6. Fire Pit Kit
Jon Sarriugarte $95 and up
formandreform.com
Blacksmith/sculptor Jon 
Sarriugarte of Form & 
Reform makes magical 
propane-powered fire 
pits. As he puts it, “Not 
only do they give off warmth but you can 
entertain your guest with drawings in 
the sand that burn where you draw!” 
 
You can buy one ready-made, or pick up 
one of his fire pit kits to make your own.
—AOG
7. PumLantern Kit
Maker Shed $30
makershed.com MKSB009
This kit includes 
everything needed to 
build a solar-charged, 
nighttime-activated, 
light-pulsing lamp. It 
charges all day from the SCC3733 solar 
cell, and “pumms” the four ultra-mega-
super-bright LEDs to cast artistic silhou-
ettes against the walls of the stylized 
cardboard lantern. 
 
The LEDs are a random grab of white, 
blue, red, orange, and green. Basic solder-
ing is needed to assemble the Pummer 
circuit, while the laser-cut lantern slides 
and snaps together with little effort. 
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
3
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4

kit reviews
62
Make: kits.makezine.com
science
Experiment! Re-create great inquiries in neuroscience, 
genetics, space, communication, and other fields — 
or test out hypotheses of your own.
1. SpikerBox
Backyard Brains $100
backyardbrains.com
This is a solder-together 
kit for studying the 
electrical impulses of 
cockroach neurons. 
The online instructions 
are excellent, with videos and plenty of 
clear photos of the assembly process. 
My 8-year-old daughter identified and 
inserted all the electrical components into 
the clearly marked printed circuit board 
through-holes, and I did the soldering. She 
asked me about the function of resistors, 
capacitors, timer chips, etc., and I felt she 
got a lot out of the activity.
	
But when it came time to pull a leg off 
one of the cockroaches ($10 for a set of 
three Blaberus discoidalis) and insert elec-
trodes into it, my daughter objected. She 
had already named the bugs and enjoyed 
feeding them apple slices and petting their 
backs with her finger. I told her that the 
instructions indicated that cockroaches’ legs 
grow back, but she put her foot down. Now 
we have three pets and a gadget that pro-
duces Geiger-counter-like sounds when you 
touch the electrodes to your fingertips. 
—Mark Frauenfelder
2. TubeSat  
Personal Satellite
Interorbital Systems $8,000
interorbital.com
TubeSat makes space 
your personal labora-
tory. You build a satellite 
the size of a large soup 
can, get it launched into 
a 310km Earth orbit moving 17,000 miles 
an hour, and talk to it via ham radio a 
few times a day for 1–3 months. Smile as 
you reflect on your new skills in surface-
mount soldering, amateur radio (you’ll 
need a license), spacecraft control, solar 
power, and, yes, rocket science.
	
Even with a kit, building a satellite 
requires significant time and skill-build-
ing. You’ll need to order (or make) two-
layer PCBs, and master reflow soldering to 
attach the fragile solar cells. But the man-
ual is clear, you don’t need much math or 
science, and an online community shares 
techniques. I’m adding an ion engine to 
my TubeSat, which brings high-voltage 
electronics, micro-machining, and calcu-
lus into the mix.
	
The kit and launch cost $8,000 for 
academics and citizen scientists. (A larger 
CubeSat kit is $19,125, and Arduino ver-
sions of both are in development.) Success 
isn’t guaranteed — rockets fail, space 
radiation breaks electronics, and launch 
stresses can shake a satellite apart. (Test 
yours in a near-space balloon first.) 
	
My TubeSat launches in spring 2012, 
and one thing’s for sure: when it’s all done, 
and the satellite burns up, I’ll never look at 
a shooting star the same way again.
 —Wesley Faler
 
3. Perfume Science
Thames & Kosmos $60
thamesandkosmos.com
Learn about the sense 
of smell with eight per-
fume oils and a variety 
of jars, mixers, and 
pipettes. Experiments 
range from fragrance extraction to 
composing your own perfume scents. 
My friend and I enjoyed one experiment 
where we prepared test strips of all the 
fragrances and then guessed which we 
were sniffing. I got two wrong and he 
missed five (Lemony and Mentha are 
freebies, since they’re unmistakable).
	
Reading the manual is a must — it’s 
well-written, with lots of fun scientific 
facts and historical anecdotes. I learned 
about human olfaction, the history and 
art of perfume composition, and how 
scents are analyzed and categorized. 
Thanks to this kit, I’m now armed with an 
understanding of the Fragrance Family 
Tree: floral, green, animal, and spicy/ 
woody.                                      —Laura Cochrane
4. Energy Wiz
ScienceWiz $20 
sciencewiz.com
Aimed at kids 8 and up, 
this kit has real heart. 
Its 48-page workbook 
and components (solar 
cell, buzzer, two motors, 
LED, capacitor, copper rivets, pinwheel, 
etc.) take you through lessons and fun 
experiments that teach the basics: What 
is energy, as distinct from force? What 
forms does it take? How can it be con-
verted between forms? 
	
My daughter and I had fun making the 
solar-powered fan, electric car, and other 
projects. She’s a bit young for the kit, so 
as she used various bits to decorate a fin-
ish line for the solar car, I experimented 
with what else I could power, and for how 
long, with the 6-farad supercapacitor 
— those things are amazing. One recom-
mendation: add your own alligator clips 
(without the leads) to make the solder-
less joints less tweaky. 
—Paul Spinrad
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
5
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
1
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
2
Components 
3
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
4

63
Follow us @make
1
2
3
6
5
5. Cloning a Fluorescent Gene
Genotyp $600 
speakscience.org
When I told my 8-year-
old daughter I had a kit 
to clone fluorescent 
jellyfish DNA, she was 
excited to try it. But 
this is a high-school level project. The 
reagents are sent in a styrofoam box
with dry ice, and the projects require
a polymerase chain reaction thermal 
cycler (which Genotyp will loan out to 
classrooms that don’t have one). It’s
complicated (I scratched my head at 
some of the manual), but looks to be an 
affordable science kit for older students 
and classrooms.                                               —MF
6. Laser Voice Transmitter 
and Receiver
Scitoys $25 and $7
scitoyscatalog.com
This amazing demo 
shows how you can 
transmit sound over a 
laser beam. The trans-
mitter modulates power 
to a laser pointer with audio from a
headphone jack. The receiver is just 
an earphone and a solar cell; no power 
source. I assembled both in minutes, and 
it was strange (in a good way) to hear 
music whenever I held the cell in the 
beam. As seen in MAKE Volume 16, the 
Spy Tech issue!                                                  —PS
7. Litiholo Hologram Kit
Litiholo $100
litiholo.com
Making holograms 
became faster and 
easier a few years 
ago when Litiholo 
introduced its Instant 
Hologram film. Like old Polaroids, these 
film plates require no developing after 
exposure, which means, in about an hour, 
you can make your own transmission 
hologram of anything that will sit still 
next to the plate. The kit also includes an 
LED darkroom light and the SafetyLight 
Laser Diode that you use to both make 
the exposure and view (or “reconstruct”) 
the hologram.
—Arwen O’Reilly Griffith
8. Analog Geiger Counter
Images Scientific Instruments $139
imagesco.com
MAKE contributor
John Iovine has been 
designing and improv-
ing affordable Geiger 
counters for decades. 
After Japan’s nuclear crisis last spring,
his company was swamped with orders. 
Now they’re working on even better 
designs and DIY kits. 
 
This analog counter detects beta
radiation above 36 kilo-electron volts 
(keV) and gamma above 7keV, signaling 
each radioactive particle detected with 
an LED flash and a click in the head-
phones. For digital output, logging, and 
graphing, add the DMAD-03 digital meter 
adapter kit ($60).                                             —PS
Complexity 
5
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
1
Completeness 
5
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
3
Completeness 
4

kit reviews
64
Make: kits.makezine.com
closed eyelids) and sounds at brain wave 
frequencies.
	
With this kit, you’ll build an SLM for 
much cheaper than you can buy one. 
As seen in MAKE Volume 10.
12. The Truth Meter
Maker Shed $25 
makershed.com MSGR01
See what happens 
when someone asks you 
questions or when you 
laugh or get surprised. 
Everyone responds dif-
ferently. See if you can turn the LED on 
with your mind. Try it on your friends or 
adversaries — it’s a great way to get to 
know someone! We’ve even included a 
few extra resistors, so you can calibrate 
the circuit and experiment with different 
sensitivities or hack it to get GSR data into 
your Arduino. Fun!
See the build at: 
makeprojects.com/project/t/703
great kits from THE maker shed
9. Reinventing Edison:  
Light Bulb Kit
Harris Educational $60 
makershed.com MKHE01
Thomas Edison purport-
edly said that he didn’t 
fail 700 times in trying 
to make the incandes-
cent light, he succeeded 
in proving 700 ways not to do it. Now it 
can be your turn. This fun science kit is 
designed to excite and engage experi-
menters of all ages in re-creating the 
development of the first light bulb. Build 
your own working Edison bulb using the 
included safety vacuum chamber and a 
number of different filament materials, 
including carbon and tungsten. 
10. Stirling Engine
Gakken $130 
makershed.com MKGK5
This beautiful engine 
teaches you the basics 
of thermodynamics as its power comes 
from an external heat source, which can 
be anything from fuel to solar to geo-
thermal energy. The instructions are in 
Japanese, but the Maker Shed 
page has an English translation. MAKE 
is proud to be the exclusive distributor 
in North America for this kit, part of 
Gakken’s Sophisticated Science Kit for 
Adults series.
11. Brain Machine
Adafruit Industries $35 
makershed.com MSBM
Hack your brain! Put 
on these glasses and 
headphones, close your 
eyes, and enjoy some 
harmless hallucina-
tions as you drift into deep meditation. 
You’ll come out after the 14-minute pro-
gram feeling fabulous. Sound and Light 
Machines (SLMs) help people sleep, wake 
up, meditate, and more. They work by 
generating light pulses (seen through 
7
10
8
11
9
12
science
Cody Pickens (12)
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
3
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
5
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
2
Completeness 
5

65
Follow us @make
toys & games
The Dice Kit
Spikenzie Labs $20 makershed.com MKSKL09
This is a fantastic introductory electron-
ics kit that comes with your choice of 
large red or green LEDs and everything 
else needed (aside from a soldering 
iron, solder, and flush cutters) to make 
one electronic 6-sided die. (The manufacturer says: 
“The name Dice Kit sounds a great deal better than ‘Die 
Kit’, so we bent English grammar rules just a little in the 
name of making a marketable product.” Good move!) 
	 The finished project is fun to use: you lift it a half-inch 
above the table and drop it to “roll” the die. A piezo- 
electric buzzer senses the impact and triggers the 
circuit to generate a random number and illuminate the 
LEDs. Everyone I show it to smiles at the way it works.
—Mark Frauenfelder
At MAKE Labs we built a squadron of 
balsa-and-tissue ornithopters for William 
Gurstelle’s how-to article in MAKE Volume 
08. The trickiest part was bending the tiny 
wire crank that flaps the wings in time. 
Even with Bill’s clear instructions, that little wire was  
trial-and-error.
	
This kit spares you that error. The pre-bent crank and laser-
cut parts fit precisely; you only need scissors, glue, and a few 
evenings. Instructions are well illustrated, and online there’s 
a build video and a teacher’s guide. The delicate ’thopter 
weighs ¼oz, has a 16" wingspan, and flies about 1 minute on 
200 turns of the rubber band. At press time BirdKit.com was 
upgrading the kit, so yours may fly that much better.
—Keith Hammond
This kit’s great for office warfare but 
it’s really meant for flight-testing paper 
airplanes. Two DC motors spin rubber discs 
in opposite directions to grab your plane and 
propel it up to 30mph. There’s no soldering, 
just pre-cut wires and a screw terminal block. 
	
Intended for teaching kids ages 14 and up, it’s easily 
assembled in minutes with a screwdriver (included); you add 
only batteries. I’d say kids 10 and up could build it, with adult 
help to push the motors tightly into grommets. Caveats: the 
instructions have some inconsistent drawings (the online 
video helps), and the front leg is fastened by a nut on the deck 
directly in the plane’s path — a dubious placement, though it 
hasn’t tripped up my planes yet. (Incoming, Jake!)   
—KH
Gryphon Ornithopter
BirdKit.com $10 
Electric Plane Launcher
4M Industrial Development $20 4m-ind.com
Complexity	
2
Components	
5
Documentation	 5
Community	
2
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
2
Components	
3
Documentation	 3
Community	
1
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
2
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
3
Completeness	
4

kit reviews
66
Make: kits.makezine.com
Solar 
Grasshopper Kit
OWI, Inc. $12
makershed.com MKOW02
Build your own life-
size grasshopper and 
explore solar power 
with this educational 
mini solar robot kit. The 
snap-together, attention-getting  
Solar Frightened Grasshopper teaches 
how solar energy can be used to  
generate electricity. 
	
This easy-to-use science kit is perfect 
for first-time experimenters with little or 
no experience. Ages 10 and up.
toys & games
Pendulum 
Challenge
Maker Shed $26 
makershed.com MSPC01
How are your reflexes? Ken 
Delahoussaye’s Pendulum 
Challenge (featured in MAKE 
Volume 26) is a fun and 
clever handheld game that 
you assemble on a printed circuit board. The 
game’s arc-shaped array of 15 LEDs (14 red 
and 1 green) simulate the path of a swinging 
pendulum, which you try to stop at the bottom 
of its arc through 5 levels of difficulty. A piezo 
buzzer adds sound effects (which the mode 
button can silence for the benefit of hard-work-
ing parents and studious siblings).
Video Game 
Shield
Wayne & Layne $23
makershed.com MKWL02
The Video Game Shield 
is an Arduino add-on 
shield to make your own 
video games, including 
graphics, text, sound 
effects, and music! 
	
Using the power of open source, this 
shield allows you to make awesome 
black-and-white video games on your 
TV. It supports up to two Nintendo Wii 
Nunchuk controllers for an easy and 
familiar interface. (Arduino and Wii 
Nunchuks not included.)
Karakuri 
Somersault Doll
Gakken $75
makershed.com MKGK26
Employing a centuries- 
old secret technique 
from the Edo period, 
this kit has everything 
needed to create an 
acrobatic doll, plus a festive kimono and 
a tiered pedestal on which to perform. 
You can even adjust the velocity of the 
doll’s action. The instructions are in 
Japanese with beautiful illustrations 
that make it easy to put together. 
See the build at: 
makeprojects.com/project/k/42
Complexity	
2
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
3
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
2
Components	
3
Documentation	 4
Community	
1
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
4
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
4
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
1
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
1
Completeness	
5

67
Follow us @make
Mechamo Inchworm
Gakken $70 makershed.com MKGK3
Make a mind-blowing remote controlled 
“Meka-Inchworm” robot with this fun, 
no-soldering-required kit. You’ve got to 
love a machine that moves like a bug! It’s 
Japanese, but we’ve got English instructions 
at makezine.com/go/inchworm. MAKE is proud to be the 
exclusive distributor in North America for these brilliant 
kits, part of Gakken’s Mechanical Animals Series. 
	 Reviewer Tyler Bennett of Cary, N.C., writes: “This kit 
was a lot of fun for me as well as my 11- and 12-year-old 
grandkids. The kids put the kit together (with me looking 
over their shoulders) in around two hours and then we 
all enjoyed running it around on the floor.”
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Simon
SparkFun Electronics $25
makershed.com MKSF7
All components are 
through-hole, making 
this Simon kit great  
for beginners. 
	
Reviewer Thomas 
O’Brien from San Antonio writes: “The 
instruction booklet is very well written 
and goes step by step with clear expla-
nations. My grandson Ben, 5, helped 
put components in the holes of the 
circuit board, then I soldered them, and 
he clipped the wires. He likes working 
with the magnifier to see what’s going 
on, while I solder. I showed him how to 
insert batteries correctly (look for the 
plus sign). The kit went together with-
out a hitch and worked the first time. 
Grandma, look what we made! Thanks 
for a nice, well-designed kit — an easy 
one that a youngster can help build.”
Drawdio is an elec-
tronic pencil that lets 
you make music while 
you draw. It’s a great 
project for beginners: 
an easy kit with instant gratification. 
Invented by Jay Silver, it’s a very sim-
ple musical synthesizer that uses the 
conductive properties of pencil graph-
ite to create sounds. The result is a 
fun toy that lets you draw “musical 
instruments” on any piece of paper.
	 The kit comes with all electronic 
components, PCB, hardware, and a  
2B pencil. It works with any pencil  
(the softer, the better), and is ridicu-
lously fun for all ages. Reviewer Sue 
from Boston writes: “I have never 
soldered anything until this kit. It took 
about an hour to put together, going 
slow. Once I finished and tested it out, 
the shrill sound it produces made 
my cat hiss at me and run out of the 
room. I’d recommend this to any 
beginners out there.” 
	 Reviewer Barry from Emeryville, 
Calif., writes: “I built a Drawdio and 
showed it around my physics class 
(which happens to be studying  
electrical circuits) and got a great 
response. One of my guys even  
started brainstorming a musical 
instrument, something really big 
and loud based on the resistance 
of a long copper pipe. Good times!”
Drawdio Adafruit Industries $20 makershed.com MKAD12
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
5

KIT REVIEWS
KIT REVIEWS
68
Make: kits.makezine.com
CRAFT
PEE-WEE HERMAN
PAINT BY NUMBER
PopParty $35 popparty.etsy.com
Without ever painting a portrait before in my life, I re-created 
the likeness of Pee-wee Herman with this PopParty Paint 
by Number Kit. Choose from the Golden Girls, Pee-wee, or 
my personal favorite, Lindsay Lohan’s mug shot. Better yet, 
order a custom kit from your own photo for $125, with up 
to 16 acrylic paint colors. 
 The project required as much focus as I could muster (while watching 
bad TV!) and a very steady hand, but my painting looks exactly like the 
printed version. Or should I say, exactly like the real Pee-wee. 
UNUSUAL & FUN
ORDER A CUSTOM KIT 
FROM YOUR OWN PHOTO.
LEGO SYRINGE KIT 
Sean Ragan $20 seanmragan.etsy.com
MAKE blogger Sean 
Ragan created
this provocative kit 
enabling you to make 
a medical replica out 
of nothing but Lego, with the exception 
of one slightly modified piece. Build the 
syringe by following the easy “order-of-
operations,” using red for blood, or maybe 
a blue medicine from the future, or create 
yourself a sickly yellow-green poison. 
Complete your work of art with a single 
drop of Lego, seemingly pouring out the 
end of the needle.
REMAKE IT PLASTIC 
BAG TRASH CAN
RePlayGround $17 replayground.com
Turn your trash into 
treasure, or in this case, 
a trash can. Out of the 
box, this metal basket 
skeleton won’t hold a 
lot, but add your own recycled material, 
and it becomes much more useful. Walls 
are formed by weaving through the 
spokes. If you like paper crafts, weave 
in folded strips of newspaper. If you’re 
into sewing, use fabric scraps. If you’re 
into irony, make your garbage can out 
of garbage bags!
BY BROOKELYNN MORRIS, 
CRAFT STAFF WRITER 
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
1
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
2
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
Nat Wilson-Heckathorn

69
Follow us @make
JUST FOR KIDS
MAKE YOUR OWN 
CAT PUPPET
Folkmanis Puppets $14
makezine.com/go/handpuppets
Starting with the basic sock-style, this kit empowers kids
to create handsome puppets and teaches different con-
struction methods. With simple instructions, pre-marked 
patterns, pre-sewn parts to stuff, and packaging that 
becomes a stage, this kit is only two hours from coming 
to life. The hardest part is waiting for the glue to dry, but that’s the perfect 
time to color the stage. The finished puppets are adorable, and it’s my new 
favorite gift for young kids in the family, particularly if I live close enough
to help them put on a show.                                                        —Gregory Hayes
Schacht Mini Loom Weaving Kit
Schacht Spindle Co. $35 halcyonyarn.com/kidstuff.html
Beginners can learn how to weave their own bags, mats, 
coasters, and more with this portable weaving kit. The
plastic mini loom comes with two shuttles, a beater, a
weaving needle, five colors of yarn, and project instructions. 
Perfect for kids!                                             —Natalie Zee Drieu
THE HARDEST PART IS
WAITING FOR THE GLUE TO DRY.
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
1
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Pottery
Kick Wheel 
Wood and 
Metal Parts 
Kits
Brent $551 (for both kits) 
amaco.com
A friend and I tried 
to build a pottery
kick wheel our-
selves, but the 
concrete flywheel 
we poured cracked immediately, 
rendering the wheel a bit wobbly. 
Fortunately I later discovered these 
two kits, which include everything 
you need to make a solid kick wheel, 
including the wheel head, ball bear-
ings, and all the pre-cut wood. And 
if you’re a better woodworker than 
me, you can just buy the metal kit 
and build the wood frame yourself. 
I use it all the time to make pottery, 
which is what it’s all about!
—Steve McDonald
Adapted from pottery-on-the-wheel.com.
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
5

kit reviews
kit reviews
70
Make: kits.makezine.com
70
craft
Sashiko 
Daisies
TaDaa Studio LLC $14 tadaastudio.com
Sashiko embroidery is a 
Japanese needle-art that can 
be both meditative and addic-
tive. Colors are worked into the 
design by making “little stabs” 
along the printed lines, creating a surprisingly 
complex final piece. Once complete, the ink 
washes out, leaving only your perfect sewing. 
TaDaa provides beautiful thread, sashiko nee-
dles, a leather thimble, and a linen base, as well 
as directions in both English and Japanese that 
are charming and fun.                                    —BM
Nat Wilson-Heckathorn (OctopusFriend and Sashiko Daisies); Bethany Mann (Soft Circuit - Jawa Doll)
Soft Circuit 
Sewing Kit 
Sternlab $15 makershed.com CSTL1
An introduction to 
sewing with soft 
circuits, this fantastic 
kit teaches you how to 
augment your garments 
or needlework with LEDs. There’s a free 
video tutorial as well as step-by-step 
instructions, and the kit includes every-
thing you need to get started; Jawa doll 
not included!          —Arwen O’Reilly Griffith
NEEDLEWORK
Octopus Friend
Hi-Fiber Kits $18 hifiberkits.com
If you’ve never needle felted before, you’ll start this kit a 
beginner, and complete it an expert. With enough wool to 
make two large friends, or a handful of tiny octopi, these 
creatures will take shape before your eyes, and as you 
work, you’ll refine your skills. Follow the clear and funny 
directions to needle the wool into a three-dimensional, 
eight-tentacled, fuzzy cephalopod.      —Brookelynn Morris
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
5

71
Follow us @make
MADE BY MOXIE
MOXIE
madebymoxie.com
Moxie is a cat-owning, pinball-
playing, book-writing, kit-making 
fiber artist with a wit as sharp 
as her signature tool, the felt-
ing needle. Her art is beautifully 
executed, emotionally provoca-
tive, and has been featured in 
galleries across the country. Her 
designs make people say, “What 
is that? I have to touch it.”
 
She began needle felting in 
August 2006, and she posts her 
work online, teaches felting, and 
instructs the masses at Maker 
Faire. After almost every lesson 
people ask, “Where can I find 
these materials?” 
 
Moxie realized that in order to 
turn people on to needle felting, 
she would first have to provide 
the proper materials. Her supplies 
consist of high-quality wool bat-
ting, eco-foam pads, and felting 
needles, plus she adds a creative 
spin, using everything from 
cookie bags to Frappuccino 
cups as packaging, and sprinkles 
some irreverence into her clear 
instructions. 
 
Moxie makes kits because she 
genuinely wants people to have 
as much fun as she does needle 
felting. 
—Brookelynn Morris
KIT MAKER
PAPER CRAFTS
FINGER MAGIC
ORIGAMI KITS 
Origami Bijou $10 origamibijou.com
Origami kits always intrigue me, 
but after folding a few animals
I wonder what it’s all for. So 
when I discovered Finger Magic, 
I thought, origami with a pur-
pose! Not only do the kits teach fresh origami 
like Small World-style elephants, 3D tulips, and 
butterflies, but some kits come with greeting 
cards and envelopes. Just attach your paper 
gems to make stunning cards.     —Carla Sinclair
HOT LAMINATOR KIT 
Purple Cows $59 craftzine.com/go/laminate
I save recipes on cards and 
always get bits of food or water 
on them, but laminating them 
with this hot laminator kit makes 
wiping them off a breeze. Use it 
for scrapbooking or for special photos you
want to protect, or make your own laminated 
crafts such as luggage tags, signs, and more. 
Any crafter will find some use for this kit, and
its compact size makes it easy to store.     —NZD
Complexity 
1
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
5
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
5

KIT REVIEWS
CAPABLE OF HURLING A PROJECTILE 
A RESPECTABLE 200 FEET!
SUITABLE FOR SERIOUS 
DART FLINGING.
DESKTOP BATTERING RAM?
I THINK YES. 
72
Make: kits.makezine.com
ATLATL
KITS 
Thunderbird Atlatl $42 and up
thunderbirdatlatl.com
If you’ve ever wanted 
to hurl spears to bring 
down a woolly mam-
moth, then these two 
kits from Thunderbird 
Atlatl are the way to go. The Nanticoke 
and Kanakadea kits are both high qual-
ity and simple to build, so with a little 
time and effort you can make a very 
nice-looking atlatl suitable for serious 
dart flinging. 
 
The kits include everything you’ll 
need except for wood glue, plus a brief 
history of the atlatl and instructions 
for casting darts. The kits can be pur-
chased with three or seven darts, 
or none at all for those adventurous 
enough to make and experiment 
with different dart lengths and sizes. 
Additional darts of various styles are 
available from Thunderbird.                             
—Brian Melani
MEDIEVAL
BATTERING RAM
RLT Industries $35
rlt.com/12141
Desktop battering 
ram? I think yes. This 
small kit is a lot of 
fun to build and use. 
It takes some time to 
put together and uses a fair amount 
of wood glue, but the instructions are 
clear and easy to read. 
 
The kit comes with two ½"-thick 
boards that are CNC’ed out with all of
the pieces of the ram, plus a dowel and 
some twine. All you need to do is care-
fully finish cutting out the pieces and 
glue them together. 
 
Once you’ve assembled your batter-
ing ram you’re ready to storm the walls 
of the nearest cubicle.                              —BM
F.A.T. 3000 
GUILLOTINE 
TREBUCHET
RLT Industries $169 
rlt.com/10101
I’ve built my share of 
catapults (see MAKE 
Volume 28, “Gravity 
Catapult”), and this 
floating-arm kit has 
thoroughly impressed me. The parts 
come pre-cut in solid ash, and you clip 
off tabs to remove them, just like the 
plastic models I built as a kid. A file will 
help clean up the tabs.
 
It’s put together with wood glue,
so use one with good tack or you’ll do
a lot of waiting. The instructions call for 
two clamps, but you'd be much better 
off with eight or more. Spring clamps 
provide suitable force and won’t mark 
up your wood parts.
 
After all your satisfying work, you 
end up with an impressive 34-inch 
trebuchet, capable of hurling a small, 
dense projectile a respectable 200 feet!
—Daniel Spangler
SIEGE & BALLISTICS
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4

THREE GREAT STARTER KITS
FOR MAKING SMALL TABLETOP
SIEGE WEAPONS. 
73
Follow us @make
TABLETOP CATAPULT,
BALLISTA, AND TREBUCHET
Abong $20 and up
abong.com
These three great starter kits for making small tabletop siege
weapons pack quite a kick. They’re simple to build, and include
well-documented, easy-to-follow instructions. All components are 
made of quality materials accurately machined and drilled.
 
The Ballista kit is built of laser-cut hardwood and is a real blast
to assemble and fire. It’s a bit more difficult than the other two, due to the fact
that you need to “power up” the ballista by twisting the torsion skein. The finished 
weapon measures six inches tall and fires small wooden projectiles 30 feet.
 
The Catapult (onager) and Trebuchet are fun to fire too — reaching 12 feet
and 18 feet, respectively.                                                                                                                           —BM
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
DESKTOP
TREBUCHET
RLT Industries $40
rlt.com/10421
RLT Industries has 
gone above and 
beyond with its 
Desktop Trebuchet 
kit. Each piece of 
wood is carefully chosen and precisely 
computer-cut. All the required tools 
can be found around your house or at 
a hobby shop, and the instructions are 
very detailed. However, as instructed, 
I used wood glue on the main frame 
and supports, but it didn’t hold well. 
So I resorted to a hot glue gun, which 
worked perfectly. The build took about 
four hours. 
 
The Desktop Trebuchet kit comes 
with four wooden balls to fire, and it 
shoots about 15 feet. I showed it to my 
engineering club, and we fired circus 
peanuts with it. (One of my club mem-
bers ate all the peanuts.) It’s a great
kit for the model hobbyist who's just 
starting out. Overall, RLT has done
a great job with this one!
—Robert M. Zigmund
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4

KIT REVIEWS
74
Make: kits.makezine.com
WHEELS
Diesel to 
Veggie Car 
Conversion 
Greasecar Vegetable Fuel Systems $1,550
greasecar.com
Whether your
motivation is the 
environment, the 
economy, indepen-
dence, or you simply 
despise the oil companies, converting 
your diesel vehicle to run on waste 
vegetable oil (WVO) can truly be a 
rewarding experience. (You can get 
THE TRUE REWARD IS
DRIVING A FEW  HUNDRED MILES
DOWN THE INTERSTATE
AND NOT SEEING YOUR
FUEL GAUGE MOVE. 
SOUTH-POINTING 
CHARIOT KIT
RLT Industries $59
rlt.com/14201
Indie makers RLT 
Industries of New 
Braunfels, Texas (see 
Siege Weapons kits 
on page 72), sells this 
lovely wooden model kit of the classic 
“south-pointing chariot” mechanism. 
Set the chariot down with the vane 
pointing in an arbitrary direction — 
south, north, whatever — and a geared 
differential connected to the wheels 
will keep it pointing the same direction 
regardless of which way the chariot 
turns. Their version went through 
eight prototypes to get the gearing just 
right and seems like a helladeal at $59. 
—Sean Michael Ragan
WVO free from restaurants,
preferably higher end. Luckily for
me, my brother-in-law is a head chef, 
and he has access to WVO.)
 Greasecar sells complete conver-
sion kits for diesel Volkswagen, Volvo, 
BMW, Mercedes-Benz, and Peugeot 
cars, and Ford, GM, Dodge, and Isuzu 
vans and trucks. I could not be more 
pleased with the results of converting 
my 2004 Jetta TDI Wagon to run on 
WVO. The kit supplies all necessary 
components, which upon installation 
revealed high quality and excellent fit 
and features. Written instructions and 
a professional installation CD made 
the project a complete success for 
this weekend mechanic.
 The neat part about the kit is that it 
doesn’t compromise the car’s original 
diesel system. You start the car on 
diesel and, once up to temperature, 
you transition to WVO either manually 
or automatically. Prior to shutdown, 
a simple button on the onboard con-
troller initiates back-flushing of the 
WVO lines with diesel fuel so they 
won’t get clogged with WVO when the 
car cools.
 Once installed, the operation is 
incredibly simple. The true reward is 
driving a few hundred miles down the 
interstate and not seeing your fuel 
gauge move … wow! 
—Benjamin J. Mansi
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
5
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Benjamin Mansi (under hood)

75
Follow us @make
FreeRadical  
Cargo Bike 
Conversion
Xtracycle $335 and up  
xtracycle.com
I’ve been living 
car-free for 12 years. 
When I first saw 
Xtracycle’s cargo bike 
conversion kit, I was 
impressed by the broad utility of the 
design; it can be used to haul cargo 
and also passengers. I decided to 
build the ultimate people-and-stuff 
hauler so I could pick up friends who 
don’t bike and we could go places. 
	  I got the FreeRadical Classic exten-
sion kit with cargo deck and giant 
panniers, and added the WideLoader 
cargo shelves and KickBack kick-
stand. Xtracycle favors a mountain 
bike platform, not road, because the 
wheels are stronger. I bought a 2002 
Cannondale MT2000 mountain tan-
dem with a stong, American-made 
aluminum frame, and hydraulic disc 
brakes and quality tires for safety. 
	 If you have any background in 
bikes, the kit is easy. Components 
are good quality; a “snap deck hook” 
failed on me, but I’m a heavy-duty 
user. The documentation is good, 
and if something wasn’t mentioned, 
a quick YouTube search had it figured 
out — the Xtracycle community is 
rad, and totally open source.
	 The kit bolts to the bike in three 
strong and strategic places: the drop-
outs and rear triangle near the bottom 
bracket. Moving the rear wheel back 15 
inches doesn’t affect the handling on 
such an already-long bicycle. From my 
local bike shop I got a 10-foot hydrau-
lic cable, a tandem rear derailleur 
cable, and another chain. I completed 
my cargo-bus-cycle with a Rock the 
Bike Mothership sound system. Now 
I ride around with my friends listening 
to music like we used to do in a car! 
—Lucas French
I was reading Boing 
Boing one day and saw 
a link to this bicycle 
motor kit, consisting 
of a 66cc two-cycle 
engine, drive mechanism, gas tank, 
muffler, and controls. 
	
The ad brought back kid-time memo-
ries for me, as I had dreamed of one day 
owning a Whizzer, the classic motorized 
bicycle. It was the only vehicle you could 
purchase new during World War II. Now 
I could make one!
	
The kit arrived from China in three 
weeks. I opened the box to find that 
every nut, bolt, washer, and other sundry 
parts were not packed in tidy little plastic 
bags but were loose and had obviously 
rolled around in the box during its journey 
to me. I had no idea if parts were missing, 
as there was no assembly manual either. 
	
I went online and found an assembly 
manual PDF and an assembly video at 
Gas Bike (gasbike.net). (They also sell a 
variety of bike motor kits.) Then I picked 
up a cheap used mountain bike.
	
Now for the coup de grace — the 
engine and control mounting! Actually, 
the process went quite well. The kit 
uses a chain-driven sprocket that 
clamps to the rear wheel’s spokes. I 
found I was missing a part and readily 
located a replacement at a scooter shop. 
	
Since the now-motorized bike has no 
starter, I had to get on, aim it downhill, 
let out the clutch, and hope it started. 
It did! A nice pop-pop-pop noise like a 
baby Harley came from the muffler. I 
turned it uphill and was amazed at the 
torque that came from that tiny engine.
—Lew Frauenfelder
Complexity 
3
Components 
3
Documentation 2
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
2
Components 
3
Documentation 4
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
Garry McLeod (top); Lucas French (bottom)
Bike Motor Kit
Gas Imports $180 bikemotorkit.com

KIT REVIEWS
KIT REVIEWS
76
Make: kits.makezine.com
76
ROCKETS
People my age remember red plastic toy
rockets from childhood that you filled with 
water, pumped with air, and watched as they 
leaped dozens of feet into the air. Well, things 
have gotten far more serious in the world of 
water-powered model rocketry, and hobbyists 
are reaching heights upwards of 800' using 
plastic soda bottles, thin wood or plastic for 
fins, tape, glue, a tire air valve, and an air 
source such as a bicycle pump.
 
Where the DIYer goes, the kit maker soon fol-
lows. We recently spied these cool-looking kits 
from EnVision Labs and AntiGravity Research, 
both of which will allow you to build towering, 
multi-stage water rockets using special con-
nectors. Watch for reviews on makezine.com.  
 
But even without a kit, you probably already 
have everything you need (or can easily
aquire it). Consult aircommandrockets.com
for advanced hydrorocketry ideas. 
 
 
 
    —Gareth Branwyn
See the build at:
makeprojects.com/project/s/446
GRAVITY KEEPING YOU DOWN? MAKE A ROCKET 
AND WATCH IT LIFT TO THE SKY.
Compressed Air 
Rockets Kit
Maker Shed $50
makershed.com MKRS1
I was looking for something to do with the kids. 
They raved about how much fun the rocket 
launching was at Maker Faire, so I brought some 
of that fun home with this kit, which is based on 
Rick Schertle’s project from MAKE Volume 15 
(makeprojects.com/project/c/585). The kit is an easy build, one 
or two hours total, and the rockets go amazingly high — so high I 
could barely see them anymore. I guess that’s high enough! The 
kit includes Rick’s article, all the electronics, and the PVC parts 
cut to length. All you need to supply are a few common tools, 
glue, paper, tape, and an air compressor or bicycle pump.
—Marc de Vinck
WATER ROCKETS
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Launch Pro Multi-Stage 
Starter Kit
EnVision Labs $88
envisionlabs.com
Ultimate Water Rocket 
Experimenter’s Kit  
AntiGravity Research Corporation $200
antigravityresearch.com

77
Follow us @make
3. Big Daddy
Estes Industries $32
estesrockets.com
A few rungs up the
ladder toward high 
power is Estes’ Big 
Daddy, a chunky, 3"- 
diameter model. While 
designed for D and E solid rocket motors, 
it can easily handle AeroTech’s 24mm 
F motors. It’s not much more difficult to 
build than the Astra, but bear in mind 
that an E motor has up to 16 times the 
power of the Astra’s A.
4. Initiator Starter Set
AeroTech $200
aerotech-rocketry.com
This starter kit has
been the standard intro-
duction to high-power 
rocketry (motor types H 
and above) for 20 years, 
and for good reason. The Initiator rocket 
is big (39"), looks sharp, and can handle 
a wide variety of motors with its 29mm 
reloadable motor casing. You can put the 
kit together in an evening with 5-minute 
epoxy. The included pad and launch panel 
are easy to use and transport; they won’t 
handle truly huge models, but serious 
rocketeers generally fly their giant
projects on shared club equipment.
5. Hi-Tech H45
LOC Precision $70
locprecision.com
If you want a more
challenging high-power 
build experience, I like 
the Hi-Tech H45 kit. 
It’s big (2.63" diameter 
and 49" tall), with sturdy plywood fins 
and a durable plastic nose cone, and it 
can handle motor types F through I. I got 
my first high-power certification on this 
model back in 1990. Good times! 
77
Follow us @make
1. Astra 1
Quest Aerospace $11
questaerospace.com
Hobby rocketry leader 
Estes Industries makes 
more than a dozen 
inexpensive launch 
sets (launch pad/rod, 
launch controller) for beginners, but their 
included rockets are either pre-built or 
not much of a challenge. For a good first 
build, I’d instead suggest the Quest Astra 
1. Its balsa fins are mounted “through the 
wall,” making it easy for beginners to put 
them on straight. You can put it together 
with CA adhesive (“crazy glue”) and have 
it ready to fly in 15 minutes. 
4
1
2
SOLID-FUEL HOBBY ROCKETS
Complexity 
1
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 2
Community 
2
Completeness 
4
BY STEFAN JONES,
HOBBY ROCKETEER
1 Astra 1
3
2. Mars Lander 
Semroc $46
semroc.com
If you want a more
challenging project that 
takes shape with some 
real cutting and sand-
ing, small manufacturer 
Semroc produces high-quality balsa
rocket kit reproductions. The Mars 
Lander, originally sold by Estes in the 
1970s, is a beautifully realistic-looking 
spacecraft with spring-loaded landing
legs. You can also try their Saturn 1B 
($78), a 1/70 scale re-creation of the 
Apollo booster. 
Complexity 
5
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
5

KIT REVIEWS
KIT REVIEWS
78
Make: kits.makezine.com
KIT PARTY!
1. Thingamagoop 2
$75–$160
Analog voltage-
controlled oscillators 
(AVOs) make a variety 
of intriguing hums, 
beeps, buzzes, and 
loops, controlled by buttons, knobs, and 
sensors. These are fantastic group proj-
ects because once the soldering irons are 
all put down, you get an excellent payoff: 
you can have an impromptu concert. 
Bleep Labs, run by Austin, Texas, circuit 
bender and kit maker John-Michael Reed, 
produces a few AVO kits that I’ve built 
and had fun with.
 
The Thingamagoop 2 features a square 
wave amplitude modulator and triangle 
wave pulse width modulator, packed into 
a lovely silkscreened metal enclosure. 
The Thingamagoop’s signature compo-
nent is an LED on a bendable wire anten-
na called the LEDacle, which looks cool 
and, more importantly, interfaces with 
the light sensor hidden in the eye, mak-
ing for a huge range of possible sounds.
 
I found the build to be rather challeng-
ing. It took me a couple of hours to make, 
with one or two tricky steps. One thing
I appreciated was that unlike other Bleep 
Labs kits, you don’t need anything but 
the kit itself to make cool music — there’s 
no need to plug into anything. When 
I finally finished my Thingamagoop, 
I turned it on and watched as my kids 
snatched it out of my hands and ran off 
with it.
 
While the Thingamagoop is obviously 
kid-friendly, it offers some cool features 
for mom and dad to explore further. 
For instance, I’m intrigued that you can 
reprogram its ATmega328 chip using
an Arduino. 
2. Pico Paso
$25–$40
This tiny, handheld 
synth features two light 
sensors, two pots, and 
two buttons. It’s an easy 
build, even for newbies, 
soldering together very quickly with no 
difficult steps. I love how snug the little 
guy is, but this compactness comes at 
a price: no enclosure and no speaker. To 
hear the Pico Paso, you’ll need a ¼" mono 
cable to connect it to a mixer or amp. 
3. Nebulophone
$55–$80
Another small synth 
from Bleep Labs, the 
Nebulophone is more 
robust than the Pico 
Paso. It packs three 
potentiometer knobs, two buttons, an 
LED/light sensor combo that serves as 
an analog low-pass filter, and a unique 
piano-like series of pads on the PCB that 
you can control with an alligator clip. It 
has a programmable sequencer, outputs 
six octaves, and features six arpeggio 
modes. For remote control fun, you can 
clock the arpeggiator over IR. Like the 
Pico Paso, you’ll need to plug the synth 
into an amp to get any sound out of it. 
BY JOHN BAICHTAL,
GEEK DAD AND MAKE BLOGGER
BLEEP LABS        
 
 
 
 
 
 
     bleeplabs.com
I TURNED IT ON
AND WATCHED AS MY KIDS
SNATCHED IT OUT OF MY HANDS
AND RAN OFF WITH IT.
2
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
3
3
1
KIT REVIEWS
KIT P
KIT REVIEWS
2
1

79
Follow us @make
Ask any hackerspace:
kit-building parties are more fun
(and memorable).
DrinkShield
for Arduino
(and DrinkDuino)
GfxHax $28
makershed.com MKGX01
The DrinkDuino 
drinking game was 
the perfect excuse 
for me to get my 
first Arduino. After 
ordering the DrinkShield breatha-
lyzer kit and an Arduino Uno to 
drive it, I hastily pieced it together 
on my living room floor. The kit was 
simple enough, all components were 
included, and the instructions online 
were quick and easy.
 
Once I finished the build and 
uploaded the software, I informed 
my girlfriend that she would have 
to “drink for science!” Needless to 
say, she happily did her part. The 
next several days were spent play-
ing with it and whatever alcohol we 
could find around my office.
 
The open-source DrinkDuino 
Game software uses the DrinkShield 
API and is a big hit with everyone. 
It’s simple enough for a drunk to 
play, but fun enough to keep them 
interested. DrinkShield developer 
Craig Smith is incredibly helpful, 
and when I had some issues setting 
up the game, he helped me stumble 
though. All in all, DrinkDuino is a 
must for any get-together featuring 
adult beverages. Cheers!   
 —Will Stone
DIGITAL DOMINOS
Crash Space $20 store.crashspacela.com
These Digital Dominos work just like regular dominos
knocking each other down, only virtually. Each domino-
sized PCB has a button that triggers an LED to blink (which 
corresponds to the domino “falling”). An IR sensor on
one end and an IR LED on the other allow each domino
to trigger any adjacent domino to blink, and so on.
 Created by Daryll Strauss of Los Angeles hackerspace Crash Space,
these open source boards come four to a pack and are the perfect large-
group build for people just learning to solder. They’re easy to assemble, and 
a hundred people building them can collaborate to create gigantic, blinking 
trails of light. Best of all, to see the dominoes fall another time, you don’t 
have to stack them all back up. Just press the first domino’s button again. 
Coil Driver
Perth Artifactory $45
artifactory.org.au/kits/coildriver
If you like high-voltage 
sparks arcing through 
the air (and who 
doesn’t?), check out 
the Coil Driver, which 
drives an automotive ignition coil at 
audio frequencies. Like other musi-
cal kits, the Coil Driver makes a great 
group build because you can all make 
cool sounds together when you’re 
done. However, while it’s an easy solder, this kit may intimidate the casual 
maker because, let’s face it, high-voltage current is scary.
 Each board drives one automotive ignition coil, and you can control one 
or more using an Arduino microcontroller (not included). Designers Brett 
Downing and Daniel Harmsworth, of the Artifactory hackerspace in Perth, 
Australia, used these boards to build their Polyplasmic Arcophone, a giant 
instrument that features 13 Jacob’s ladders, zapping out music! 
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
I INFORMED MY GIRLFRIEND 
THAT SHE WOULD HAVE TO 
“DRINK FOR SCIENCE!” 
Complexity 
4
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
4
Completeness 
3

kit reviews
80
Make: kits.makezine.com
food
Gear up and get 
cooking with this 
arsenal of pantry 
supplies and  
gadgets galore.
By arwen o’reilly griffith,
make editor and 
culinary maven
meat & cheese
1. Mozzarella Cheese Kit
Leeners $25 
leeners.com
I would happily eat my 
weight in cheese, so 
the idea of having fresh 
mozzarella whenever I 
want has very strong 
appeal. This kit makes it as easy as buy-
ing a gallon of (not ultra-pasteurized) 
milk. The clear instructions take any 
mystery out of the chemistry, and I went 
from hot milk to perfect curds to pulling 
mozzarella in under an hour. Perfecto! 
More ambitious cheese-makers can try 
Leener’s Ultimate Cheese Making Kit to 
attempt hard cheeses.
2. Bacon Curing Kit
Leeners $20 
leeners.com
Bacon is enjoying the 
limelight these days, 
showing up in every-
thing from chocolate 
to donuts! If you really 
want to hop on this fat 
fad, brine your own. It takes a week, but 
is incredibly simple and delicious. This 
kit’s recipe book covers bacon, Canadian 
bacon, and pancetta. Note to the truly 
dedicated: invest in a smoker. My oven-
roasted bacon was tasty, but I gave half 
of my pork belly to a neighbor, and his 
hickory-smoked slices really sizzled. 
3. Corned Beef and Pastrami Kit
Leeners $30
leeners.com
I’ve made corned beef 
every St. Paddy’s day 
for years now, and 
have finally perfected 
my cocktail of pickling 
spices. Turns out I could 
have just gotten Leeners’ Corned Beef 
and Pastrami Kit; theirs is just as good. 
The kit comes with absolutely everything 
you need except the brisket (including a 
scarily effective meat tenderizer), and 
you can take it a step further and smoke 
yourself a mean pastrami out on the  
grill. Yum. 
preservation & fermentation
4. Water Bath Canning Kit
Granite Ware $50
makezine.com/go/canning
There’s nothing like 
prying open a jar of 
gleaming, homemade 
strawberry jam in 
January. This kit is a 
classic and contains everything you need 
to get started. It’s worth it for the mag-
netic lid lifter alone! (How many times 
have I burned myself fishing around the 
pot for lost lids?) For smaller batches, 
I like steam canners to cut down on all 
that boiling water, but when you’re up to 
your elbows in tomatoes, you’ll definitely 
reach for this capacious pot. 
	
You may need an additional book, like 
Ashley English’s Canning and Preserving 
(her cherry marmalade recipe is worth 
pitting cherries for). And if you prefer 
your jam on the tart side, I recommend 
Pomona’s Pectin, which uses calcium 
instead of sugar to give you more sweet-
ness control. 
	
Best of all with this kit: everything 
fits back in the pot, so it doesn’t take 
up tons of space in your cabinet.
5. Vegetable Fermenting Gear
Cultures for Health $20 starter, plus 
$62 for cookbook, mandoline, and jar
culturesforhealth.com
To make sauerkraut, 
all you really need is 
cabbage, salt, and a jar 
with a lid, but you can 
make your life much 
easier with a mandoline slicer, vegetable 
starter culture, and fermenting crock 
from Cultures for Health. (A copy of Wild 
Fermentation by Sandor Katz will only 
help the cause.) They carry charming 
crocks from Poland and Germany, but I 
love the Fermented Vegetable Master 
jar because you can keep an eye on your 
veggies through the glass, and the air-
lock in the lid adds some space-age chic 
to your kitchen. Questions? Check out the 
forums, videos, and how-to articles on 
their website. 
6. Bread Making Gear
Cultures for Health
$13 starter, up to $50 for other tools 
culturesforhealth.com
While not exactly a “kit,” 
Cultures for Health has 
everything you need 
for making sourdough 
bread: 15 starters from 
all over the world, clear instructions, and 
a great selection of useful bread-making 
tools, like cookbooks, dough scrapers, 
bread bags, and baker’s blades for scoring 
that classic ridge down the middle of your 
loaf. I experimented with a New Zealand 
rye starter, and after a week of tender 
care and regular feeding, it was bubbly 
and ready to go. The next day, I pulled my 
first loaf of warm, tasty raisin rye bread 
out of the oven. Next up: I’m going to 
tackle a classic San Francisco sourdough.
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
1
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
3
Components 
4
Documentation 2
Community 
1
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
1
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
2
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
4
Completeness 
2
Roasted, Smoked
Complexity 
2, 4
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
1
Completeness 5, 4
Corned Beef, Pastrami
Complexity 
2, 4
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
1
Completeness 
5

81
Follow us @make
1
4
7
2
5
8
3
6
9
dessert
7. Mayan Magic Chocolate 
Making Kit
Mayan Magic $25 
makezine.com/go/mayan
Chocoholics, take note! 
This kit allows you 
to make your flavor 
fantasies come true. 
It’s got everything you 
need to make basic, agave-sweetened 
chocolate, but I used honey instead and 
added lemon zest to create something 
out of this world. Ruffled paper cups are 
included, so the presentation is worthy 
of your sweetheart. After a few days, the 
chocolate took on a grainy texture, so eat 
it quickly (that won’t be hard).
grow your own
8. Pre-Activated Shiitake 
Mushroom Mini Farm
Far West Fungi $20
farwestfungi.com
Who’d believe a saw-
dust log in a plastic bag 
could turn into a magi-
cal mushroom forest 
before your eyes! My 
first harvest was bounteous and the shii-
takes delectable, but careful attention to 
growing conditions was required to yield 
multiple crops of mushrooms rather than 
mold. If you get 3–5 harvests, the kit is a 
bargain; but regardless, it’s worth it just 
to be able to pluck those lovely ’shrooms 
right next to your dinner plate. 
iStock (1, 5, 6); Arwen O’Reilly Griffith (4, 7); Sam Murphy (9)
9. Spirulina Growth Kit
Algae Lab $249 
algaelab.org
You don’t have to 
depend on commercial 
growers or expensive 
powders to get your 
spirulina fix. With this 
kit, you can have it fresh and alive, any-
time. I made a few modifications to help 
mine grow faster and prevent clogging, 
like replacing the intake line with rubber 
tubing and swapping the bubble wand for 
a stone and filter. If I’d known it was so 
easy, I’d have done it long ago.    
	
Build your own spirulina superfood 
tank: see MAKE Volume 27, page 92.   
—Vicky Glisson 
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
2
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
3
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
3
Documentation 4
Community 
4
Completeness 
5

 
WHERE 
Grove City, Ohio
 
BUSINESS 
Science Kinetics      sciencekinetics.com 
 
SHOPBOT 
PRSstandard 96 X 48
 INSPIRATIONS 
"My initial inspiration to start Science   
 
 
Kinetics was sparked by the reactions of  
 
 
visitors to the interactive exhibits at the  
 
 
Center of Science and Industry where I  
 
 
worked while attending Ohio State. To me,  
 
 
a well-designed exhibit has an almost   
 
 
magical ability to speak to a diverse  
 
 
 
audience. A child may take away something  
 
 
completely different than an adult but that  
 
 
doesn’t really matter. If the exhibit made an  
 
 
impression it did its job!"  
 WHAT’S NEXT 
"Developing a traveling exhibit to be leased  
 
 
by museums for a few months at a time. I’m  
 
 
also very interested in the idea of designing  
 
 
interactive, electro-mechanical art exhibits."
Jeff Shapiro is a former 6th grade science teacher whose company, Science 
Kinetics, designs and fabricates interactive educational displays for museums. Jeff 
began making hands-on displays as teaching tools for his classroom, and turned 
this passion into his fulltime business in 2005. The company's work is being 
enjoyed by thousands of visitors to museums across the U.S. and ﬁve other 
countries around the globe. "My ShopBot CNC is hands-down the most valuable 
tool I have ever owned. I don't think there is one exhibit I sell that doesn't have 
components fabricated on the ShopBot. The accuracy of the tool enables us to 
produce moving displays that work perfectly and can withstand use by kids and 
adults for years and years!"   
ShopBotTools.com
888-680-4466 •
ShopBotter Jeff Shapiro makes 
learning fun with Science Kinetics

83
Follow us @make
BY JOHN EDGAR PARK,
MIXOLOGIST
KOMBUCHA
STARTER KIT
Oregon Kombucha $16
oregonkombucha.com
What’s kombucha? It’s 
a refreshing, lightly 
sweetened, sparkling 
tea drink that is natu-
rally fermented (yet 
non-alcoholic). The Oregon Kombucha 
kit comes with everything you need to 
make your own kombucha at home. The 
instructions are clear and easy to fol-
low. Boil a gallon of water, brew the tea 
satchel, dissolve the sugar, let it cool, 
then add the live kombucha culture, and 
wait at least a week for it to do its thing. 
And by “it” I mean the SCOBY (symbiotic 
culture of bacteria and yeast). The reus-
able SCOBY is the living, pancake-like 
mass that forms on top of the tea and 
gives carbonation and added flavor to 
the beverage. 
GINGER
ALE
Maker Shed $16
makershed.com MKCT08
The Brew It Yourself 
Ginger Ale kit is
a great weekend 
project for the whole 
family. It comes with 
easy-to-follow instructions, ginger ale 
flavor extract, yeast, a funnel, and two 
blank labels. My kids enjoyed measur-
ing, mixing, and heating ingredients, 
proofing the yeast, and bottling in 
two 2-liter bottles, adorned with their 
custom-made labels. After fermenting 
and refrigerating, the ale was highly 
carbonated (we made a spectacular
ginger ale fountain by accident),
naturally sweet, and delicious.
HARIO COLD WATER 
COFFEE DRIPPER
Hario $251
roustaboutproducts.com
Iced coffee is refresh-
ing and delicious, but 
I’ve never been able 
to make it as well as 
I’d like. As it turns 
out, I was doing it wrong. Rather than 
prepare it with a traditional hot brew 
method, I should have been cold brew-
ing it. This reduces acidity and produces 
a concentrated flavor that stands up 
well to ice, sugar, and cream. The Hario 
Cold Water Coffee Dripper makes this 
easy and aesthetically beautiful, with 
its clear stand, lab-style glass, and 
high-quality components. The instruc-
tions are in Japanese, but I figured it all 
out from the illustrations (and a peek at 
some web videos). Place grounds into 
the filter chamber, wet them, then fill 
the reservoir with cold water. Open the 
drip valve to a 1-drip-per-second rate, 
then wait a few hours for liquid gold to 
brew through to the carafe.
BEVERAGES
MAKE YOUR OWN
KOMBUCHA AT HOME.
A GREAT WEEKEND PROJECT
FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY.
EASY AND AESTHETICALLY
BEAUTIFUL.
USE COUPON CODE MAKECOFFEE
FOR 25% OFF. GOOD NOV. 22 – DEC. 22, 2011.
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 3
Community 
3
Completeness 
3
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 3
Community 
2
Completeness 
5
Complexity 
2
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
2
Completeness 
4

kit reviews
84
Make: kits.makezine.com
Spike 
Your Juice
Spike Your Juice $10
spikeyourjuice.com
Spike Your Juice is a 
simple introduction to 
home fermentation. 
The kit comes with 
enough yeast packets 
for six batches, an airlock with rubber 
stopper, and clear instructions. To brew 
a batch of alcoholic juice, add one yeast 
pack to a 64oz bottle of juice (such as 
grape or cranberry), shake, stopper 
with the water-filled airlock valve, and 
wait 48 hours. The yeast will digest the 
sugar, producing alcohol and carbon-
ation. Tasty, fizzy, and tipsy fun! 
Brooklyn Brew 
beer making kit
Brooklyn Brew Shop $40
makershed.com MKBBS1
The Brooklyn Brew 
Shop 1 Gallon Beer 
Making Kit is the 
perfect introduction 
to brewing for the 
quality-conscious quaffer. Instead of 
the typical can of malt extract, you’ll 
learn about the true steps of making a 
grain mash, sparging, hopping, yeast-
ing, fermenting, bottling, and then 
drinking a delicious homebrew. I made 
a tasty IPA, though they offer many 
other styles. One of the most inspired 
things about this kit is its size — small 
enough to do on a stovetop, more man-
ageable than the typical 5-gallon size. 
Includes malted barley blend, hops, 
yeast, glass fermenter, airlock, tubing, 
thermometer, tubing clamp, sanitizer, 
stopper, and blowoff attachment.
Molecular 
Cocktails
ThinkGeek $80
thinkgeek.com
The Molecular 
Cocktails Starter Kit 
is the perfect gift for 
the mad-scientist mix-
ologist in your life. It 
comes with the tools, chemical  
compounds, and information needed  
to create gels, liquid-filled spheres, 
foams, and UV-reactive glowing drinks. 
The included book contains chapters on 
foundational techniques derived from 
molecular gastronomy, as well as  
50 recipes.
Tasty, fizzy, and 
tipsy fun!
Brewing for the quality- 
conscious quaffer. 
perfect for the mad-scientist 
mixologist in your life.
alcoholic beverages
Complexity	
4
Components	
5
Documentation	 5
Community	
3
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
2
Components	
4
Documentation	 3
Community	
2
Completeness	
3
Complexity	
4
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
4
Completeness	
4

85
Follow us @make
Whiskey 
Aging Kit
Woodinville Whiskey Co. $150
woodinvillewhiskeyco.com
Just because you 
don’t own a distill-
ery doesn’t mean 
you can’t have a 
hand in making your 
own whiskey. Whiskey starts its life 
as a clear, nearly flavorless spirit; it’s 
the aging process that provides the 
beautiful brown color and most of the 
smooth, smoky flavor. The Age Your 
Own Whiskey Kit provides all you need 
to age whiskey in much less time than 
you may think. The kit comes with a 
desktop-sized 2L charred oak barrel, 
two 750ml bottles of “white dog” un-
aged whiskey, a funnel, two tasting 
glasses, and clear instructions. Swell 
the barrel with water to make it water-
tight, then drain, pour in the young 
whiskey, and wait. Thanks to the high 
proportion of surface area to volume, 
you can age in three to six months what 
would normally take a few years. I 
tasted mine after the first week and it’s 
already developing color, smoothness, 
and smoky, caramel flavor. 
Perlini 
carbonation Kit
Perlage Systems $199
perlini.biz
Open the cool alumi-
num briefcase and 
remove your weapon 
of choice. Charge 
the pistol grip with a 
16-gram CO2 cartridge. Fill the lower 
shaker chamber with gin, maraschino 
liqueur, lemon juice, Creme de Violette, 
and ice. Thread the shaker top and  
valve onto the lower chamber. Inject 
CO2 into the shaker. Shake. Settle. Open. 
Pour. You’ve just made a delicious,  
sparkling Aviation.
	
You can use the Perlini system to 
carbonate cocktails and other drinks 
that won’t work in a traditional home 
carbonation system, thanks to the large 
opening of the three-part cobbler-style 
shaker. I even used it to carbonate some 
fresh strawberries. It comes with excel-
lent instructions (printed, and on a USB 
drive) that include recipes, solid expla-
nations of the science of carbonation, a 
formula to calculate optimal booze-to-
ice ratios, and other important mixologi-
cal physics. 
Carbonate cocktails, 
or even fresh fruit!
Age in 3–6 months what would 
normally take a few years.
J. Edgar’s  
Aromatic  
Bitters №1
Invigorate your newly carbonated 
cocktails, sodas, and aged whiskey 
with homemade bitters.
Ingredients
151-proof grain alcohol, 375ml
100-proof bourbon, 375ml
Zest of one lemon peeled with 
a vegetable peeler
Quinine extract, ¼tsp 
from a health food store
Wormwood extract, 1tsp 
from a health food store
Tellicherry peppercorns, 2tsp
Cinnamon stick
Fresh ginger root, 2" piece
Allspice berries (6)
Cloves (4)
Dried cherries, 1c
Vanilla bean split in half length-
wise, with its seeds scraped and 
reserved to add to jar
Raw sugar, ¼c
Directions
1. Put all ingredients, except for 
sugar, in a large glass jar, closing 
it tightly.
2. Store jar in a cool, dark place for 
13 days, shaking it daily.
3. On the thirteenth day, filter liquid 
into a clean jar through a sieve, 
reserving solids.
4. Place filtered solids into a sauce-
pan, along with ½c of water. Bring 
to simmer, stirring occasionally, for 
15 minutes, in order to extract 
maximum flavor.
5. Strain simmered liquid through 
sieve or cheesecloth, and then  
combine with other jar of liquid.
6. Filter liquid through a coffee 
filter or AeroPress to remove small 
particles.
7. Heat sugar in a small saucepan 
over medium-high heat, stirring 
until it caramelizes and froths, then 
add it to bitters.
8. Shake jar until burnt sugar  
dissolves, then let bitters cool.
9. Bottle and apply directly to your 
tongue to relieve the fantods, or 
enjoy a dash or two in most any 
drink for added flavor.
recipe
John Edgar Park
Complexity 
3
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
4

kit reviews
kit reviews
86
Make: kits.makezine.com
Audio Gear
Crank it up with 
these audiophile 
projects.
1. MSA-R MIDI Decoder
Highly Liquid $50–$67
highlyliquid.com
This kit gets top marks 
for ease of assembly 
and low price, and 
because it’s prepro-
grammed to do all the 
heavy lifting, all you need to do is solder 
it together and attach it to the device of 
your choice. It’ll take an average-skilled 
solderer 1½ hours to assemble, and 
from there the possibilities are endless. 
Circuit-bent devices, kinetic toys, and 
things that light up can all be linked and 
sequenced into a sound-and-light show 
that’ll impress onlookers with your inge-
nuity and resourcefulness. And it’s fun!
—Michael Una
2. Elekit TU-879S  
Stereo Tube Amplifier 
Tube Depot $600
tubedepot.com
The great thing about 
this kit is the variety of 
skills you’ll learn. Not 
only do you end up with 
a warm-sounding tube 
amp, but you also learn how all these 
audio components are produced, as well 
as proper soldering technique, orienta-
tion of polarized capacitors, spacing of 
large-value wirewound resistors, and 
heat sinking of transistors. It's relatively 
straightforward to build, but if you’re a 
novice, seek out a mentor with electron-
ics experience to offer some guidance.
—Jake Spurlock 
3. PoddWatt 
Series 1 Amplifier
OddWatt Audio $575
oddwattaudio.com
Just one listen to this 
home-built, high-end 
tube amp, and you'll 
quickly discover that 
there’s more to that 
classic song you've been listening to 
for years. It has nothing to do with 
nostalgia — tubes just sound more 
musical than pure solid state, and the 
PoddWatt is a prime example.
	
So, what can you get from a mid-priced 
tube amp kit nowadays? If you're willing 
to play by the rules, the answer is quite 
a bit. The PoddWatt produces a smooth 
sound that rarely offends, and as a kit, 
the build is fantastic. The instructions 
are thorough, and the components USA-
sourced. The best part? The listening just 
gets better with time.                                     —JS
speakers
4. TriTrix MTM Speakers
C&W Audio Labs $259/pair
parts-express.com
Speaker design master 
Curt Campbell has 
created several dream 
kits for the audiophile, 
including the TriTrix. 
Featuring two 5.25" Dayton Audio 
woofers and a single tweeter in MTM 
format, the final product has an easy, 8Ω 
load that can be used for audio or home 
theater systems. The transmission line 
kit includes precision-cut MDF for making 
the cabinets, which came together for me 
with a little wood glue and some clamps 
(I used five to make it easy on myself). 
With instructive online manufacturer 
videos and priced at only $259/pair, 
these speakers blow the roof off any 
competitor.                                                            —JS
5. Seas Idunn 2-Way Speakers
Seas Prestige $698/pair 
madisoundspeakerstore.com
Named after the Norse 
goddess of youth, the 
Seas Idunn kit sets a 
high standard for DIY 
speakers. Cabinets come 
fully assembled in black ash, cherry, 
or maple, and the crossover also comes 
prebuilt, so installing it is just a matter of 
affixing it to the boxes and attaching the 
drivers. All told, the build took me about 
two hours using basic hand tools. To get 
speakers that look and sound this good, 
you'd normally pay several thousand  
dollars.                                                                     —JS
retro
6. Premium Berliner 
Gramophone Kit
Gakken $120 
makershed.com MKGK28
Constructed from a 
motor and various bits 
of wood, plastic, and 
styrofoam, this retro 
gramophone kit offers 
the allure of carving grooves into 
compact discs and Dixie cups with a 
sewing-needle-based pickup and 
playback assembly. 
	
Illustrated instructions in both 
Japanese and well-translated English are 
included, and the hour-long assembly 
only requires a screwdriver, some scotch 
tape, and a battery. This kit definitely 
delivers on the archaic, hands-on audio 
experience. Recommended for all ages. 
—Adam W. Kempa 
Complexity	
3
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
3
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
5
Components	
5
Documentation	 4
Community	
4
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
3
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
5
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
2
Components	
5
Documentation	 4
Community	
3
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
3
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
1
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
3
Components	
5
Documentation	 5
Community	
2
Completeness	
5

87
Follow us @make
1
5
3
4
6
7. XS-402 Little Wonder  
Crystal Radio Kit
Xtal Set Society, Inc. $19 
midnightscience.com/kits.html
Many middle-aged DIY 
enthusiasts have con-
structed a crystal radio 
set; it’s such a joy to pull 
radio signals out of the 
ether using only the radio signal itself 
for power. 
	
Unlike traditional crystal sets, the 
XS-402 uses a molded, high frequency 
choke, eliminating the frustrating coil-
winding process, and features large 
solder pads, great for learning to solder. 
It’s a perfect project for adults to build 
with kids, and it serves as a great tool to 
teach basic radio theory, soldering, and 
handling of electronic parts and PCBs.  
If you’re interested in “old school” radio 
technology or want to learn more com-
plex skills, this is the kit for you.
—Thomas Arey N2EI
oddwatt audio
bruce heran 
& Rodney 
brinker
oddwattaudio.com
OddWatt owners Bruce Heran 
and Rodney Brinker met in 2009 
after Heran posted a kit build on 
diyaudioprojects.com. Brinker 
was working on the same kit, and 
they realized they had a lot in 
common, especially their sense 
of what makes a quality kit. 
	
“We liked the idea of just 
building the thing right the first 
time using quality parts,” says 
Brinker. 
	
Using their unique OddWatt 
amplifier circuit as a basis, they 
knew they had something effec-
tive and different. "The circuit is 
deceptively simple," they write. 
"The signal path has only one 
capacitor and one transformer." 
	
 Heran focuses on design-
ing solid products that last, 
and Brinker strives to provide 
instructions so clear that even 
the unskilled will enjoy success. 
Hundreds of hours go into each 
kit, from concept to completion. 
It’s no wonder their motto is 
“Good Listening!” 
	
Look for new kits coming soon, 
including a large power amp, 
a phonograph preamp, and a 
single-watt vacuum tube kit for 
beginners.
—Goli Mohammadi
KIT MAKERS	
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 4
Community 
5
Completeness 
4
7
2

88
Make: kits.makezine.com
Make: Marketplace
1.888.437.4564
sales@epiloglaser.com
Visit epiloglaser.com/make.htm for more information and 
to receive your brochure kit with engraved and cut samples! 
LASER IT!
LASER IT!
LASER IT!
S
LASER IT!
LASER IT!
Cut it.     Engrave it.     Mark it. 
Laser Engraving, Cut ing and 
Marking Systems from Epilog Laser
g y
p
g
g y
p
g
From creating and personalizing 3D models, 
to engraving photos on keychains, to marking 
high-tech gadgets, our laser systems create the 
products you see here and more!
Laser Systems Starting at $7,995
erer

89
Follow us @make
H3125 Ukulele
Grizzly Industrial $23 grizzly.com
Aspiring luthiers will find this a satisfying first project, with 
its pre-assembled mahogany body and ready-to-attach neck; 
you’re left with the satisfying jobs of final assembly and fin-
ishing. The woods are nice despite the low price — the ply-
wood fretboard being the only weak piece — and if you build 
it as instructed, you’ll end up with a very nice entry-level ukulele. Experiment 
with techniques like body-edge binding and inlay work to take it up a notch. 
Whether you aspire to be an exotic island crooner or to start the next post-
punk, all-toy-instrument band, a ukulele is just a nice thing to have around.  
—Steve Lodefink
Rock out and celebrate making your 
own instruments and effects.
musical instruments
Tenor Wolfelele 
Ukulele
Wolfelele Ukuleles $96
wolfelele.com
It took me about 45 
minutes (not includ-
ing glue drying time) 
to put together a 
service-able ukulele 
from Wolfelele’s precut wooden com-
ponents. The well-designed parts fit 
together in a way that ensured it didn’t 
end up crooked, and the triangular 
instrument sounds better than any 
other $100 ukulele I’ve played. The kit 
has everything you need, except wood 
glue, a Phillips screwdriver, sandpaper, 
and scissors. (I recommend that you 
refer to the online instructions rather 
than the paper ones as the former are 
more complete.) The website also has 
a downloadable teacher brochure and 
useful instructions on how to run a 
Wolfelele-building workshop.
—Mark Frauenfelder
Complexity	
4
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
2
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
2
Components	
5
Documentation	 3
Community	
5
Completeness	
4

KIT REVIEWS
KIT REVIEWS
90
Make: kits.makezine.com
E.S.V.
FUZZ PEDAL
BYOC $95
buildyourownclone.com
Perfect for the hobby 
electronics musi-
cian, the E.S.V. Fuzz 
pedal adds that “Extra 
Special Vintage” tone 
to your electric guitar. The kit has a 
handy PCB design that makes soldering 
a breeze, and as a result I was able to 
put this kit together in about an hour. 
Follow the detailed instructions and 
you, too, will be playing with that nice 
and crunchy, vintage sound in no time.
SAGA ELECTRIC 
GUITAR: T-STYLE
Saga Musical Instruments $179
makershed.com MKSGTC10
If you want an easy-
to-build guitar that 
you can really make 
your own, this kit 
offers a blank canvas. 
You can paint it, stain it, or classically 
distress it to look like your favorite 
guitar idol. All the holes are pre-drilled, 
and the connections don’t require any 
soldering. The headstock comes in a 
generic paddle shape to allow your 
imagination to run wild — I deliberated 
for ages before landing on the perfect 
style for mine. This kit takes you from 
making to rocking in no time.
THE PERSUADER 
TUBE DRIVE 
EFFECTS PEDAL
Mod Kits DIY $65
amplifiedparts.com
Looking to get some 
clean preamp boost 
out of your guitar, 
and love the tone that 
vintage tubes offer? 
Check out The Persuader pedal from 
Mod Kits DIY. The Persuader can take 
the tone of your guitar from nice and 
clean to that warm, smooth tube over-
drive. Easy to construct with the solid 
instructions, this pedal is built with 
the 12AX7 tube, but if you’re looking 
to change up the tone, consider swap-
ping in other tubes also available from 
Amplified Parts.
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
Ben Lowe (Drone Lab)
Complexity 
2
Components 
2
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
4
Components 
4
Documentation 4
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
Complexity 
2
Components 
5
Documentation 5
Community 
3
Completeness 
4
ADD THAT “EXTRA SPECIAL
VINTAGE” TONE. 
PAINT IT, STAIN IT,
OR CLASSICALLY DISTRESS IT.
SMOOTH TUBE OVERDRIVE.

91
Follow us @make
MOD 102 DIY Guitar 
Amplifier
Mod Kits DIY $215
amplifiedparts.com
Musicians have long 
praised the tone of 
tube amps, and after 
a face-melting guitar 
solo, it looks pretty rad 
to have your amp glowing behind you 
on stage.
	
I love the simplistic, wholly utilitarian 
design of the Mod102’s case, and the 
sweet tone it adds. The circuit design 
is point to point, giving beginners and 
experts alike an enjoyable project to 
put together, and to plug into.
Etherwave Theremin
Moog Music $359 moogmusic.com
Due to its hands-free interface (your body’s interference 
with its electromagnetic field controls the sound), the 
theremin is famed for both its novelty and its importance 
in 20th-century music. When I started building this kit, 
I had little soldering experience, but the straightforward 
instructions made for a great introduction to the world of circuits. 
The wooden casing needs a brief sanding and varnish or paint, and the 
mostly constructed circuit board only requires soldering the components 
that determine tone and waveforms. Bonus: the kit comes with a hilari-
ous performance DVD of Clara Rockmore, one of the first theremin 
players, and a somber demonstration by her granddaughter.
—Meara O’Reilly
Drone Lab V2
Casper Electronics $230 casperelectronics.com
As a newbie to synthesizers and most electronics, I found 
the Drone Lab V2 a rewarding kit to construct. This ana-
log drone synthesizer is made up of four oscillators, each 
with tuning and volume control, that get mixed together 
and run through various effects. You can also run another 
synth, noisemaker, guitar, or whatever straight into it for 
all kinds of cool sonic interplay. The assembly is all soldered onto one 
PCB, eliminating the need for wiring and mounting, and although the 
construction and layout is solid, it does feel very DIY. So, how does it 
sound? In a word: awesome. The tuning controls allow you to dial in your 
drones by ear, but it’s the effects that really make it playable on its own.
—Ben Lowe
Complexity	
4
Components	
4
Documentation	 3
Community	
3
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
4
Components	
5
Documentation	 4
Community	
3
Completeness	
4
Complexity	
4
Components	
4
Documentation	 3
Community	
3
Completeness	
4
by jake Spurlock, 
Make Web guru 
and audiophile 
IT looks pretty rad. 

kit reviews
kit reviews
92
Make: kits.makezine.com
Loud Objects 
Noise Toy
Loud Objects $20
makershed.com MKLOK
Bzzzzrrrreeeeepeh-
khkhkhhhhhhhk! 
Build your own Noise 
Toy with this kit from 
electronic noise group 
the Loud Objects. Plug in your head-
phones and glitch out, or jack into an 
amp and play it as an instrument.
	
These kits come complete with a 
custom-printed circuit board, a noise 
generating microchip programmed with 
the firmware Loud Objects uses for 
their live performances, two buttons for 
modulating the sound, headphone jack, 
and battery.
Phantastron 
Synthesizer Kit 
Electric Western $195
electricwestern.com
In an alternate Old 
West universe, folks 
played synthesiz-
ers, and they called 
‘em “Phantastrons.” 
Incorporating tubes, steel panels, and 
a branded wooden crate ripe for custom-
ization, this is one unusual synth kit. 
The power supply comes mostly assem-
bled, but the 30s-era “turret board” is a 
challenge for seasoned solderers. Not 
your standard volt-per-octave function-
ality; this oscillator beast can be steered 
via amplified audio, or control-voltage 
signals, reacting with a rebellious voice. 
Plus, the onboard controls and rotary 
selector offer three waveforms to  
tweak pitch. Though it would be a 
welcome addition to my “guitarsenal,” 
I foresee using this as the core of an 
unusual instrument.
—Collin Cunningham
Drum Kit 
Kit
Spikenzie Labs $19
makershed.com MKSKL2
Turn anything into a 
drum set with your 
Arduino and this 
simple kit. Some mak-
ers build custom drum 
sets from fine hardwoods, while others 
take the easy route and make practice 
sets from mouse pads and sheet metal. 
Instead of building my own, I used the 
included piezo elements to trick out 
my Rock Band drums, hooked them up 
to my friend’s Yamahas, and gave him 
a few more drumheads to tap. With 
software like GarageBand or Ableton 
Live, you can start making music right 
away. Simply map your notes with the 
Arduino sketch, and start recording.
—Jake Spurlock
musical instruments
Complexity	
5
Components	
5
Documentation	 4
Community	
1
Completeness	
5
Complexity	
2
Components	
5
Documentation	 4
Community	
3
Completeness	
3
Complexity	
3
Components	
4
Documentation	 4
Community	
3
Completeness	
4
this is one unusual synth kit.
Turn anything 
into a drum set. 
Plug in your headphones 
and glitch out.

93
Follow us @make
Make: Marketplace

94
Make: kits.makezine.com
Make: Marketplace
Parts, Upgrades
Tools & Guides
 
Interested in DIY electronics? Get Started Today!
We sell quality 
tools too!
Electronics Skills Kit
was $29.95 
save $5.00!
Find what you’re looking for at iFixit.com
DIY
ELECTRONICS
Must Have!
Learn about soldering,
capacitors, diodes, and 
identifying resistors!
USA Customers Only  -  Part # if145-018-1
Part # if145-161-1
MuscleWires.com
Also 
available in 
Human and 
Robot 
versions!

95
Follow us @make
Make: Marketplace
FrontPanelExpress.com
1(800)FPE-9060
■  Cost effective prototypes and production runs
■  Powder-coated finish and panel thickness up 
to 10mm now available
■  Choose from aluminum, acrylic or customer 
provided material
■ 1, 3 and 5-day lead times available
Custom Front Panels 
& Enclosures
Sample price $57.32 + S&H
FREE 
Software
Designed by you using our  
FREE software, Front Panel Designer
www.buildyourownclone.com
the world’s finest DIY
guitar FX
&
amplifiers

95
Follow us @make
Make: Marketplace
FrontPanelExpress.com
1(800)FPE-9060
■  Cost effective prototypes and production runs
■  Powder-coated finish and panel thickness up 
to 10mm now available
■  Choose from aluminum, acrylic or customer 
provided material
■ 1, 3 and 5-day lead times available
Custom Front Panels 
& Enclosures
Sample price $57.32 + S&H
FREE 
Software
Designed by you using our  
FREE software, Front Panel Designer
www.buildyourownclone.com
the world’s finest DIY
guitar FX
&
amplifiers

the last word
96
Make: kits.makezine.com
Most Dangerous Kits
»Information Unlimited calls its 
kit-buildable Burning Laser Ray Gun 
($1,576) an “excellent demonstra-
tion of future weapons technology. 
... When used with a simple lens this 
laser can cut through a rock. When 
used with a lens system, the air will 
actually explode at the focus point.” 
amazing1.com
»The Firebird ($3,295 base, $6,691 
loaded) is the world’s fastest R/C 
kit plane, clocked at 337mph. It’s a 
needle-nosed mini gas turbine jet 
over 7 feet long with an 81" wingspan. 
jetmodelproducts.com
»Mile Hi Distilling’s Reflux Distiller Kit, 
13 Gallon Milk Can with 3" Torpedo 
Tower ($629), produces 180-proof 
spirits at a rate of 1 gallon per hour. 
That’s a party. milehidistilling.com
»Brooklyn’s Madagascar Institute 
teaches how to build a Propane Flame 
Cannon. madagascarinstitute.com
»Earth’s Tongue sells mushroom 
grow kits “intended for edible gour-
met mushroom cultivation” ($59) 
and spore samples of psilocybin 
mushrooms “intended for microscopy 
study” ($18–$38). earthstongue.com
»Gun laws restrict the sale of kits for 
assembling modern guns, but not 
front-loading black powder weapons. 
Cabelas sells the Trapper .50 Caliber 
Pistol Kit ($270), Kentucky Rifle  
Kit ($300), and many Civil War-era 
muskets. cabelas.com
»Information Unlimited’s High Power 
Large Tesla Coil stands 8 feet tall and 
throws high-voltage electrical dis-
charges 10 feet ($9,500 assembled, 
$7,000 kit, $20 plans). amazing1.com 
» BASE jumping rigs (for parachut-
ing from skyscrapers, cliffs, bridges, 
etc.) from Morpheus Technologies 
include a canopy or parachute, con-
tainer, and optional wing suit (starting 
at about $2,000). baserigs.com  
»Spud Gun Extreme sells potato  
cannons, both pneumatic and com-
bustion-fired ($150 and $180), that 
can shoot potato plugs hundreds of 
yards. spudgunextreme.com 
»RoadsideImports LLC sells switch-
blade kits like the Mikov Automatic 
($80–$200) and 13" AKC Dark Horn 
Italian Stiletto ($125 and up). They 
sell many other switchblade, stiletto, 
and butterfly knives; just add the $16 
“Make My Knife a Kit” option to avoid 
import failure. assistedknife.com 
»Finally, the DIY-X Explosive 
Simulants Kit from Tactical5, which is 
used for training security personnel, 
isn’t dangerous itself — but don’t try 
carrying it through airport security. 
tactical5.com  
Most kits are safe when 
used responsibly as part  
of a balanced lifestyle. 
Here are a few of the 
other ones.
iStockphoto/Evgeniya Moroz

make
make
your own gamese
s

mouser.com
Mouser and Mouser Electronics are registered trademarks of Mouser Electronics, Inc. Other products, logos, and company names mentioned herein, may be trademarks of their respective owners.
Find It Here. Faster.
™
The Newest Products for Your Newest Designs
®
  1470+ Product Knowledge Modules
  2 Million Parts Online 
  Same-Day Shipping
  450+ Industry-Leading Suppliers
  #1 Customer Support
  16 Website Languages and Currencies Available
Authorized distributor for the most advanced semiconductors and 
electronic components.
Get What’s Next. Right now at mouser.com.
AS9120A Certified Distributor
mouser.com 
Semiconductors and electronic 
components for design engineers.
Authorized Distributor

