                                           
 
 How To Make 1000$In 10 Days!
The method is made by superfredrik and written by 
superfredrik and its copyright to superfredrik  
 
It`s not allowed to copy. 

 
Little info! 
 
 
This method I will tell you is very easy and the income will be around 1000$ in 
10 days. I made so and could easy make more. But the result can be something 
else for you. But if you follow correctly it will end well. I also have to add that I 
do not take any responsibility if something happens. 
 
 
 
 
What is needed? 
 
You will need: 
 2 PayPal accounts. One with legit info, and one with false info. Or both 
with false information. 
 An eBay account with false info. 
 And this link to my HF profile if you need help: 
http://www.hackforums.net/member.php?action=profile&uid=136603 
 
 
I really hope that you are able to setup all that by yourself. Else you have to PM 
me and I will help. But this is very basic and everybody should be able to do it! 
 
 
 

Let`s do this shit! 
 
Ok now that we got everything setup let`s start get the cash! 
I will explain this fast an easy. This won`t be any high quality eBook, that is 
because I give for free. 
 
Login to your eBay account. In upper right corner you see: my account, sell, 
community etc. Click on “Sell”.  After that click were I show in image: 
 
The place where it says “Start selling” After that you have to enter what you 
are going to sell. For now type in “Iphone 4” Then you will se ebay suggest 
some categories. Choose 2 categories that fits your item best. This is important 
to get it sold. Choose: Cell Phones & Smartphones and one of the others. Then 
click continue. Now it will ask for brand or model. Well since we are going to 
sell a “fake iphone 4” We cannot choose. But don`t worry the iphone will look 
almost exactly the same and will work almost exactly the same. And we enter 
false info. So if it messes up we got the money and he don`t know anything 
about us. 
So at this part press “continue listing without a product” If this is first time 
listening something it will show two ways: “Keep it simple” or “More listening 
choices” Pick keep it simple.  

Notice I recommend read the whole eBook before using the method. So there 
will be no misunderstanding.  
 
Now we are soon done. You maybe think but wtf where I get the Iphone from? 
I tell you later… 
 
At the last page you see several numbers from 1-5 lets start with 1! 
1: Here I recommend you type anything that describe the item very good and 
easy and make it good so people will click yours instead of others. Example: 
“iPhone4 WIFI 3.5 Inch Quad-band Unlcoked 32GB  CHEAP!” 
2. Here you have to add an picture of what you are selling. I usually just google 
it. For the iphone 4 I can recommend this:  
http://munntilmunn.files.wordpress.com/2010/08/iphone4gpl71.jpg?w=327&
h=458 
3.  Set the item condition to new. And in type: enter Iphone 4 or remove it. 
Compatiable brand: Just remove it. 
In the big box enter something that makes the buyer want to buy. Tell it`s free 
shipping and how amazing the product is. 
4. Set start auction to something between: 400-600$ lower than other sell on 
ebay is always best. Let it last for 3 or 5 days. That`s only what I recommend 
you can choose all self. Add the Buy it know and set the price to 10% more than 
what you enter at the bidding start price. 
On shipping: select “other(see in describtion)” and the cost to 0$. Set the 
handling time to 10-15days. Choose self.  
5.  Just enter your paypal and click the “block bids from buyers who…” 
Look over it all on the page. Click save and preview. And then add the item. If 
any problems, PM me! 
You maybe have to choose a method to pay fees, just follow the steps. Or Pm ;) 

Where do I get this stuff? And how so cheap? 
I will provide you everything. You will buy the items thouth my site: 
www.dropshipitems.co.cc  
At the site you can get Iphone 4 for around 200$ and sell it for up to 600$ you 
can get windows 7 ultimate keys for around  10-15$ windows 7 retail with cd 
and etc for around 60-70$ and sell for dobble. You can get computers and A 
LOT of stuff cheap and sell more expensive. Myself I sold 4 windows 7 for little 
over 100$ and got a nice profit. I also sold Iphone 4 and Ipad. All this will I 
provide  you from my site. Check out and find a lot of more stuff! 
But notice that they are fake. But hard to tell that they are. And if the buyer 
figure out. Lol to bad for him. And yeah you maybe wonder why 2 paypal 
accounts. That is so you don`t make same mistake as me. At once then I mean 
at once you got a sale. Transfer the money from the paypal you received the 
money to the other one. Then it`s no danger for be limited or he get money 
back(if he try) 
 
Just add many products at once, I added like 10 products and the cash just ran 
in.  
You can also dropship items from: www.dignityshop.com and if you want you 
can dropship my hosting. Means I pay you to sell my hosting packs. PM more 
info. 
If there is any products you think will sell good but it`s not on the site, please 
PM me and I see what I can do! 
 
When order, remember to change address to the correct or Mail me the 
correct! Else you will get the item and not the one who buys from you! 
You can add the address at the payment place where it says “your comments” 
 
REMEMBER TO PM SUPERFREDRIK IF HELP IS NEEDED! 

