makezine.com
Mesmerizing 
Jellyﬁ sh Tank
page 82 »
» Do-Not-Touch Box
» Treadmill Desk
» Portable LED Sign
PROJECTS
TO MAKE AT HOME:
PLUS
25
BUILD THESE BOTS, FROM EASY TO ASTOUNDING
Yellow Drum Machine • Spazzi Solenoid Dance Bot
Teleclaw Remote Gripper • Transform Toys into Real Robots
ROOMBA 
WITH A VIEW
Make this wireless
spy bot and play with
your dog from work.
Page 49

©2011 Corning Incorporated. All rights reserved.
Visually stunning and incredibly tough, Corning® Gorilla® Glass is changing 
the face of television. It allows manufacturers to create slim, edge-to-edge 
displays that dissolve the boundaries between the viewer and action. And 
its outstanding optical clarity helps bring pictures to life. Corning Gorilla 
Glass enables advanced television designs that you never dreamed possible. 
Where will it go next?
                                                           Start innovating at CorningGorillaGlass.com
yet inspiring.
Tough,

DISCOVER DIY KITS, TOOLS, BOOKS, AND MORE AT » makershed.com
AIR ROCKET KIT
[MKRS1] $50
Shoot paper rockets hun-
dreds of feet into the air! 
Includes parts for the rocket 
launcher, plus templates for 
rocket design. Whooooosh!
GALVANIC SKIN 
RESPONSE (GSR) KIT
[MSGR01] $25 
Make a truth meter circuit 
and measure your reaction. 
Try it on your friends (or  
enemies). It’s a great way  
to get to know someone!
MINI FUME EXTRACTOR 
[JMBUN07] $35
Solder safely in small spaces 
with this fume extractor.  
Includes all the parts you  
need – even the fan!  
Soldering required.
MOTION-SENSITIVE 
CAMERA PARTS KIT
[MKS1] $40 
Use this kit with your IR 
remote-ready digital camera 
to take amazing wildlife  
pictures, then flip a switch  
to take time-lapse photos!
Save 20% on these kits from the pages of Make!
Visit makershed.com and enter coupon code MAKEIT*
USELESS MACHINE 
[MKSB023] $25 
What does this machine do? 
It turns itself off. You turn it 
on again, it turns itself off 
again. Great for hours of use-
less fun for the whole family. 
PENDULUM  
CHALLENGE KIT
[MSPC01] $26 
Can you stop the pendulum 
at the bottom? This game 
features 15 LEDs arranged in 
an arc to simulate the path 
of a swinging pendulum.
MAKE Volume 23
MAKE Volume 26
MAKE Volume 15
MAKE Volume 26
MAKE Volume 19
MAKE Volume 22
* offer valid through 8/31/11

Make: Volume 27
Vol. 27, July 2011. MAKE (ISSN 1556-2336) is published quarterly by O’Reilly Media, 
Inc. in the months of January, April, July, and October. O’Reilly Media is located at 
1005 Gravenstein Hwy. North, Sebastopol, CA 95472, (707) 827-7000. SUBSCRIP-
TIONS: Send all subscription requests to MAKE, P.O. Box 17046, North Hollywood, 
CA 91615-9588 or subscribe online at makezine.com/offer or via phone at (866) 
289-8847 (U.S. and Canada); all other countries call (818) 487-2037. Subscrip-
tions are available for $34.95 for 1 year (4 quarterly issues) in the United States; 
in Canada: $39.95 USD; all other countries: $49.95 USD. Periodicals Postage Paid at 
Sebastopol, CA, and at additional mailing offices. POSTMASTER: Send address 
changes to MAKE, P.O. Box 17046, North Hollywood, CA 91615-9588. Canada 
Post Publications Mail Agreement Number 41129568. CANADA POSTMASTER: 
Send address changes to: O’Reilly Media, PO Box 456, Niagara Falls, ON  L2E 6V2
42: Yellow Drum Machine
Build a musical bot that drives around making wicked beats 
on found surfaces. By Frits Lyneborg
49: Roomba Recon
Turn an old Roomba vacuum robot into a web-controlled, 
wireless remote surveillance vehicle. By Raymond Caruso
with Evin Papowitz
56: Spazzi: A Solenoid-Powered Dancebot 
Make a cute robotic bobble-head that dances to your music, 
and even makes some of his own. By Marek Michalowski 
62: Teleclaw: Remote Robot Gripper 
Use a TV remote and dollar-store parts to grab and release 
small objects from afar. By Gordon McComb
66: Teaching Old Toys New Tricks
Convert toys into surprisingly capable robots using a 
Bluetooth-connected brain. By DJ Sures
74: Welcome, Robot Overlords!
A look at the latest projects and parts in hobby robotics.
80: Robots of Maker Faire
The robots ran rampant in San Mateo, Calif., this year.
Columns
11: Welcome: Building Robots That Play
Can a machine be playful? Can it entertain us, even mimic us? 
By Dale Dougherty
12: Reader Input
Jacobean joinery, zinc fumes, space pods, and stealth networks.
15: Maker’s Calendar
Events from around the world. By William Gurstelle 
16: In the Maker Shed
The kit that launched 3,100 new electronics makers.
By Dan Woods
26: Tales from the Web
Building a MAKE video network. By Gareth Branwyn
27: Making Trouble
Pneubotics: Walking bouncy castles. By Saul Griffith
28: Country Scientist  
Startups: Origins of the PC revolution. By Forrest M. Mims III
31: Make Free: Moral Suasion
Four horsemen of the 3D printing apocalypse.
By Cory Doctorow
THE SPY WHO VACUUMED: Hacked with a 
router and webcam, this Roomba spies via the internet. 
Creative direction by Sean DallasKidd. Photography
by Garry McLeod. Prop styling by Tietjen Fischer.   
TOY HACKS: DJ Sures shows you how to make 
interactive robots out of common toys.
49
66
SPAZZI: A bouncy, solenoid-powered robotic
character from the makers of Keepon.
56
ON THE 
COVER
Family fun project
2
Make: makezine.com/27

The year is 2021, and the Federal Panel of Obsolete Technology (PØT) has banned the
manufacture, sale and use of manually adjustable (analog) potentiometers, trimmers
and the like. Only digitally-programmable potentiometer technology may be 
manufactured and used. Consultant Leo Smith is an analog old timer with a thriving
business designing workarounds for circuits that would work much better if "old 
fashioned" analog components banned by the PØT were still available. How did Leo
design a rotary style, continuous (no steps) volume control for a 
children's portable radio without breaking the law? 
See if you are correct at w w w. J a m e c o . c o m / u n k n o w n p o t. 
1-800-831-4242  | www.Jameco.com
Order Your Free Catalog
www.Jameco.com/Catalog
By: Forrest M. Mims III

104
92
116
82
PRIMER  
Make: Projects
Jellyfish Tank
Convert a regular aquarium
into a jellyfish habitat.
By Alex Andon
PS/2/You
Build a go-anywhere, instantly
updatable digital message board.
By Immanuel McKenty
VISUALIZING
WITH IMAGEJ
Use free image/video processing
software to create vivid representations 
of time, movement, and data.
By Bob Goldstein
Limelight
Experience pre-Edison
incandescent lighting.
By Peter Tabur
4
Make: makezine.com/27

Melissa Jones from Minnesota, a 
mother of two, has been diligently 
building her one-woman sign business 
for about 5 years. She got a ShopBot 
CNC router in 2008 to expand her 
production capability, and that’s when 
the call came from Sony Pictures to 
make specialized props for “The Green 
Hornet.” And business has been going 
well ever since. 
ShopBot offers powerful, precise and 
affordable digital fabrication tools. So 
give us a call and let’s see how we can 
help your business dreams come true.
Work really hard, and use a ShopBot.
See Melissa’s and other ShopBotter stories 
at shopbottools.com
How to be ready  
    when Hollywood calls?
ShopBotTools.com
Ŕ

Maker
18: Made on Earth
Snapshots from the world of backyard technology.
32: Glenn Derry: Movie Maker
This special effects innovator hacks together blockbuster 
filmmaking tools. By Bob Parks
38: Peasant Da Vincis
Incredible inventions from Chinese villagers.
By Tom Vanderbilt
115: 1+2+3: Action Root Beer Pong
Make a pong toy that scuttles about. By Cy Tymony
122: 1+2+3: Stud Chair
Make a sturdy chair with a single 8-foot 2×4 in an hour.
By Corky Mork
150: Electronics: Fun and Fundamentals
Use a simple accelerometer to perplex your friends with
a Do-Not-Touch Box. By Charles Platt
154: MakeShift: Hot Water
Living downstream from a nuclear disaster. By Lee D. Zlotoff
156: Howtoons: Robot Wobbler
By Saul Griffith and Nick Dragotta
158: Toolbox
Multimeters and soldering irons and scissors, oh my!
Plus a reference manual for pyros, and the ultimate maker belt.
166: Danger! Penny Squash
Leverage the force of a locomotive.
By Gever Tulley with Julie Spiegler
167: Robot Contest Winners
Got bots with character? Our winners do.
168: What I Made
Create an elegant telescopic light with a coin counterweight.
By Scott Bedford
170: Remaking History: The Daniell Cell
Make the electric battery that powered the scientific
revolution. By William Gurstelle
176: Homebrew: My DIY King Pong
By Jerry Reilly
123: Workshop
Spoon-carving knife, 
smartphone camera 
gobo arm.
HOT WATER: How will you provide enough safe 
drinking water for your family during a nuclear crisis?
154
Make: Volume 27
MOVIE MAKER: Avatar F/X innovator Glenn Derry 
shares his recipe for an indie-budget virtual camera.
READ ME: Always check the URL associated 
with a project before you get started. There may 
be important updates or corrections.
32
128: Outdoors
Portable solar powerhouse,
bee swarm bait hive,
wood gas camp stove.
141: Office
Treadmill desk,
touchscreen desk.
6
Make: makezine.com/27

O’Reilly Ebooks:
Your bookshelf on your devices
This summer, have some real fun:  learn how to 
create and operate cool gadgets you design and build 
yourself.  Get into Arduino—the electronics proto-
typing platform anyone can use—and Processing, 
an easy-to-learn, easy-to-use programming language. 
When you combine the two, the possibilities are, 
well, endless. Just like a great summer.
©2011 O’Reilly Media, Inc. The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc.  11583 
oreilly.com
Spreading the knowledge of innovators
Hack your summer. 
Join the Arduino revolution.
Buy 2 Books, 
Get One Free
Use discount code OPC10. 
Orders over $29.95 qualify for 
free shipping within the U.S.
oreilly.com/arduino
Project Book
BUILD YOUR 
OWN ARDUINO- 
COMPATIBLE 
BOARD
MintDuino
Fundamentals of How  
Microcontrollers Work
James Floyd Kelly
Beginning AVR  
Programming
Learn the Microcontroller  
That’s the Heart of Arduino
Alan Trevennor
GO HANDS-ON 
WITH INTERACTIVE 
ELECTRONIC 
PROJECTS
Project Book
Codebox:
Adventures in  
Processing
Andrew Odewahn
GO HANDS-ON  
WITH FUN  
PROCESSING  
PROJECTS
Project Book
oreilly com

8
Make: makezine.com/27
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Mark Frauenfelder 
markf@oreilly.com
EXECUTIVE EDITOR
Paul Spinrad
pspinrad@makezine.com
MANAGING EDITOR
Keith Hammond
khammond@oreilly.com
SENIOR EDITOR
Goli Mohammadi 
goli@oreilly.com
STAFF EDITOR
Arwen O’Reilly Griffith
EDITOR AT LARGE 
David Pescovitz
DIRECTOR OF DIGITAL MEDIA
Shawn Connally
shawn@oreilly.com
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF
Gareth Branwyn
gareth@makezine.com
ASSOCIATE EDITOR
Becky Stern
becky@oreilly.com
DIRECTOR OF TECHNOLOGY 
Stefan Antonowicz
WEB PRODUCER 
Jake Spurlock
EDITOR AT LARGE
Phillip Torrone
pt@makezine.com
COMMUNITY MANAGER
John Baichtal
DESIGNER
Katie Wilson
kwilson@oreilly.com
PRODUCTION DESIGNER
Gerry Arrington
PHOTO EDITOR
Sam Murphy
COPY EDITOR
Gretchen Bay
ASSISTANT EDITOR
Laura Cochrane
ADMINISTRATIVE COORDINATOR
Ramona Minero
FOUNDER, GM & PUBLISHER, MAKER MEDIA
Dale Dougherty
dale@oreilly.com
MAKE TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD
Kipp Bradford, Evil Mad Scientist Laboratories, 
Limor Fried, Joe Grand, Saul Griffith, William Gurstelle, 
Bunnie Huang, Tom Igoe, Mister Jalopy, Steve Lodefink, 
Erica Sadun, Marc de Vinck
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS
William Gurstelle, Mister Jalopy, Brian Jepson, Charles Platt
CONTRIBUTING WRITERS
William Abernathy, Alex Andon, Doug Bradbury,
Raymond Caruso, Abe Connally, Kindy Connally-Stewart,
Cory Doctorow, Adam Flaherty, Frank Ford, Bob Goldstein, 
Saul Griffith, Rachel Hobson, Andrew Lewis, Frits Lyneborg, 
Gordon McComb, Immanuel McKenty, Marek Michalowski, 
Forrest M. Mims III, Philip “Corky” Mork, Pauric O’Callaghan, 
Bob Parks, Riley Porter, Stacey Ransom, Jerry Reilly,
Chris Singleton, Bruce Stewart, Jerry James Stone,
Doug Stowe, DJ Sures, Peter Tabur, Cy Tymony,
Tom Vanderbilt, Rose White, Adam Zeloof,
Robert M. Zigmund, Lee David Zlotoff, Zach Zundel
CONTRIBUTING ARTISTS
Roy Doty, Nick Dragotta, Timmy Kucynda, Juan Leguizamon, 
Tim Lillis, Brian McLaughlin, Garry McLeod, Rob Nance, 
James Provost, Kathryn Rathke, Damien Scogin, Jen Siska, 
Colin Way, Noah Webb
ONLINE CONTRIBUTORS
John Baichtal, Chris Connors, Collin Cunningham,
Adam Flaherty, Matt Mets, John Edgar Park, 
Sean Michael Ragan, Matt Richardson, Marc de Vinck
INTERNS
Cameron Caywood (video), Eric Chu (engr.),
Craig Couden (edit.), Sydney Francis (mktg.),
Gregory Hayes (photo), Brian Melani (engr.),
Tyler Moskowite (engr.), Lindsey North (edu.),
Nada Raoof (online), Nick Raymond (engr.)
EDITORIAL
ONLINE
PUBLISHING
“When I’m working on a problem, 
I never think about beauty. I think 
only how to solve the problem. But 
when I have finished, if the solution 
is not beautiful, I know it is wrong.”
—Buckminster Fuller
PLEASE NOTE: Technology, the laws, and limitations 
imposed by manufacturers and content owners are 
constantly changing. Thus, some of the projects described 
may not work, may be inconsistent with current laws or 
user agreements, or may damage or adversely affect some 
equipment. 
 
Your safety is your own responsibility, including proper 
use of equipment and safety gear, and determining whether
you have adequate skill and experience. Power tools, 
electricity, and other resources used for these projects 
are dangerous, unless used properly and with adequate 
precautions, including safety gear. Some illustrative photos 
do not depict safety precautions or equipment, in order
to show the project steps more clearly. These projects are 
not intended for use by children. 
 
Use of the instructions and suggestions in MAKE is at 
your own risk. O’Reilly Media, Inc., disclaims all responsibility
for any resulting damage, injury, or expense. It is your 
responsibility to make sure that your activities comply
with applicable laws, including copyright.
MAKER-IN-CHIEF
Sherry Huss 
707-827-7074 
sherry@oreilly.com 
SENIOR SALES MANAGER
Katie Dougherty Kunde
katie@oreilly.com
SALES ASSOCIATE
PROJECT MANAGER
Sheena Stevens
sheena@oreilly.com
SALES & MARKETING
COORDINATOR
Brigitte Kunde
brigitte@oreilly.com
PUBLISHED BY 
O’REILLY MEDIA, INC. 
Tim O’Reilly, CEO
Laura Baldwin, President
Copyright © 2011 
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
All rights reserved. 
Reproduction without 
permission is prohibited.
Printed in the USA by 
Schumann Printers, Inc.
Visit us online: 
makezine.com
Comments may be sent to: 
editor@makezine.com
MAKER MEDIA CARES
MAKE is printed on recycled, process-chlorine-free, 
acid-free paper with 30% post-consumer waste, 
certified by the Forest Stewardship Council and the 
Sustainable Forest Initiative, with soy-based inks 
containing 22%–26% renewable raw materials.
ASSOCIATE PUBLISHER & GM,
E-COMMERCE
Dan Woods
dan@oreilly.com
DIRECTOR, RETAIL MARKETING
& OPERATIONS
Heather Harmon Cochran
OPERATIONS MANAGER
Rob Bullington
DIRECTOR, PRODUCT 
DEVELOPMENT
Marc de Vinck
MAKER SHED EVANGELIST
Michael Castor
CUSTOMER SERVICE 
cs@readerservices.
makezine.com
Manage your account online, 
including change of address: 
makezine.com/account
866-289-8847 toll-free 
in U.S. and Canada
818-487-2037, 
5 a.m.–5 p.m., PST
Follow us on Twitter:
@make
@craft
@makerfaire
@makeprojects
@makershed
On Facebook: makemagazine

Gregory Hayes (MAKE photo intern) 
is a California photographer, writer, 
puppeteer, and handyman, among 
other things; it’s his hope that this rare 
combination of skills will keep him high 
on the invite list for off-Earth coloniza-
tion efforts. In the meantime, he enjoys 
canoeing, tinkering, cooking, and 
eating. He lives on the Russian River, 
throws sticks for his two wonderful 
dogs (“this never, ever gets old”), likes 
making tools on the ﬂ y (“particularly if 
I can reuse parts of other projects for 
new purposes”), and really, really loves 
artichokes.
CONTRIBUTORS
Alex Andon’s (Jellyﬁ sh Tank) fascination 
with marine animals was sparked on a 
sail through the British Virgin Islands 
while free-diving underwater tunnels in 
coral reefs. He went on to work for the 
Sea Turtle Protection Society of Greece, 
camping on beaches in Crete to protect 
nests and hatchlings. Alex accumu-
lated extensive experience in building 
aquariums for his own research projects 
at Duke and the University of Delaware. 
He founded Jellyﬁ sh Art on a platform 
of cutting-edge jellyﬁ sh husbandry 
techniques that have been developed 
over the past decade. Alex has a B.S. 
from Duke in biology and environmental 
science.
As a kid, Peter Tabur (Limelight) had 
just about every construction set there 
was, and loved taking broken things 
apart to ﬁ gure out how they worked. 
His love of making, ﬁ xing, and building 
is unabated, so it should come as no 
surprise that he went to engineering 
school. He lives in Augusta, Mich., with 
his wife, Teri, and foundling beagle, 
George. Peter likes to make pizza and 
furniture and loves his 1950s vintage 
Rockwell radial arm saw — “a massive 
cast-iron beauty” he fully restored. He’s 
currently between jobs and is taking 
advantage of his ample free time to 
work on his long list of projects.
Marek Michalowski (Spazzi: A 
Solenoid-Powered Dancebot) has 
been excited by robots and airplanes 
since childhood, and things haven’t 
changed much. Together with Hideki 
Kozima, designer of the robot Keepon, 
Michalowski co-founded BeatBots 
LLC in 2007. He’s enthusiastic about 
the growth of desktop fabrication and 
community hackerspaces, and about 
their implications for the future of toys, 
art, and design. In his spare time, he 
enjoys using his private pilot, scuba, and 
motorcycle licenses (though never at 
the same time). Michalowski was born 
in Poland, grew up in New York, and
currently lives in San Francisco.
If Colin Way (Teaching Old Toys New 
Tricks photography) were to describe 
what he strives for in images, it might 
sound like this: illustrative and immedi-
ate, layered and detailed. Colin has been 
fortunate to work with a varied client 
list, including Chatelaine, Dell, WestJet, 
Canadian Business Magazine, and
Fashion. One of the best things about 
his job is the interesting people he 
meets along the way (including meeting 
DJ Sures for this issue). To see more
of his work, visit colinway.com. 
Kathryn Rathke (MAKE author 
portraits) is “a practical Wisconsin girl” 
living in Seattle with her husband and 
her “gargoyle-faced dog,” Bunny. Her 
portraits have appeared on the covers 
of magazines, been projected onto 
screens, turned into embroidery, and 
scaled down to ﬁ t onto cupcakes. She 
“treasures wit and absurdity,” took up 
competitive badminton a year ago, and 
just had her ﬁ rst Friend Request from 
one of her subjects. She’s learning Flash 
animation so she can teach her line 
portraits to blink. kathrynrathke.com
Garry McLeod (Marek Michalowski)
9
Follow us @make

1.888.437.4564
sales@epiloglaser.com
LASER IT!
Cut it.     Engrave it.     Mark it. 
Cut it.     Engrave it.     Mark it. 
Cut it.     Engrave it.     Mark it. 
Laser Engraving, Cutting and 
Marking Systems from Epilog Laser
Marking Systems from Epilog Laser
Marking Systems from Epilog Laser
From creating and personalizing 3D models, 
to engraving photos on keychains, to marking 
high-tech gadgets, our laser systems create the 
products you see here and more!
Laser Systems Starting at $7,995
Come see us at 
Maker Faire Detroit
July 30-31st
Visit epiloglaser.com/make.htm for more 
information and to receive your brochure kit 
with engraved and cut samples! 

THIS MAY, MAKER FAIRE BAY AREA
brought together 100,000 people for a week-
end to celebrate creativity, tinkering, and the 
DIY spirit. I’m proud to see our event grow so 
large in just six years. It’s a huge indicator that 
the maker movement continues to broaden 
by inviting more people to see themselves as 
makers. Maker Faire is a tremendous outpour-
ing of creative energy: it comes from diverse 
sources, including very personal motivations, 
and it goes in all directions. 
 A reporter at Maker Faire asked me to
point out “useful inventions” and “practical 
applications.” I had to think for a moment,
but I replied that what dominates Maker Faire 
are things that are less practical and more 
playful. It’s like seeing the world through
the eyes of a kid, where ordinary stuff like 
cardboard has all kinds of possibilities for 
playtime. The power lies in your imagination.
 We tend to look at invention and innovation 
as serious business, causing us to miss the 
bigger picture. In 1876, a committee evaluating 
Alexander Graham Bell’s patent for the tele-
phone dismissed the device as “impractical,” 
“idiotic,” “hardly more than a toy.” (My favorite 
reason was that there was no shortage of mes-
senger boys.) We have a hard time predicting 
how technology creates new opportunities
for people to enjoy life. 
 Robots were conceived as laborers, designed 
to do the boring, repetitive tasks that humans 
didn’t want to do. In a dystopian vision of the 
future, the machines rule because they do all 
the work and there’s really no need for humans. 
 But can a machine be playful? Can it enter-
tain us, even mimic us? Indeed, most of the 
technology in our lives we use for play, and 
that play personalizes the technology, whether 
it’s cars or computers. I wonder how long it 
was before IBM recognized the popularity
of solitaire on PCs.
 Nothing could be more mundane than a 
robot that cleans house, as iRobot’s Roomba 
does. But ever since the debut of the robotic 
vacuum cleaner, hackers have treated it like
a plaything. This issue’s “Roomba Recon”
project (page 49) starts with a Roomba as
a mobile platform, then adds wireless net-
working and a video camera to create a spy 
robot with all kinds of potential for mischief. 
Useful? Maybe. Fun? Definitely. 
 Our “Spazzi” bot (page 56) is a rhythmic 
response to the question, “So you think 
your robot can dance?” Developed by Marek 
Michalowski of BeatBots, Spazzi amuses us. 
Yet the thinking behind this toy robot reflects 
a serious application. BeatBots also devel-
oped the Keepon robot, a yellow ball that can 
produce a range of simple expressions for 
nonverbal interactions with children. Keepon 
has been used in studies of autistic children
to understand how they react to social cues. 
 “Teaching Old Toys New Tricks” by DJ Sures 
(page 66) shows you how to use the Bluetooth 
EZ-B Robot Controller to transform a dopey 
Digger the Dog pull-toy into an autonomous 
robot that can chase a red ball and obey your 
voice commands. Someone will no doubt
program Digger to chase cars as well. 
 The playful robots we feature in MAKE say
a lot about us humans and how we create 
things in our own image. We’ve domesticated 
dogs to do things like play fetch, come when 
they’re called, and lie by our side while we
sit in our favorite chair. Like dogs, robots are 
becoming our companions, demonstrating
the ability to learn new routines that make
us happy. a
Dale Dougherty is the founder and publisher of MAKE.
WELCOME
Building Robots 
That Play
By Dale Dougherty
11
Follow us @make

12
Make: makezine.com/27
  Finally subscribed. (Me cheap, and the 
cover price put me off for a while.) This com-
munity, this attitude has given me a second 
technical life. I am a controls engineer looking 
for something after the current career ends.
 Your attitude has been a cool spring breeze. 
It makes me love the basics of my science-fair 
youth and believe in open-handed sharing for 
the good of our common future. 
 I love the hell out of this MAKE thing. I’m
on board.
—Dave Weidling, Arcata, Calif.
  The pattern for the “Fool’s Stool” 
(Volume 26) repeats a common mistake: 
cutting notches in the aprons (the horizontal 
pieces). This creates a high likelihood of
short-grain failure (splitting along the grain). 
 Instead, cut a slot only in the legs, and 
make it deep enough to accept the apron’s 
full height. 
 Next, rather than gluing the joint, pin it. 
Assemble the 4 base pieces and hold them 
together with tape, clamps, or a helper. Now 
drill two ¼" holes through each joint, one high 
and one low, going from the outside edge of 
the leg through the apron and at least ½" 
beyond. Pound in a ¼" oak dowel and cut it 
off flush (the way the author affixes the seat).
 The result will be a rock-solid frame you can 
expect to hold up a lifetime, if not 500 years! 
This is how all the surviving boarded stools 
from the 16th and 17th centuries that I’ve 
examined were made. 
 It’s not only more authentic, it’s faster, 
easier (4 slots to cut, not 8, and they needn’t 
fit tightly because they won’t be glued), and 
much stronger. See also: albionworks.com/
Stools/STOOLS.htm.
—Tim Bray, Albion, Calif.
  In “Weekend Warrior Gravity Racer”
(Volume 26), author Jeremy Ashinghurst says 
to “sand off the galvanized surface layer” from 
EMT tubing before welding, “as it can weaken 
the joint.” The reason it weakens the joint is 
because burning zinc gives off hazardous 
gases. The simple answer is: don’t weld galva-
nized steel. There are sources for thin-walled 
steel tubing without using EMT conduit. 
 I use a TIG welder, and occasionally I can’t 
avoid welding on galvanized steel. Even after 
thorough grinding, the weld is never as good 
as on plain steel. In addition, the torch nozzle 
and tungsten get contaminated and spoil your 
next weld on steel or stainless steel.
 Otherwise it’s a great story — my compli-
ments to Jeremy on an excellent cart design.
—Gord Martin, Mississauga, Ontario
EDITOR’S REPLY: Good tip, Gord. MAKE’s Technical 
Advisory Board agrees: welding galvanized metal creates 
fumes that aren’t good for you or your weld. Further, EMT 
conduit is dip-galvanized, so the zinc coating is also inside, 
where it’s impractical to grind off.
  I teach astronomy, physics, and engineer-
ing, and I was inspired by one of my students 
to think about making a device he could use 
to look at the stars and planets. I hope your 
readers find it an interesting challenge.
 This student is good with a joystick, as he 
uses one on his wheelchair. I envision an egg-
shaped pod (remember the movie 2001?). 
He could sit in a comfortable (heated?) chair 
inside the pod away from the cool night 
air and wind. We have a 40lb, 20x power, 
120mm Nikon binocular telescope that could 
be installed at eye level. The pod would be 
mounted on a motor-driven gimbal or wheels, 
controlled by the joystick, to point the student, 
pod, and telescope at any astronomical object 
of interest.
READER INPUT
Jacobean Joinery, Zinc Fumes, 
Space Pods, Stealth Networks
From Makers Like You

 I’m experimenting with a microcontroller 
to begin the project, and I thought about a 
fiberglass pod, but I have no experience with 
fiberglass or carbon fiber.
—Joe Polen, Redding, Calif.
EDITOR’S REPLY: Joe, what a nice idea. Makers, see our 
Make: Arduino page (makezine.com/arduino) and carbon 
ﬁ ber primer (makeprojects.com/Project/c/880), and/or 
basic ﬁ berglassing instructions (Google it). Then show
us your Astronomy Pod at makeprojects.com!
  Do you sell back issues? My buddy loves 
pinball machines, and I’d give him my copy 
of Volume 08, but I want to make sure I can 
replace it. Collecting MAKE is just as impor-
tant (if not more so) than collecting comics.
 Also, could MAKE do an issue on stilts? A 
cool company called Weta out of New Zealand 
makes “reverse leg” stilts for movies, and I’ve 
seen people make their own on YouTube, but 
there’s little information on building them. 
Extreme stilts and/or hydraulic or pneumatic 
stilts would be awesome on so many levels.
 Thanks for MAKE. It has changed my life, 
and may well speed up that singularity event 
author/scientist Ray Kurzweil writes about.
—Robert Bohan, Kent, Wash.
EDITOR’S REPLY: Robert, thanks for passing MAKE along. 
Yes, back issues are for sale at makershed.com; Volume 
08 is out of print, but you can get it as a PDF. Better yet, 
as a subscriber, you can read, search, and download back 
issues online in the MAKE Digital Edition. 
  I love this magazine! Someone should 
start a charity to distribute MAKE to young, 
underprivileged nerds and geeks living in 
remote areas far from hackerspaces (like me, 
except I already get MAKE). 
 I really liked the conductive play-dough in 
Volume 22 as a way to safely teach children
about circuitry. Also I loved “Maker: Kid 
Robot” (Volume 23) and the recent “Arduino 
Revolution” issue (Volume 25). It’s refreshing, 
encouraging, and inspirational to read about 
folks who are doing the stuff I wish I could
do — and hopefully will do (I’m 17).
 For future Maker Faires, I recommend 
Portland, Ore.; Boise, Idaho; and Spokane, 
Wash. Bring MAKE to the Northwest — you 
will have at least one happy maker!
—Lizbeth, Boise, Idaho
EDITOR’S REPLY: Thanks, Lizbeth. Watch for Mini Maker 
Faires in Kitsap County, Wash., and Vancouver, B.C. Or why 
not organize one? See makezine.com/go/makeamakerfaire.
  WikiLeaks’ persecution (“Make Free,” 
Volume 26) and desperate despots in the 
Middle East shutting down the internet are 
a warning! Legislating net neutrality is not 
enough. The onion router and distributed-
computing “leak-server” apps are not enough.
 Freedom-loving makers need to own their 
own network infrastructure. I’d like to see 
how-tos on building long- and short-range 
data distribution systems — especially optical 
networks, because they minimize RF interfer-
ence and get more bandwidth per watt on a 
maker’s power budget. Could optical audio 
cables carry network packets? Would a $200 
telescope lengthen a Ronja’s range?
—Evanie Cronquist, Skull Valley, Ariz.
MAKE AMENDS
In Volume 26’s Flame Tube Tools list, page 75, the drill 
bits should be 5" and 9". 
Volume 26’s Make Amends incorrectly corrected the 
equation values in Volume 25’s “Remaking History.” 
Aargh! The crank length (a radius) is 6" as originally 
stated, but the radius of the large barrel is 1½". The 
value of the expression is therefore 96, not 48.
13
Follow us @make

Come see what happens 
when we imagine the 
world differently!
Maker Faire Detroit July 30 & 31
SATURDAY & SUNDAY, 9:30AM–6PM
The Henry Ford, Dearborn, MI
COME
PLAY
WITH 500+
MAKERS
OF ALL AGES!
MakerFaire.com
To buy tickets and get more info, 
check out the website »
2nd Annual New York
September 17 & 18
NEW YORK HALL OF SCIENCE
SAT: 10AM–7PM, SUN: 10AM–6PM
PRESENTED BY
A two-day, family-friendly event that 
celebrates arts, crafts, engineering, food, 
music, science and technology projects 
and the Do-It-Yourself (DIY) mindset.
Brought to you by MAKE magazine
A division of O’Reilly Media, Maker Media is devoted entirely to a growing community 
of resourceful people who believe that if you can imagine it, you can make it.

AUGUST
SEPTEMBER
OCTOBER
May
Jun
Apr
July
Oct
Aug
Sept
Jan
Nov
Dec
Feb
Mar
* IMPORTANT: Times, dates, 
locations, and events are subject 
to change. Verify all information 
before making plans to attend.
MORE MAKER EVENTS:
Visit makezine.com/events to find 
classes, exhibitions, fairs, and more. 
Log in to add your events, or email 
them to events@makezine.com. 
Attended a great event? Talk about 
it at forums.makezine.com.
Les Cheneaux Islands 
Antique Wooden Boat Show
Aug. 13, Hessel, Mich.
An old joke says the happiest day of
a boat owner’s life is the day she buys 
her boat, and the second happiest is 
the day she sells it. But wooden boat 
enthusiasts love working on their boats 
and showing them off. This big meet 
includes dinghies, rowboats, canoes, 
launches, sailboats, runabouts, and 
cruisers. lchistorical.org/boatfest.html
» Magic Live!
Aug. 14–17, Las Vegas
Magic and making go hand in hand — 
so much so that we devoted a MAKE 
issue to it (Volume 13). Tricks, illusions, 
and props require a lot of secret, 
one-of-a-kind constructions. One of 
the biggest magician gatherings is this 
“unconventional convention” in Las 
Vegas (where else?). Here, the best 
and brightest will demonstrate some 
of their top tricks, and perhaps share 
some of their best-kept secrets. 
magicmagazine.com/live
World Maker Faire New York 
Sept. 17–18, Queens, N.Y.
Last year saw the debut of World Maker Faire New York,
the biggest maker-oriented event on the East Coast.
From loud, fiery pulsejets to Tesla coil lightning to Arduino-
controlled sculpture to some of the best technology
presentations of the year, there was something for every-
body. This year promises to be even bigger and better. 
makerfaire.com/newyork/2011
» Festival of the 
Building Arts
Sept. 17, Washington, D.C.
This festival celebrates the past and 
envisions the future of construction. 
Nascent builders can design their own 
buildings from recycled craft materials 
to create a City of the Future. Visitors 
of all ages can try their hand at drywall 
ﬁ nishing, plastering, roof thatching, 
woodworking, surveying, nail driving, 
and more. nbm.org/families-kids/
festivals/foba.html
» The Paciﬁ c Pinball 
Exposition 2011
Sept. 23–25, San Rafael, Calif.
Welcome to the electromechanical
underground — the world of light, 
sound, relays, switches, and solenoids 
that we visited back in MAKE Volume 08. 
The PPE boasts a huge variety of pinball 
and other games as well as historical 
displays, unique artwork, and science 
exhibits. paciﬁ cpinball.org/events/ppe-5
» U.S. Department of 
Energy Solar Decathlon
Sept. 23–Oct. 2, Washington, D.C.
When President Obama — “the
Maker President” — throws down the 
gauntlet, it’s hard to resist answer-
ing the challenge. Twenty competing 
university teams come to our nation’s 
capital to design, build, and operate 
solar-powered houses. The results
of the contest will stand proudly
on the National Mall. 
solardecathlon.gov
» Great Western War XIV
Oct. 5–10, Taft, Calif.
Catapult warrior, hast thou been 
looking for a good place to launch 
thy weapon? Then consider a journey 
to the Great Western War, a major 
gathering of the Society for Creative 
Anachronism. The event features a 
great number of ancient science- and 
crafts-related events. caid-gww.org
» Steamcon III
Oct. 14–16, Seattle
The world of Victorian science ﬁ ction 
— airships, submersibles, rayguns, 
and mad scientists — is brought to 
life when aﬁ cionados of steampunk 
(highlighted in MAKE Volume 17) as-
semble. Steamcon is a great event for 
those who love brass gears, goggles, 
and Jules Verne-like machines — this 
year’s theme is 20,000 Leagues Under 
the Sea. steamcon.org
MAKER’S CALENDAR
Our favorite events
from around the world.
Compiled by William Gurstelle
15
Follow us @make

16
Make: makezine.com/27
OUR 6TH ANNUAL BAY AREA MAKER FAIRE 
drew to a close just 72 hours ago, and I’m 
working through the post-Maker Faire blues 
— transitioning from the adrenaline rush of 
being surrounded by 100,000 passionate DIY 
enthusiasts one day to the relative serenity of 
the office the next. It’s enormously satisfying, 
however, to reflect on the profound impact 
that Maker Faire has on attendees.
 The heart of the Maker Shed’s mission is 
to help people get started making. Through 
project-based kits like Getting Started with
Arduino and Getting Started with Compressed 
Air Rockets, we help newcomers start making 
for the first time and help experienced makers 
learn new skills. 
 Nowhere is this more true than in the Maker 
Shed pop-up stores we operate during Maker 
Faire: 14,000 square feet and hundreds of 
kits and components combined with dozens 
of makers, authors, and volunteers helping 
people explore everything from Arduinos to 
cheese making.
 And nowhere is our mission more visible 
Dan Woods is MAKE’s associate publisher and general
manager of e-commerce.
IN THE MAKER SHED
Getting Started:
3,100 New Electronics Makers 
By Dan Woods
Learn to Solder
Merit Badge Kit
$3, Product code MKLS0L 
makershed.com/pin11
than in the Maker Shed’s “Learn to Solder” 
tent where, with the helpful coaching of Mitch 
Altman, Jimmie Rodgers, and a dozen local 
hackerspace volunteers, some 3,100 attend-
ees mastered soldering for the first time. 
Participants left the Maker Shed with smiles 
on their faces, new skills, increased confi-
dence, and a cool flashing LED merit badge to 
show for it. The perfect gateway project kit.
 If you’d like your own Learn to Solder merit 
badge kit — or you’re looking for a cool gate-
way project or for a group or after-school 
class — they’re available for purchase in the 
Maker Shed (makershed.com/pin11). We’ll 
also include one with every Maker Shed order 
of at least $10 through August 31. It’s on me. a

@]pflZXe`dX^`e\`k#pflZXeD8B<`k%
dXb\q`e\%Zfd
¾
JlYjZi`Y\efn
Xe[jXm\+)!
ÈK_\b`e[f]dX^Xq`e\
k_Xknflc[`dgi\jj
DXZ>pm\i%É
ÆJXe=iXeZ`jZf:_ife`Zc\
PflËcc^\kXkfkXcf]+`jjl\j]fi*+%0,
Gi`Z\`eZcl[\jL%J%j_`gg`e^%=fi:XeX[Xgc\Xj\X[[,%
8[[(,]fiXccfk_\iZfleki`\j% 
!
>fkf1dXb\q`e\%Zfd&jlYjZi`Y\
<ek\igifdfk`feZf[\1>'8JL9
¾p
r
79JDEM
IF;9?7B
E<<;H
KJL9
79JDEM
IF;9?7B
E<<;H

18
Make: makezine.com/27
Made On Earth
Reports from the world of backyard technology
Tom Banwell
Face to Face
Tom Banwell is a self-taught man of many
talents. He’s a leatherworker, a caster/sculptor,
and a tireless inventor of a vast selection of 
imaginative facemasks, many of which have 
been featured in films, television, and major 
magazines.
 His most complex and extraordinary works 
are his “steampunk” gas masks, but he’s also 
known for his delicate, laser-cut leather party 
masks and other uniquely shaped costume 
masks. Just to keep things interesting, he also 
makes rayguns. 
 His fantastic blog is a must-read for any 
costume designer or lover of steampunk.
It’s filled with well-written, step-by-step 
explanations and interesting tips and tricks. 
(Be sure to search for “A Steamier Raygun 
Holster,” “Elevated Shoes,” and “Modifying
a Straw Hat.”) 
 When asked why he gravitated to gas masks, 
Banwell says, “A gas mask, though functional, 
dramatically alters the appearance of the 
wearer. This can be perceived by the viewer as 
terrifying — as one resembles a monster — or 
humorous — as one becomes a silly clown.”
 Banwell manages to combine these two 
feelings to create unforgettable masks that 
embody both fear and curiosity. The formal, 
antiqued leatherwork feels classic and fore-
boding, but he says the form of the masks 
— which can resemble a rhinoceros or an 
elephant — is “pure fantasy.”
 Banwell is constantly looking at the world 
around him and re-creating it in the most 
mad and pleasing manner possible. Looking 
through his fan photos, it’s clear that when 
seemingly ordinary people don his masks, 
they unleash the more fantastic selves that
lay dormant.
—Stacey Ransom
» Steamy Leather: tombanwell.blogspot.com

19
Follow us @make

20
Make: makezine.com/27
Made On Earth
Joshua Sarner
Analog Wranglers
Brian Dewan may be a jack-of-all-trades,
but he’s clearly a master of many. An inventor 
and builder, this Catskill, N.Y., resident is also 
a performance artist, cartoonist, and multi-
talented musician.
 Dewan plays and sings along with semi-
traditional instruments like autoharps,
zithers, and accordions, making them seem 
appropriate for everything from heavy 
metal to folk songs. He also performs 
with the cheerfully lunatic Raymond Scott 
Orchestrette. (Raymond Scott composed 
the music for numerous Warner Brothers
cartoons.) 
 In collaboration with cousin Leon Dewan, 
Brian has created a series of instruments 
called Dewanatrons that vary in complexity 
from simple, elegant, wall-mounted interactive 
sound sculptures such as their Melody Gins 
and Courtesy Modules to the extraordinary 
Dual Primate Console Mark II, shown here.
 It’s impossible to precisely control, so the 
“primates-in-charge” must guide the machine 
to produce melodies, percussion, and innu-
merable unpredictable sound effects. Brian 
explains, “It is the responsibility of each pri-
mate to encourage or restrain the instrument.”
 Some simpler pieces are best experienced 
in unison: a dozen Wall Gins, for instance, 
were displayed in Brooklyn’s Pierogi Gallery, 
configured to play simultaneously, creating an 
eerie and enthralling ambient soundscape.
 All the musical instruments are “analog, 
solid-state” works covered in knobs and dials, 
full of oscillators and other physical sound 
manipulation controllers, with beautifully
finished cases that bespeak Brian’s fine-
furniture-building background. They are
artifacts and heirlooms of a Dewan-ized
version of the past. 
—Rose White 
» Dewan’s Instruments: dewanatron.com

Goffe Struiksma
Turn Signals and Turntables
Combine two unrelated things inside the brain 
of Dutch artist Olaf Mooij — the electronica 
song “God is a DJ” by Faithless, and the 
Popemobile — and the result is the DJ Mobile.
 With 14 woofers, tweeters, and other loud-
speakers boldly splaying in various directions 
out the back of a dark blue 1983 Ford Sierra, 
the DJ Mobile has a surreal, cartoonish look. 
 Not only does the car have a professional-
quality Beyma sound system, but it’s also got 
a DJ setup, with a place to set up turntables 
and a mixer on the roof of the car. There’s 
a hole in the roof as well, where the DJ can 
stand and mix.
 The idea came to Mooij, 53, when he heard 
the song and then thought of the infamous 
vehicle that the Pope makes public appear-
ances in — a normal-looking car in front with 
a bulletproof glass, pope-sized display case
in the back.
 Mooij bought the used car from a local gas 
station. “I always liked the Ford Sierra,” he 
says. He worked up the quirky design using 
buckets, cardboard, and duct tape. Later,
he swapped the prototype materials out
for wood and polyester.
 As you might imagine, the DJ Mobile
commands a good deal of attention when
it gets driven around. Though it’s street
legal, Mooij notes that driving around can
be dangerous because of how distracting
it is to other drivers. The people most notice-
ably affected when in the presence of the
DJ Mobile are “the guys with big car hi-fi 
sound systems,” says Mooij, who get “pale 
with jealousy.”
 Next up: Mooij is currently building a
temple out of three old Volkswagen Beetles.
—Laura Cochrane
» DJ Mobile: olafmooij.com
21
Follow us @make

22
Make: makezine.com/27
Made On Earth
Rachel Hobson
Hutt’s Cantina
When Jason Hutt was just 2 years old, his 
mother took him to see Star Wars at the movie 
theater. He sat in rapt silence throughout the 
entire film, and a lifelong obsession was born. 
 “There’s really never been a time in my life 
when I didn’t love Star Wars,” he says. “My mom 
loved space and science fiction; she cultivated 
that interest in me throughout my childhood, 
and Star Wars was really the center of it.”
 As Hutt’s collection of Star Wars action 
figures (1,600 and counting) and memorabilia 
grew, he realized he needed a fun way to dis-
play it. His penchant for DIY projects led him 
to creating a massive and intricate diorama
of the Mos Eisley cantina scene. 
 “The cantina scene has to be one of the 
most iconic in all of science fiction,” he says. 
“It’s where the adventure truly begins as the 
heroes meet for the first time and begin their 
epic journey.”
 By day, Hutt works in NASA’s International 
Space Station Mission Control at Johnson 
Space Center, and is father to three young 
girls. It was by night, after his daughters went 
to bed, that his project took shape. Working 
for about an hour each evening, it took nearly 
four months to complete. 
 He started with sketches and lots of 
research and chose MDF to create the base 
and walls of the structure. From there, he had 
to get creative to find ways to replicate some 
of the details of the iconic scene. The bar 
posed the greatest design challenge. 
 “The bar was a mini-project in itself, as
I used a combination of wood spheres, doll-
house pipes and accessories, some empty jars, 
and a half dozen other things,” Hutt recalls. 
 Now that his cantina diorama is complete, 
Hutt is beginning work on Jabba the Hutt’s 
Throne Room and also has plans to create
an Endor bunker-fight diorama.
—Rachel Hobson 

Ruben Faber
Drill-Powered Future Trike
In MAKE Volume 26, we featured a drill-
powered go-kart you can build at home. As 
cool as that vehicle is, it looks positively retro 
compared to the EX, a futuristic drill-powered 
vehicle designed by promising young German 
designer Nils Ferber.
 Ferber’s work explores outside-the-box 
thinking and the potential of design to “alter 
reality,” he writes. The EX (a play on eccen-
tric, as in “deviation from what is ordinary or 
customary”) sure meets these criteria, with 
its sleek, Tron-worthy shape and its complete 
rethinking of a steering mechanism.
 Working with fellow designer/builders 
Sebastian Auray, Ruben Faber, and Ludolf 
von Oldershausen, Ferber and team started 
out by prototyping designs in Lego blocks, 
wood scraps, and finally steel. The final trike 
is fashioned in stainless with many CNC and 
specially fabricated parts. 
 Through their design process, they developed 
a unique way of driving and steering the vehicle. 
The driver lies down on the EX, forward-facing. 
This creates “an exciting driving experience” 
and allows the driver to operate the strange 
“spine-shaped joint” steering.
 To steer the EX, the driver has to employ 
body weight to flex the six axles of the basi-
cally groin-mounted spine-joint, a sort of short 
spinal column that’s used to flex and bend the 
vehicle in the desired direction of travel.
 Propelled by two Bosch 18-volt cordless 
drill/drivers, the EX achieves speeds of 30 
kilometers per hour (almost 19mph). And 
given the position of the driver and proximity 
to the ground, we can only image the thrill 
ride offered by this ingenious crotch-rocket. 
Let’s just hope that EX doesn’t take on any 
unintended additional meanings.
—Gareth Branwyn
» EX Riders: nilsferber.de/ex.html
23
Follow us @make

24
Make: makezine.com/27
Made On Earth
Pedal Power
As gas prices soar, Ian Fardoe of Staffordshire, 
England, is faring better than most — at least 
better than those of us who drive cars. The 
40-year-old is car-free and always has been.
 “I’ve been cycling all my life. I did learn to 
drive a car but realized that I hated it a long 
time before I took my driving test, so didn’t 
even bother,” he explains. And with the price 
of petrol above 130 pence a liter (about $8
a gallon) this year, he’s much better off. 
 Fardoe commutes 4,000 miles a year by 
bike, so building a wacky, plastic-wrapped 
tricycle is no surprise. Called a velomobile, the 
trike’s outer shell is made from repurposed 
corrugated plastic that was harvested from
a recumbent bike’s fairing, and fashioned
after vehicles found in Australia’s Pedal Prix.
 The first build took about six weeks, but 
Fardoe spent 18 more months tweaking the 
design to make it more practical and efficient. 
The initial frame weighed in at only 11lbs and 
didn’t stand up to his 6-mile commute to work. 
 “I bought some hot glue and zip ties, etc.,
to make it look remotely pretty. The making
it pretty bit didn’t work very well,” he jokes. 
 Overall, the vehicle cost about £2,600 
($4,000) to build — far less than commercial 
velomobiles, which can cost twice that price.
 Fardoe admits his way of building is very 
learn-by-doing, which is how his vehicle 
earned the name OTP (On the Piss).
 But hot glue and zip ties aside, it’s a pretty 
serious ride. He’s done 125 miles in a single 
trip and reached a top speed of 73mph going 
downhill, 53mph on flat ground. 
 In the process, Fardoe has become a pretty 
serious velo pilot; at press time he was plan-
ning to race a commercial velo in the Cycle 
Vision races in the Netherlands in June.
—Jerry James Stone
» Fardoe’s Velos: picasaweb.google.com/ian.fardoe
Ian Fardoe

California Academy of Sciences
Pendulum Perfector 
If you’ve visited enough science museums, 
you’ve seen a Foucault pendulum. Named 
after its inventor, French physicist Léon 
Foucault, the pendulum demonstrates the 
Earth’s rotation by knocking down pins 
arrayed around the pit over which it swings. 
Although the pendulum appears to swing 
around the pit, it’s the pit, and Earth it stands 
on, that rotate beneath the pendulum. And 
there’s a good chance the pendulum you 
know is one of more than 100 made so far
by Cary Ponchione. 
 For 34 years, Ponchione worked in the 
basement shop of the California Academy
of Sciences museum in San Francisco. Shortly 
before moving from its home of 87 years in 
Golden Gate Park, the Academy downsized 
its in-house exhibit-building shop and offered 
early retirement to Ponchione. 
 But calls for the pendulums that the 
Academy could no longer make kept coming 
in. “They asked me to take [them],” Ponchione 
says of the pendulum orders, and a small busi-
ness, Academy Pendulum Sales, was born. 
 A friendly, outgoing machinist and fabrica-
tor, Ponchione keeps a spare, tidy shop by
the tracks in Richmond, Calif., where he 
assembles pendulum kits for customers to 
install. “As you can imagine,” the semi-retired 
maker deadpans, “it’s not a full-time job.” 
 Though he has others join, turn, finish,
and polish the cast brass hemispheres that 
make the 235-pound, 16-inch bob, Ponchione 
makes and assembles most of the small 
parts, and still hand-winds the ring electro-
magnet, which adds the perfectly timed kick 
that keeps each pendulum swinging. 
—William Abernathy
» Foucault Pendulums: calacademy.org/products/pendulum
25
Follow us @make

26
Make: makezine.com/27
5 How-Tos with Matt Richardson In this 
biweekly series, Matt shows how to make a 
cool project, from a physical mailbox that 
tweets your mail’s arrival to fun photography 
hacks to an Arduino-powered music box. 
blog.makezine.com/tag/howtoswithmatt
5 Becky’s Workshop Every month, our 
CRAFT/MAKE crossover star, Becky Stern, 
presents an innovative project to add some 
high-tech high-touch to your life, from pocket 
reflectors for cycling to T-shirt hacks to 
working with electroluminescent wire. blog.
craftzine.com/archive/video_beckys_workshop
5 Collin’s Lab Every two weeks, Collin 
Cunningham presents a new project or 
explains an electronics concept in enter-
taining and easy-to-understand language. 
blog.makezine.com/tag/collinslab
5 The Latest in Hobby Robotics Tune in 
weekly as Frits Lyneborg and friends from 
the Let’s Make Robots community discuss 
the week in DIY robots. blog.makezine.com/
tag/latestinrobots
Gareth Branwyn is editor-in-chief of makezine.com.
WE’VE GREATLY EXPANDED MAKE’S VIDEO offerings with a regular roster of excellent 
project and tutorial series, all conveniently accessed from blog.makezine.com/video and 
youtube.com/makemagazine and iTunes. We’ve come a long way since our original Weekend 
Projects series! Tune in to see what we’ve got going on.
5 Make: Live Our increasingly popular 
streaming show and tell, hosted by Becky 
Stern and Matt Richardson, airs every second
and fourth Wednesday of the month. Watch
as they bring MAKE magazine to life, with
in-studio and on-cam makers showing off 
their projects. makezine.com/live
5 Tiny Yellow House This show from prolific 
backyard builder Derek “Deek” Diedricksen 
has been described as “This Old House meets 
Wayne’s World.” Each month Deek builds 
forts, cabins, and “microhomes,” and teaches 
woodworking, construction, reuse, and recy-
cling in the process. blog.makezine.com/tag/
tinyyellowhouse
 And that’s not all. We've also got a weekly
Meet the Makers series, Super Awesome 
Sylvia’s Mini Maker Show, Home Décor 
with Meg Allan Cole, Corinne’s Craft 
Closet, The Latest in Arduino, and more. 
Check the MAKE video page (blog.makezine.
com/video) and watch them all. a
TALES FROM THE WEB
Building a 
MAKE Video Network
By Gareth Branwyn

SOMETIMES I FEEL LIKE A FALSE NERD,
or a geek with two important genes missing: 
I’m not particularly interested in space explo-
ration, except as fiction, and I’ve never cared 
for robots. So I find it strange that I’m now 
working on a Defense Advanced Research 
Project Agency (DARPA) robotics program. 
 I think what I never liked about robots is that 
they’re complex machines that really don’t do 
much. They’re fragile and very expensive. I like 
simple, robust things; things that don’t cost 
more than they should.
 What I’ve found myself working on (with 
Jack Bachrach, Geoffrey Irving, Pete Lynn, 
and the good guys from Meka Robotics) is 
completely soft, completely compliant, very 
lightweight, and very cheap. No joints. No
servos. Just skins — inflated skins. 
  For a long while I’ve been fascinated by 
inflatable objects for their extreme strength-
to-weight ratios (they can carry a lot of load 
for very little mass). I also love the challenge 
of designing something “human safe,” in the 
robotics lexicon. Biology doesn’t use metal, 
and it doesn’t use servos. Nature points to 
some very interesting alternatives.
 To make it work, we had to invent a new kind 
of actuator. Think of it as a vascular system 
for robots. It’s fluidic — works equally well with 
air or water — and by pumping either of those 
around, you can change the dimensions of the 
skin and effect motion. Our first actuator was 
quite literally a bicycle inner tube in a sewn 
pair of membranes. It worked really well for
a $5 prototype!
 For the next trial, I asked my sister to return 
an inflatable 4-foot-high elephant I’d designed 
and given to my niece. When it arrived, Pete 
burned the midnight oil and sewed up some 
vascular “muscles,” and in a day or two we had 
four moving legs. It actually walked. About one 
mile every 24 hours, but hey — baby’s first 
steps! It moves like no machine you’ve ever 
seen; more like the way biology moves. A walk-
ing inflatable elephant might sound ridiculous, 
but it works, and the numbers on paper told 
us it should have incredible strength, good 
speed, extremely low weight, and cost very, 
very little to manufacture.
 The next prototype was designed to walk 
with a human rider on it and to look less like 
an elephant. We built it in under a week for less 
than $1,000 in parts. A 15-foot-long, 5-foot-
high robot with 28 muscle actuators (four in 
each of six legs, another four in the trunk). It 
worked too (after a few exploded actuators).
 I like the idea of a robot you can sew together.
I like that it has no heavy, sharp, or costly parts. 
Most of all, I like the intellectual challenges of it. 
There aren’t any CAD packages for designing 
highly elastic kinetic membrane structures. We 
had to write our own. There aren’t any analysis 
simulations. We had to write our own. There 
aren’t any walking bouncy castles out there. 
We built our own! We call our weird new style 
of robotics “pneubotics,” as in pneu for air (like 
pneumatic).
 Who knows if the robotics community will 
like it or even care. Either way, that’s not why
I built it. I built it because perhaps my niece 
will forgive me if she gets a walking elephant 
next Christmas that she can ride to school. a
Biology doesn’t use metal, 
and it doesn’t use servos. 
Nature points to some very 
interesting alternatives. 
Saul Griffith is chief troublemaker at otherlab.com.
MAKING TROUBLE
Pneubotics:
Walking Bouncy Castles
By Saul Griffith, Omnivorous Inventor
27
Follow us @make

28
Make: makezine.com/27
TODAY’S SMARTPHONES AND TABLETS, 
laptop and desktop computers all trace their 
ancestry to the arrival of the hobby computer 
era of the 1970s. 
 After Intel introduced its 8008 micropro-
cessor in 1972, several individuals and teams 
began using the new chip to build DIY comput-
ers. But these computers made little progress 
due to the 8008’s limited capabilities. 
 The computer revolution was jump-started 
in 1975 when MITS, Inc., a small electronics 
company that I co-founded in Albuquerque, 
N.M., announced the Altair 8800, a kit com-
puter designed around Intel’s new and powerful 
8080 microprocessor.
 Many books have been written about what 
happened next, and Idea Man (Portfolio/
Penguin), a new memoir by Microsoft co-
founder Paul Allen, shines a spotlight on 
many details that were previously known only 
to insiders. Whatever your favorite kind of 
computing device or operating system, Idea 
Man is a book well worth reading, especially
if you have entrepreneurial aspirations.
 The story begins at Out of Town News in 
Cambridge’s Harvard Square on a snowy 
December afternoon in 1974. Allen visited 
the newsstand each month to check out the 
latest issues of Radio-Electronics, Popular 
Science, and similar magazines.
 When he saw the January 1975 issue of 
Popular Electronics, it stopped him in his 
tracks. Emblazoned on the cover was a photo-
graph of the Altair 8800 microcomputer.
The blurb over the photo read:
PROJECT BREAKTHROUGH!
World’s First Minicomputer Kit
to Rival Commercial Models …
“ALTAIR 8800” SAVE OVER $1,000
 Allen opened the magazine and found
complete construction plans for the Altair 
8800, which was available as a kit ($439) or 
fully assembled ($621). He noticed that the 
core of the Altair was Intel’s powerful new 8080 
microprocessor, the successor to the 8008. 
He paid 75 cents for the magazine and hur-
riedly strode almost a mile to Harvard’s Currier 
House, where sophomore Bill Gates resided. 
 Gates shared Allen’s enthusiasm for the 
Altair. Both had become expert assembly 
language programmers in high school, and 
they decided to contact Altair developer Ed 
Roberts, who headed MITS, Inc. Their plan 
was simple: offer Roberts a version of the 
BASIC language that would run on the Altair.
 After eight grueling weeks of programming, 
Allen flew to Albuquerque with a paper tape, 
punched with their new BASIC. The code ran 
fine when simulated on a PDP-10 minicom-
puter at Harvard, but would it work with an 
Altair? While Roberts watched, Allen carefully 
entered into the Altair’s front panel toggle 
switches the code he’d written on the airplane 
to enable the Altair to load the BASIC from the 
Teletype terminal connected to the computer. 
The paper tape reader then loaded the BASIC 
into the Altair’s memory. When Allen typed 
PRINT 2+2, the Teletype immediately printed 4. 
 Roberts was amazed. So was Allen, though 
he didn’t let on. Soon Roberts hired Allen, and 
later that year Gates joined him in Albuquerque. 
There, Allen and Gates formed a partnership 
that they initially called Micro-Soft. 
Idea Man
Allen tells what happened next in Idea Man, a 
detailed and appropriately technical account 
of the origin and early history of Microsoft. 
It’s much more than a book about microcom-
puter history and Allen’s life as a billionaire, 
COUNTRY SCIENTIST
Startups: Origins
of the PC Revolution
By Forrest M. Mims, Amateur Scientist

Juan Leguizamon
for it’s packed between the lines with tips for 
aspiring entrepreneurs, designers, program-
mers, and makers with revolutionary ideas. 
 Idea Man has attracted considerable
attention in the media world because of its 
candid revelations about friction between Allen 
and Gates and what Allen describes as Gates’ 
efforts to reduce Allen’s stake in Microsoft. 
 The shouting matches he describes closely 
parallel what Roberts and others told me 
over the years. Some believe that dredging 
up these old stories is sour grapes, especially 
since Allen played much less of a role at 
Microsoft after his 1982 bout with cancer 
and his growing disillusionment with Gates’ 
confrontational leadership style. 
 Having just spent four years writing an 
exhaustive history of the world’s leading
atmospheric monitoring station, Hawaii’s 
Mauna Loa Observatory, I disagree. Debates, 
arguments, and leadership flaws, whether
in the low-pressure environment of a remote 
station at 11,200 feet or in the high-pressure 
environment of a startup company, are the 
sparks that illuminate the organization's 
history. Allen would have short-changed his 
readers had he failed to describe the disputes. 
 Allen even describes an expletive-laden 
temper salvo directed by Steve Jobs against 
a hapless Apple employee while he and Gates 
watched with surprise. Leadership antics like 
these will provide business analysts, academ-
ics and, yes, psychologists much to ponder 
when they study the astonishing success of 
Microsoft and Apple.
 Whether these disclosures have burnt the 
bridge in the four-decade relationship between 
Allen and Gates remains to be seen. In January 
2011, four months before the release of Idea 
Man, Allen was in Albuquerque to dedicate 
Startup, a personal computer museum gallery, 
to the memory of Ed Roberts, who died in April 
2010. When I asked Allen about his book, he 
said he was concerned how Gates would react. 
 Gates seems to have mellowed over the 
years. After he joined Allen in Albuquerque 
in the mid-70s, the teenage-looking Gates 
sometimes had major battles with the burly 
Roberts, a former Air Force officer who 
expected respect. Last year when Gates 
29
Follow us @make

30
Make: makezine.com/27
Forrest M. Mims III (forrestmims.org), an amateur scientist 
and Rolex Award winner, was named by Discover magazine as 
one of the “50 Best Brains in Science.” He was a co-founder of 
MITS, Inc. and wrote the first Altair 8800 user’s guide.
learned that Roberts was near death, he flew 
across the country to spend several hours 
with him days before Roberts died. 
 Allen writes in Idea Man that Gates regularly 
visited him in 2009 when he was hospitalized 
with his second battle with cancer: “He was 
everything you’d want from a friend, caring 
and concerned.” Based on their past history, 
it seems likely the two billionaires will eventu-
ally make their peace, perhaps while agreeing 
to disagree on some points. After all, many 
Microsoft customers who have a love-hate 
relationship with the company’s software 
(including me) keep going back for more.
After Microsoft
Microsoft made its founders two of the world’s 
richest men, and Idea Man follows Allen’s 
account of the MITS-Microsoft years with 
highlights about his life, business, and philan-
thropy. He enthusiastically discusses his
billionaire lifestyle, including his sports teams, 
his love affair with the guitar, and his far-flung 
travel adventures aboard his mega-yachts.
 Much more important to us makers than 
the celebrity name dropping and travel stories 
are the details of Allen’s business successes 
and failures, his founding of the Allen Institute 
for Brain Science, and his carefully restored 
World War II-era aircraft collection.
 Then there’s Allen’s partnership with
Burt Rutan that culminated in SpaceShipOne, 
the first privately developed and launched 
reusable, manned spacecraft. The historic 
SpaceShipOne, which earned the $10 million 
Ansari X Prize, is now suspended between 
Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis and Chuck 
Yeager’s Bell X-1 at the Smithsonian Air and 
Space Museum in Washington, DC. 
Lessons for Makers  
Idea Man provides important tips and lessons
for today’s generation of makers, some of 
whom might even now be developing what 
might become the next billion-dollar technol-
ogy or product. Here are some lessons I’ve 
gleaned from its pages and between the lines.
 
» Does your idea pass the balloon test? Good 
ideas and futuristic visions don’t guarantee 
successful products and ventures. As Allen 
wrote about his pre-Altair days with Gates, 
“Each time I brought an idea to Bill, he would 
pop my balloon.” 
 
» Texas-style handshake agreements with 
partners, supporters, and customers are 
great. I sold millions of books to RadioShack 
over handshakes and purchase orders. But 
Allen’s experience suggests it’s best to follow 
handshakes with carefully drafted agree-
ments that all concerned are willing to sign. 
 
» Use care and prudence when working and 
dealing with partners and financial backers. 
 
» Get to know your partners and their idio-
syncrasies before signing on with them. 
 
» Carefully read any agreement or contract 
before you sign it!
 
» Partnerships are a two-way arrangement. 
So get to know yourself. Are you living up to 
your agreements? Is your management style 
reasonable or do you create chaos? 
 
» A partnership agreement should provide 
contingencies for all eventualities. For example, 
the partners should agree to pursue arbitration 
in the event of a serious disagreement. The 
agreement should cover what happens should 
a partner be incapacitated or die.  
 
» Never, never, never release imperfect
products! Delaying a promised new product is 
always better than releasing a defective one.
 
» Treat your customers with the respect they 
deserve.
 
» As Roberts learned so well, if your first 
products don’t succeed, try again. a

CHARLES STROSS’ EXCELLENT NEW 
novel, Rule 34 (Ace Books), is a futuristic
police procedural set in a near-future 
Edinburgh, in which 3D printing has become 
boringly ubiquitous.
 You can buy safe, prepackaged 3D printers
at the local housewares shop, and they’re 
handy for whipping up generic replacement 
parts for broken appliances (at one point
a character drops and cracks his wife’s cher-
ished German onion slicer and realizes he’ll 
have to google for a 3D file to match the
broken piece) or paid-for 3D files licensed 
from big media companies.
 These printers are controlled by DRM that 
checks jobs against a blacklist of forbidden 
shapes and prevents them from being output 
if they match (presumably there’s some loose 
matching algorithm in use that can get past 
ruses like simple changes to the shape).
 Of course, this doesn’t work. The bad guys 
handily outmaneuver the prohibitionists, and 
a black market springs up, producing such 
wicked marvels as solid-state meth labs, brass 
knuckles made from super-hard polymers, 
and X-ray-invisible, nonferrous stick-up knives.
 I think Stross’ speculation on the future
of 3D printing gets the shape right, even if the 
details might not match exactly. Since the 
early days of computer regulation, hysterics 
have made recourse to the “Four Horsemen
of the Infocalypse”: child pornographers, 
organized crime, terrorists, and pirates. 
Invoking one or more of these terrible fellows 
is often sufficient to stifle further debate
and end critical thought (“Won’t someone 
think of the children?!”).
 It’s not that bad guys don’t use our beloved 
machines to do bad things. But a prohibition 
against running certain programs is a non-
starter. In practice, a computer’s owner can, 
with sufficient technical knowledge (or access 
to a large, searchable database of general 
knowledge, such as the internet), trivially 
unlock her device so that it can execute any 
valid program.
 But when all you have is a hammer, every-
thing starts to look like a nail. In Stross’ world, 
as in our own, the regulatory response is 
to build devices that have internal snitches 
that check to see if their owners are running 
naughty unlocking programs. And in Stross’ 
world, as in our own, the need to prevent the 
dissemination of snitchware countermea-
sures leads to widespread surveillance and 
censorship of the internet.
 And in Stross’ world, as in ours, none of
this actually works worth a damn at stopping 
bad guys. Instead, it creates a vicious cycle
of more surveillance and more control to 
overcome the failings of the current round
of censorship and surveillance.
Rule 34 abounds with imaginative horrors 
about the potential for technology to do bad, 
and as imaginative as Stross is, I’m guessing 
that the real thing will be even ickier.
 We need real solutions to the bad stuff
that people come up with when they get tech-
nology. The first step to finding a real solution 
is to stop doing things that don’t work. a
Pro-regulation hysterics 
make recourse to the Four 
Horsemen of the Infocalypse: 
child porn, organized crime, 
terrorists, and pirates.
Cory Doctorow’s latest novel is Makers (Tor Books U.S., 
HarperVoyager U.K.). He lives in London and co-edits the 
website Boing Boing.
MAKE FREE
Four Horsemen of the 
3D Printing Apocalypse
By Cory Doctorow, Digital Rights Defender
31
Follow us @make

32
Make: makezine.com/27
Maker
Noah Webb
By Bob Parks
GLENN DERRY: 
MOVIE MAKER
When the credits finally scroll up after a 
great special effects movie, don’t you won-
der at the alphabet soup of job titles on the 
screen? (What’s the difference between a 
previs supervisor and a virtual production 
supervisor?) Well, regardless of title, there 
are always a few key engineers who work 
at a director’s side, solving near-impossible 
problems without complaint. When the 
director asks for a 2-ton Tyrannosaurus 
that moves like a ballerina, these guys are 
on it. When the director asks for a new way 
to film giant blue people flying through the 
air, they say, “No problem.” 
 Glenn Derry is one of those guys. The 
36-year-old owner of a small Hollywood 
engineering company called Technoprops 
spends his days solving specialized chal-
lenges on the set. When he was 16, he 
worked for director Steven Spielberg on 
Jurassic Park, making a dinosaur move 
gracefully. At 30, he worked on Avatar, tak-
ing orders from James Cameron to create 
a “virtual camera” device that lets directors 
climb inside computer-generated films as 
they shoot real-life actors (see page 37 for 
an indie film version you can build).
 The virtual camera is so effective that 
it’s becoming de rigueur on effects films, 
necessitating Derry’s travel to movie sets 
— including those of Real Steel, in which 
Hugh Jackman coaches robots in arena 
boxing, and The Adventures of Tintin, 
Spielberg’s motion-capture animated 
version of the classic comic (both due
in theaters later this year).
 By now, Derry’s almost used to the fran-
tic pace of technology development in the 
movie business. “Nothing is ever carefully 
planned out,” he says. “Your job is to solve 
problems fast and hope to God you don’t 
hurt anyone with a dinosaur tail bigger 
than a Kubota backhoe.”
Bob Parks is a frequent contributor to MAKE, Runner’s 
World, and Wired. He lives in Vermont with his wife and two 
children. He can be reached at xbobparksx.com.
Avatar’s special effects innovator hacks 
together blockbuster filmmaking tools —
and shares his recipe for an indie-budget 
virtual camera.

a VIRTUAL VIRTUOSO: 
Hollywood F/X innovator
Glenn Derry perches on 
racks of equipment to
be used in future CG
film endeavors.
33
Follow us @make

34
Make: makezine.com/27
Maker: MOVIE MAKER
THE DAY I SPOKE WITH DERRY, HE WAS
chatty and in good spirits, though physically 
exhausted. Three days earlier he’d had neck 
surgery to remedy a pinched nerve, but he 
denied any connection between the neck 
brace he was wearing and his demanding 
schedule of maintaining his cameras and 
using them on film sets around the country.
 All he could talk about were the fun side 
projects he has on deck. In one corner 
of his 18,000-square-foot prop fabrica-
tion shop stands a hydraulic lift that once 
moved the robotic armor “AMP suit” in 
Avatar but now might be modified into a 
promising Formula 1 simulator. In his home 
workshop are remnants of giant hydraulic 
chimes and gongs he constructed to make 
a colossal musical instrument.
 Elsewhere, Derry’s staff of ten mechanical 
and electrical engineers and programmers 
tinkered with an open source CNC mill as it 
churned out metal parts for an upcoming 
film production. By hacking around like this, 
Derry and crew have cultivated the uncanny 
ability to chew up random consumer prod-
ucts, bits of castoff metal, and fiber-optic 
cables, then spit it all out in the form of tools
that have become essential to modern 
spectacle filmmaking.
 Derry’s father worked in the film industry 
as a welder, machinist, and physical effects 
guy (“From the time I was a teenager, my 
dad blew up cars,” he says), and this con-
nection and some lucky timing landed him 
an internship on Jurassic Park. The need 
for good engineers became clear to Derry 
his first time on the set, where the teenager 
worked on giant robotic dinosaurs (the film 
used physical puppets as well as computer-
generated dinos). “I was soldering op-amp 
circuits by hand, one at a time,” he says.
 But the production soon ran into major 
problems. When you move a robot bigger 
than a carnival ride, the great mass of steel 
shakes and sways awkwardly. Already a 
budding electronics whiz, Derry helped 
come up with the solution: mount acceler-
ometers on the dinosaurs’ limbs and feed 
the signals back into the controller. Making 
the dinosaurs move more gracefully turned 
out to be a formative experience, recalls 
Derry. “I was 16, surrounded by electronics
card cages and getting screamed at by 
Spielberg and Stan Winston.”
 He started college, studying to be a 
musician, but the lure of movie work was 
too much. (Years later he returned to study 
mechanical and electrical engineering at 
UCLA.) Derry worked full time as a pup-
peteer on the second Jurassic Park film 
in 1997, where they started out using the 
same animatronic technology they’d used 
to control the shark head in Jaws.
 But Derry, who’d spent years in his bed-
room sequencing keyboard music with 
MIDI controls, put two and two together: 
he rigged up a MIDI interface that would 
let any desktop music package control a 
dino’s facial gestures and fine movements, 
resulting in more credible movie monsters. 
 All this prepared him for the toughest
challenge yet of his career: Avatar. To make 
that film, Cameron became fixated on a 
motion capture system that would track 
the actors’ faces as well as their bodies, a 
feat never before achieved in film produc-
tion. Derry, the virtual production supervi-
sor, found a sensor that was simple and 
reliable enough to attach to a little boom in 
front of the actors’ faces.
 Cameron also wanted to direct scenes 
that mixed live actors and animated 
characters. But motion capture systems 
couldn’t be used near live-action filming 
because the little reflective dots on motion 
capture suits don’t show up under white-
hot studio lights. Derry told Cameron it 
was an easy fix, but he labored two years 
to solve it. He and his team built special 
LED trackers that blinked at the exact 
frame rate of the motion capture cameras, 
which enabled the cameras to see them. 

I was 16, surrounded by electronics card
cages and getting screamed at by Spielberg
and Stan Winston.”
a MECHA MOTION: Derry’s 
7-axis motion controller (top 
left) is at ¼ scale to the full-sized 
hydraulic 7-axis motion base 
(bottom left) used on Avatar 
to move the massive, robotic 
AMP suit torso. His sprawling 
prop fabrication shop (top right) 
is overseen by plaster casts 
of actors’ faces from various 
projects (see if you can spot 
Daniel Craig, Simon Pegg, Nick 
Frost, Andy Serkis, Cary Elwes, 
and Timothy Dalton), digitally 
scanned and 3D-printed.  
 Cameron wanted to live and breathe 
inside Pandora, the jungle moon setting 
for Avatar, and it was Derry’s job to make it 
work. It started when visual effects expert 
Rob Legato suggested the director use a 
system that would let him look inside the 
artificial world of the movie, frame shots, 
pick lenses, and choreograph camera 
movements. Derry built a device that 
resembled a 16mm movie camera with an 
LCD eyepiece. The idea was that the direc-
tor could carry it around the set, checking 
out different angles, but the camera shape 
was cumbersome. It was then that Derry 
developed the virtual camera, a 7-pound 
package that automatically swings toward 
35
Follow us @make

36
Make: makezine.com/27
Maker: MOVIE MAKER
the user no matter how it’s held. 
 Directors have delighted in the way the 
technology connects them artistically 
with moviemaking again. Spielberg told 
Derry that using the virtual camera felt like 
shooting Super 8 film in the backyard as 
a kid: “He said Tintin felt handmade, even 
though there was this giant juggernaut
of a special effects company behind him.”
 A product so valuable to the movie 
industry would seem to be easy to com-
mercialize. Instead, Derry has been hiring 
himself out, before rival effects exp erts 
figure out how to make their own virtual 
a PANDORA BOX: (Left) Director James Cameron 
used Derry’s virtual camera on the set of Avatar to 
live, breathe, and compose shots inside the world of 
Pandora. (Right) Derry’s facial capture head rig from 
Avatar transformed Zoe Saldana’s performance into
an incredibly credible 9-foot-tall blue warrior princess. 
cameras. And Cameron insists that the 
concept be shared with other directors. “If 
Jim wants to share it, I’m not going to tell 
him he can’t,” Derry shrugs. “Besides, I was 
able to prototype stuff on the most expen-
sive movie ever made, so now I can bring 
the technology to smaller-budget films.” 
 But with Avatar 2 in production, Derry’s 
busy schedule precludes indie filmmaking 
or other hobbies. Derry looks wistfully at 
his old electric bass and piano in his Santa 
Clarita, Calif., home, which he shares with 
his wife and two kids. “As many would-be 
rock stars learn,” he says, “you eventually 
get a real job.” Although making 9-foot blue 
people fly around isn’t exactly a day at the 
office for most of us. a
 See makeprojects.com/v/27 for a video 
profile, slideshow, and virtual camera how-to. 
Courtesy of Glenn Derry (left); Noah Webb (right)

KEY COMPONENTS
Cintiq 12WX LCD touchpad Wacom (wacom.com), 
$999
Xbox 360 Wireless Controller Microsoft, $50 list 
price; available online for $30–$40
V120:Duo motion tracking camera system
OptiTrack (optitrack.com), $1,499
MotionBuilder Autodesk (autodesk.com), $3,995
Custom plugin for MotionBuilder download from 
makeprojects.com/v/27
Make Your Own Virtual Camera
Learn how at makeprojects.com/v/27.
“THERE DOESN’T HAVE TO BE A CRAFT
services truck out front to make a high-
quality computer-generated movie,” 
says special effects expert Glenn Derry. 
Planning great camera shots is the key. 
 To make your indie shine, Derry advises 
using a device he hacked together with 
James Cameron called a “virtual camera.”
It helps you compose shots in effects
movies, and even plan complex shots in 
traditional live-action films.
 The gadget, essentially an LCD screen 
festooned with motion capture markers, is 
something you hold while walking around
a motion capture studio. It lets you see
the animated world of a digital movie or
a mockup of a live set.
 Derry has created a plugin especially for 
MAKE readers to make a low-cost virtual 
camera (note that “low cost” in Hollywood 
terms means software and hardware that 
add up to $7,000; but student discounts 
and borrowed equipment would bring the 
price down considerably). 
 “The indie filmmaker will take longer 
to finish a film, and will need to bribe his 
or her buddies in the CG class with beer,” 
says Derry. “But this setup uses the same 
concept as the stuff we use on Avatar.” a
Noah Webb
37
Follow us @make

38
Make: makezine.com/27
Maker PEASANT DA VINCIS
PEASANT DA VINCIS
In 2004, the Chinese artist and collector 
Cai Guo-Qiang began to hear stories about 
fantastic “peasant inventions” trickling out 
of the Chinese countryside: submarines, 
airplanes, robots, and even “UFOs,” fashioned 
in tiny backyard workshops by people without 
easy access to technical information, tools, 
and proper materials. 
 The following year, Cai would acquire his 
first invention, a fish-shaped submarine — 
replete with eyes, fins, and painted depth 
markings on the side — named Twilight No. 1. 
 The sub, which is pedal-power-propelled by 
its pilot, is one of a number of submersibles 
built by Li Yuming, a 70-year-old with a grade-
school education who lives in Wuhan. Having 
mortgaged his house to fund his work, Li 
rises each day to tinker with his submarines, 
working just outside the door from his wife, 
who, as Cai recounts, “watches his shadow 
at work.”
 The life of a would-be peasant inventor is not 
an easy one, Cai tells me over breakfast at The 
Peninsula hotel in Shanghai one morning. 
When Li built a second, larger submarine — 
named, naturally, Twilight No. 2 — and set out 
to sail it down the river, “the government was 
worried that he would have a liability issue 
if it sunk,” Cai says. Authorities were also 
concerned it would clog the traffic of local 
waterways. “So the government river authori-
ties towed the boat to a subsidiary river where 
there’s less traffic, and just let it sink.” 
 As an artist, Cai has become known primar-
ily for his work with the traditional Chinese 
media of gunpowder and fireworks (I first met 
Incredible inventions from Chinese villagers.
By Tom Vanderbilt
Lin Yi, courtesy Cai Studio

him a number of years ago at the Fireworks by 
Grucci test compound on Long Island, N.Y.); 
his largest audience came as organizer of the 
fireworks program at the Beijing Olympics. 
 But he also has something of a curatorial 
and collecting bent (among other things,
the Socialist Realist work of Konstantin 
Maksimov, a Russian artist who toured China 
in a moment of Sino-Soviet outreach). 
 After Li’s submarines, Cai went on to
purchase any number of Chinese mechanical 
readymades, ranging across the country-
side to distant villages, buying functioning 
airplanes in Sichuan province (the inventor, 
Wang Qiang, used plastic bathroom drain-
age tubes for the fuel tank), rickshaw-pulling 
robots in Tongxian, flying saucers in Xiaoxian, 
and even a working submarine made from 
fused oil drums in Fuyang. 
 The bulk of these devices were displayed 
this past summer in the show Peasant
Da Vincis, at the Rockbund Art Museum in 
Shanghai, set amidst propagandistic banners 
that proclaimed aphorisms inspired by the 
creators themselves, e.g., “Never learned how 
to land.” 
 Atop the building spun a (non-)flying
saucer by Du Wenda, while on the second 
floor, Wu Yulu conducted a “robot workshop” 
demonstrating a delightful range of automata, 
from a chess-playing contraption to a robotic 
interpretation of artist Yves Klein’s famous 
Leap into the Void. A somber note was struck 
by the placement of a shattered motor, the 
remnants of a plane built by Tan Chengnian, 
who died in 2007 after he crashed his third 
airplane. 
 “There’s something common shared 
between all these inventors,” Cai says. “They 
want to fight their gravity, and the restraint of 
the circumstances that they find themselves 
in.” The act of creation is more important than 
the result. (“What’s important isn’t whether 
you can fly,” announced one banner.)
 While five of the inventors who came to 
the show’s opening had created airplanes or 
other flying machines, Cai notes that for three 
of them, the trip to Shanghai was their first 
GIZMOS FROM THE PROVINCES
a (Opposite) Du Wenda’s Flying Saucer D, fashioned 
from aluminum, propeller blades, and LEDs, on the 
rooftop of the Rockbund Art Museum in Shanghai.
a (Left) Nine inventors with the painted slogan 
Peasants — Making a Better City, a Better Life, 
by Cai Guo-Qiang.
a (Below) Li Yuming’s Twilight No. 6 is suspended
as part of the installation Fairytale at the Rockbund 
Art Musuem. 
Justin Jin (Twilight No. 6), courtesy Cai Studio 
39
Follow us @make

40
Make: makezine.com/27
Maker PEASANT DA VINCIS
commercial flight. When Cai asked Wu Shuzai, 
the creator of a rough-hewn wooden heli-
copter (which some compared to a chicken 
coop) with rotor blades repurposed from a 
threshing machine, where he wanted to go if 
he could get his craft aloft, his answer was the 
capital of Jiangxi province — basically a few 
towns over. “That’s where he wants to go,” Cai 
says. “The nearest idea of a city he has is a 
country town.”
 The notion of DIY home industry in China 
invariably recalls Mao Zedong’s doomed drive, 
during the Great Leap Forward, to ramp up 
steel production through a 600,000-strong 
network of “backyard furnaces.” What the pro-
gram had in revolutionary fervor it lacked in 
logistical organization and smelting know-how 
— the resulting iron output was substandard 
and essentially had to be scrapped. 
 Where Peasant Da Vincis diverges from 
this precedent — and from the enormous 
Chinese manufacturing power also on display 
in Shanghai last summer at the World Expo — 
is that with these inventions, “peasants are 
trying to find their own voices and their own 
creativity, courageously in a very controlled 
environment.”  
 China, says Cai, “is desperately trying to 
transition from a society where everything’s 
‘made in China’ to where things are ‘created in 
China.’” Among these backyard boffins may be 
some future Nobel Prize winner.
 But in the end, Cai’s desire is more imme-
diately personal. “What I’m really collecting is 
my childhood dreams.”
Tom Vanderbilt is the author of Traffic: Why We Drive the Way 
We Do and Survival City: Adventures Among Ruins of Atomic 
America. He contributes to many publications, ranging from 
the New York Times Magazine to Wired to Artforum.
DREAMS TAKE FLIGHT
a (Top, left) Wu Yulu’s 13"-high Walking Robot, made of 
repurposed electronics and materials, stands at attention.
a (Right) Wu Shuzei built his Wooden Helicopter with 
salvaged lumber, polyester tarp, and a gas engine. His 
wife dismantled his first copter for firewood.
a (Bottom) What’s Important Isn’t Whether You Can Fly, 
proclaims this painted calligraphy by Cai Guo-Qiang.
Justin Jin, courtesy Cai Studio

Make:ROBOTS!
One roams around drumming rhythms and loops, another bops to the beat. 
A Roomba spy keeps an eye on your house, as a Teleclaw hands you a treat. 
Hack any toy to behave like a bot, and meet new friends at Maker Faire. 
Welcome, Robot Overlords! Please forgive us if we stare. 
» Go to makezine.com/27 to download your free Make: Robots desktop wallpaper.
Brian McLaughlin
41
Follow us @Make

Garry McLeod
A couple of years ago I started getting into Picaxe microcontrollers,
and I ordered a bunch of random components to experiment
with. Turning these funny little spring-mounted motors on and off,
I thought, Hmm — I could put a stick on that and let the micro-
controller drum! This mini sound-recorder board? Hey, if the robot
is drumming, it could record itself and play a new beat with the 
first one in a loop. Oh, nice yellow tracks, a rangefinder — cool,
it could move around and look for things to drum on.
 After that, the Yellow Drum Machine (YDM) 
practically made itself. Using hot glue and 
wooden sticks, it didn’t take me long to make 
a simple chassis, and after a weekend, the 
finished robot was driving around my house, 
making wicked beats on stuff it found.
T
START
1. Build the chassis.
Assemble the Gear Motor and Tread set
into 2 tracks with 20 links each. Put a wheel 
on each motor and solder a 4" (10cm) lead
to each motor contact (4 total, Figure A, 
page 44).
 Make a flat wood chassis about 5½"×2¼" 
(14cm×5.5cm); it should be a bit longer than 
the tracks. I cut flat sticks into 4 pieces and 
glued them together (Figure B). You can also 
use more sticks, or a single piece of wood with 
a hole drilled in it for wires to pass through.
 Flip the chassis upside down and affix the 
motors flat to its rear underside with double-
sided tape (Figure C). Orient the motors so 
that the tracks will run parallel along the
chassis without touching it or sticking past
its rear or front edges. The motors themselves 
should sit at least ½" away from of the rear 
edge, to leave room for the GM10 “tail” motor 
(Step 3). Reinforce the join with 2 applications
of hot glue, letting it cool in between.
 Prepare your front axle so its wheels will 
turn freely without touching the chassis.
I used 2 washers on each side to space the 
wheels away from the chassis, and a metal 
screw hot-glued into each end of the axle to 
YELLOW
DRUM
MACHINE
BY FRITS LYNEBORG
COLLABORATE ON
makeprojects.com
42
Make: makezine.com/27

BUILD A FUNKY LITTLE 
FREE-RANGE DRUMBOT 
THAT ROAMS, MAKES 
BEATS, AND SAMPLES.
43
Follow us @make

B
A
Frits Lyneborg
C
E
D
F
MATERIALS
See makeprojects.com/v/27 for 
suppliers, prices, and other sourcing 
information.
Picaxe-28X1 Starter Pack (USB)
includes microcontroller in a project 
board with a programming cable
Motor driver chips, L293D (2)
Solarbotics GM10 pager gearmotors 
(4) These can only turn from side
to side, not rotate fully around.
Sound recorder module (aka sampler 
board), 20-second such as item 
#PPM155 from techsupplies.co.uk, 
or #276-1323 from radioshack.com. 
The Tech Supplies module’s buttons 
both have wire pairs you can connect 
to easily. With RadioShack or other 
modules, you’ll have to solder a wire 
to button pads on the circuit board. 
Speaker, 2", 16Ω
Ultrasonic distance sensor (aka 
rangefinder), 3-pin Devantech SRF05
Solarbotics Gear Motor and Tread 
Package, GM9 (143:1, 90° shaft)
Flat wooden sticks such as paint 
stirrers, popsicle sticks, etc.
Lightweight tubing or rod, fiberglass, 
carbon fiber, or hollow aluminum, 
about 1' (30cm) for the “bass drum” 
(tail) and “snare drum” sticks
Lightweight fiberglass rod, very thin, 
about 6" (15cm) for the “hi-hat” 
drumstick
Aluminum or other tubing, ¼" 
(6.4mm) diameter × 4" (10cm) for 
front wheel axle. Use the same tubing 
as above or something heavier. I like 
to cut pieces from old radio antennas.
Metal washers (4) to fit over the axle
Battery holder (long), 4×AA (2×2)
Female-to-female jumper wires (15) 
Yellow is nice, to match your robot.
Wire, stranded, 18–22 gauge, 3'
Header pins, male, snap-off (4)
Heat-shrink tubing Choose colors
to match your design.
Cable ties, various sizes and colors
Rechargeable AA batteries, 1.2V (4)
These need to be 1.2V — standard 
1.5V alkalines might fry your robot.
Epoxy, quick-setting
Adhesive tape, double-sided either 
foam or thin
TOOLS
Soldering equipment
Cutting tools for wood and wire
Lighter or heat gun
Screwdriver, small, Phillips for 
mounting motors
Hot glue gun and glue sticks (5)
Fine-gauge steel wire to hold sticks
to the motor shafts while epoxying
Computer Windows, Mac OS X, 
or Linux
44
Make: makezine.com/27

keep the wheels from falling off (Figure D).
 With the chassis still upside down, run the 
tracks around the wheel pairs. Push the axle 
forward (away from the motors) as you hot-
glue it to the bottom of the chassis (Figure E). 
Try to get the tracks tight. The chassis will be 
tilted forward — that’s fine (Figure F).
 Mount the battery holder to the rear end of 
the chassis like a rear bumper, using a line of 
hot glue (Figure G).
 Test the sampler board with AA batteries
to make sure it works (record your voice 
and play it back). Cut and strip one end of 2 
female jumpers, then unsolder the sampler’s 
mini speaker and replace its 2 original wires 
with the jumpers (Figure H). Hot-glue the 
speaker under the chassis at the axle and
run the jumpers topside (Figure I).
2. Add the head and neck.
Solder 4 insulated wires, each about 4" (10cm) 
long, to the back of the SRF05 rangefinder, 
to all but the fourth pad along the bottom 
(Figure J). These are the board’s 5V, Echo 
Output, Trigger Input, and Ground contacts.
 Epoxy the SRF05 “head” to a GM10 motor, 
perpendicular across the shaft and pointing 
away from the small pin sticking up, so the 
rangefinder can turn from side to side. During 
curing, I held the board and motor in place 
with putty and foam tape (Figure K), but you 
can improvise another way.
 Mount the “neck” motor at the front center 
of the chassis so that the head stands vertical 
(or leans only slightly forward; not as much
as the chassis) and the rangefinder “eyes”
sit back 5" or so (2mm) from the front edge.
I used a bit of wood just under ½" (10mm)
to prop the front of the motor to let it sit level, 
then added liberal amounts of hot glue to 
secure it to the chassis (Figure L). Try to give 
the mount a small footprint.
 Turn the head from side to side. It should 
look straight ahead when not touched, and 
if it moves much more to one side than the 
other, glue fiberglass rods or wooden stops 
vertically so that it turns about equally far to 
the left and right (Figure M, following page). 
G
I
H
J
K
L
45
Follow us @make

3. Add the drumsticks.
The robot has 3 drumsticks, each of which is
mounted to a GM10 motor: a bass drum “tail” 
under the battery pack, and thick snare and 
thin hi-hat drum sticks in front, held by motors 
attached to wooden uprights just above and 
behind the rangefinder “head” on either side.
 Estimate stick lengths by holding the 
motors in position and observing which way 
they’ll turn. The bass drum stick (about 2") 
should hit the ground at an 8 o’clock angle 
and the 2 front sticks (about 4" each) should 
be able to reach and drum on vertical surfac-
es 1" or so in front of the robot. Cut the sticks 
long, then trim them after seeing how they 
perform. Shorter sticks work better but look 
less cool, so you need to find a balance.
 Pre-mount each stick to its motor. Drill a 
hole through thicker sticks to fit over the pin, 
and tie thin sticks on with wire. Epoxy the 
sticks in place (Figure N).
 Mount the motors to the chassis, eyeballing 
where you think they’ll look good (Figures O 
and P). For the front motors, I hot-glued wood 
uprights onto the chassis and added triangular 
reinforcements in front and back. (No, I’m not 
sponsored by a hot glue company.) Check that 
the sticks can travel freely with the head and 
other sticks in all possible rotational positions 
(Figure O).
4. Mount the boards and large speaker.
To prepare the Picaxe board, plug one of 
the L293D motor controller chips into the 
onboard 16-pin socket, making sure the notch 
at one end of the chip matches the marking 
on the board. (Bend its pins to fit the socket 
by pressing the chip down sideways on a 
table.) This chip will control the track motors. 
 Snap off and solder 2×2 male header pins 
into the 4 holes marked A and B on the board.
 It’s time to mount the microcontroller,
sampler, and larger, cool-looking speaker.
 Using more flat sticks and hot glue, I made 
2 dividers running fore and aft along the
right side to separate the microcontroller and 
sampler boards and hold them upright on 
edge (Figure Q). Note that the Picaxe board’s 
O
P
Q
N
M
programming jack needs to be easily acces-
sible. On the sampler board, cut off the battery 
clip, but leave its wires connected to the board.
 Then I added a pillar on the left side and
a roof to enclose the boards and support the 
large speaker on top, pointing up. 
46
Make: makezine.com/27

Rangefinder SRF05
S1 
(+5V)
S2 
(Echo output)
S3 
(Trigger
input)
S4 
(Ground)
L293D
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
L7
L8
External motor 
controller
5. Wire the rangefinder, motors,
and microcontroller.
Now let’s wire everything up. Figures R–T 
show the wiring points for the rangefinder, 
microcontroller board, and external motor 
controller chip (for the neck motor). Connect 
these components with wires, following the 
Connections list. (Save the sampler board 
for later, because you need to test it first to 
determine how it should connect.)
» You can connect voltage wires (V) to any 
+5V point, and ground wires (G) to any 
Ground point, whatever is closest or easiest.
» Connect wires to the rangefinder and exter-
nal chip by soldering and insulating with 
heat-shrink tubing. Make connections to the 
AXE20 board by plugging in female header 
wires. Make your own female headers by 
R
S
cutting female-to-female jumpers in half and 
soldering each half to a plain wire if more 
length is needed. (You can also connect 
ground wires to the AXE20 board via the 
solderable pads along one edge.)
»  Connect the motors (tracks, drums, and 
neck) either way for now. You’ll run test 
routines later and swap the 2 connections 
to any motors that run backward.
CONNECTIONS
Right and left track motors: Connect to the 
onboard motor controller — left motor wires 
to the 2 MA pins on the main board, and right 
motor wires to the 2 MB pins. You’ll swap pins 
later if motor direction is reversed.
Rangefinder: S1 to +5V, S4 to Ground, S2 
(Echo) to microcontroller I1, S3 (Pulse) to I0. 
The code converts pin I0 to an output, so it 
can trigger the pulse.
External motor controller: L1, L7, and L8 to 
+5V, L4 to Ground, L2 to I6, L6 to I7. The code 
converts pins I6 and I7 into outputs.
Neck motor: To external motor controller L3 
and L5; swap them later if they’re reversed.
Drum motors: Snare drum motor to O1 and 
Ground, hi-hat motor to O2 and Ground, bass 
drum motor to O3 and Ground.
Small speaker (under chassis): O0, Ground.
6. Wire the sampler board.
You already cut off the sampler board’s 
battery clip and speaker, but it still has a 
microphone, an LED, and Record and Play 
buttons connected by wire pairs. Mount 
female headers on the black and red wires 
that connected to the battery clip, then plug 
red onto a +5V pin on the main board and 
black onto a Ground. Mount the larger speaker 
on top of the robot, pointing up, and solder 
the 2 sampler board speaker wires to it.
 Insert batteries in your robot and test that 
the Record and Play buttons still work. Cut 
the Play wires close to the button and touch 
one of them to Ground on the main board. 
Does it play back? If so, this is the wire you’ll 
need, and you can trim off the other one close 
to the board. If not, try the other. (With some 
Microcontroller board AXE20
I0 
O0 
O1 
O2 
O3 
O4 
O5 
O6 
O7 
MB 
MA 
I1 
I2 
I3 
I6 
I7 
+5V 
I = Input (default)
O = Output
M = Motor control
Ground 
T
47
Follow us @make

Frits Lyneborg is co-host of “The Latest In Hobby Robotics” 
(blog.makezine.com/video) and runs letsmakerobots.com, 
the largest online community of its kind, which he started 
in 2008 as a forum for robot electronics, programming, and 
funny ideas and inspiration.
samplers, you’ll remove the Play button, test 
its pads on the circuit board, then solder a 
wire to the pad that works when connected to 
Ground.) Do the same with the Record button 
— find the wire that works when touched to 
Ground, and cut the other one away.
 Mount female headers to both wires, then 
connect the Record wire to I2 on the main 
board and the Play wire to I3. 
 Mount the microphone and LED somewhere 
nice and visible. Now’s the time to be creative 
with extra little decorative parts. (I found a 
shiny plastic ring that works well holding the 
microphone.) To tidy up, use cable ties and hot 
glue, and you can also shorten wire lengths.
7. Program, test, adjust, and play.
At this point, you should have a nice little 
robot. Now it’s time to give the robot its 
program. Download and install the Picaxe 
Programming Editor or AXEpad (depending 
on your computer OS) from rev-ed.co.uk/
picaxe/software.htm, if you haven’t already. 
 Launch the software, then open the Mode 
and Ports tabs under the Options panel to 
specify the type of chip (28X1) and the COM 
port for your computer’s USB.
 Switch the main board off (remove a bat-
tery) and connect it to your computer using 
the Picaxe programming cable. Download the 
code files from makeprojects.com/v/27. 
 Each motor has a test code file in the test 
directory. Open each in the programming edi-
tor and click Program to compile and upload it 
to the microcontroller. Replace the battery and 
check that the motor behaves as it should, as 
described at the top of the test code, or swap 
its wires if it runs in the reverse direction.
 The test runs will also guide you in trimming 
the sticks to adjust their balance. The sticks 
should be light enough for the motors to move 
easily, but with fiberglass or carbon fiber rods, 
it might help to epoxy a small bolt or screw at 
the end, to make the strikes louder.
 With all the motors tested and wired prop-
erly, compile and upload the final code, ydm_
default.bas. Place the robot on a hard surface 
and power it up; it should look to the sides and 
begin driving around. After some time, it may 
feel it’s time to get funky. It will then search for 
an appropriate item (like a wall) to drum on. 
Eventually, it will find an object it likes, then 
tap a little beat on it. 
 The Yellow Drum Machine will record its 
drumming, then play it back in a loop while 
drumming more and making clicks from its 
lower speaker to the beat. Meanwhile, it also 
makes dance motions with its head and body.
 While the robot records itself, it will also 
record your voice or other nearby sounds and 
include them in its tune. This is especially 
entertaining for kids. Play a musical instru-
ment to “jam” with the YDM, letting it record 
and play back your riffs as an accompanist. 
 The BASIC software is written for modifying 
and playing. All parameters can be reset, and 
notes at the top and comments throughout 
explain how everything works. So you can 
make the YDM drum only when you enter the 
room, or use it as a platform to do a lot of 
other things. You can even make it draw.
U
Garry McLeod
48
Make: makezine.com/27

ROOMBA 
RECON
BY RAYMOND CARUSO WITH EVIN PAPOWITZ
TURN AN OLD ROOMBA
INTO A WEB-CONTROLLED
WIRELESS REMOTE
SURVEILLANCE VEHICLE.
Garry McLeod
49
Follow us @make

MATERIALS
See makeprojects.com/v/27 for recommended suppliers, 
prices, and other sourcing information.
Wireless router, Linksys WRTSL54GS You could use 
another router compatible with OpenWrt (see wiki.openwrt.
org/toh/start for a list), but it might need different drivers.
iRobot Roomba robotic vacuum cleaner We used an old 
Roomba Red 4100 model (Discovery/400 series).
Webcam, compatible with Spca5xx driver See mxhaard.
free.fr/spca5xx.html for a list. We used a cheap Creative 
Live Cam.
USB hub, 4-port, aka splitter
TTL to USB serial cable, TTL-232R We used #TTL-232R-5V 
from FTDI (ftdichip.com).
8-pin mini-DIN cable
DC power plug, size M coaxial aka barrel connector
9V battery snap connector 
Battery holder, 8xAA 
AA batteries, 2,700mAh (8) 
Diode, 1N4001 
Switch, SPDT (single-pole double-throw) toggle
Electrical tape
Windows computer with wi-fi and internet connection 
Other platforms should also work, using their own Telnet/
SSH and FTP utilities.
For mean, green LED/acrylic bling (optional):
Acrylic/plexiglass sheet, clear, 6" thick, 36"×30"
9V battery snap connectors (2)  in addition to 1 above
LEDs, green (4)
Resistor, 330Ω
Switch, SPST (single-pole single-throw) 
Machine screws, #10-24, 5" (16) These can be cut down to 
size as necessary.
Wing nuts, #10-24 (14)
Rod couplings, ¼-20×4" (14)
Machine screw nuts, 6" (19)
Flat bar, about ½" wide (2 pieces) to secure the USB hub 
and battery holder. We cut aluminum plate to size, but 
anything will work — wood, plexiglass, etc. We secured the 
hub with a bar, 2 machine screws, and wing nuts; and the 
battery holder with a bar and 2 inverted machine screws, 
no wing nuts.
Hot glue (optional)
TOOLS 
OSMO/Hacker serial interface (optional) Needed for older 
Roombas; see makeprojects.com/v/27 for details.
CAT5 network cable aka Ethernet cable
Soldering iron and solder
Multimeter
Wire strippers
Drill and drill bits for machine screws
Screwdrivers to match screw type
Cutter or saw for acrylic (optional) We used a homemade 
CNC cutter.
Who said a Roomba was just for vacuuming? For robot makers, 
it’s an excellent platform for modifications. Why not start with 
an already-working autonomous vehicle? We collaborated with 
our friend Rob Schumaker and decided to turn an old Roomba 
into a remote surveillance vehicle, which Raymond now uses
to spy on and play with his dog while he’s at work.
 The key to the Roomba Recon’s operation
is that it carries a wireless router on its back. 
The router acts as the Roomba’s “brain.” 
Its wi-fi side communicates with a nearby 
computer, which sends it instructions and 
receives captured images. Meanwhile, the 
USB side of the router connects to both the 
Roomba itself and a USB webcam “eye” on 
top through a small USB hub. The router gets 
power from its own onboard battery pack.
 To enable the router to interface with the 
computer, Roomba, and webcam, we first 
replaced its native firmware with the open 
source OpenWrt. This allowed us to install 2 
more pieces of free software on the router:
RoombaCMD, which enables control of the 
robot through a serial port on its side (available
at roombahacking.com/roombahacks); and 
Spca5xx, a device driver for the webcam from 
the folks at mxhaard.free.fr. The webcam 
plugs into the USB splitter directly, while the 
Roomba connects via a hacked USB-TTL cable 
outfitted with an 8-pin mini-DIN plug that fits 
the Roomba’s serial port.
50
Make: makezine.com/27

1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
7
8
3
4
1
2
5
Black
FTDI cable
Mini-DIN
8-pin
GND
TXD
RXD
DD
+16V DC
Brown
Red
Orange
Yellow
Green
9V snap
–
+
B
A
Raymond Caruso
 Finally, every project needs LEDs. So we 
added a few to make this thing light up the 
darkest of rooms. We mounted 4 green 
LEDs around the back of the custom-cut 
clear acrylic frame that carries the project 
components. Engraved on top of the plexi-
glass is our engineering team name, Zero 
Cool, from that awesome movie Hackers.
T
START
1. Make the USB-to-serial cable.
To connect the Roomba to the router, we 
constructed a USB-to-serial tether by splicing 
together 2 cables: a USB-TTL converter cable 
with an FTDI FT232R serial chip in its female 
USB end, and an 8-pin mini-DIN cable that
fits into the Roomba’s serial jack.
 With the TTL-232R cable, cut off the serial 
end (with a straight 6-pin header) and strip 
the black, orange, yellow, and green wires 
(brown and red are cut short). With the 8-pin 
mini DIN cable, cut off the female end, peel 
away some of its outer sheathing, and strip 
the green, yellow, white, red, brown, and 
orange wires (cut the other 2 short).
 Use a multimeter set to “continuity” to 
trace which pins on the mini-DIN plug go to 
what color wire (Figure A). Write it all down.
 Solder the wires from the mini-DIN cable
to the TTL-232R according to Figure B.
The orange (transmit data, TXD) and yellow 
(receive data, RXD) wires from the TTL-232R 
cable connect to pins 5 and 3 of the mini-DIN 
plug, respectively. Black (ground) connects
to pins 7 and 8, green (device detect, DD)
to pin 6, and V+ to pins 1 and 2.
 If you want to steal power from the Roomba 
battery for lighting the LEDs, as we did, solder 
a 9V battery snap between V+ and ground 
(Figure C).
2. Enable the Roomba serial interface 
(if necessary).
On newer Roombas, the serial interface (the 
Roomba Open Interface, or ROI) is enabled 
out of the box. But for models manufactured 
before October 2005, like ours, you can only 
C
communicate through the robot’s serial port 
after flashing its firmware with an OSMO/
hacker device.
 To use the OSMO/hacker, remove the serial 
port cover on the Roomba’s side. Plug the 
OSMO/hacker into the port and watch its LED 
blink for about 90 seconds. Then unplug the 
device after the light stops blinking.
3. Install OpenWrt on the router.
Our router “brain” will drive the Roomba, 
51
Follow us @make

adapter, so we substituted an 8xAA battery 
pack and added an SPST switch to make the 
process of restarting the router a little easier.
 Solder the cathode side (marked with a 
stripe) of a 1N4001 diode to the positive 
side of a DC power plug that fits your router 
(Figure E). This will prevent reverse voltage 
from frying the router. Solder a short wire 
between the diode’s anode and the middle/
common pin (sometimes marked “ACC”) of 
an SPDT switch. 
 Solder a wire between one side of the 
switch and the red (+) wire of a 9V battery 
snap. Solder wires to connect the opposite 
side of the switch to the snap’s black (–) wire 
and the negative side of the barrel connector. 
Insulate all connections with electrical tape 
(Figure F). The snap can now be attached to 
the battery pack.
5. Install the USB and serial drivers.
Now it’s time to start installing drivers on the 
router. To do this from our Windows laptop, 
D
PWR
ACC
GND
1N4001
9V snap
Male
barrel
connector
SPDT 
switch
+
–
–
+
E
F
but first we have to open it up with the third-
party software, OpenWrt. When installed as 
a router’s firmware, OpenWrt not only lets 
the router create wireless networks or join 
existing ones, but enables it to run additional 
software like RoombaCMD. Furthermore, 
OpenWrt has a built-in Linux web server that 
serves pages at the router’s own IP address 
(http://192.168.1.1). This lets us use a browser
to both configure the router software and, 
later, control the Roomba remotely.
 To install OpenWrt, visit downloads.
openwrt.org/whiterussian/0.9 and download
whiterussian-0.9.tar.bz2. There are several 
builds available, but White Russian was the 
most stable with the RoombaCMD code and 
our device drivers. RoombaCMD won’t run on 
the more recent Kamikaze builds unless it’s 
recompiled with new libraries.
 Connect your computer to the router with 
an Ethernet cable, then point a browser to 
http://192.168.1.1 to access the router set-
tings. To log in, leave the username blank 
and use the password admin. Then click 
Administration → Firmware Upgrade.
 Click Browse, navigate to the firmware you 
just downloaded, and click Upgrade. Don’t 
turn the router off; it will reset itself when 
complete, after at least 5 minutes.
 Reload http://192.168.1.1 in the browser 
to open the OpenWrt dashboard and set the 
router password. If the password can’t be 
set on the web interface, open a command 
prompt or use a Telnet client to telnet to 
192.168.1.1, then enter passwd.
 Click the Wireless tab and either specify 
Ad-Hoc Mode (Figure D) or Client Mode, 
select your existing home wireless network 
for ESSID (extended service set identifier), 
and fill in your network settings. This setup 
will let our computer talk to the router, which 
we’ll be doing a lot of.
4. Make the battery pack.
To avoid our router’s having to use up pre-
cious Roomba battery power, we decided to 
run it off its own battery pack. Our Linksys 
WRTSL54GS router used a 12V DC wall wart 
52
Make: makezine.com/27

we used the free SSH client PuTTY, which you 
can download from the.earth.li/~sgtatham/
putty/0.60/x86 as putty.exe.
 The first drivers to install, kmod-usb-serial 
and kmod-usb-ohci, and the FTDI driver 
enable the router to control its USB port and 
the FTDI chip on our hacked cable.
 Start by connecting the router to your 
computer with an Ethernet cable to check 
that your computer has internet connectivity. 
Launch PuTTY and start a session connected 
to IP address 192.168.1.1 via your router, using 
the password you set earlier (Figure G).
 In the PuTTY session window (Figure H), 
enter the sequence of commands listed at 
makeprojects.com/v/27 to install the drivers 
using the ipkg utility. OpenWrt knows where 
to download most of its drivers, so when you 
enter ipkg install [package-name], it looks up the 
package’s location and automatically down-
loads it from there.
6. Add the webcam eye.
A USB webcam allows the Roomba Recon 
to capture and stream JPEG images using 
OpenWrt’s built-in web server. These images 
display on a Flash-based page alongside the 
robot’s browser-accessible control panel.
 To keep our robot looking sleek, we short-
ened our webcam’s cord (Figure J). To do this, 
open the camera case and cut the cord about 
2" from where it connects to the board, then 
unsheath the wires. Shorten the cable wires to 
just a few inches, unsheath, and resolder the 
wires back together (Figure I). Tape up the sol-
der joints and tuck it all back inside the case.
 To install the camera drivers, use PuTTY
to connect to the router, as in Step 5, then 
follow the instructions listed at makeprojects.
com/v/27. From the PuTTY session window, 
you will download and unzip the spca5xx web-
cam driver, then install it and other needed 
drivers and libraries into OpenWrt’s startup 
folder. You’ll also install the spcacat utility, 
which captures the webcam’s current image.
 Finally, you’ll need to install ImageSnap,
a simple, three-line script that calls spcacat 
and stores the resulting image file where the 
H
I
J
G
Gregory Hayes (J)
53
Follow us @make

OpenWrt web server can find it. Download 
imagesnap from makeprojects.com/v/27. To 
upload it to the router, you can use the free 
file-transfer program WinSCP (winscp.net). 
Launch WinSCP (Figure K) and connect to 
your router as you have been with PuTTY. 
Then navigate to imagesnap in your com-
puter’s pane and the root (/) directory in your 
router’s pane, and drag-drop imagesnap over 
to the router.
 Connect to your router through PuTTY and 
enter the following commands (type what 
comes after each # sign, followed by Return):
root@OpenWrt:~# chmod +x imagesnap
root@OpenWrt:~# mv imagesnap /usr/bin
root@OpenWrt:~# imagesnap &
root@OpenWrt:~# ln –s /tmp/SpcaPict.jpg /www/
SpcaPict.jpg
 This gives the ImageSnap script the proper 
permissions and location, starts it running, 
and creates a symbolic link so that OpenWrt’s 
web server can find its output.
7. Install RoombaCMD.
RoombaComm, originally written by Tod E. 
Kurt, is a Java library for communicating and 
controlling the Roomba from a computer. 
RoombaCMD, which we’ll use, ports this 
remarkable code to run on a router. It allows 
us to send commands to the Roomba, mak-
ing it move as we please. In addition, it has 
premade templates for the web interface 
we’ll add later. 
 To install RoombaCMD, connect to the 
router through PuTTY and enter the following
commands:
root@OpenWrt:~# wget http://roombahacking.com/
software/openwrt/roombacmd_1.0-1_mipsel.ipk
root@OpenWrt:~# ipkg install roombacmd_1.0-1_
mipsel.ipk
8. Build the Flash page.
A Flash page published by the router’s web 
server lets you control your Roomba, see 
through its webcam, and show it off to your 
friends from anywhere in the world. The Flash 
interface is encoded in 4 files, which can
be downloaded from roombahacking.com/
K
roombahacks/roombacmd/roombapanel. 
Then download and unzip RoombaControl.zip 
from makeprojects.com/v/27.
 Connect to your router with WinSCP as in 
Step 6 and point the remote pane to the /www
directory. Move all roombapanel and Roomba-
Control files to /www, and exitWinSCP.
 Now you can control your Roomba by
pointing your browser to http://192.168.1.1/
roomba.html (Figure L), or use the snazzy 
Flash interface at http://192.168.1.1/
roombapanel.html (Figure M).
 
9. Take it worldwide.
The next step is to control the Roomba from 
anywhere with internet access. To do this, 
connect the Roomba router to your home 
wireless network and open up a port on your 
home router to redirect any traffic coming in 
from port 80 to the Roomba router. 
NOTE: You need to run imagesnap & each time after you 
reboot the router (or you can add to the startup script;
see makeprojects.com/v/27 for instructions).
L
54
Make: makezine.com/27

Raymond Caruso is an IT professional from Connecticut.
A student at Iona College in New York, he enjoys all types of 
projects, particularly those that modify existing products.
 With this working, you can access the 
robot’s web page under your WAN address 
(the IP address that your ISP gives you) 
rather than at http://192.168.1.1. See 
makeprojects.com/v/27 for more detailed 
instructions on how to forward your 
router ports.
10. Make it mean (optional).
You can piggyback the router, camera, and 
USB splitter hardware on the Roomba any 
way you want, but we decided to add some 
bling by mounting them inside a Roomba-
shaped plexiglass frame trimmed with green, 
glowing LEDs around the back (Figure N).
 We used a homemade CNC to cut 2 acrylic 
panes and engrave the top one with our team 
name, Zero Cool (Figure O). Then we joined 
the panes using bolts, wing nuts, and rod cou-
plings to sandwich the electronics in between.
 The plexiglass assembly is attached to the 
Roomba by 4 inverted machine screws that 
run through the bottom piece of acrylic and 
are hot-glued to the top of the Roomba. There 
are other ways to attach it, so be creative!
 For the LEDs, we used ledcalc.com to deter-
mine that the current-limiting resistor needed 
for four 2V/20mA LEDs connected in series 
with a 14.4V supply voltage was 330Ω. The 
LEDs are connected together with hookup 
wire to a 9V battery snap that easily connects 
and disconnects with the 9V snap wired to 
the router’s battery pack and switch.
 Now what trouble can you cause with your 
new remote reconnaissance vehicle? The
possibilities are endless. Every robot project is 
improved by some sort of weapon, so perhaps 
future versions of the Roomba Recon could 
incorporate something like Luke Cole’s USB 
missile launcher?
  Visit makeprojects.com/v/27 for 
further instructions, resources, and the 
aforementioned USB missile launcher.
M
N
O
P
Garry McLeod (P)
55
Follow us @make

At BeatBots, we believe that dancing is one of the most
worthwhile occupations a robot can have. We like making cute
characters move in interesting ways, and as you’ll see, this doesn’t 
require expensive components or complicated programming.
For Spazzi here, we decided to forego the rotational motors
(servos and steppers) that many robots use. Instead, we went 
with solenoids, for movement that is fast, linear, and percussive.  
 We designed our popular teleoperated 
robot Keepon (pictured in Figure A, page 58) 
for research and the rigors of a child-filled 
playroom, so he’s made from high-end com-
ponents and custom-machined metal parts. 
(A toy version, My Keepon, comes out later 
this year, and a portion of sales will subidize 
the distribution of research robots to autism 
therapy practitioners.)
 We designed Spazzi as a bouncy and easy 
to build robotic character that achieves the 
same adorable bounciness as Keepon through 
a simpler mechanism: solenoids and springs 
controlled by an Arduino microcontroller
connected to a computer.
 A solenoid is an electromagnet that
pulls a rod (or “plunger”) inside its coil when
current is passed through. Spazzi’s physical 
form is extremely simple; for his lower half, 
3 solenoids stand parallel to form a triangle 
sandwiched between 2 plastic parts — a base 
and a waist. The plungers run up through the 
top of the waist and hold up the robot’s plastic 
head, extended by compression springs.
 The 3 plastic body parts are based on the 
Reuleaux triangle — a shape with various
interesting properties and uses (search 
online for more info). I made these parts on 
a 3D printer, but you could improvise your 
own body and head parts from any material, 
including cardboard. The core of the robot is 
just its assembly of solenoids and springs. 
SPAZZI:
A SOLENOID-
POWERED
DANCEBOT
BY MAREK MICHALOWSKI 
Garry McLeod
56
Make: makezine.com/27

BUILD A CUTE ROBOTIC
BOBBLE-HEAD THAT DANCES
TO YOUR MUSIC, AND EVEN  
MAKES SOME OF HIS OWN.
COLLABORATE ON
makeprojects.com
57
Follow us @make

 Solenoids are binary: assuming they can 
draw sufficient power, they are either fully 
compressed or fully extended. A transistor 
connected to a digital pin on the Arduino 
drives each solenoid by supplying 12V from 
the power supply when its pin is set HIGH. The 
front solenoid makes the head nod up and 
down, and the 2 rear solenoids make it lean 
back to the left or right.
 With its 3 solenoids, Spazzi can move to 
just 8 different positions. But this limited rep-
ertoire produces surprisingly rich and varied 
movement when the activation and frequency 
of the solenoids are varied over time. This is 
performed by Max/MSP or Pure Data (PD) 
software on a computer, which sends on/off 
commands to the Arduino over a USB/serial 
port in response to music or other inputs.
B
C
A
MATERIALS
See makeprojects.com/v/27 for recommended 
suppliers, prices, and other sourcing information.
MAKE Spazzi Electronics Bundle item #MSSPZ from the 
Maker Shed and Jameco (makershed.com/spazzi), includes:
» Arduino Uno microcontroller, Maker Shed #MKSP4
» MakerShield, Maker Shed #MSMS01
» Mini breadboard, Maker Shed #MKKN1
» Jumper wires, Maker Shed #MKEL1
» Transistors, TIP102 (3) Jameco #32977
» Resistors, 1kΩ (3) Jameco #690865
» Diodes, 1N4004 (3)
Solenoids, sealed continuous pull, 12V, ¾" stroke (3)
Cable ties, 1.8mm wide (6)  
Compression spring, type 302, 0.312" OD, 
0.02" wire diameter  
Latex rubber cord 
Electrical tape 
Power supply, 12V 2A 
3D-printed ABS body parts (3) and eyes (optional, 2)
3D models for these plastic parts, as well as code files, can 
be downloaded from the project’s page at thingiverse.com/
thing:8909. Use a 3D printer to print them out, or send the 
files to a 3D printing service such as Shapeways, Ponoko,
or i.materialise.
TOOLS
Soldering iron and solder
Hobby knife 
Diagonal cutters 
MakerBot Thing-O-Matic or other 3D printer (optional) 
You can also send the 3D part files out to a service to have 
them printed for you (see above).
 Make Spazzi dance with the parts and
code listed here, and then after that, you can 
choreograph his moves however you want! 
T
START
For more step photos, see makeprojects.
com/v/27.
1. Assemble the MakerShield according to the 
instructions at makezine.com/go/makershield.
Stick the mini breadboard to the center. Install 
the MakerShield on the Arduino Uno. 
2. Insert the 3 transistors into the breadboard 
in a row, making sure that they don’t touch. 
Looking at the printed face, the leads from left 
to right are Base-Collector-Emitter. 
Marek Michalowski
58
Make: makezine.com/27

D
E
F
3. Using jumper wire, connect the 3 emitter 
leads to Ground on the Arduino/MakerShield. 
Connect one end of three 1K resistors to pins 
D5, D6, and D7, and the other ends to the 
base lead on a transistor (Figure B).
4. Jumper each transistor’s collector lead
to its own rail on the other side of the bread-
board (Figure C). Insert the anode of each 
1N4004 diode in one of the collector rails, and 
the cathode (marked with a band) into a new 
rail on the breadboard. Jumper the shared 
cathode rail to the Arduino’s V-in pin and to
a new rail on the breadboard (Figure D).
5. Connect one lead from each solenoid into
a collector/anode rail. Connect the other 
leads into the new cathode rail (Figure E). 
6. Using a 3D printer, print the 3 body parts: 
base, waist, and head (Figure F). These took 
about 45 minutes each on a Thing-O-Matic. 
If you don’t have access to a 3D printer, get 
creative! You can use found objects, wood, 
ShapeLock, or even cardboard. 
7. Insert the 2 rear solenoids into the
base so that their leads run out through the 
channel. Insert the final solenoid in front, so 
that its leads run over the 2 rear solenoids’ 
leads and out the back (Figures G and H). 
8. Remove the nuts and washers from the 
solenoids and fit the waist part over them.
Reinstall the washers and nuts (Figure I). 
9. Remove the plungers from the solenoids 
and loosely tie a cable tie through the hole
of each. 
10. Cut three 22mm lengths of compression 
spring (approximately 6 coils each). With 
each plunger, thread the pointy end into a 
spring and rotate the spring until one turn 
passes under the cable tie at the back end of 
the plunger. Tighten the cable tie to hold this 
single turn of the spring snugly against the 
plunger (Figure J, following page). 
G
H
I
59
Follow us @make

11. Feed the cable tie ends through the holes 
in the head part. 
12. Cut the heads off 3 more cable ties and 
slide them over the cable tie ends in the 
robot’s head (Figure K). Slide them down
so there is no slack in the cable ties, but not 
too tight, and snip off the cable tie ends. 
13. Attach the head assembly to the body
so that the eyes are opposite the wires 
(Figure L). 
14. Cut six 40mm lengths of rubber cord.
I chose this material because it looks similar 
to the wires in Spazzi’s “tail,” but you can use 
anything to make the decorative antennae. 
15. Insert 3 lengths of rubber cord into each 
of the 2 holes atop the robot head (Figure M). 
If they are too loose, cut a few millimeters of 
the discarded cable tie and wedge it in with 
the cord. 
16. Using a 3D printer, print the supplied
pupil models out of black ABS plastic and 
affix them to the eye sockets with hot glue.
If you don’t have black ABS, you can also 
color the pupils using paint, marker, or
circles cut from electrical tape (Figure N).
17. Connect the 12V power supply to the 
Arduino, and connect the Arduino to a 
computer with a USB cable. 
18. If you’re an experienced Arduino pro-
grammer, you can probably take it from here 
— setting pins D5, D6, and D7 to HIGH and LOW 
will activate and deactivate the solenoids.
 Otherwise, upload the provided Spazzi.pde 
patch to the Arduino, then set the baud rate 
to 38,400 in the Serial Monitor. Entering the 
letters a, s, and d will activate the solenoids, 
while q, w, and e, respectively, will deactivate 
them. You can make Spazzi dance by using 
the keyboard like this; now you just need an 
application that sends these characters over 
the serial port!
L
M
N
K
J
Marek Michalowski doesn’t shrug off Spazzi’s 
ability to charm people with its dance moves. 
Garry McLeod (portrait)
60
Make: makezine.com/27

Dr. Marek Michalowski (marek.michalowski.me) is a roboticist 
living and working in San Francisco. He co-founded BeatBots 
(beatbots.net) with Dr. Hideki Kozima, designer of the robot 
Keepon.
P
Application 
We like using Max/MSP to control our robots. 
It’s a visual programming language in which 
data flows between objects — switches, 
mathematical operators, filters, etc. — over 
virtual patch cables. Download a trial version 
at cycling74.com or the free variant PD at 
puredata.info.
 Download the demo patcher (the name
of a Max/MSP document) Spazzi.maxpat at 
makeprojects.com/v/27 and open it in Max/
MSP (Figure P). The serial object at the bot-
tom opens your Arduino’s port. Click the 
120 BPM rhythm checkbox (or set your own 
rhythm with the Beats button), and Spazzi 
will start dancing. His style will change every 
4 beats, based on randomly deciding, for each 
solenoid, whether it is down or up; whether it’s
bouncing; and whether it makes 1 or 2 bounces
per beat. See a video at the URL above.
  To make the robot dance to music, you 
can patch an audio stream through Olivier 
Pasquet’s op.beatitude~ object (opasquet.
fr/dl/op.beatitude~.zip) or Tristan Jehan’s 
beat~ object (web.media.mit.edu/~tristan/
maxmsp.html) and feed the detected beats 
into your Spazzi patcher. To pipe your music 
into Max/MSP (or another application) from, 
say, iTunes, try Soundflower on Mac OS X 
(cycling74.com/products/soundflower) or 
Jack on Windows (jackaudio.org). Be creative 
— Max/MSP and PD are great environments 
for rolling your own signal-processing apps. 
 A more advanced challenge is to do the 
audio processing directly on the Arduino. You’ll 
be constrained by its more limited processing 
power, but wouldn’t it be great to liberate this 
robot from its tether to the computer?
 Next step: Customize! Make Spazzi your 
own. Use other colors, different antennae and 
other appendages; even put him on a mobile 
base! And, most importantly, make videos — 
who knows, perhaps your dancing robot video 
will go viral!
Spazzi and its appearance are trademarks of 
BeatBots, but anyone is free to make the robot 
for personal or nonprofit use.
Garry McLeod (Q)
61
Follow us @make

It might have been Robots of Saturn that first got my young brain 
thinking about building a mechanical man. In that obscure 1962 
sci-fi adventure novel, Dig Allen and his fellow teenage space 
explorers transfer their thoughts into the bodies of teleoperated 
robots to mine Saturn’s dangerous rings for precious Methane-X.
 Using some of my stepfather’s “extra” ham 
radio gear, I tried to build my own telerobot, 
with plans of world domination swimming 
through my head. I didn’t get far, but now, 
with powerful yet inexpensive microcon-
trollers, maybe this time it’ll work.
 Big ideas begin with small steps, so let’s 
start petite, cheap, and easy. Here’s how
to build a super-affordable remote robotic 
gripper that can pay the pizza delivery guy.
 The telerobotic gripper (let’s call it the 
Teleclaw) has three main parts (Figure A).
The mechanics include a $2 plastic clamp,
a radio-controlled (R/C) servomotor, some 
stiff wire, and a bracket to hold it all together. 
The electronics are a simple circuit designed 
around the Picaxe 08M microcontroller and 
an infrared (IR) receiver/demodulator module.
 The remote control unit is an ordinary TV/
VCR/DVD remote. You can use a remote you 
already have or get a cheap one just for this 
project. I paid 99 cents for the model here, 
but note that cheaper remotes usually have 
shorter ranges.
TELECLAW: 
REMOTE ROBOT
GRIPPER
BY GORDON MCCOMB
T
START
1. Construct the gripper mechanics.
If you’re making your own gripper bracket, 
use rigid ¼" plywood or expanded PVC, and 
follow the diagram in Figure B. For a quick 
prototype you can use ¼" foam board.
 Saw out the bracket’s basic shape, then 
drill the mounting holes, all 1" unless other-
wise noted. For the rectangular cutout (which 
will fit the servo), you can drill a starter hole 
and thread a thin saw blade through to cut 
out the rest, or else just cut through along the 
dotted lines shown in the diagram.
 Secure the servo into the bracket using four 
4-40×½" machine screws and nuts, with the 
shaft end near the bracket’s bend (Figure C).
 Drill 2 (or possibly 3) 1" holes through the 
clamp handles, one at the end of one grip (my 
clamp already had this) and 2 more 1" apart 
along the other, matching the 6" holes in the 
bracket (Figure D, page 64). 
 Use flush cutters to trim the plastic away 
from the clamp’s handle around the red 
COLLABORATE ON
makeprojects.com
62
Make: makezine.com/27

Gordon McComb
MATERIALS
See makeprojects.com/v/27 for recommended
suppliers, prices, and other sourcing information.
MAKE Telerobotic Gripper Kit item #MSTGK from the 
Maker Shed (makershed.com/teleclaw), includes all of the 
following project Materials:
Clamp, ratcheting plastic, about 5" long, with jaws that 
open at least 1¼" such as Sears Craftsman #31594
Servomotor, radio-controlled (R/C), standard size 
(roughly 40mm×20mm×38mm), with double-arm horn 
such as GWS S03N STD. Save your money and skip the 
fancy digital or metal gear servos.
Picaxe 08M microcontroller
Infrared remote control compatible with Sony equipment
Infrared receiver/demodulator, 38kHz Be sure it has a 
wide voltage range if using the Picaxe at less than 5V DC.
Gripper bracket ready-made or cut from aircraft-grade 
plywood or expanded rigid PVC, ¼" thick, 3½"×2"
Stiff wire unbent 2¼" coilless safety pin or a 3" length of 
18 gauge or thicker steel or brass wire (not annealed)
Solderless breadboard, half-size Maker Shed #MKKN2
Hookup wire, solid core, 22 AWG Maker Shed #MKEL1
Stereo audio jack, 3.5mm
Resistors, ¼W, 2%–5% tolerance: 330Ω (2), 4.7kΩ, 
10kΩ, 22kΩ
Capacitors, electrolytic, 15V or greater: 4.7μF, 47μF
LED, T1¾ (5mm) any color
Power supply, 5V DC, regulated, 200mA minimum or bat-
tery holder with 3×AAA alkaline batteries (4.5V) or 4×AAA 
NiCd or NiMH rechargeable batteries (4.8V); for Picaxe.
Power supply or wall adapter, 6V DC, 750mA minimum
or battery holder with 4×AA batteries
Machine screws, 4-40 pan head: ½" (4), ¾" (2)
Nuts, 4-40 hex (6)
TOOLS
Picaxe USB programming cable, AXE027 If you use
a different Picaxe cable, you’ll need a different connector 
than the 3.5mm stereo jack specified above.
Saw(s) to cut the bracket; e.g. hacksaw, jigsaw, scroll saw
Drill and drill bits: 1", 6", ¼" plus a bit to start the cutout 
for the servo (optional)
Wire cutters (flush cutter type) and wire strippers
Pliers: needlenose and lineman’s (heavy-duty)
Computer with internet connection
Soldering iron and solder 
Multimeter (optional) to test connections
USE A TV REMOTE TO 
GRAB AND RELEASE 
SMALL OBJECTS 
FROM AFAR.
A
B
C
3½"
Cut from rectangular piece
1"
3½"
13"
2"
2"
12"
 2"
¼"
¼" hole
4"
8"
6" holes
q"
GET
THE KIT
makershed.com
/teleclaw
63
Follow us @make

ratcheting piece, then yank out the ratcheting 
mechanism with heavy-duty pliers.
 Mount the clamp to the bracket using two 
4-40×¾" bolts and nuts. Make them tight 
without seriously deforming the plastic.
 Drill a 1" hole toward the end of one side 
of a double-arm servo horn and temporarily 
fit the horn over the servo shaft. Slowly rotate 
the servo counterclockwise until the motor 
hits its internal stop, then back off about 5°. 
Reposition the horn so that its arms are in the 
9 o’clock and 3 o’clock positions, then attach 
it to the servo using the included screw.
 Clip off the clasp from a 2¼" coilless safety 
pin, straighten it, and cut a 3" length (or just 
start with 3" of stiff wire). Bend ½" of each 
end of the wire 90° in opposite directions to 
make a thin “S” hook (Figure E).
 Hook the wire through the holes in the 
servo horn and the outside handle of the 
clamp. Use needlenose pliers to crimp the 
wire around the horn and handle loosely,
so that it won’t bind (Figure F).
2. Build the gripper electronics.
Following the schematics (Figures G and I), 
wire the circuit together on a solderless 
breadboard (you can transfer it to a soldered 
board later). Keep lead lengths short, espe-
cially for the 2 capacitors. Leave one side of 
each battery pack unconnected for now.
 For simplicity, this project uses 2 separate 
voltages, one non-regulated, to operate the 
Picaxe and the servo. See makeprojects.com/
v/27 for how to power the Teleclaw from a 
single 4.5V–5V supply.
 Solder leads to the 3.5mm stereo jack, 
which the Picaxe programming cable will
plug into. Connect the jack and 2 remaining 
resistors to your board as shown in Figures G 
and H. All resistors must remain in place even 
after you’ve uploaded your program.
3. Set up your remote.
If you’re using a universal remote, follow its 
instructions for how to set it up for a Sony 
TV, VCR, or DVD player. With my remote, for 
example, I selected VCR code 098. The Picaxe 
D
E
PICAXE
08M
PICAXE 08M
+V 1
Serial 2
Out4/In4 3
In3/InfraIn 4
8 Gnd (0V)
7 Out0/SerialOut
6 In1/Out1
5
7
2
8
In2/Out2
SerialOut
22kΩ
10kΩ
SerialIn
Gnd
Gnd
To download
cable
F
G
Clip here and straighten
Cut to length
3"
2"
Bend at ends
Drill hole 
as needed
Trim here to remove 
ratcheting mechanism
1"
64
Make: makezine.com/27

1
2
3
In3
Out1
Out4
1
2
3
Signal
+
+
–
–
6V
battery
pack
Vishay
TSOP38238
IR module
(or equivalent)
Servo
4.5V to 5V
8
3
1
5
4
LED
330Ω
4.7μF
47μF
4.7kΩ
330Ω
Picaxe 08M
I
H
08M has built-in commands for reading and 
decoding Sony SIRC protocol IR codes.
4. Program the Picaxe.
Download and install the free Picaxe Program 
Editor (Windows) or AXEpad (Mac/Linux) 
software from picaxe.co.uk. Plug your pro-
gramming cable between your computer’s 
USB and the 3.5mm jack. 
 Launch the Program Editor or AXEpad, and 
specify 08M under Options → Target Device. 
Also select the serial port used with the 
download cable.
 Download the project code from make
projects.com/v/27 and open it in the editor. 
Apply power to the microcontroller circuit 
only — the servo doesn’t need to be powered 
yet — and click the Program button to com-
pile and transfer the code to your Picaxe.
5. Now play!
Connect power to the servo, then disconnect 
and reconnect power to the Picaxe. The LED 
 WARNING: 
Double- and triple-check 
the wiring before applying 
power, and make sure 
the power connections 
aren’t reversed, or else 
permanent damage can 
result to the Picaxe, the 
capacitors, and the 
servo. Reversing the 
voltage to the servo 
can cause its nearly 
instant (and sometimes 
explosive) death!
Gordon McComb, “the father of hobby robotics,” has been 
building robots since the 1970s, and wrote the bestselling 
Robot Builder’s Bonanza. Read his plans to take over the world 
with an army of mind-controlled automatons at robotoid.com.
should glow to indicate when the Picaxe is 
sending pulses to the R/C servo, and the servo 
should quickly center itself.
 Point the remote at the IR receiver on the 
breadboard and start pressing buttons to
control the servo actions as follows:
» Channel Up/Channel Down — close/open 
the gripper incrementally.
» 2/8 — close/open the gripper fully.
» 5 — set the gripper to midway.
» 0 — toggle the servomotor power on and 
off (to extend battery life).
 The gripper should be closed, or nearly so, 
when the servo is rotated all the way clock-
wise. To adjust its range, unscrew the servo 
horn from the servo’s motor shaft, reposition 
it, and put the screw back on.
 The 0 button toggles “active” mode. Press
it once (the LED goes out), and the servo 
shuts off after each move, saving power and 
eliminating a slight jitter. Press 0 again (the 
LED goes on), and the servo receives periodic 
pulses to set its position, which makes it 
maintain a tighter grip on things.
 Comments in the code explain how to 
change parameters to fine-tune your Teleclaw.
 That’s it! It’s just that simple. In the next 
installment of Telerobots for World Domination, 
I’ll tackle the job of creating a weapons system 
consisting of a pulsed atomic-powered rail gun 
and chemical laser. Stay tuned, fellow space 
explorers!
Servo power 
6V
Front
1 2 3
Picaxe power 
4.5V to 5V
3.5mm stereo 
jack (used with 
USB download 
cable)
Caution!
Don’t mix up 
these wires!
SerialIn
Servo
Gnd
Serial-
Out
65
Follow us @make

Colin Way
Watching an animated robot is certainly amusing, but inter-
acting with a robot is an experience! You can make interactive 
robots with unique personalities out of many common toys, and 
I designed the EZ-B Robot Controller (ez-robot.com) to make the 
process as easy as possible. This tutorial will introduce how the 
EZ-B works, and then explain how you can use it to teach an old 
Digger the Dog pull-toy some new tricks: autonomously chasing 
a red ball and obeying voice commands.
 The EZ-B is a microcontroller circuit board 
that connects to numerous inputs and out-
puts. Put one inside a toy, and it will control 
servomotors, sensors, speakers, LEDs, and 
other devices that enable your bot’s behavior. 
 Meanwhile, the EZ-B also connects wire-
lessly to a nearby computer using the 
Bluetooth protocol. Unlike with other micro-
controller boards, all the programming and 
computational “heavy lifting” with the EZ-B 
happens on the PC side, and the onboard 
microcontroller just acts as a slave interface 
to your robot’s motors, sensors, and other 
peripheral devices. This lets your robot
perform voice recognition, speech synthesis, 
visual feature detection, and other functions 
far beyond the capability of standard micro-
controllers, and it also means you never
have to compile or upload new firmware.
Plug-In Peripherals
The EZ-B circuit board has the same general 
pin arrangement as an ordinary Arduino 
microcontroller, but instead of connecting 
the microprocessor chip’s I/O pins to single 
female headers for plugging wires or shield 
pins into, it breaks them out into 3-pin rows, 
each with their own voltage and ground.
 This lets you solderlessly plug in hobby
servomotors with their standard 3-wire 
female plugs (red = power, black = ground, 
and white or yellow = signal/data). 
 Many Arduino-compatible sensors and 
peripherals also use this type of connector. 
On the sensor (inputs) side, these include 
distance sensors, tilt sensors, compasses, 
thermometers, button pads, and joysticks. 
 Popular effector components (outputs) 
with 3-wire plugs include servomotors, 
TEACHING
OLD TOYS
NEW TRICKS
BY DJ SURES
66
Make: makezine.com/27

67
Follow us @make
DJ SURES
CONVERTS TOYS 
INTO SURPRISINGLY 
CAPABLE ROBOTS.

MATERIALS
See makeprojects.com/v/27
for recommended suppliers, 
prices, and other sourcing 
information.
Toy with moving parts
EZ-B .NET Bluetooth Robot 
Controller V3 $119 from 
ez-robot.com
Computer running
Windows 7 or Vista, with 
Bluetooth transceiver
Batteries, AA (5) 
2.4GHz wireless camera 
I got one on eBay for $19 
with an embedded battery 
that charges off USB.
GWS modified servos (2)
A
Servo horns (2) star-shaped 
attachments for mounting
Small screws
Optional, for LED and 
speaker connections:
Servo extension wires (2)
LED
TOOLS
Dremel with cutting wheel
Screwdrivers, small
Sharpie 
Masking tape or label 
maker
Optional, for LED and 
speaker connections:
Soldering iron and solder
H-bridge adapters for motor control, and 
high-voltage relay adapters (Figure A).
 With the included female-to-female header 
adapter, the EZ-B is compatible with any 
Arduino shield. In addition, it has a header 
for I2C devices, which use 4 wires: power, 
ground, clock, and signal. This protocol, which 
is gaining popularity in robotics, lets you chain 
together multiple low-speed peripherals, 
ranging from servos to programmable LED 
modules (like the BlinkM RGB LED), and
communicate with each in the software by 
using its unique address.
 The EZ-B also has built-in protocol sup-
port for MIDI, iRobot Roomba control, and 
TellyMate serial-to-TV control.
 For powering a robot’s wheels or tractor 
treads, you can often use the toy’s original 
motors and gears. Otherwise, you’ll need
a gearmotor (or DC motor and gear set),
or a continuous-rotation servomotor. Plain
DC motors spin too fast, and the gears 
decrease motor speed while increasing 
torque. Continuous-rotation servos are
variable-speed forward/reverse motors that 
use 3-wire servomotor connectors.
 For robot joint movements and other
animations, (e.g., to control head/camera 
position), you’ll use servomotors. You’ll most 
likely need to replace a toy’s original servos, 
if it has any, with generic hobby modules. 
Servos make precise movements within a 
range of 90° to 120°, specified by software. 
Small servos are fragile, so be careful with 
them; rotating their shafts manually can strip 
the gears and render them useless.
 Distance sensors are favorite robot input 
peripherals that can typically detect >1"-wide 
solid objects from ≅ 2" to 30" away. Ultrasonic 
sensors, like the Satistronics HC-SR04, are 
less effective with angled or textured objects, 
while infrared rangers, like the Sharp GP2D12, 
are less effective in sunlight, so many robot 
builders combine both.
 On the host computer side, the EZ-B soft-
ware reads from the computer’s USB port
in addition to communicating with the EZ-B
controller via Bluetooth. This lets you pack 
more functionality into your robot by using 
2.4GHz wireless USB devices, which don’t 
interfere with Bluetooth. For example, you 
can install a wireless camera onboard your 
bot and plug its wireless dongle into the host 
computer to have your EZ-B program process 
the live video feed. By using a 2.4GHz wireless 
USB hub, you can support both a camera and 
a sound card (to give your bot better sound), 
along with any other USB peripherals.
 The EZ-B has an SDK (software develop-
ment kit; ez-robot.com/sdk) that supports 
development for the controller within the 
larger EZ Robot Project. Community contribu-
tors have developed EZ-B software modules 
for a growing number of peripherals and
sensors, letting you control these devices 
from the EZ-B without worrying about the 
low-level electrical details of the connections.
DJ Sures
68
Make: makezine.com/27

T
START
1. Set up your environment.
With any robotics project, you’ll want to focus 
on the creative side. So before you begin 
building your robot, create a quiet, comfort-
able, and clutter-free workspace where your 
ideas can flow.
 It’s discouraging having to stop midway 
because you’re missing some supplies, so 
make sure you have enough hot glue sticks 
and a variety of screws, nuts, and bolts 
around. (Keep leftover screws from any toys 
you modify, along with any reusable lights, 
motors, gear sets, springs, and switches.)
 If you’ll be Dremeling hard plastic, be pre-
pared for a mess of shavings, and make your 
cuts outside or in a room with easy vacuum 
access and no carpet. If you’ll be working 
on a table, cover it with cardboard first. This 
prevents scratches and messes from the hot 
glue gun, and is also handy for making quick 
sketches or notes.
2. Find a toy.
Browse thrift stores or revisit your old toy box, 
and find a toy that has moving parts and good 
robot-control potential. These can be robots, 
vehicles, animals, or even dolls (Figure B). 
I should warn you, however, that converting 
a doll into an animated robot may result in 
disturbing some of your friends.
 The toy that leaped out at me when I was 
hunting for ideas for this article was Digger 
the Dog, a $7 pull-toy from Playskool. Here’s 
how you can get Digger to chase a red ball 
and obey voice commands, and you won’t 
even need to solder or write any code. The toy 
doesn’t even have a motor, so it’s also a great 
example of how to add autonomous mobility. 
 Take a good look at the toy you’ll be
modifying. Study its limbs, head, and any 
other movable parts, and decide what you 
want to control. Animating arms, head, and 
other parts that require precision positioning 
will require servos. As a beginner, start small 
by adding basic movements. You’ll be able
to add more features as your robotics experi-
ence grows. Practice makes robots!
 The most common mechanisms for hobby 
robot mobility are wheels or tracks. Making a 
robot that walks is too complicated to explain 
in this tutorial, unless you start with a toy 
that already walks via a wheel-driven shuffle 
motion. In that case, it’s easy. To make a 
stuffed animal walk, you can wrap its “skin” 
over the shell of a modified walking robot toy.
 If you already have your motors and other 
components, hold them against the toy in 
order to help you visualize where you’ll need 
to modify it and how to mount everything. 
With hobby servos, it helps to snap photos of 
available mounting brackets and motor shaft 
attachments at the hobby shop, and then refer 
to them while browsing toys. This minimizes 
buying hardware that you don’t end up using.
3. Add the servos.
Most toys use small Phillips screws, so make 
sure you have some small screwdrivers. Keep 
B
69
Follow us @make

each type of screw you remove in a different 
small container to avoid confusion when reas-
sembling. Digger had 6 screws under its belly, 
which lifted off to expose an open area perfect 
for housing the robot controller and battery 
(Figures C and D).
 The toy may be a little dirty if you purchased 
it from a thrift store; if so, you can put the 
plastic parts in the dishwasher once they’re 
dismantled. Remove the pull-rope leash con-
nected to Digger’s collar; you won’t need it 
anymore.
 Hold the servos and sensors to the desired 
mounting positions and sketch with a Sharpie 
marker any cuts or drill holes before you start 
modifying the toy shell. Follow the carpenter’s 
rule: Measure twice, cut once!
 With Digger, the servos could fit back-to-
back in the rear axle area, provided that the 
rear wheels were pushed out a bit wider than 
they sat in the original toy. So I removed 
Digger’s rear axle, dug plastic out of its body 
underside to make room for the servos, and 
dug out the rear wheels to accommodate the 
servo horns (Figure E). I also trimmed back 
the nose to expose the camera lens.
 I secured the servo horns to the wheels 
with small screws saved from previous toy 
builds, then hot-glued the servos in place 
(Figure F). To avoid lopsided wheels, double-
check their alignment with your servos.
 For mounting nearly all peripherals, a 
hot glue gun will be your best friend. Fit and 
hold the servos and sensors against the
modified area of the body. Does it look OK? 
Great! Use a few drops of glue at first, verify 
the fit, and then go wild and add glue from
all available angles.
4. Add the speaker, LED, and camera.
For any peripheral devices that don’t have 
3-pin connectors, including any LEDs, speakers,
and other devices that you liberate from the 
toy itself, I like to add servo connectors to 
make them easily pluggable. To do this, cut 
the male end off a servo extension cable and 
solder to your peripheral, referring to its data-
sheet to find its power, ground, and signal 
F
E
C
D
 TIP: If you make a mistake, wait for the glue to dry and 
use a drop or two of rubbing alcohol to separate.
contacts. For LEDs, speakers, and other 2-wire 
devices, connect just the signal and ground.
 For any other LEDs, springs, washers, 
mounting hardware, or screws that you liber-
ate, this is a good time to start your collection 
of miscellaneous hardware.
 If you want to connect the speaker, unscrew 
it, then unsolder its 2 wires and replace them 
70
Make: makezine.com/27

with a servo extension cable, soldering its 
white/yellow and black wires to each contact 
(Figure G).
 For the LED, wire another servo cable to
the LED, black (ground) side to its cathode, 
which is indicated by the shorter leg and flat 
part of the plastic. Glue the LED into the hole 
in the top of Digger’s collar, where its leash 
used to connect (Figure H).
 To help you during assembly and in the 
future, label the cables and plugs of all your 
peripherals using a label maker, or just mask-
ing tape and a marker. Label each servo by 
its position (right/left) and each sensor by 
its type. For Digger, we have a left servo, 
right servo, speaker, and LED.
 For the camera, unscrew its case and 
remove its internal workings. Doing this with 
any peripheral device saves room, making
it easer to fit. Use hot glue to lightly secure 
the camera inside the toy shell, with the
lens pointing out of the nose hole (Figure I). 
Don’t use too much glue, as you may want
to realign the camera or reuse it later in
a different project.
5. Final assembly.
Determine the mounting position of the robot 
controller and battery pack. With Digger, its 
belly area was the perfect width to host the 
EZ-B Controller with the battery underneath. 
Refer to the EZ-B manual to determine the 
connection points for each servo and sensor. 
 Digger’s left servo plug is connected to
pin row D14 and the right servo is connected 
to pin row D13. The speaker signal and ground 
are connected to D7. The LED anode is con-
nected to the signal wire and the cathode 
to ground on pin row D6. Keep track of all of 
these connections; you’ll need to know them 
when configuring the software.
 Once the connections are completed,
carefully reassemble the shell, trying to
protect the controller connections and any 
other fragile parts (Figure J).
 To give your robot a unique look, you can 
paint the shell. Scuff the smooth finish with 
sandpaper and then clean it to allow the paint 
G
H
I
to bond. I painted over the Playskool doggy 
tag with red paint, then replaced it with an
EZ-Robot label from our trusty label maker. 
You can also paint the entire shell a custom 
color. Bring it to a paint store and ask them 
what type of paint and process they suggest. 
6. Connect to the PC.
Right-click the Bluetooth icon that should 
appear in the System Tray and select 
Add Device to bring up a listing of nearby 
J
71
Follow us @make

Bluetooth devices. Power on the EZ-B, wait for 
the PC to discover it, then select the device 
and press Next. When prompted for a pairing 
key, select Provide A Key and enter 1234. Your 
computer should add the EZ-B connections 
as 2 COM ports. Note the lower numbered 
port; this port will carry the data connection 
between the PC and the EZ-B.
 Download and launch the EZ-Builder 
software from ez-robot.com/ez-builder. 
This is the application through which you 
can program your robot (you can also use 
Visual Studio .NET, msdn.microsoft.com/
en-us/vstudio). Under the Add Control menu, 
choose Connection, specify the COM port just 
noted when you established the Bluetooth 
connection, then click Connect. Then select 
Servo (also under Add Control) to specify the 
left and right servo connections at pins D14 
and D13, respectively.
 Time for our first test. From the Windows 
menu, add a Modified Servo Panel to your 
workspace. Press Config and select the Left 
and Right modified servo ports, then press 
Save. If all’s well, you should now be able to 
drive Digger around by clicking the arrow but-
tons or using the arrow keys on the keyboard.
7. Configure ball-following behavior.
If your mobility was a success, install your 
camera’s driver on the PC. Click Add Control →
Camera → Camera Color Tracking (Figure K). 
Your camera should appear in the Video Device 
dropdown list. Select your camera, then put 
the ball in front of the lens. Select the ball’s 
color from the next dropdown box (I picked 
red) and adjust the Color Brightness slider at 
bottom right until you can only see the ball in 
the preview window. (A bright room or sunlight 
works best for color camera tracking.)
 To translate the color tracking into motion 
tracking with the servos, go back to the Servo 
Movement Panel, click the Config button, 
and enable Motion Tracking. Then return to 
Camera Color Tracking and check the Enable 
Forward Movement box. This will make the 
robot move forward when the detected
colored object is directly in front.
L
K
 Now you have a robot dog that follows
a red ball (Figure M). You’ll almost certainly
be entertained for a while, but what if the 
ball is out of view? Instead of having to steer 
Digger around manually, you can get it to 
respond to voice commands.
8. Configure voice recognition.
EZ-Builder lets you access the Voice Recogni-
tion functionality that’s built into Windows 7 
or Vista operating systems. To do this, click 
Add Control → Voice Recognition, and then 
click the Config button. This opens a grid in 
which you can enter words or phrases to be 
recognized on the left, and add correspond-
ing script commands on the right, dragged 
from a menu of possible commands at far 
right. Add commands like Forward, Back, Left, 
Right, and Stop, and you can now verbally 
control your robot (Figure L)! You can get 
creative by adding phrases such as “How are 
you?” and have the robot respond with bleep 
bleep noises, or use the operating system’s 
72
Make: makezine.com/27

DJ Sures is a roboticist who lives in Calgary, Alberta.
is exciting, and you can easily build on it by 
adding new sensors and EZ-Builder controls. 
Once you’ve tested each peripheral to con-
firm that it behaves correctly, you can create 
custom scripts to give your robot a unique 
personality. For example, you can script 
your robot to turn left if the distance sensor 
returns a value less than 8". The tutorials and 
community forum at ez-robot.com are great 
places to obtain assistance and share.
 Because large corporations have no control 
over robotics, we’re experiencing a great age of 
revolution. Today’s hobby robots will, we hope, 
be refined into superior robots of the future. 
I created the EZ-Robot project to inspire and 
exercise your creativity, and I hope you’ll share 
your creations with the community. The future 
of robots begins with your imagination!
  See Digger and the other toy-robots in 
action at makeprojects.com/v/27.
built-in speech synthesizer to reply, “I am 
doing great, thank you for asking!”
 If you have trouble with the voice recognition
not hearing your voice, check the recording 
settings for your sound card in the control 
panel. The volumes for recording may be either 
too low or high. There is a wizard in Vista and 
Windows 7’s control panel that you can use
to set up the voice recognition. Those settings 
will be carried over to EZ-Builder.
Going Further with Your Bot
The reward of interacting with your first robot 
Colin Way
SMART DOGGIES
a Fig. M: Formerly dumb Digger the Dog now moves 
autonomously, follows a red ball, and obeys voice
commands, thanks to his EZ-B robot brain.
a Fig. N: The author’s award-winning, scratch-built 
K-9 robotic dog (faithful companion to TV’s Doctor 
Who) was the basis for the EZ-B Robot Controller. K-9 
avoids obstacles, follows people using onboard 3D 
mapping capabilities, synthesizes speech, and changes 
his personality based on human interaction.
M
N
73
Follow us @make

74
Make: makezine.com/27
WELCOME,
ROBOT
OVERLORDS
Quadrotors, or quadrocopters, are all the 
rage in hobby robotics. MIT has built a fully 
autonomous quadrotor that uses an onboard 
Kinect to navigate and map its surroundings 
while generating a visual representation of 
where the robot has flown. 
 Algorithms scan image frames from the
camera and recognize objects within the
environment to assign depth and color to
the models. The robot runs all the programs 
and controls in real time without the use
of any additional sensors (makezine.com/
go/quadrotor).
  Sweden-based Daedalus Projects aimed
to get a PCB with four motors to fly, the result
of which is the amazingly tiny CrazyFlie, 
weighing in at 20 grams and boasting
a 12cm×12cm footprint. Bonus points for 
technique: the accelerometer and gyroscope 
packages were soldered on using a frying
pan (daedalus.nu/category/crazycopter).
 Meanwhile, the Institute for Dynamic 
Systems and Control in Zurich, Switzerland, 
has developed a 35,000-cubic-foot Flying 
Machine Arena for testing mobile robots, most 
notably quadrotors exhibiting mesmerizing
agility with synchronized choreography and 
cooperative ball juggling (www.idsc.ethz.ch/
Research_DAndrea/FMA).
—Nick Raymond
Quadrotor Craze

PROJECTS
Evil Mad Scientist Labs strikes 
again, this time with its Drink 
Making Unit 2.0, a gorgeous hunk 
of machinery with parts sourced 
from such unlikely places as 
pet stores, chemistry labs, and 
Japanese gardens. 
 The DMU2 can dispense spe-
cific quantities of up to six liquids 
(Long Island Iced Tea, anyone?) 
and features a rad retro control 
panel. Precision bartending made 
easy (insert maniacal laughter)! 
makezine.com/go/drinks
—Goli Mohammadi
Lab Lush
Orbotix has designed and built a robotic ball controlled by 
a driving app, or by tilting an iOS or Android device in the 
direction you want the ball to roll. 
 Sphero is essentially a smarter remote control toy: the 
ball collects data that can be used to add conditions to the 
gameplay, utilizing an accelerometer and gyroscope inside. 
In the app Tag, for example, players can pit their Spheros 
against each other. When the balls collide, they read contact 
data and compile game actions. And Sphero’s open API lets 
developers build their own games and applications for it. 
makezine.com/go/sphero
—Laura Cochrane
ON A ROLL
OFF-ROAD SNAKE
Sriranjan Rasakatla’s Semi 
Autonomous Snake Robot-p3
is a modular robot designed 
to move over rough terrain 
where wheeled robots fail. 
 In manual mode, the 
operator wears a data glove 
embedded with two acceler-
ometers to intuitively send 
the snake commands. In 
autonomous mode, it utilizes 
an aerial-mounted camera 
to survey terrain and adjust 
its movements accordingly. 
Future applications include 
search and rescue missions 
and mine detection.
makezine.com/go/snake
—NR
75
Follow us @Make

76
Make: makezine.com/27
PROJECTS
Since the word “robotic” has a decidedly cold 
connotation, the idea of a temperamental 
robot rings my chimes. Created by the Scottish 
collective FOUND, Cybraphon may look like 
a 19th-century nickelodeon, but its guts are 
decidedly 21st-century. 
 A hidden computer runs custom software, 
while solenoids, servos, and infrared motion 
detectors play exotic instruments and antique 
machinery. Best of all, “performance is affected
by online community opinion,” leading it to act 
“just like a real band.” Let’s hope this review 
brings sweet music to Cybraphon’s ears. 
cybraphon.com
—Arwen O’Reilly Griffith
EMOTIONAL 
ROBOTIC
BAND
Cavalcade of 
CoasterBots
Last year on makezine.com we ran a simple 
“CoasterBot” contest: build a bot using
dead CD/DVDs (aka “coasters”) as the main 
structural material and make it able to
navigate a space. We taught CoasterBot 
basics, and our pals at Jameco offered a
parts kit we put together. 
 We were floored by the variety and sophis-
tication of the entries. Dan Ray’s winning 
design, Jartron (seen here), walks, dances, 
sports stereoscopic rangefinder eyes, and has 
a laser nose that draws. You can see all the 
finalist entries, read the newsletter tutorials 
and blog progress reports, and still order 
the parts kit. makezine.com/robotbuild
—Gareth Branwyn

TOOLS & PARTS
Learning how to program a robot can be challenging if you 
don’t have an actual robot to run your programs on. Luckily, 
Carnegie Mellon University’s Robotics Academy is developing 
a Windows-based robot-simulator game called Planet H99. 
 Users can program their robots in RobotC to control 
either a Lego NXT robot or a VEX robot. There’s currently
a working demo of the game available for download, and
you can snag yourself a free copy of the final release by
providing the Robotics Academy feedback on the demo. 
makezine.com/go/h99
—Eric Chu
A wi-fi or Bluetooth module will connect to a robot locally, 
but the DroneCell can control it over any distance within 
the GSM quad-band cellular network coverage area — i.e. 
all over the world — and at altitudes of at least 10,000 feet 
above the nearest cell tower. 
 Connect the DroneCell’s UART (universal asynchronous 
receiver/transmitter) TX and RX pins to a microcontroller 
or serial interface, and your project can send and receive 
text messages and jack into a standard cellular data plan. 
Hobbyists are using the versatile little communications 
portals to fly pilotless aircraft and relay data from weather 
balloons; industrial engineers are using them to outfit 
large-scale machinery for process control. 
dronecell.narobo.com
—Paul Spinrad
TurtleBot 
Hobby 
Platform
Looking for a reasonably 
priced personal robotics kit? 
TurtleBot from Willow Garage 
might be the answer, with kits 
ranging from $500 to $1,200. 
 TurtleBot uses open source 
software and builds on exist-
ing components like iRobot 
Create, Microsoft Kinect, 
and the ROS community’s 
thousands of computer vision 
libraries. 
 There’s no need to wire 
or solder anything — the 
TurtleBot comes with the
only tool (a screwdriver) 
you’ll need to assemble it. 
This leaves you the time and
energy to concentrate on 
making a robot that can 
zoom around the house, build 
3D images, take panoramas, 
and even deliver you food.
I’ll take fries with that! 
willowgarage.com/turtlebot
—AOG
PLANET H99
CELLPHONE 
FOR 
MACHINES
77
Follow us @Make

78
Make: makezine.com/27
PARTS & ALTERNATIVE METHODS
Hamster Inside
After seeing the wind-powered Gakken Strandbeest 
hacked to use solar and rubber band power and micro-
processor control, I-Wei Huang, better known as CrabFu, 
was inspired with a delightfully silly idea: hamster power. 
“It’s in so many what’s-under-the-hood jokes,” he says. 
 He removed the gearing and windmill and mounted a 
hamster ball instead; Meccano sprockets and chain were 
used to transfer the power from the hamster ball to the 
main crank. He then borrowed an acquaintance’s pet
hamster, Princess, to perform the inaugural run, much
to the delight of his onlooking nieces, who now want their
own hamster. “So,” he says, “I may get some more test 
pilots in the near future.” makezine.com/go/hamster
—LC
GET A GRIP
JamBot, created by a 
University of Chicago team 
led by physicist Heinrich 
Jaeger, rocked the robotics 
world by approaching the 
challenges of gripping and 
picking up objects from a 
whole new angle: by using 
granular material encased 
in an elastic membrane. The 
mechanism jams onto an 
object, a vacuum is applied 
to tighten the grip, and any 
shape of object can be picked 
up. Maker Carlos Asmat Jr. 
documented a DIY version 
using a party balloon, ground 
coffee, and his lungs. Now 
that’s genius. makezine.com/
go/grip
—GM
Have a project that needs distance sensing? Check out 
MaxBotix’s line of ultrasonic sensors. Used by professional 
engineers, educators, and hobbyists, MaxBotix offers a
wide variety of reliable and low-power sensors. With choices 
of wide to narrow beams, indoor and outdoor packages, 
and noise rejection on their higher end models, MaxBotix’s
sensors cover many demanding projects. maxbotix.com
—EC
ULTRASONIC 
SENSORS

CONTESTS & EVENTS
Roboexotica has been partying with cocktail robots 
since 1999. Somebody needs to “document the 
increasing occurrence of radical hedonism in 
man-machine communication,” right? 
 This collective of Austria-based makers hosts an 
annual festival devoted to bots that make drinks, com-
plete with a symposium to explore the implications, an 
award for top bot, and workshops for those interested 
in building their own. What’s not to love? roboexotica.org
—GM
BOTS
ON THE ROCKS
DIY UNDERWATER 
EXPLORATION
Dying for undersea adven-
tures? Like robotic vehicles? 
Then check out the National 
Underwater Robotics 
Challenge, where student 
teams of all ages compete
in mock undersea missions 
with DIY ROVs. 
 For more practical applica-
tions, check out OpenROV, a 
DIY telerobotics community. 
Group members built a spe-
lunking rover equipped with 
an HD webcam and Arduino 
microcontroller connected to 
the surface via USB. openrov.
com and h2orobots.org
—CC
Whether or not you think robots can make art, there’s
no denying the artistry of Harvey Moon’s Drawing Robot. 
This wall-mounted, computer-controlled bot analyzes
and re-creates images in pen. Ranging from intricate
geometric patterns to beautiful portraits, the drawings 
resemble those of a futuristic Etch A Sketch and some-
times take weeks to complete. 
 Moon went to kickstarter.com to fund his second,
more versatile prototype, and pledges exceeded his goal
of $450 by almost $2,700. Check out more details and 
robot art at unanything.com.                             —Craig Couden
Art Hacks 
79
Follow us @Make

ROBOTS OF
MAKER FAIRE
This year’s Maker Faire Bay 
Area saw Google Android bots 
(like the smartphone-headed 
biped above), stolid industrial 
robots creating crazy art (à la 
Paint-Bot from WALL-E), and 
legions of DIY robots, from 
Mars rovers to bartenders to 
fierce combatants. See more 
great robots at Maker Faire 
in Detroit and New York this 
summer. makerfaire.com
—Keith Hammond
Gregory Hayes
80
Make: makezine.com/27

Projects
Build an aquarium whose gentle curtain of recir-
culating water sets the stage for an ever-changing 
jellyfish ballet. Then wire up a lightweight, portable 
sign that instantly displays anything you type in 
big, bright LED letters. Finally, turn back the clock 
and make the limestone-based spotlight that was 
state-of-the-art pre-Edison incandescent lighting.
PS/2/You
92
Limelight
104
Jellyfish Tank
82
Garry McLeod
81
Follow us @make

82
Make: makezine.com/27
JELLYFISH TANK
Garry McLeod
I was always terrified of jellyfish as a kid. The thought of a slimy 
translucent blob just below the water’s surface that could deliver 
a painful sting kept me out of the ocean most of the summer.
It wasn’t until years later when I collected a small jellyfish at
the beach and observed it in an aquarium that I realized how 
stunningly beautiful they are. As it pulsed steadily and allowed
its tentacles to flutter behind it, I was completely hypnotized. 
Soon, I decided to design and build an aquarium that could
keep jellyfish alive and well.
Convert a regular aquarium
into a jellyfish habitat.
By Alex Andon
 Jellyfish can’t live in a regular aquarium 
because they get sucked into the filtration 
pumps and liquefied. Using my extensive 
experience in building aquariums as part 
of my research projects at Duke and the 
University of Delaware, I developed a tank 
with a special water flow to keep jellies
suspended in the middle of the tank.
 The jellyfish aquarium design described
in this article has no dead spots for water 
flow, eliminates strong points of suction, and
creates a laminar water flow pattern that 
sweeps the delicate jellyfish away from the 
edges of the tank.
Alex Andon is the founder and president of Jellyfish Art
(jellyfishart.com). He has a B.S. from Duke University in
biology and environmental science.
SET UP: p.85
MAKE IT: p.86
USE IT: p.90

COLLABORATE ON
makeprojects.com
83
Follow us @make

84
Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: JELLYFISH TANK
Jellyfish require a special aquarium design to keep 
them from getting sucked into filtration intakes.
James Provost
JELLY JAR
 A
 C
 B
 G
 I
 F
 H
 D
 E
 A  Jellyﬁ sh swim around
an aquarium tank, suspended 
safely in the relatively still 
water in the middle. 
 B  The corners of the tank 
are rounded with a polycar-
bonate sheet to keep water 
ﬂ owing in a smooth, ﬂ at sheet 
along its sides and the bottom. 
 C  A drain feeds water that 
exits the tank into an external 
bucket, for ﬁ ltration and 
recirculation.
 D  A large exit screen keeps 
the jellyﬁ sh from getting 
sucked into the drain.
 E
Inside the bucket, a pump
circulates the water.
 F
A heater in the bucket 
keeps the aquarium water at
a consistent temperature.
 G  The bucket also contains 
high-surface-area plastic 
pieces. A helpful nitrifying 
bacteria called Nitrosomonas
lives on these plastic pieces 
and digests the jellyﬁ sh waste. 
The pieces also trap particu-
lates via ﬁ ltration.
 H  Water is pumped from the 
bucket back into the tank via 
a ﬂ exible hose and the spray 
bar.
 I
Water re-enters the tank 
through a spray bar that 
washes the water in a ﬂ at 
sheet across the outside of 
the exit screen. This prevents 
the jellies from getting stuck 
to the screen.

Gregory Hayes
MATERIALS
A. Polycarbonate sheet, e" thick 
width 1" less than the interior width
of your tank, and length equal to the 
tank height plus the tank length
B. Salt water pump able to pump at 
least 5 times the volume of your tank 
per hour at 0 head pressure
C. PVC glue
D. PVC pipe and fittings:
» PVC caps, slip, ½" (2)
» PVC pipe, Schedule 40,
½" diameter, 2' length
» PVC tee fitting, slip × slip
× female pipe thread, ½"
» PVC pipe, Schedule 40,
1½" diameter, 2' length
» PVC hose barb fittings,
male pipe thread (2) sized
for ½" flexible hose
» PVC ball valve, slip × slip, ½"
» PVC fitting(s) to connect ½" hose 
barb to ½" valve to water pump 
This will depend on your pump. My 
pump had a male pipe thread (MPT) 
fitting, so I used two adapters: female 
pipe thread (FPT) at both ends, and 
MPT × slip. It would have been simpler 
to use just one slip × FPT adapter.
SET UP.
» PVC adapter, male pipe thread
× slip, 1½"
» PVC elbow, slip × slip, 1½"
» Plastic epoxy
» Teflon tape
» Threaded bulkhead fitting, 1½"
» Flexible hose, ½" diameter,
3' length
» Mesh screen, cut to (width of tank 
+ 2") × (½ height of tank)
» Plastic bio-balls, about 3gals
or plastic pieces of any kind with a lot 
of surface area, such as green plastic 
army men
» Twist ties or zip ties (2)
» Acrylic strips: ½" × 1" × outside 
width of tank; and ½" × 1" × inside 
width of tank (2) for braces to hold 
the screen and polycarbonate sheet
» Salt water
» Submersible aquarium heater
50W for up to 15gals; 100W for up 
to 25gals; 200W for up to 50gals.
For cold-water species, replace the 
heater with a drop-in water chiller.
» Aquarium tank At least 4 gallons and 
approximately cube-shaped. I built a 
23"×28"×17" acrylic tank (see Tools).
TOOLS
E. PVC pipe cutter
» Dremel with 1" drill bit and router
» Tape measure
» Diamond hole saw (optional) 
if you’re using glass tank
To build your own 28"×23"×17" 
(L×W×H) aquarium (includes poly-
carbonate and acrylic listed above):
F. Acrylic cement
G. Aquarium-grade silicone caulking 
available at aquarium or pet stores
» Acrylic sheets, ½" thick: 28"×23" 
(bottom); 28"×17" (2, sides); 
22"×17" (2, ends); 22"×1" (2, 
braces); 23"×1" (brace) Buy cut-to-
size from a local plastics distributor 
or cut yourself (carefully) using a 
table saw with carbide blade in a well-
ventilated area. 
» Polycarbonate sheet:
214"×45"×e"
» DImensional lumber, 2×4,
8' lengths (2) to build a 90º jig
» Ruler or straightedge
A
F
B
C
E
G
D
85
Follow us @make

86
Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: JELLYFISH TANK
1. 
BUILD THE TANK 
(OPTIONAL)
1a. The acrylic sheets come 
with a protective wax paper 
covering. Peel back the 
paper 1" from each edge you 
plan to glue, and use a ruler 
or straightedge to tear the 
excess (peeled) paper off.
1b. Use a saw and drill to 
build a 90º jig from the 2×4s 
to hold the acrylic pieces in 
place while the glue sets.
1c. Use acrylic cement at 
the joints to weld the tank 
together (refer to instructions 
included with the cement, 
and see Step 3a for place-
ment of braces). The cement 
enters the cracks through 
capillary action.
1d. Use aquarium-grade
silicone caulking to seal all the 
glued joints to prevent water 
from leaking (normal silicone 
caulking isn’t rated for salt 
water and will degrade quickly; 
it may also leach into the 
water and kill your jellyfish).
1e. After the joints are
completely dry, peel the
rest of the wax paper off
the acrylic.
BUILD YOUR
JELLYFISH TANK
MAKE IT.
1b
1b
1d
1c
1a
Time: 3–5 Days
Complexity: Easy

2. 
ASSEMBLE
THE SPRAY BAR
2a. Cut the ½" PVC pipe into
2 equal pieces — these will be 
assembled with the tee fitting 
and 2 slip caps to form the 
spray bar. 
2b. Glue the 2 pieces of ½" 
PVC pipe on either side of the 
tee fitting. Glue the slip caps 
onto the ends using PVC glue. 
2c. Using a Dremel or a
drill press with a 1" bit, drill 
holes in the PVC pipe on the 
side opposite the tee fitting’s 
opening. The holes should 
be approximately ½" apart, 
following a straight line from 
one end of the spray bar to 
the other. 
2d. Screw a hose barb fitting
into the tee using teflon tape. 
3. 
MAKE THE
EXIT SCREEN
3a. Using plastic epoxy or 
acrylic cement, glue the long 
acrylic brace on top of the 
tank at a distance from the 
drain side of the tank equal
to 1/3 of the tank height. 
3b. Cut out the corners of
the screen as shown. The 
longer, straight sides will be 
glued to cross-braces and the 
short, beveled sides will be 
glued to the inside of the tank. 
2d
2c
2b
3a
2a
 TIPS: The PVC pieces 
should be cut so that the 
ﬁ nal length of the spray bar 
is a little narrower than the 
width of your tank.
Before gluing, make sure 
the assembled spray bar 
ﬁ ts inside the width of your 
tank.
3b
87
Follow us @make

88
Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: JELLYFISH TANK
3c. Epoxy one long side of the 
screen to one of the shorter 
acrylic braces. Add more 
epoxy on top, and sandwich 
the screen between the brace 
and the inside of the tank, on 
the drain side, about 1/3 of the 
way down from the top. Hold 
it in place and allow the epoxy 
to cure to a strong hold.
3d. Glue the opposite side of 
the screen under and around 
the long brace on top of the 
tank. Gently pull the screen 
taut and hold it in place while 
the epoxy cures. 
 Fold the short sides of the 
screen in and epoxy them 
against the inside of the tank.
4. 
MAKE
THE DRAIN
4a. Cut out a circle slightly 
bigger than the bulkhead fit-
ting in the middle of the tank’s 
exit screen side, as far up as it 
can go without the fitting over-
lapping the top of the tank. 
4b. Install the bulkhead
fitting in the hole. 
 Using teflon tape, screw the 
1½" male pipe thread (MPT) 
× slip adapter into the outside 
of the bulkhead fitting. 
4c. Cut a 3" long piece of 1½" 
PVC pipe and use it to con-
nect the 1½" male pipe thread 
MPT × slip adapter to the 1½" 
PVC elbow, pointing down.
4d. Cut a piece of 1½" PVC 
pipe long enough to run from 
the 1½" PVC elbow into the 
bucket beside the tank.
3c
3d
3d
4d
4b
4b
4a
NOTE: If you’re using an 
acrylic tank you can make 
the hole with a hole saw or 
Dremel with a router ﬁ tting. 
If you’re using a glass tank 
you need to make the hole 
with a diamond hole saw.

5. 
ASSEMBLE
THE BUCKET
5a. Using the necessary 
adapters, attach the ½" hose 
barb fitting to the ½" valve, 
and attach the valve to the 
pump. 
5b. Attach the ½" flexible 
hose to the hose barb fitting. 
Put the pump and heater at 
the bottom of the bucket, and 
fill the bucket with bio-balls 
or whatever pieces of plastic 
you’ll be using for the filter. 
6. 
ASSEMBLE
THE SPRAY BAR
6a. Attach the free end of the 
½" flexible hose to the hose 
barb fitting on the spray bar. 
6b. Use 2 zip or twisty ties
to tie the spray bar in place 
so the sheet of water will 
wash across the exit screen. 
7. 
INSERT THE
FLOW SHEET
7a. Epoxy the remaining 
acrylic brace flat inside the 
end of the tank opposite the 
drain, flush with the top.
7b. Wedge the polycarbonate 
sheet into the tank so that it 
runs along the bottom and 
curves up at each end, held 
down by the two braces glued 
inside the tank. (If you built a 
tank 28"×23"×17" high, your 
polycarbonate sheet should 
measure 45"×214".) 
5b
7b
6a
6b
5a
7b
89
Follow us @make

90
Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: JELLYFISH TANK
Fill the tank with salt water. You can get 
pre-mixed salt water or mix it yourself with 
aquarium salt, but make sure you use distilled 
or reverse-osmosis (RO) filtered water. Do not 
use unfiltered tap water.
 Plug in the pump and heater, and allow the 
water to heat to the natural temperature of 
the jellyfish you’ll be adding (almost all com-
mercially available jellies are kept at 77°F).
 Add jellyfish. Moon jellyfish do best in these 
aquariums. (If you can’t collect jellyfish from 
the ocean, you can buy jellyfish and jellyfish 
food from my company: jellyfishart.com). 
Adjust the valve so there’s just enough water 
flow to keep the jellyfish from settling on the 
bottom. Water has a lot of momentum, so 
wait at least 10 minutes after adjusting the 
valve to observe the effect on water flow. 
Adjust the position of the spray bar so water 
washes over the exit screen without creating
any air bubbles, and the jellyfish don’t get 
stuck to the screen.
 You can feed your jellyfish live brine shrimp 
or frozen plankton foods made specifically
for jellyfish. Learn more about the care and 
feeding of jellyfish at jellyfishart.com. a
USE IT.
JUST ADD
JELLYFISH
 TIPS: Change 25% of the water every 2 weeks 
once your tank is running. For maximum longevity 
with coastal jellyﬁ sh (from their natural lifespan of 
about 8 months up to a year or more), feed them 
twice a day and use a robust ﬁ ltration system.
Try lighting your jellies from the side or top of the 
tank. The light will bounce off their translucent 
bodies and make them glow. You can use color-
changing LEDs to make the jellyﬁ sh light up with 
whatever colors you shine on them.
Garry McLeod

Taking great photos of jellyfish comes down to controlling
3 things: the tank, lights, and camera. These tips will help you 
reveal the stunning beauty of your jellies through photography. 
 As with all creative processes, these rules are made to be 
broken as your artistic impulses dictate. Motion-blurred images 
of softly focused jellies can be as beautiful as crisp shots on
a clean black background.
 If you do collect wild jellies and get good pictures, be sure
to submit them to jellywatch.org!
PHOTOGRAPHING
YOUR JELLYFISH
By Steve Haddock
Steve Haddock
Tank
For a black background, put a piece of 
velvet behind the tank, or put a piece of 
black acrylic inside the tank in the back.
 For illuminated backgrounds, you 
can play with different colors, but you’ll 
want to use a low depth of ﬁ eld to make 
sure the background isn’t in focus. 
You can use a second light source to 
illuminate the background, so that you 
can control the exposure independently.
Camera
You can use either a fancy SLR or a 
cheaper compact camera. If you want 
a dark background, set the exposure 
manually — most cameras will try to 
expose to a uniform gray. If your camera 
doesn’t have manual exposure settings, 
then you’ll want to set the exposure 
compensation to –3. This will also make 
a shorter exposure to avoid motion blur.
 Set the focus manually on the SLR, 
and depending on the shot, use macro 
mode on the compact. With an SLR, 
initially set the focus so the jelly is the 
right size in the frame. Then, instead of 
constantly turning the focus ring, move 
the camera closer or farther from the 
tank to get the subject into focus.
 You’ll typically get better results if 
you underexpose the images relative to 
what you think they should be based on 
the camera’s preview. You can’t recover 
overexposed areas, but you can bump 
up the levels of underexposed shots.
 Depth of ﬁ eld in macro shots can be 
a problem. If you can set the aperture, 
the higher numbers will give you greater 
depth of ﬁ eld (more things in focus).
Lights
An external light source is the most 
important element — you can’t use an 
on-camera ﬂ ash to get good pictures.
 You can use a strobe or a clip lamp 
as a light source. Position it so it shines 
in from the side of the tank, farther 
from you than the plane of the front 
window. If you’re using a clip lamp, set 
your camera’s white balance manually 
to “incandescent” (the light-bulb icon). 
Otherwise your pictures will all have
a yellowish tint.
  Make a cover out of cardboard (for the 
strobe) or foil (for the lamp), to narrow 
the beam of light. Ideally, the slice of 
light will illuminate just the jellyﬁ sh, and 
not the back of the tank or the front sur-
face (or you, reﬂ ected in the front). Turn 
off the room lights while taking pictures, 
and use a ﬂ ashlight or the clip lamp to 
focus. This will prevent capturing your 
reﬂ ection in the glass. a
Steve Haddock is a marine biologist with an engineering background who studies 
jellyfish and bioluminescence at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute.
He co-wrote Practical Computing for Biologists (practicalcomputing.org).
91
Follow us @make

92
Make: makezine.com/27
PS/2/YOU
Island Light Photography 
It all started with a small LCD salvaged from an old printer.
I recruited my code-savvy older brother, Adam, and we soon had 
the LCD displaying text from an Arduino microcontroller. This 
was neat, but it was inconvenient having to plug the Arduino into 
a computer for reprogramming whenever we wanted to change 
the text.
Go-anywhere, instantly updatable
glowing digital message board.
By Immanuel McKenty
 We needed something for inputting the text, 
and it didn’t take long to find a PS/2 keyboard 
code library for Arduino — which confirmed 
my observation that anything that communi-
cates with wires has probably been hooked up 
to an Arduino. I salvaged a PS/2 port from an 
old computer motherboard, and after some 
trial and error, we could plug in a common 
PS/2 keyboard ($5 new) and type messages 
directly into the Arduino and out to the LCD.
 The LCD was so small, however, that hardly 
anyone noticed our witty remarks. We needed 
a bigger display. After looking at many appall-
ingly priced commercial LED matrix products, 
we found a new and much cheaper offering: 
Sure Electronics’ 8×32 display boards. They 
cost $9 each and you can cascade up to four 
into one long display. We ordered three, and 
by the time they’d arrived, the Arduino com-
munity had already produced a library to run 
them. (Our code is based on two open source 
Arduino libraries: PS2Keyboard, by Christian 
Weichel; and MatrixDisplay, by Miles Burton.)
 The result is our PS/2/You system, which 
displays keyboard-typed messages in 2"-tall 
LED letters that can be read from quite a 
distance. You can store and switch between  
six different lines of text, and it automatically 
scrolls through lines that are too long for the 
display. Power comes from an AC adapter
or six AA batteries for portable operation,
and the whole thing is housed in a sturdy 
wooden frame.
Immanuel McKenty is an 18-year-old home-schooler. Among 
other things, he rather enjoys taking things apart, and some-
times even manages to get them back together again.
SET UP: p.95
MAKE IT: p.96
USE IT: p.103

COLLABORATE ON
makeprojects.com
GET
THE KIT
makershed.com
/ps2you
93
Follow us @make

94
Make: makezine.com/27
C
H
D
K
G
A
B
I
E
F
J
L
 A With each key press and 
release, a PS/2 keyboard sends 
a “scan code” identifying the key 
over its data pin (pin 1).
 B The keyboard plugs into a 
PS/2 port, which breaks its pins 
out into connectable contacts.
 C The PS/2 port connects to 
an Ardweeny microcontroller, an 
Arduino clone, which interprets 
the scan codes. For character key 
inputs, the software looks up the 
corresponding 5×7 glyphs, then 
writes them via ribbon cable. The 
Enter key toggles between Input 
and Output modes.
 D Three 8×32 LED modules
display the glyphs sent from the 
Ardweeny. Data is transmitted 
serially over a single wire.
 E
Ribbon cables carry outputs 
from the Ardweeny to the display 
modules one by one, in a “cas-
cade” conﬁ guration that acts as 
one 8×96 pixel display.
 F
A 9V–12V AC wall adapter
provides plugged-in power.
 G Six AA batteries power the 
display for on-the-go operation.
 H A voltage regulator and
ﬁ ltering capacitors pare the 
voltage from batteries or wall 
wart to the circuitry’s required 5V.
 I
A mini solderless bread-
board holds and connects all the 
circuit components and wires.
 J
An SPDT (single-pole, 
double-throw) switch selects 
battery power, plug-in power,
or power off.
 K A custom wood enclosure
holds all the components.
 L
A plexiglass back cover
keeps the components inside 
while letting curious spectators 
marvel at the geeky goodness.
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: PS/2 LED SIGN
Rob Nance
LOOK, MA —
NO COMPUTER!
Dot-Matrix Font Glyphs
In the MatrixDisplay 
code library, font 
glyphs for the PS/2/
You are stored in
a multidimensional 
array of hexadecimal 
values (base 16). Each 
character of the font 
corresponds to one 
line in the array.
As an example, one line looks like this:
{0x7F, 0x88, 0x88, 0x88, 0x7F},
This sequence represents the capital 
“A” character. Convert the hex values into 
binary, write them vertically from top to 
bottom, and you get a 5×8 array of 1s and 
0s. Convert these bits to On and Off LEDs, 
and you’ll see your big “A” up in lights.
 
The PS/2/You code actually only
generates 5×7 characters, leaving the top 
row of LEDs unused — 5×7 is a standard 
size for LED matrix characters, and it
allows more characters to ﬁ t on the dis-
play without looking overly elongated.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
4
5
7F 88 88 88 7F
Hexadecimal
7F
88
Binary equivalent 
(1×8 LED column)
01111111
10001000
Decimal equivalent 
(not that it matters)
127
136

Gregory Hayes
MATERIALS
See makeprojects.com/v/27 
for suppliers, prices, and other 
sourcing information.
A. MAKE PS/2/You Kit item #MSPS2 
from the Maker Shed (makershed.com/
ps2you), includes items B–I below and 
all other electronic components, except 
batteries.
B. Dot matrix LED display modules, 
8×32, with ribbon cable (3) Sure 
Electronics item #DE-DP106, about $9, 
or equivalent module. This item was 
recently discontinued but is available on 
eBay; see makeprojects.com/v/27 for 
alternative modules, drivers, and code.
C. Computer keyboard with PS/2 
connector They’re readily available at 
thrift stores. You can also use a USB 
keyboard with a USB-to-PS/2 adapter.
D. Ardweeny microcontroller
This small, cheap Arduino clone fits 
into a standard 14-pin DIP socket, but 
it doesn’t come with an onboard 5V 
voltage regulator or an FTDI USB-serial 
converter for programming.
E. 5V voltage regulator You can use
a 7805, but the low-dropout LM2937
SET UP.
will make your batteries last longer, 
especially with lower-voltage NiMH AAs.
F. PS/2 port from an old PC mother-
board; ask your local computer shop.
G. Solderless breadboard, self-
adhesive, mini
H. Breadboard jumper wires (around 
20, multiple colors), or solid core 
22AWG wire Jumpers are easier to use 
and well worth the expense.
I. FTDI serial programmer such as the 
FTDI Friend, Maker Shed #MKAD22, $15
» 9V–12V AC wall adapter can be 
found for $1–$2 at most thrift stores
» DC power jack to match your 
adapter probably a standard 
5.5mm/2.1mm barrel jack
» Power switch, SPDT (on-off-on)
» Capacitor, ceramic, 0.1μF labeled 
“104”
» Capacitor, electrolytic, 10μF
» Batteries, AA (6)
» Battery holder, 2×AA
» Battery holder, 4×AA in a long, flat, 
2×2 configuration
» Stranded wire, 22AWG, 4' total
We used red and black.
» Electrical tape or heat-shrink tubing
» Acrylic/plexiglass sheet, clear,
1" thick, 21"×4" Lexan will work 
great but is more expensive.
» Wood screws, #8 flathead,
1¼" long (8)
» Wood screws, #8 pan head,
½" long (6)
» Wood screws, #6 pan head, ½" 
long (12, optional) see page 97
» Dimensional lumber, 1×4 
(¾"×3½"), 4' length, or 1×2 
(¾"×1¾"), 8' length see page 97
TOOLS
» Measuring tape or long ruler
» Handsaw or chop saw
» Table saw (optional) see Step 1g
» Chisel
» File
» Hammer or mallet
» Drill and drill bits: E", countersink
» Screwdriver, medium 
» Soldering iron and solder
» Desoldering braid or solder sucker
» Wire cutters
» Needlenose pliers (optional) handy 
for plugging in breadboard jumpers
» Multimeter
» Glue gun and hot glue
» Computer with internet connection 
and USB port
A
H
G
E
F
I
C
B
D
95
Follow us @make

96
Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: PS/2 LED SIGN
1. 
BUILD
THE FRAME
1a. Cut the 1×4 lumber in
half lengthwise to make
2 strips about ¾"×1¾" 
(a nominal 1×4 is actually 
around ¾"×3½"). Use a
narrow-kerf blade if possible.
1b. Line up the 2 boards 
beside each other on a flat 
surface with their narrow 
edges up. Place one of the 
display panels facedown 
between the boards, so that 
the flanges on the panel rest 
on the boards, with the pro-
truding LED matrix between 
them. Gently squeeze the 
boards snug against the 
sides of the LED matrix, and 
measure between the outside 
edges of the boards. This 
measurement is the length
of the frame’s end pieces.
1c. Use a chop saw or hand-
saw to cut a 45° angle on one 
end of each piece, oriented 
so the cut goes diagonally 
across the narrow edge. 
Measure 18¼" down the 
board’s length from the inner 
edge of the cut, and make
a second 45° cut that angles 
back out. Repeat on the
second board. These will be 
the 2 long sides of the frame.
BUILD YOUR DIGITAL 
MESSAGE BOARD
MAKE IT.
1b
1b
1b
1c
1a
1a
Time: 3–4 Hours
Complexity: Moderate
NOTE: This frame ﬁ ts the 
DE-DP106 LED modules; if 
you use alternative modules 
you’ll have to improvise
a frame to fit them. 
Immanuel and Adam McKenty
NOTE: The frame style
isn’t crucial, so let your
creativity (and materials) 
have a say in the design.
I had a woodshop at my
disposal, so I made some-
thing like an extra-deep 
picture frame with mitered 
corners and a slot cut in 
the long sides to hold the 
display panels.

1d. On each of the leftover 
board pieces, mark the dis-
tance measured in Step 1b 
down from the sharp, outside 
edge of the miter cut, along 
the longer face of the board. 
Cut one at 45° angled in from 
the measured length (the 
mirror image of the first cut), 
which will be each piece’s
longest dimension. Don’t cut 
the other piece yet.
1e. Desolder the PS/2 port 
from its donor motherboard. 
Line up the DC jack, PS/2 
port, and power switch atop 
the edge of the marked but 
uncut short piece of wood. 
Mark out a notch in the edge 
of the board just wide enough 
for all of them to fit next to 
each other and deep enough 
that the tallest component 
will sit flush.
1f. With a handsaw (or chop 
saw) cut the 2 edges of the 
notch. Make a few cuts to the 
correct depth in the middle of 
the notch, then chisel out the 
rest of the wood and file the 
bottom of the notch smooth. 
The ports and switch should 
slide into the notch easily but 
without extra space. Cut the 
second (notched) end piece 
as marked in Step 1d.
1g. Set the blade of your
table saw to a depth of 7" 
(the size of the flanges on
the display panels). Cut a 
groove lengthwise down the 
inside face of each long frame 
piece, ¼" in from the edge 
(preferably with a narrow-
kerf blade). 
1b
1b
1b
1e
1f
1f
1g
1g
NOTES: The panels should 
be able to slide into the 
slots and be roughly ﬂ ush 
with the front of the frame.
If you don’t have access to 
a table saw, another way 
to make the frame is to 
cut two 1×2 boards (really 
¾"×1½") to 18¼", and two 
shorter lengths of 1×2 to ﬁ t 
on the ends. Then, rather 
than cutting grooves for the 
display module ﬂ anges, use 
12 #6 screws to secure the 
3 modules onto the front
of the frame through their 
pre-drilled mounting holes.
97
Follow us @make

98
Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: PS/2 LED SIGN
1h. Slide the 3 display panels
into the slots in the long 
frame pieces, all oriented so 
that the writing on the printed 
circuit boards reads right side 
up as you look into the back 
of the frame. Fit and hold a 
frame end piece in place at 
each end, then drill E" pilot 
holes and countersinks for 
the 1¼" #8 screws that hold 
the frame together. 
 The notched end belongs 
on the left side of the frame 
as you read the circuit board 
backs, which is the right 
side as you view the front of 
the display. Put the screws 
in as you go to keep the 
frame together. Ensure that 
your countersinks are deep 
enough, and (to avoid split-
ting the frame pieces) don’t 
overtighten the screws. The 
frame is now finished!
2. 
CUT THE
BACK COVER
2a. Place the assembled 
frame on top of the plexiglass 
sheet. Use a screw or other 
sharp object to scratch a 
mark around the edge of the 
frame.
2b. Cut out the back cover 
with a handsaw, table saw, or 
the cutting implement of your 
choice. Line up the cut piece 
on the back of the frame and 
drill 6 pilot holes through the 
back cover material and into 
the frame itself. It’s now ready 
to be closed up once all the 
electronics are in place and 
functioning.
2b
1h
2a
1h
 TIPS: Be sure to install
the screws on the bottom 
edge of the frame at least 
3" up from the bottom 
to avoid contact with the 
screws we’ll use to secure 
the back cover. 
If you’d like, add some glue 
to the notched end of the 
frame for extra strength, 
but leave the other end
unglued so you can unscrew 
it and slide the display 
panels back out.

PS/2 port
Battery packs
Display ribbon
DC jack
Power switch
Voltage regulator
(back view)
3a
3
3c
3. 
WIRE THE POWER 
AND PS/2 PORTS
3a. Wire the 2 battery packs 
in series by soldering the red 
(+) lead of one to the black 
(–) lead of the other.
3b. Position the battery packs 
in the frame (I put them at 
the end opposite the notch). 
and lengthen the remaining 2 
wires if necessary by splicing 
in stranded wire to let them 
reach the notch, where you’ll 
connect them to the DC jack 
and power switch. Insulate 
connections with electrical 
tape or heat-shrink tubing. 
3c. Cut one end off a black 
breadboard jumper, and strip 
and tin the wire. Repeat with 
a red jumper. Solder the cut 
end of the black jumper and 
the black wire from the bat-
tery packs onto the DC jack’s 
negative terminal. Solder a 
short chunk of stranded red 
wire between the DC jack’s 
positive terminal and one of 
the outside contacts on the 
switch. Solder the cut end of 
the red jumper to the switch’s 
common terminal, and the 
battery positive to the free 
outside switch terminal.
3d. Cut one end off 4 more 
breadboard jumper wires: 
red, black, blue, and white 
(or your equivalent). Strip, 
tin, and solder them onto the 
positive, negative, data, and 
clock pins on the PS/2 port 
(see pin diagram), and use a 
multimeter set to “continuity” 
to confirm the pin-wire
connections.
Schematic diagram of the PS/2/You circuit;
see makeprojects.com/v/27 for a larger version.
NOTES: The battery packs 
need to be removable for 
battery changes, so you can 
secure them in the frame 
using velcro, although the 
back cover and display 
panels seem to hold them 
in place nicely.
If all went well, your switch 
should have an off position 
in the middle, a battery 
power position to one side, 
and adapter power on the 
other.
3d
I used blue for data wires, 
white for read/write and 
clock wires, yellow for the 
display panels’ “CS” wires, 
and red and black for power 
and ground — although
I accidentally switched blue 
and white here on the PS/2 
port. Having a consistent 
color scheme will make it 
much easier to ﬁ gure out 
what’s going on.
Pin 1 Data •
Pin 3 Ground•
Pin 5 Clock•
•Pin 4
+5V DC
99
Follow us @make

100 Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: PS/2 LED SIGN
3e. Dry-fit the PS/2 port, DC 
jack, and power switch again 
into the notch at the end of 
the frame. Heat up a glue gun 
and dab a bit of glue on each 
one before quickly pressing
it tightly into the notch.
4. 
CONFIGURE THE 
DISPLAY PANELS
4a. Each LED display panel 
comes with a ribbon cable and 
has 2 ports on its backside 
that the cable will connect to. 
 Use 2 of the ribbon cables 
to chain the 3 panels together 
end-to-end by their adjacent 
ports. Plug one end of the 
remaining cable into the port 
closest to the switch and 
power jack. Fold this ribbon 
up tightly and use hot glue to 
attach its free end plug to an 
inner side of the frame, with 
its holes facing up toward the 
back of the frame. 
4b. Each LED display panel 
has a block of little DIP 
switches labeled CS1, CS2, 
CS3, and CS4. These switches 
determine how the microcon-
troller identifies each panel. 
The PS/2/You code numbers 
the displays left to right, look-
ing from the front, so turn off 
all but switch 3 on the panel 
nearest the notch, all but 
switch 2 on the middle panel, 
and all but switch 1 on the 
panel at the battery end. 
 (To see what these switches 
do, set them to some other 
sequence once you have your 
display up and running.)
3e
4a
4b
 TIPS: Make sure the 
plug holes have enough 
headroom to let you 
plug in breadboard wires 
without their scratching 
the transparent back cover 
(once it’s screwed on). Also 
make sure there’s enough 
room between the glued-in 
plug and the board’s other 
ribbon cable port to accom-
modate the mini solderless 
breadboard.
NOTE: This is admittedly an 
unorthodox way of attach-
ing what would normally 
be PCB or panel-mounted 
components, but it’s very 
strong and relatively tidy 
— a good substitute when 
there’s no PCB or mount-
able panel nearby.

5a
5. 
ADD THE 
ARDWEENY
5a. Plug your Ardweeny into 
the breadboard straddling the 
trench, with the green LED 
near the top, taking up the 
first 14 rows. Plug the voltage 
regulator into the bottom 3 
rows on one side.
 Plug the 0.1μF capacitor
in between the voltage regu-
lator’s input and ground legs 
(typically the sequence is 
IN-GND-OUT, going left to 
right looking at the front of 
the regulator, but check your 
datasheet to be sure).
 Plug the 10μF capacitor’s 
positive leg in the regulator’s 
output and its negative leg 
(marked with a stripe) into 
the regulator’s ground bus.
5b. Peel off the breadboard 
backing (exciting!) and stick
it onto the flat, surface-mount 
Holtek chip on the back of the 
display panel closest to the 
switch and ports.
5c. Since the voltage regula-
tor’s ground bus is getting 
crowded by now, use a small 
jumper to extend it to an 
unused bus on the other side 
of the breadboard. 
 Plug the red power wire 
from the switch’s common 
into the regulator’s input bus, 
and the GND wire from the 
DC jack into the new ground 
bus. Use a red jumper to
connect the regulator’s out-
put to the Ardweeny’s power 
(labeled “+”) and a black 
jumper to hook the ground 
bus to Ardweeny GND.
NOTES: The mini bread-
board has 17 rows, each 
consisting of an electrically 
connected 5-hole bus on 
either side of a central 
trench. 
5b
The ribbon cables each 
have 15 wires, and their 
plugs have 2 rows of holes 
that connect to odd-num-
bered wires along the top 
and even-numbered ones 
along the bottom. 
5e
5c, 5d
5d. Plug the PS/2 port’s power wire into the Ardweeny’s 
power and its GND into the Ardweeny’s GND bus. Plug the 
PS/2 port’s read/write wire into Ardweeny pin D3 and its data 
wire into Arwdeeny pin D7.
5e. Use jumpers to connect your components to the ribbon 
cable plug glued inside the frame. Note that the odd-numbered 
pins on the 2×8 plug run along the side with the small bump, 
opposite the side that the ribbon comes in.
 To begin, connect CS2, the first wire on the ribbon (marked 
in pink) to Ardweeny pin D5. Connect CS3, the second wire, to 
D6, and ribbon wire 3 (CS1) to Ardweeny D4. For the display’s 
read/write input, connect ribbon wire 5 to Ardweeny D11, and 
for the data input, connect wire 7 to Ardweeny D10. 
 Finally, connect ribbon wire 15 to Ardweeny ground, and
ribbon wire 16 to Ardweeny power. (You can also wire power 
and ground to the buses off the voltage regulator.)
101
Follow us @make

102 Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: PS/2 LED SIGN
6. PROGRAM IT
6a. If you haven’t already, 
download and install the 
Arduino IDE (integrated 
development environment) 
from arduino.cc/en/Main/
Software. Launch the IDE. 
 To configure it for the 
Ardweeny, which acts just like 
an Arduino Duemilanove, click 
the menu item Tools → Board 
→ Arduino Deumilanove or 
Nano w/ATmega328.
 Then tell it which USB port 
you’ll program the Ardweeny 
through by clicking Tools →
Serial Port and selecting the 
highest-numbered COM port 
(if there’s more than one).
6b. Download the code
package PS2You_code.zip 
from makeprojects.com/v/27
and unzip it.
 Move the PS2Keyboard
and MatrixDisplay folders
into your Arduino libraries 
directory.
6c. Restart the Arduino IDE 
and open up the code file 
PS2You.pde. Connect your 
computer to the Ardweeny 
with the FTDI programming 
adapter. Click Verify and 
Upload, and if all is well, a 
moment later the display will 
light up with the default text.
6d. Unplug the programmer, 
load some batteries into the 
battery packs (if you’re going 
to be using battery power), 
and screw on the back cover. 
You’re all set!
6d
6
6

Input and Output Modes
The PS/2/You has an Input mode for entering
text and an Output mode for displaying it. 
Pressing any alphanumeric key puts the
system into Input mode, and hitting Enter 
gets you back to Output mode.
 In Input mode, the PS/2/You displays a 
single line of text as you type it in, a maximum 
of 100 characters long. You can store up to 6 
lines of text (this number is settable by chang-
ing the value of numLines near the beginning of 
PS2You.pde). Use the up and down arrow keys 
to select which line to edit, and backspace 
over any line of text or hit Escape to delete it.
 In Output mode, the display loops through 
the stored text lines on its own, displaying each 
for one second, or if the line is longer than 
16 characters, it will scroll across the display 
before moving onto the next line. If only one 
line of text is stored, it displays continuously.
Text Messaging
The uses for this contraption are many. Plug 
the keyboard in and enjoy putting your wittiest 
“wiseclacks” on it in the safety of your home, 
shop, or office — or use the battery option to 
take it into the wide world. We like to have the 
keyboard accessible so that passersby can 
add a riposte or two to the dialogue. But if 
monologue is more your thing, you can always 
keep the keyboard out of reach.
 Add a dowel as a removable handle so you 
can wander the streets digitally promoting 
your geekified political leanings. Keep score 
(or heckle) at sporting events, deliver birthday 
greetings, advertise your wares at a farmer’s 
market, beam cryptic messages to your neigh-
bors — the possibilities are endless!
USE IT.
MAKE SOME 
BRIGHT
REMARKS
Further Illuminations
There’s plenty of room for improvement to 
the code. Try using Ctrl and other keys to 
modify how the text displays: flashing, sliding 
in from the top, fading in, or other effects. 
 Four display panels can be cascaded 
together for a longer display, and Sure 
Electronics sells an identically programmable 
8×32 panel with 5mm instead of 3mm LEDs, 
so a jumbo PS/2/You is almost inevitable.
Roll Your Own Glyphs
The display font is defined by hexadecimal 
values in the font.h file. It’s not user-friendly 
for editing, but Brent Morse has made a free 
applet that lets you design your own 5×7 LED 
display glyphs (morse-code.com/id89.htm). 
Use it to modify the font, or make custom 
smilies or any other pattern you like. a
 Visit makeprojects.com/v/27 for the 
PS/2/You circuit schematic, code, and more.
103
Follow us @make

104 Make: makezine.com/27
LIMELIGHT
Sam Murphy
When I was a wee lad, I enjoyed the television show Connections, 
by James Burke. Each episode traced the technical developments 
that ultimately resulted in some modern marvel. For example, 
the 18th-century theory that disease was caused by “bad air” 
(“mal’aria” in Italian) inspired Alessandro Volta to create a fanciful 
pistol-shaped sparking device that checked for methane. This
led to spark plugs and ultimately to the automobile.
Experience pre-Edison
incandescent lighting.
By Peter Tabur
 Burke also discussed the limelight, which 
came to prominence in the mid-1820s when 
it was used by land surveyors in Ireland who 
needed a brighter light to sight between 
mountain peaks in murky weather. Atop 
the mist-shrouded Slieve Snaght, Thomas 
Drummond heated a ball of lime in a flame 
of burning alcohol fed by an oxygen jet. The 
resulting incandescence glowed far brighter 
and whiter than any bare flame, making it
visible from Divis Mountain, more than 66 
miles away. Limelights fueled by oxygen-
hydrogen combustion subsequently enabled 
bright spotlights in theaters, which is mainly 
how the word “limelight” survives today.
 The idea of actually building a limelight 
became a splinter that lodged in my brain for 
30 years, and last year I finally did it. My first 
experiment was to simply secure a cylinder
of limestone (calcium carbonate, CaCO3)
in the top of a pipe clamped in a vise, then 
convert it into lime (calcium oxide, CaO) using 
a blowtorch, and make it incandesce under
a hotter oxyacetylene torch. As expected, 
this produced an intense white light that few 
people today have experienced. I decided
to build a standalone spotlight version of 
an oxyacetylene-fueled limelight that could 
throw a beam like the spotlights of old.
Peter Tabur is a mechanical engineer, project manager, and 
technology history buff whose next projects are a model 
wooden ship and some fiber optic art. He’s currently between 
jobs and looking for opportunities.
SET UP: p.107
MAKE IT: p.108
USE IT: p.114
ILLO TK

105
Follow us @make

106 Make: makezine.com/27
PROJECTS: LIMELIGHT
Timmy Kucynda
WHITE HOT SPOTLIGHT
Limestone is a soft, white, sedimentary stone — a precursor to 
marble. Like chalk, it’s composed primarily of calcium carbon-
ate. Heating limestone above 1,517°F (825°C) causes it to release 
carbon dioxide. This turns it into lime, aka quicklime, a caustic 
material used in the production of glass and steel that’s also the 
base ingredient of lime mortar and Portland cement. Quicklime 
reacts exothermically with water, which is why it can burn the 
skin and why cement heats up as it sets.
 
The easiest and safest disposal method for lime is to dump 
it in water. This will convert it to Ca(OH)2, slaked lime, aka 
hydrated lime.
 CAUTION
• Do not touch the lime element 
with bare hands, as it is caustic!
• Be careful working with sheet 
metal, which can have sharp edges 
and burrs. I recommend wearing 
gloves, even though they make it 
tougher to manipulate the tools.
• Wear a welding shield or goggles 
when heating the lime element.
It becomes extremely bright!
• The limelight generates a huge 
amount of heat; be careful of hot 
surfaces when using it, and don’t 
leave it unattended.
 A
 D
 B
 E
 F
 C
 G
 H
LIMESTONE, LIME, AND SLAKED LIME
 A
Oxyacetylene torch burns 
a mixture of acetylene gas and 
oxygen from welding tanks.
 B
Lime element heats up 
under torch ﬂ ame and glows 
at a temperature of 4,298°F 
(2,370°C).
 C
Sheet metal cylinder con-
tains the ﬂ ame and lime element 
and emits the light from its front.
 D
Mirror reﬂ ects the light
toward the front of the cylinder.
 E
Chimney vents hot air,
to reduce heat buildup inside
the cylinder.
 F
Gimbal allows the cylinder 
to pivot and swivel, to aim the 
beam of light.
 G
Handles let an operator
aim the limelight without
touching the hot cylinder.
 H
Base holds the gimbal and 
acts as a stand for the limelight.
makeprojects.com/v/27

Gregory Hayes
MATERIALS
A. Limestone (calcium carbonate), 
small piece, approximately 1"×1"×2" 
You may be able to get a free scrap
from a local landscaping supplier, or 
check the garden center at any major 
home improvement store for limestone 
edging blocks.
B. Mirror, round, framed, 6" in 
diameter (including frame) available 
at most beauty supply stores. Many are 
2-sided (regular and magnified) — we’ll 
be using the regular mirror.
C. Copper pipe: ½"×6', ¾"×1'
» Pop rivets, 1" diameter, 1 box
» Steel, sheet stock, 26 gauge, 
24"×26" non-galvanized if possible. 
Galvanized steel emits zinc oxide 
fumes when it gets really hot, and
it’s harder to solder.
» Copper elbow fittings, 90°, ½" (6), 
½" to ¾" (4)
» Copper tee fittings, ½" (8)
» Copper coupler fitting, ½"
» Hose clamp, 2" diameter
» Plumbing solder 
» Plumbing flux
» Lumber, 2×6 nominal size, 1' long
SET UP.
TOOLS
D. Pop rivet tool 
E. Oxyacetylene gas torch 
F. Oxygen and acetylene gases
G. Striker or butane barbecue lighter
H. Welding goggles or shield
» Yardstick or straightedge
» Tape measure or ruler
» Tinsnips
» Metal file
» Carpenter’s square
» Center punch, conventional or 
spring-loaded Spring-loaded is 
easier to use.
» Hose clamps, 6" diameter (2)
» Cold chisel
» Hammer
» Bench vise
» Electric drill and drill bits: 1", 3"
» Sheet metal drill bit, aka castle bit 
This is a graduated conical bit that 
can drill many sizes of holes — pretty 
clever!
» Pipe cutter or hacksaw
» Propane blowtorch
» Dremel tool with steel cutoff wheel
» Disc sander or belt sander
» Steel wool or fine-grit sandpaper
» Disposable gloves or flux brush
» Leather or protective gloves
» Vise-grip pliers (optional)
A
D
E
F
G
H
B
C
107
Follow us @make

108 Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: LIMELIGHT
1. 
CONSTRUCT THE
MAIN CYLINDER
1a. Remove any legs or stand 
from the 6" mirror.
1b. Draw a 20"×20" square 
on the sheet metal and cut 
it out. 
1c. Open two 6" hose clamps 
to their maximum diameter, 
then roll one long edge of the 
sheet metal over to the oppo-
site edge to form a cylindrical 
shape. Slip a hose clamp over 
each end, being careful to 
avoid the sharp edges.
1d. Insert the mirror flush
into one end (with either side 
facing in), and slide both 
clamps down to the mirror 
end. Cinch the 2 hose clamps 
to constrict the sheet metal 
snugly around the mirror, 
tightening them the same 
amount so that you get a
cylinder, not a cone.
1e. Use a center punch to 
mark the location of the first 
rivet hole, where the metal 
overlaps near the end of the 
cylinder. Drill through using
a 1" bit, then loosen the hose 
clamps and file away any 
burrs. Retighten the clamps 
until the holes line up again.
BUILD YOUR
LIMELIGHT
MAKE IT.
1b
1b
1c
1d
Time: A Weekend
Complexity: Moderate
1e
 TIP: To help hold the 
cylinder in place for clamp-
ing, you can secure the far 
end using vise-grips while 
you apply the hose clamps 
around the mirror end. If 
you cut an accurate square, 
the overlapping edges 
should align.
Peter Tabur
NOTE: Use a carpenter’s 
square to ensure that all 
corners are true 90° angles. 
File the edges to remove 
burrs, and save the leftover 
sheet metal for later.

1f. Insert a pop rivet into the 
pop rivet tool, and insert the 
rivet into the hole. Squeeze the 
tool until the rivet “pops” (this 
expands the rivet on the inside 
until the steel pin breaks).
1g. Push out the mirror and 
insert it in the opposite end 
of the cylinder with its flat, 
non-magnifying side facing 
in. Repeat Steps 1d–1f at 
that end.
1h. Loosen the hose clamps, 
slide them down the cylinder, 
and retighten to add more 
rivets spaced approximately 
equidistant along the length 
of the cylinder seam; I used
a total of 5. 
2. 
ADD THE 
CHIMNEY
2a. Print the chimney tem-
plate from makeprojects.com/
v/27 and draw the pattern 
onto the leftover sheet metal.
2b. Cut out the metal along 
the solid lines, and file to 
remove sharp edges. Fold as 
indicated on the template 
along the dashed lines; you 
can do this by bending the 
metal over the edge of a 
workbench. Drill and rivet as 
indicated to complete the 
chimney structure. 
2c. Mark the center of the 
cylinder 180° opposite the 
seam. Draw a 4"×3" rectangle 
centered around this point, 
running lengthwise along the 
cylinder. Cut the rectangle 
out with a Dremel tool.
2a
2b
1f
1h
1g
 TIP: To leave room for 
the lime holder tube, don’t 
place a rivet exactly in the 
middle (i.e., 10" from either 
end) — you can offset it 
by 1".
2c
2c
109
Follow us @make

110 Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: LIMELIGHT
2d. Fit the chimney bottom 
over the hole, bending the 
chimney or rectangle edges 
as necessary so the chimney 
“pinch fits” snugly in place. 
You don’t want the chimney 
to fall off, but you should be 
able to squeeze and lift it 
away to access the inside of 
the cylinder. When the proper 
fit is achieved, file away any 
burrs. 
2e. Mark 3 locations at the 
exact middle of the cylinder’s 
length, one in line with the 
rivets on the seam (the
bottom of the cylinder), and 
the other two 90° around 
from this point in both direc-
tions. Use the center punch 
to dimple the steel at these
3 points.
2f. Drill a ¾" hole with the 
sheet metal bit at each of 
these 3 points, to just fit
a copper tee fitting.
3. 
ADD THE GIMBAL 
AND HANDLES
3a. Cut the copper pipe to 
the following lengths and 
keep the leftover pieces. 
½" pipe: 11" (2), 1½" (4), 
2" (1), 2½" (4), 4½" (4), 
5¾" (4)
¾" pipe: 4½" (2)
3b. Dry-fit the pipe pieces 
together into a handle-and-
gimbal assembly to ensure 
they fit together. Note that 
the two ¾" pipes are side-
handle parts of the handle 
assembly, which connect via 
½" to ¾" elbow fittings.
3b
2d
2f
3a
3a
 TIPS: Pipe cutters are 
relatively cheap and easy 
to use, and they make 
square cuts that are almost 
burr-free. 
To use a pipe cutter, open 
it up to ﬁ t around the pipe, 
then tighten its handle 
until the cutting wheel just 
touches the pipe at the 
distance you wish to cut. 
Tighten the handle down 
another half turn (for cop-
per pipe), roll the cutter 
around the pipe 2–3 times, 
and repeat tightening and 
turning until the pipe is cut. 
If you’re cutting steel pipe, 
only tighten the handle ¼ 
turn at a time.
You can cut the pipe with 
either a hacksaw or a pipe 
cutter, but I recommend 
a pipe cutter. If you use 
a hacksaw, ﬁ le each cut 
perimeter afterward to 
remove burrs.
NOTE: The 5 joints indi-
cated by arrows will not be 
soldered.

3d
3c. Disassemble the handle 
assembly and clean all the 
pieces for soldering (see side-
bar, above). Pop the mirror 
out of the cylinder end while 
soldering, flux the pipe 
pieces, and reassemble the 
handle assembly around the 
cylinder, about 1" from the 
mirror end and with its sides 
along the cylinder’s sides 
(seam on the bottom).
3d. Solder the handle assem-
bly together in place around 
the cylinder, and solder the 
cylinder to the copper piping 
wherever they touch.
3e. Disassemble and clean 
the gimbal assembly pieces. 
As with the handles, flux the 
joints, and assemble the inner 
gimbal pieces around the 
cylinder, with the tee fittings 
running through the holes. 
Solder the joints.
COPPER PIPE SOLDERING
Soldering water pipe is an easy and useful skill to learn. After
cutting the pipe to length, clean all joint surfaces with steel wool 
or sandpaper until they’re free of corrosion, markings, etc., and 
have a bright shine. I wrap steel wool around the end of the pipe, 
then grip ﬁ rmly and rotate the pipe. For inside surfaces, I wrap 
steel wool around a ﬁ ngertip, then press and rotate the pipe 
around it. If you have a large project, you can buy a special steel 
brush ($3) that quickly cleans inside surfaces.
 
Once the pipe is clean, apply a thin coat of ﬂ ux paste on all 
surfaces to be soldered. This is a chemical cleaner that’s essential 
for sound solder joints. Apply it with a brush or wear disposable 
rubber gloves — it’s acidic and a real pain to wash off your hands.
 
Assemble the parts and ﬁ re up the propane blowtorch. Keep
the torch head about 3"–4" back from the pipe surface with the 
end of the ﬂ ame in contact with the metal. Slowly move the ﬂ ame 
around each side of the joint, and poke the joint periodically with 
solder. When the parts are sufﬁ ciently hot, the solder will readily 
melt and be wicked into the joint via capillary action.
 
Keep applying solder until you can see a meniscus of solder 
around the joint’s circumference. If the solder beads up rather 
than wicking into the joint, this indicates that the joint is not clean 
enough or doesn’t contain enough ﬂ ux. Finally, it’s a very good 
practice to wipe away the ﬂ ux when it’s all cool.
 TIP: I simply soldered 
to the sheet metal as-is, 
but for stronger connec-
tions, you can sand away 
the steel’s outer galvanized 
layer at each solder point.
3e
NOTE: The joints indicated 
by arrows in the Step 3b 
photo must not be soldered. 
These dry-ﬁ t joints will
allow the gimbal to hinge 
and the base and incandes-
cent element holder to be 
detached. 
111
Follow us @make

112 Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: LIMELIGHT
3f. Assemble the outer gimbal 
around the inner one, then 
solder all joints except those 
needed for gimbal rotation.
3g. To make the stand, drill a 
3" diameter hole centered in 
the 2×6. Then cut a base pole 
of any desired length out of 
leftover ½" copper pipe and 
fit it between the wood and 
the gimbal’s center tee fitting.
4. 
MAKE THE
LIME ELEMENT
4a. Chisel away a chunk
of limestone about the size
of a walnut, then sand it with
a disk grinder or belt sander 
into a tapered cylinder that 
fits into the pipe coupler.
4b. Slide the coupler with the 
limestone onto the 2" piece of 
½" pipe. Secure the pipe in a 
vise, and heat the stone with 
a blowtorch until it glows dull 
red (like charcoal briquettes) 
for a few minutes. Move the 
flame around to heat uni-
formly and avoid cracking. 
4c. The lime element is ready. 
You can let it cool and install 
it into your limelight, but it’s 
more fun to test it by making
it incandesce right now! 
 Consult your oxyacetylene 
instructions for regulator 
adjustments (I used 3psi for 
the acetylene and 15psi for 
the oxygen). Start the torch 
and adjust for a neutral flame. 
Put on your welding goggles 
and heat the lime under the 
flame. Within a minute, it will 
become a bright white light.
3f
4c
4c
4b
4a
4a
NOTE: Heating your 
limestone will thermally 
decompose the outer layer 
of the calcium carbonate 
into lime while releasing 
carbon dioxide.

5. 
INSTALL THE 
TORCH, LIME, 
AND MIRROR
5a. The oxyacetylene torch 
runs forward horizontally 
along the cylinder. Drill a hole 
for the torch nozzle to get its 
tip close enough to the lime 
element to heat it. 
 This was the trickiest part 
of the project, requiring a bit 
of trial and error. I cut a hole 
halfway between the lower 
gimbal hole and one of its 
side holes.
5b. Cut 2 slots farther back
in the cylinder for threading 
the 2" hose clamp through 
vertically. This will hold the 
torch handle in place.
 Then thread in the small 
hose clamp, poke the tip of 
the torch into the slot, and 
affix the torch handle to the 
cylinder with the clamp.
5c. Allow the stone and 
mounting to fully cool, then 
put on gloves and install it in 
your limelight. The 2" pipe 
base fits into the inner gimbal 
tee fitting along the seam of 
the cylinder.
5d. Remount the mirror. If its 
plastic frame can’t take the 
heat, cut a backing plate from 
scrap sheet metal with 4 tabs 
to hold the mirror and 2 big 
tabs to rivet to the cylinder. 
Or just cut and fold tabs from 
the cylinder itself.
 TIP: I found igniting the 
gas with the striker a little 
difﬁ cult in the conﬁ ned 
space. Using a butane 
barbecue lighter is easier.
5b
5c
5d
5d
5d
5a
5a
113
Follow us @make

114 Make: makezine.com/27
makeprojects.com/v/27
PROJECTS: LIMELIGHT
USE IT.
LIGHT UP
THE STAGE
Limelight Performance
To use the limelight, remove its chimney, 
ignite the torch, and reinstall the chimney. 
Soon, voilà — limelight! Perfect for any non-
electric night performance or steampunk 
cabaret.
 If the lime element doesn’t glow white-hot 
all around, grind it down smaller and move 
the flame close enough to envelop it. Also, try 
different oxygen/acetylene pressure mixes.
 When I first used my limelight, I expected it 
to be blindingly bright from a distance, like a 
klieg light. I was surprised at how “not bright” 
it was. So I did a bit of experimenting with a 
photographic light meter to compare its out-
put to other light sources.
 I set the light meter at 200ASA and put it 
7' in front of the limelight. I turned off all the 
other lights in my shop and took readings 
of the limelight, a 100W incandescent bulb 
inside the limelight cylinder, and a 750W
halogen worksite lamp by itself. 
 For a shutter speed of 1/30 second, the 
light meter indicated apertures (f-stops) of 
6.2 for the limelight, 5.1 for the 100W bulb, 
and 11.0 for the halogen lamp. This means 
that the limelight is a little brighter than a 
100W bulb, but significantly less bright than 
the 750W shop light.
 Coincidentally, we recently lost power to 
our house while cooking dinner. We lit candles 
and kept going. It was surprisingly dark! I had 
to hold a candle directly over the cookbook 
to have sufficient light to read. I realized that 
when the limelight was invented nearly 200 
years ago, small flames were just about the 
only source of lighting. In comparison, the 
limelight must have seemed brilliant! a
Sam Murphy

Cy Tymony is the author of the Sneaky Uses for Everyday Things book series. He lives in Los Angeles. sneakyuses.com.
PLAYING THE POPULAR BEER PONG GAME
can be enjoyable for a while, but as your skill 
improves, the challenge and fun diminish. 
After some practice, tossing a ping-pong ball 
at a cup just isn’t too difficult.
 Bring back the fun by adding motion, with 
your own pong toy that scuttles about.
1. Make the legs.
Bend 2 paper clips into curved “C” shapes, 
with legs, and tape them to the sides of a cup.
2. Connect the motor.
Using a small motor removed from a toy, 
bend and press a paper clip around the gear 
shaft to make it off-balance. (Alternatively, 
you can use a ready-made mini vibrating 
motor found in an old pager or cellphone.) 
Test the motor with a 3V button cell battery
by pressing its wires onto both terminals.
 Tape the motor and battery to the bottom 
of the cup. Tape a short length of copper
wire to one side of the battery. Tape one wire 
connector from the motor to the other side
of the battery. Tape the 2 loose wires (from 
the motor and the battery) to the side of the 
cup so they can be twisted together, acting
as a switch.
3. Play ball!
Turn the cup right side up, twist the 2 switch 
wires together, and the cup should vibrate 
and move on a flat surface. You can bend
the cup’s paper-clip feet so it will move in
a desired pattern. Now try to toss balls into 
the moving cup from various distances.
Going Further
To add to the challenge, use a paper clip to 
attach another cup (or two) to the side of the 
Sneaky Action Pong cup. Draw score numbers 
on them to make it more competitive. a
YOU WILL NEED
Styrofoam or paper cups
Ping-pong balls
Toy motor and paper clip, or micro-vibration motor 
RadioShack #273-107, radioshack.com
Paper clips, jumbo (3)
Button cell battery, 3V RadioShack #23-804
Copper wire
Tape
Pliers
Action Root Beer Pong
By Cy Tymony
1+2+3
1
2
3
Damien Scogin
50
20
10
115
Follow us @make

116
Make: makezine.com/27
VISUALIZING 
WITH IMAGEJ
Gregory Hayes
By Bob Goldstein
ImageJ is a free, cross-platform program for processing images 
and videos. Its author, Wayne Rasband, originally wrote it for
use by biomedical researchers working with microscope images. 
But he designed it with an open architecture so anyone could 
write plugins to add new tricks to the program. As a result, its 
capabilities are constantly growing and improving, thanks to con-
tributions from the more programming-savvy among its users.
Free image/video processing software
creates vivid representations of time, 
movement, and data.
 But ImageJ isn’t yet well-known outside of 
the scientific community. As a scientist and 
fan of creative tinkering, I thought it would be 
fun to introduce MAKE’s readers to some of 
the tricks it can perform.
 ImageJ processes images using filters 
similar to those in programs like Photoshop. 
These filters are written as plugins, and there 
are hundreds available. 
 In his Country Scientist column, Forrest 
Mims has described using ImageJ as a tool 
to make scientific measurements (see MAKE 
Volume 18, page 42, and subsequent col-
umns). But my favorite tricks are the ones 
that transform a video into a single image, 
and those that perform math on images — 
combining two images by adding their pixel 
intensities, for example.
 This article explains how to get started with 
ImageJ, then describes some of my favorite 
ImageJ recipes. Starting with a few interesting
images or a short video captured by a digital 
camera or a webcam, you can cook up any
of these example images within about 20 
minutes.
Bob Goldstein is an occasional contributor to MAKE and a cell 
biologist at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

THE QUANTIFIED SELF
117
Follow us @make

118
Make: makezine.com/27
makezine.com/27/primer
IMAGEJ
DOWNLOAD
IMAGEJ
AND PLUGINS
On a Mac or Linux computer, download 
ImageJ from the Research Services Branch
of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) web-
site, imagej.nih.gov/ij. (PC users can skip this 
step; the PC download has ImageJ included.)
 ImageJ comes with several valuable
plugins already populating its plugins folder, 
but you’ll want to add more. The NIH website 
has a huge number to choose from, with 
bewildering names like Lipschitz Filter, so
I recommend starting with the small, useful 
bundle published by the microscopy group
at McMaster University.
 Download the bundle from macbiophotonics.
ca/downloads.htm and move it into the folder 
ImageJ/plugins (for PC users, this download 
includes the ImageJ application, so the one 
download is all you’ll need).
 The McMaster site includes some simple 
instructions for allocating system memory 
before you begin. ImageJ is a memory hog, and 
following these directions before you launch 
the program will save you headaches later.
 Once you’ve installed ImageJ, it can be 
interesting to open a photo or import a video 
and just start clicking away to see what vari-
ous buttons do. For a more systematic start, 
you can follow the User Guide, available under 
the Documentation link at rsbweb.nih.gov/ij. 
The Plugins link on the same page lists addi-
tional plugins with short descriptions, and you 
can install most of them by simply moving 
them into your plugins folder.
CREATE IMAGES
Here are some examples of what you can
do with ImageJ. For each, I’ll give a short 
description, sample images, and a step-by-
step protocol that explains how to do it with 
your own photos and videos. The letters 
(A–F) correspond to the images shown.
A. IMAGE CALCULATOR:
TWO IMAGES COMBINED
The Image Calculator tool can combine 
images using simple arithmetic; for example, 
by adding, subtracting, or averaging the colors 
of each pixel. In the 4 sample images above, 
the lower left-hand corner pixel of the snow-
flake image has an RGB color of 12,6,10, while 
the lower left Lincoln pixel is 70,54,42. (RGB 
encodes colors as 0–255 each for red/green/
blue, where 0 is darkest and 255 is brightest.) 
Averaging these two values results in a pixel 
with a color of 41,30,26. Image Calculator 
combines the pixels of all images this way.
 Scientists might not need to combine images 
of paper snowflakes and the Lincoln Memorial, 
but the Image Calculator can be a powerful 
tool for combining other images in predictable 
ways. For example, it brings out differences 
between 2 nearly identical photos, as in Garry 
McLeod’s photos (A), opposite.
Protocol: Click File → Open to select an 
image on your computer, and repeat to open 
a second image. Click Process → Image 
Calculator, select each of your image names, 
then select an operation like Average or 
Difference to combine the images.
B. Z-PROJECT A STACK:
LIGHTNING FLASH
Here I started with a short video I captured 
of a lightning flash, which took about a sec-
ond to cross the sky. On the video, distinct 
parts of the flash could be seen in separate 
frames (Figure B, frames 1 through 8). To see 
Bob Goldstein
Image A
Image B
A
Average of A and B
Difference of A and B

Garry McLeod (A)
what the entire lightning bolt looked like, I 
combined all the video frames into one image 
using the Z Project tool. This effectonly works 
well with video captured from a stationary 
camera position.
Protocol: Before opening a video file, you 
may need to use a video editing program 
to shorten its length or lower its resolution. 
ImageJ has no problem with 800×600 pixel 
videos of a few hundred frames, but longer 
videos with much larger dimensions can slow 
or crash the program.
 Once your video is opened in ImageJ, click 
to select it. (You can scroll through it using 
the < and > keys.) Click Image → Stacks → Z 
Project, and choose Max Intensity to add up 
the brightest pixels from each frame.
 (The montage in Figure B was also made 
with an ImageJ tool. Select your video and 
click Image → Stacks → Make Montage to see 
options for making montages.)
C. Z-PROJECT A STACK:
PELICAN FLIGHT
The image in Figure C was made in a similar 
way to the lightning flash, but here the subject 
was darker than its background. The video was 
taken by a stationary camera, pointing at the 
B
 TIPS: You’ll see a number 
of ways to open ﬁ les of 
different formats under File 
→ Import, but there’s an 
easier way: most ﬁ les can 
be opened by dragging and 
dropping them onto the 
gray bar below the row of 
tool icons. On a PC, some 
formats will be difﬁ cult 
to open (color .mov ﬁ les, 
for example). You can use 
Quicktime Pro or other pro-
grams to convert these to 
other formats, such as .avi.
A
C
119
Follow us @make

120
Make: makezine.com/27
makezine.com/27/primer
IMAGEJ
sky as birds flew overhead. I then Z-Projected 
a 2-second segment, about 30 frames.
Protocol: Open your video. Click on your 
video to select it, then click Image → Stacks 
→ Z Project, and choose Min Intensity to add 
up the darkest pixels from each frame.
D. COLOR-CODING TIME: STAR 
PATHS ACROSS THE NIGHT SKY
I made a time-lapse film of the stars passing
over my yard from dusk to dawn. (I used a 
Canon camera hacked with open source Canon 
Hack Development Kit, or CHDK, software to 
do long-exposure time-lapse recording).
 I used ImageJ to make a black and white 
film of only the moving objects by subtract-
ing everything from each frame that was also 
in the previous frame. I then time-coded the 
resulting film by color, with purple slowly 
turning to yellow.
 Lastly, all the colored frames were pro-
jected onto a single image. In the final image, 
purple objects were the ones visible just 
after sunset, and orange/yellow objects, like 
the clouds, appeared around sunrise. Stars 
moved across the field of view at all times.
Protocol: Open a video. When the “convert 
to 8-bit grayscale” option pops up, accept 
it. Click on the video to select it, and make 
a second video showing only the moving 
objects by clicking Plugins → Stacks — 
T-Functions → Delta F. To color-code the 
time, click Plugins → Stacks – Z-Functions 
→ Z Code Stack, and select a color scheme. 
Finally, click Image → Stacks → Z Project, and 
choose Max Intensity to add up the brightest 
pixels from each frame.
E. KYMOGRAPH: MOTHER
ROBIN’S NEST TIME GRAPH
My sons and I found a robin’s nest on our 
house, and we were fascinated to have a 
peek. So we set up a webcam and watched 
the nest. One day we made an all-day, time-
lapse recording. The mother sat on the eggs 
throughout the day, periodically taking trips 
away, presumably for food. 
 We were curious to see if there were any 
obvious patterns to the timing of her trips, 
so we made a kymograph, which displays a 
single slice of the image along one dimension, 
with time running along the other dimension.
 The kymograph in Figure E marks the time 
in 10-minute intervals along the top, running 
from morning at the left to evening at the 
right. When the blue of the eggs is visible in 
the vertical stripes, the mother bird was out 
of the nest, and you can see how the egg 
positions changed with each maternal visit.
 We had read online that robins never leave 
their nests for more than 10–15 minutes at 
a time, but it looks like this bird took a long 
lunch from around 11:40 a.m. until noon. It
got dark just before 7 p.m.
Protocol: Open a video, then select the 
straight line tool from the row of tool icons, 
and click and drag to draw a line over an area 
of interest in the video (here, the eggs). Click 
Image → Stacks → Reslice to see what hap-
pened under that line over time.
F. IMAGE PROCESSING
WITH A SPREADSHEET
You can extract the pixel values from an 
image and transform them yourself in a 
spreadsheet program like Microsoft Excel.
It’s interesting to see how features like local 
contrast can be highlighted this way. 
 Here, I started with a 50×50 pixel image 
of an acorn (Image 1 above), then generated 
several versions using simple formulas in 
D

E
+
=
8 a.m.
7 p.m.
F
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Excel. Image 2 is a grayscale version of 1. 
In 3, I blurred the image by averaging each 
pixel’s value with that of its neighbors. In 4, 
I highlighted high-contrast areas by compar-
ing each pixel with its neighbors. Image 5 
shows only the high-contrast areas. In 6, the 
contrast values that I used to make 5 were 
converted into continuous grayscale (6),
and in image 7, this grayscale image was
converted to color (in ImageJ, not Excel) 
using a lookup table.
Protocol: First, I recommend that you select 
(or crop or resize down to) a tiny image of 
about 50×50 pixels, as each step that follows 
will work very slowly on larger images.
 Save an image using File → Save As→ 
Text Image. This produces a text file that you 
can open in a spreadsheet program. In the 
spreadsheet (I used Excel), you’ll see an array 
of numbers representing the pixel values in
a grayscale version of your image. In Excel,
I transformed the pixel values using a variety 
of formulas (see makezine.com/27/primer for 
a sample spreadsheet).
 After manipulating the numbers in the 
spreadsheet, I copy-pasted those cells into a 
text editor (I used TextWrangler for Mac) and 
saved it out as a plain text file (.txt). Back in 
ImageJ, I opened the file with File → Import → 
Text Image. For the final transformation, from 
Image 6 to Image 7, I clicked Image → Lookup 
Tables and selected a color scheme for color-
ing the grayscale image.
CONTRIBUTE TO SCIENCE!
Makers and scientists both constitute creative 
communities that could learn a thing or two 
from each other. If you can program in Java, 
and you see an interesting way to display 
images that no existing ImageJ plugins can 
yet do, why not write a new plug-in? Hundreds 
of plugins exist already, but the best ones 
probably have yet to be written.
 If you do write a new ImageJ plugin, you 
can add it to the wiki at imagejdocu.tudor.lu. 
 Who’ll make use of your plugin, and what 
scientific discoveries might it help propel? 
Biomedical research articles are increasingly 
found in full form online, so in the months 
and years to come after submitting a plugin, 
search online for its name to find out! a
RESOURCES
» ImageJ software: rsbweb.nih.gov/ij
» McMaster Biophotonics Facility ImageJ 
software library: macbiophotonics.ca/
downloads.htm
» ImageJ Information and Documentation 
Portal — includes a wiki where new plugins 
can be added: imagejdocu.tudor.lu
» FIJI — a distribution of ImageJ with Java 
and well-organized plugins: fiji.sc.wiki
121
Follow us @make

122 Make: makezine.com/27
Corky Mork has been making stuff from wood, electronics, 
toys, and junk since he was a kid. When not making stuff, he 
acts in community theater, sings a capella, and plays the tuba.
RECENTLY, AT MY LOCAL HOME CENTER
I stopped to look at the 2×4 studs. They cost 
just a few dollars, and I often take a few home 
“just to have.” They’re handy for workbench 
legs, sawhorses, shelving, mailbox posts, 
temporary staging, and many other uses.
 I got to thinking, What could I make with 
just one 8-foot 2×4? I got out my sketchpad 
and worked it through ... Yes! I could do it.
 I set to work with my table saw, and in less 
than an hour, I had a perfectly serviceable 
chair! It’s not the prettiest or most comfort-
able, but for the price in materials and effort, 
it’s hard to beat.
1. Cut the 2×4.
Cut the 2×4 into one 32" and four 16" lengths, 
then rip these pieces lengthwise. The following 
rip measurements assume a 1" kerf.
 Rip the 32" piece into thirds (1r" thick) 
for the legs, then cut one of these into two 16" 
legs. Rip the 16" pieces into 8 slats 0" thick.
2. Screw and glue.
A square can help keep things, well, square 
during assembly. For each joint, square it up, 
drill pilot holes to avoid splitting, and assemble 
with glue and 2 drywall screws. The glue will 
help keep the chair from racking (twisting out 
of square), especially on the leg joints.
 First build the 2 side frames; one is mirrored 
from the other. Add slats to the front and the 
seat back, then add the seat slats.
3. Finish it, or not.
You can paint, stain, and decorate your chair 
any way you like. I kept my first one au naturel 
and left it outdoors to develop a rustic look.
 What can you make with an 8-foot 2×4? 
Maybe a better chair? A table? Or what? a
YOU WILL NEED
Dimensional lumber, 2×4, 8' length straight and 
smooth, with as few knots as possible. A nominal 
2×4 actually measures 1½"×3½".
Drywall screws, 13" (32)
Wood glue
Saw I recommend a table saw or band saw, though
a portable circular saw or even a handsaw could 
work if you’re careful.
Drill with 1" twist bit and Phillips screwdriver bits
Square (optional) 
Stud Chair
By Corky Mork
1+2+3
1
2
3
Illustration and photo by Corky Mork

Doug Stowe
IN RECENT GENERATIONS, WE’VE LOST
many basic skills. Today, making a simple knife 
to work wood is beyond the capacity of most 
people in the Western world. Sad, but true. 
And yet it’s fun, and offers a sense of tactile 
satisfaction. The use of this knife is therapeutic, 
leading to feelings of accomplishment. 
 And knives are tools. Sadly, most have come 
to regard knives as weapons, forgetting the 
simple pleasures of whittling on a stick or 
making something useful for the kitchen.
Making a Simple Spoon Knife
You can’t buy anything as effective as this 
knife in a store, so you’ll need to make your 
own. It’s designed for carving the bowl shape 
at the working end of a spoon. With this knife 
and a sloyd (whittling) knife, you can carve 
anything you want. In fact, you can remake 
yourself into a craftsman. It just takes a little 
carving. But, I’ll remind you that you won't 
find everything you need in this article. It 
takes practice to actually get good at some-
thing. Your first efforts may not result in what 
you see here, but things are made more 
meaningful and useful by the effort we’ve 
invested in them.
1. Grind the blade.
Use a grinder to shape the steel blank and 
begin forming the knife edge (Figure A, follow-
ing page). For a right-handed knife, hold the 
steel from the right side of the wheel. For a 
left-handed knife, work from the other side.
2. Bend the blade to shape.
Use pliers to bend the end of the sharpened 
steel blank (Figure B). The degree of curvature 
Spoon-Carving Knife
Make a blade to make useful things for the kitchen.
By Doug Stowe
WORKSHOP
  DIY
123
Follow us @Make

WORKSHOP
DIY
124 Make: makezine.com/27
MATERIALS
Steel blank, approximately r"×½"×5" 
for blade 
Wood stock, walnut: 2"×1"×18" and 6"×1"×18" 
Brass rod, 6" diameter, a few inches long You’ll 
cut it down to 2 pins 4" long. 
Epoxy glue
Sandpaper, 600 grit, extra fine
Danish oil, ½ pint
TOOLS
in the blade determines how deep you can 
go into the bowl end of the spoon. Study the 
spoons in your kitchen to determine the level 
of curvature you’ll want. The blade should be 
curved slightly more than is required to con-
form to the spoon shape.
3. Drill holes for the pins.
Use a 6"-diameter drill bit in the drill press 
to make holes for the brass pins that will 
secure the handle (Figure C).
4. Heat treat the blade.
Use a propane torch to heat the end of the 
knife blank to cherry red (Figure D). This is 
best done in the dark. You’ll see the steel turn 
a variety of colors as it heats up. When it’s 
cherry red, quench it quickly in oil. This hard-
ens the steel so the knife will hold an edge, 
but it also makes the steel brittle, requiring 
the next step.
5. Temper the steel.
Preheat the oven to 425° and place the
metal cookie sheet inside. When the oven
has reached temperature, put the heat-
treated knife blade on the cookie sheet for
20 minutes. Then remove it and allow it
to cool to room temperature.
6. Make scale stock.
Rip wood stock as shown in Figure E to form 
the 2 “scales” that make up the handle of the 
knife. A ripping cut in one scale, only partially 
through, provides a secure housing for the 
knife blank on 3 sides as shown.
 Cut the scales to length to fit the blade.
7. Glue scales on both sides.
Use epoxy to glue the knife blank into the 
grooved scale (Figure F, following page). Then 
use the drill press to finish the holes through 
the scale.
 Glue on the other scale using epoxy, and 
then drill to finish the holes through to both 
sides. Whether you’re making a left- or right-
handed knife, yours should look like one these 
(Figure G). 
C
D
E
A
B
 CAUTION: It’s important to use a fence on the 
drill press. If the drill were to catch and the blade to spin 
accidentally, you could be cut.
Grinder
Pliers
Drill press (preferred)
or electric drill
Propane torch
Oven
Cookie sheet, metal
Clamps
Sander
Hacksaw
Dowel

Doug Stowe lives in Arkansas’ Ozark Mountains, where 
he makes, teaches making, and writes about both. He’s 
working on his seventh woodworking book and is best 
known for box making.
8. Shape the handle and install
the brass pin. 
Use a sander to shape the edges of your knife 
to be comfortable in your hand (Figure H). Of 
course another carving knife could be used for 
this! But either way, this is a job that requires 
skill and attention.
 Cut 6" brass rod into 2 pins 4" long and 
glue them in the holes using epoxy glue.
9. Finish and sharpen.
After sanding (and sanding and sanding) 
apply a hand-rubbed Danish oil finish to 
the knife to protect the wood and bring 
out its beauty (Figure I).
 Use a dowel wrapped in 600-grit extra-
fine sandpaper to sharpen the cutting edge 
(Figure J). Use a flat sheet or sharpening 
stone to hone the backside of the blade. 
10. Carve a spoon.
Now you’re ready to carve a spoon. You’ll also 
need a sloyd knife or other type of whittling 
knife as shown in Figure K. 
 You’ll find that green wood works best for 
carving spoons. So cut a stick, use an axe to 
split it in two, and then begin carving (Figure 
L). The spoon in Figure K is made of bass-
wood. Many other woods will work as well. 
 Also, if you can make a spoon knife, there 
is no reason you couldn’t make a sloyd knife 
as well. The technology is the same except 
that traditional sloyd knives, like this one 
from Mora, Sweden (Figure K), are made with 
many laminations of steel — a technique hard 
to duplicate outside the blacksmith shop. a
H
G
L
J
I
K
F
125
Follow us @Make

126 Make: makezine.com/27
Sam Murphy 
IF YOU’RE FAMILIAR WITH TABLETOP
product photography and video, you know 
what a pain it can be to shoot overhead shots 
while working on your subject. Tripods just get 
in the way. 
 The usual remedy is a document camera, 
the modern equivalent of the overhead projec-
tor. These cameras let you display close-up 
shots with an LCD projector or external moni-
tor, and they cost between $500 and $1,500. 
They’re well suited to capturing images of 
document-sized objects, but come on, a grand 
for a glorified webcam? 
 We’ve all got streaming video on our smart-
phones now, so couldn’t we just use that 
instead? The problem is, how to hold it over 
the project without a tripod to bump into. 
 Hollywood grips solve this problem with 
what is known as a gobo arm, a lightweight 
mount that lets you position your smartphone 
(webcam, etc.) down where the action is with-
out getting in the way. Commercial units run 
$100–$150, not including the $30 clamp you 
attach it to. But for the price of one of those 
fancy clamps, you can piece together your own 
Mobile Document Camera Stand using easily 
sourced parts.
 It’s easy. If you can make cuts with a hack-
saw, you can build this project. There’s also 
plenty of room for improvement. For example, 
I recently upgraded the lock washers to the 
“curved disc spring” type, and they work great.
$30 Gobo Arm: Mobile 
Document Camera Stand
Go hands-free for the price of a clamp. 
By Adam Flaherty
WORKSHOP
  DIY

Adam Flaherty
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
See makeprojects.com/v/27 for recommended 
suppliers, prices, and other sourcing information.
Threaded rods, ¼"-20, 12" long (3) 
Setscrew terminal lugs, ¼", straight tongue,
copper (4)
Spacer, ½" OD, .252" ID, ½", nylon (2) 
Wing nuts, ¼"-20 (2) 
Aluminum tubing, ½" OD, 0.4" ID, 10" length (2)
Clamping knob, threaded stud, 3-arm, ¼"-20, 
plastic (2) 
Lock washer, ¼", curved disc spring (2) 
Coupling nut, ¼"-20
Beam clamp, ¼"-20
C-clamp
Smartphone camera adapter, generic Check eBay or 
theglif.com (for the fancy iPhone 4 model).
File for cleaning up cut rod
Screwdriver, slotted  
Hacksaw
1. Cut rod and tube, and assemble. 
Cut two 11½" lengths and one 1¾" length of 
threaded rod. Cut two 10" lengths of alumi-
num round tube. Clean up the ends with a file.
Insert the threaded rod into the aluminum 
round tube, and use hex nuts to hold in place. 
Optionally, you can use nylon spacers or 8" 
strips of electrical tape wound around the 
threaded rod toward each end to position the 
tube. You should have enough rod left at each 
end to fit into the terminal lug.
 Attach a single terminal lug to one end of 
the first threaded rod, and tighten with a slot-
ted screwdriver. Attach terminal lugs to both 
ends of the second threaded rod, and tighten. 
Then thread the coupling nut onto the 1¾" 
threaded rod. Attach the remaining terminal 
lug to the end and tighten (Figure A).
2. Assemble the friction joints.
For the first friction joint, insert a nylon spacer 
onto the clamping knob shank. Insert the 
end of the terminal lug over the nylon spacer, 
keeping the locking screw facing away from 
the tip of the shank. Insert a lock washer over 
the terminal lug. 
 Now, insert the end of the terminal lug of 
the second threaded rod over the lock washer, 
keeping the locking screw facing toward the 
tip of the shank. Hold it together with a ¼"-20 
wing nut (Figure B).
 Repeat for the second friction joint, to 
attach the 1¾" threaded rod assembly to
the other terminal lug of the second 11½" 
threaded rod assembly.
3. Finish. 
Thread the beam clamp onto the remaining 
end of the first threaded rod assembly and 
attach it to the C-clamp (Figure C). Make 
sure a little extra of the threaded rod sticks 
through the bottom of the beam clamp. You’ll 
want this overhang to wedge the C-clamp into 
so that the beam clamp aligns straight.
Attach the generic smartphone tripod 
adapter to the ¼"-20 end of the 1¾" threaded 
rod assembly. Use the coupling nut to adjust 
for a snug fit.
A
B
COLLABORATE ON
makeprojects.com
Adam Flaherty is a contributing writer for makezine.com. 
He edited MAKE’s iPhone Hacks book (O’Reilly), and has 
tech-reviewed other O’Reilly titles including Linux Unwired and 
Netbooks: The Missing Manual. He has dabbled in industries 
including alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and the declining auto-
motive industry. 
C
 Now you’re ready to photograph your
project for sharing at makeprojects.com, or 
even stream live video from your workbench. a
127
Follow us @Make

128 Make: makezine.com/27
Andrew Lewis
WHEN THE TIME CAME FOR ME TO SELL 
my cabin cruiser, I couldn’t bring myself to 
part with the 17-watt solar panel that I’d
fitted to its deck. This panel was my first foray 
into renewable energy, and it had served me 
well aboard my 22-foot fiberglass home away 
from home.
 I turned my attentions to camping, and 
found that the problem with getting back
to nature is a lack of charging facilities for
the computer, MP3 player, and cellphone
that I like to use. I tried some portable solar 
chargers but found them either too low-power 
or too awkward to comfortably carry.
 I soon realized that the semi-flexible, 
resin-coated solar panel from my old boat 
was roughly the same size as my backpack, 
so I set about repurposing this solar trophy to 
suit my needs. For strapping the panel over the 
backpack, I attached fabric storage pockets 
to its top and bottom, and I outfitted the 
bottom pocket with a flat “connecting plate” 
that sports 3 pairs of metal snaps, spaced 
apart to prevent electrical shorts. 
 The connecting plate attaches to custom 
charging cords with a snap pair at one end 
and a USB plug on the other. By plugging the 
cords into the plate, you can trickle-charge up 
to 3 USB devices at once in bright sun.
1. Make the connecting plate.
Detach the solar panel’s power cord (Figure A). 
I removed a plastic cover, then cut away some 
silicone from the wire leads underneath 
Portable Powerhouse
This semi-flexible solar panel system clips onto a 
backpack and provides power to electronic devices.
By Andrew Lewis
OUTDOORS
 DIY

MATERIALS
Solar panel, semi-flexible, no wider than about 
12" Choose a size that will fit over the top and back 
of your favorite camping backpack without hanging 
over the side and getting snagged on the scenery.
Fabric, waterproof, 1 yard square Remember that 
waterproof and water resistant are not the same.
Plastic sheet, thin but rigid, about 6"×4"
Metal snaps (8) Any size, but they must be conduc-
tive metal; test with a multimeter if you’re in doubt.
Copper or aluminum tape, 1" wide, 1 roll Copper is 
better, but aluminum will work fine.
Wire, 18-gauge, insulated
Spade connectors, medium (optional) to fit 
insulated wire
Diode, power, 1N4002 or similar (1) plus more for 
each charging cable; see below.
Acrylic PCB sealant, spray can
Bolts, stainless steel, M4×10mm long or 
similar size (4)
Nuts and washers to fit bolts (4) Ordinary nuts will 
be OK, but stainless will resist the weather longer.
Velcro tape, 8"
Nylon strapping, 1"×12" A luggage strap is ideal.
Thread for sewing
D rings, metal (4) the type used on luggage or
saddlery, to fit the strapping. Or you can use buckles.
Heat-shrink tubing, assorted sizes
Tape, double-sided
Masking tape or chalk
White (PVA) glue (optional)
For each charging cord (charger can accommodate 
up to 3 cords at once):
Diodes, power, 1N4002 or similar (4)
Cable to fit chargeable device: USB cable for USB 
devices, and laptop cable for laptop.
Voltage regulator The voltage out should match the 
device. I used a 78M05 (5V) for my USB cable and
a 78M12 (12V) for my laptop cable.
TOOLS 
Hammer
Hole punch sized for attaching snaps
Sewing machine, or needle and thread
Soldering iron
Wire cutters
over each hole row (Figure E). This will make 
the electrical connections between the snaps.
 Strip both ends of two 7" lengths of wire. 
Cut one wire in the middle, and solder-splice 
in a 1N4002 (or similar) diode. This diode will 
allow power to flow away from, but not back 
into the solar panel. Mark the wire on the 
marked (cathode) side of the diode, and then 
insulate the joints with heat-shrink tubing.
B
A
D
E
C
(Figure B) and desoldered them.
 Punch 2 rows of 4 small holes at regularly 
spaced intervals lengthwise along the 6"×4" 
plastic sheet (Figures C and D). Space the 
rows of holes fairly far apart; they’ll accept the 
backing pieces of the snaps carrying power 
from the solar panel, so they shouldn’t be 
easily bridged. Wrap 2 strips of copper or alu-
minum tape all the way around the sheet and 
129
Follow us @make

130 Make: makezine.com/27
OUTDOORS
DIY
 Push 2 snap backing pieces through the 
pair of holes at one end of the connecting 
plate. Wrap the cathode end of the diode wire 
and either end of the other wire around each 
backing piece. (If the wires are too thick to 
wrap comfortably, solder a spade connector 
onto each and insulate the joint with more 
heat-shrink.) Hammer a male top piece for 
each metal snap into place using the hole 
punch, making sure that the wire ends or 
spade connectors are sandwiched securely 
between the backing and the tape (Figure F).
2. Make the electrical and
storage pockets.
The plate is shrouded at either end by a 
waterproof pocket, similar in design to a pen-
cil case. One pocket contains the electrical 
connections to the solar panel, and the other 
can be used to store cables or batteries.
 Cut a piece of waterproof fabric a little 
wider than the solar panel and about 10" 
long. Position the connecting plate with its 
widest edge about 2" away from the edge of 
the fabric, then mark and cut small holes in 
the fabric where it lines up with the 6 holes 
in the plastic. Poke the backing pieces of the 
6 unmounted snaps up through the plastic 
plate and the waterproof fabric, then hammer 
the snap tops to attach them over the fabric 
(Figures G and H).
 Spray the back of the connecting plate (and 
any other exposed areas) with acrylic PCB 
sealant. The idea is to waterproof as many of 
the exposed electrical connections as pos-
sible, while leaving the snaps uninsulated.
 Fold the fabric in half underneath the plate 
so that the snaps face upward, and stitch the 
metal D rings to the folded edge using short 
loops of nylon strapping (Figure I, bottom).
 Test-fit the open long side of the pocket 
against an end of the solar panel. Stitch the 
fabric pocket along its shortest sides, posi-
tioning the stitching runs so that the pocket 
fits tightly over the end of the solar panel. 
 Now slip the pocket over the solar panel so 
that the panel doesn’t quite meet the con-
necting plate inside. Using chalk or tape, mark 
F
G
H
I
a seam line on the pocket, midway between 
the panel and plate. Also mark the locations 
of the solar panel’s corner mounting holes.
 Remove the solar panel from the pocket, 
and stitch in from the sides along the seam 
mark you just made. But don’t connect the 
seam all the way through; leave the wires 
from the connecting plate poking outside the 
pocket. You should have a closed bag with 2 
wires sticking out from the side (Figure I, top).
 Solder the wires from the plate onto 
the solar panel, with the diode wired to the 
positive (+) terminal. Poke any excess wire 
back inside the fabric pocket. 
 Make holes in the pocket at the mounting 
locations you marked, and attach the solar 
panel to the pocket via the mounting holes, 
using nuts, bolts, and washers. If you want 
to reinforce the area where the bolts pass 

J
K
M
N
through the material, I recommend painting 
the edges of the holes with white glue.
 Spray the solder joints on the solar panel 
with the PCB sealant, and stick the loose
fabric seams to the solar panel with double-
sided tape.
 Make a storage pocket from waterproof
fabric, and attach it to the other end of the 
solar panel, just like you did with the electrical 
pocket (Figure J). The only differences are that 
the storage pocket will be empty, and should 
be held closed with velcro instead of with 
stitches (Figure K). To make sure the velcro 
lines up correctly, remember to sew it in place 
before you stitch the other seams closed.
3. Make the charging cords.
For each charging cord, take 2 strips of water-
proof fabric, and add snap tops (female) to 
one piece, spacing them apart the same dis-
tance as the snaps on the connecting plate. 
Solder wires directly onto the backs of the 
2 snap tops and spray them with PCB sealant.
 I used a bridge rectifier circuit to control
the polarity of the power from the snaps, so
it wouldn’t matter which way I snapped on 
the cord. 
 Make this circuit by soldering 2 power 
diodes oriented in opposite directions off of 
each snap wire, 4 diodes total. Solder the 
diodes’ 2 unconnected cathode ends together 
to the input pin of the voltage regulator (pin 1),
and the free anode ends of the other 2 diodes 
to the regulator’s ground pin (pin 2). Insulate 
all connections with heat-shrink.
 Cut, split, and strip the power supply end
of your device’s charging cord and identify
the power and ground wires inside. With a 
USB, the power wire will connect to pin 1 and 
should be red; the ground wire will connect to 
the last pin, 4 or 5, and should be black. Solder 
the regulator’s ground pin to the charging 
cord ground, and its output pin (pin 3) to the
charging cord’s power wire. Insulate with
more heat-shrink (Figure L).
 Finally, stitch the other piece of fabric over 
the wires and snaps to enclose the connec-
tions (Figure M). Use a piece of heat-shrink 
Andrew Lewis is a keen artificer and computer scientist with 
interests in 3D scanning, computational theory, algorithmics, 
and electronics. He is a relentless tinkerer, whose love of 
science and technology is second only to his love of all 
things steampunk.
tubing to reinforce the stitches where the 
cord exits the cloth sleeve. The cord is done, 
and you’re ready to plug into the sun!
 The flexible pockets and D-rings at the ends 
of my Portable Powerhouse let me strap it to 
my ordinary book bag as well as my camping
rucksack, so I can charge my laptop while I’m 
walking around town (Figure N). 
 My next project will be to add a lithium
polymer (LiPo) battery pack with an integrated
charge circuit. This will enable the Portable 
Powerhouse to store power for use at night, 
after the sun goes down! a
L
131
Follow us @make

132 Make: makezine.com/27
Abe Connally and Josie Moores
GETTING HONEY FROM YOUR “HONEY 
Cow” beehive (Volume 25, page 123) requires 
that you have bees in it. In this article we’ll 
show you how to make a bait hive and some 
bee lure and go fishing for a swarm of bees to 
fill your Honey Cow. 
 Bees tend to swarm during the big nectar 
flows in late spring and early summer, so you 
should set up your bait hives well ahead of 
this time. It helps to have more than one bait 
hive, to increase your chances. In some areas, 
it’s possible to catch a few swarms per year. 
 Like the Honey Cow, the bait hive has a 
series of bars arranged side-by-side along its 
top. The bees attach their honeycombs to the 
underside of the bars. These top bars are inter-
changeable, so it’s quick and easy to move 
your fresh-caught bees to the Honey Cow. 
 As with fishing, you must be patient. But 
before long, you’ll have happy and productive 
bees ready to join your family.
1. Build the bait hive.
Our bait hive has 6 top bars, for an interior 
width of approximately 8½". This interior width 
may vary according to the width of your bars.
1a. Start by measuring the total width of the 
6 top bars. If they are more than 8½" in total 
width, use 5 top bars instead. This measure-
ment will affect the length of the sides and 
bottom. In this version, the sides and bottom 
pieces are 10½" long (8½" plus 2" for the 
thickness of the lumber).
Fishing for Swarms
Lure in a local colony of honeybees with a simple 
wooden bait hive.
By Abe Connally and Josie Moores
OUTDOORS
 DIY

24"
51"
72"
33½" 40½"
61½"
51"
72"
40½"
61½"
7"
Front
Back
Roof
Drill holes
Side
Side
Bottom
16½"
MATERIALS
Lumber, untreated, 1×10, 8' length cedar or pine
work well
Lumber, 1"×1½", 24" lengths (5) for top bars. 
If you’ve built the Honey Cow, use those bars.
Wood screws, 1½" (24)
Wood screws, ¾" (10)
White paint a small amount
Linseed oil, boiled (optional) or other natural wood 
preservative
Sheet metal, 11"×3" (2)
Beeswax, 1" cube
Olive oil, ¼ cup
Lemongrass oil (20 drops) 100% natural or organic
TOOLS
Electric drill, cordless
Circular saw
Drill bits, ¼" and ¾"
Wood rasp
Straightedge
Paintbrush
Fluorescent marker such as a yellow highlighter
Small glass jar and lid
Stove and small saucepan
Beekeeper gear, including a smoker, gloves, 
full protective suit, and veil
1b. Mark one edge of an 8' length of 1×10 
lumber as follows: 24", 33½", 40½", 51", 
61½", and 72". On the opposite edge of the 
board, mark the following: 7", 16½", 40½", 
51", 61½", and 72". Draw lines between the 
marks, to create your cutting template.
1c. Using a circular saw, cut the board accord-
ing to the diagram (Figure A). Also cut top 
bars from the 1"×1½"  lumber if you haven’t 
built the Honey Cow.  
1d. On the cut edges of the side and bottom 
boards, drill 3 holes along each side (6 total 
per board), using the ¼" drill bit. Make the 
holes about ½" from the cut edges. On the 
roof board, drill 4 holes, 2 on each side on the 
factory (uncut) edge.
1e. On a flat surface, place the front and 
back boards upright with the 24" edges 
down. There should be an 8½" to 8¾" space 
between the boards. Lay the bottom board 
atop the front and back boards and screw in 
A
place, carefully keeping the boards square 
(Figure B). 
 Test the width of your bait hive by placing 
your top bars in between the face boards. 
They should fit easily, but not have any 
spaces between the top bars. Now, using the 
1½" screws, screw in each side board, care-
fully keeping the width of your box consistent 
(Figure C).
1f. Once everything is screwed together, use 
a ¾" drill bit to make an entrance hole on the 
bottom of one of the sides (Figure D). Slightly 
round the edges of the hole to give it a nice, 
funnel-like opening.
1g. You can weatherproof the outside of your 
hive with a natural preservative, like boiled 
linseed oil and beeswax. Try to avoid chemical 
preservatives, as they will add a smell to the 
hive that might repel the bees. The preserva-
tive is optional, depending on your climate (in 
our climate, there’s really no need).
B
C
D
133
Follow us @make

134 Make: makezine.com/27
OUTDOORS
DIY
1h. Paint around the opening of the hive with 
just a bit of white paint. Once the paint is dry, 
add some lines and decorations around the 
opening with a yellow highlighter (Figure D, 
previous page). Bees see fluorescent colors 
very well, and having a contrasting color 
around the entrance will make it easier for
the swarm scouts to find the front door.
1i. Place the top bars across the top of your 
hive (Figure E). Attach the pieces of sheet 
metal on each side with ¾" screws, to prevent 
the top bars from moving or shifting (Figure F).
Then, place the roof on top.
2. Make the bee lure.
2a. Place a small glass jar in a saucepan, and 
raise it about 1" off the bottom of the pan on 
a small metal rack or something similar. Put 
some water in the saucepan, about halfway 
up the jar. 
2b. Put the saucepan on the stove and slowly 
heat the water to a simmer (not boiling). Once 
the water is simmering, place ¼ cup olive oil 
and the 1" cube of beeswax into the glass jar, 
stirring constantly (Figures G and H).
2c. As soon as the wax is melted, turn off the 
heat. Add 15 to 20 drops of lemongrass oil to 
the wax/olive oil mixture and stir well. 
 Take the glass jar out of the water and allow 
it to cool. This concoction makes a great bee 
lure for attracting your bees.
2d. Rub a bit of the bee lure on the underside 
of each top bar in your bait hive, and a bit 
more around the entrance. You don’t need 
much, just a dab in these key spots.
3. Set the trap.
Setting up your bait hive is the most impor-
tant step. Experience shows us that you can 
improve your chances of catching a swarm
if you do the following:
 
» Situate a hive in a good bee location: a 
place that has water and plenty of flowers, 
and isn’t likely to be disturbed by humans.
E
F
H
G
 TIP: Cut the beeswax into smaller pieces to expedite 
the melting process.

» Place the hive at a height of anywhere 
between 8' and 15'. Putting the hive in a 
tree or on a roof works well. 
 
» The hive shouldn’t be in full, direct sunlight 
— dappled sunlight works well. 
 
» Face the entrance of the hive toward 
the sun, meaning it will face south in the 
Northern Hemisphere and north in the 
Southern Hemisphere. 
 
» If you have a bit of old brood comb, it’s 
good to place this in your bait hive as well.
 
» Make several bait hives and place them all 
around your area.
 
» Once you place the hive, leave it alone for
2 to 3 weeks. When you do check on the 
hive, just look at it from a distance and try 
not to handle it very much. You can add 
more bee lure about once a month.
4. Transfer the hive.
If you’re lucky, one day you’ll check on your 
hive and you’ll see bees flying in and out of 
the entrance. Once you notice bee activity, 
leave the hive alone for another week and 
then visit it after sundown. No bees should
be leaving the hive at this time of the day. 
4a. Place a bit of rag or cotton in the entrance 
to block it so that no bees can enter or leave. 
Carefully transport the hive to your Honey 
Cow or other top bar hive. For now, just set 
the hive next to the Honey Cow. You’ll come 
back tomorrow to continue the transfer.
4b. In the morning, suit up again, and start 
your smoker. Make room in your Honey Cow 
for the 6 new top bars. You should place them 
in the middle of the hive, at least 5 or 6 bars 
from the entrance. As you move the new bars 
in, keep them in the same order. 
4c. Puff a bit of smoke toward the bait hive. 
Carefully remove the roof and puff a bit more 
smoke over the top of the top bars. Starting 
at one end, remove a top bar and carefully 
lift it straight out and quickly place it in the 
Honey Cow. Move the second bar the same 
way, carefully and quickly.
Abe Connally and Josie Moores are an adventurous couple 
living in an off-grid hideaway with their 2-year-old and 
newborn. Their experiments with energy, architecture, and 
sustainable systems are documented at velacreations.com.
4d. Once all the bars have been moved to the 
Honey Cow, take out 6 bars at the back of the 
Honey Cow. Quickly lift the bait hive and place 
it upside down on the Honey Cow, and then 
bump it quickly to drop the bees out.
4e. Leave everything alone for 30 minutes or 
so, to give the bees a chance to move into the 
new space, then remove the bait hive. If there 
are still a lot of bees in the bait hive, quickly 
hit it once or twice against the top of the 
Honey Cow to knock the bees down into the 
new hive. Using a bee brush or a leafy branch 
from a tree, brush the remaining bees into the 
Honey Cow.
4f. Replace the missing top bars in the Honey 
Cow and put on the roof. Put the bait hive in 
your house or another area where bees can’t 
get to it. Leave the Honey Cow alone for a 
while, at least 2 weeks. Check on it periodi-
cally, to confirm that the bees are entering 
and leaving. If all is well, 2–3 weeks after the 
transfer, you can open the Honey Cow and 
check on your bees. They should be starting 
to enlarge any existing combs and possibly 
building new combs. You have successfully 
captured and transferred a swarm! a
Online Resources
» Tools, accessories, and DIY kits for top bar 
hives: goldstarhoneybees.com
» Natural beekeeping forum: biobees.com
» Authors’ site: velacreations.com/bees.html
 CAUTION: It’s important to wear protective 
clothing while handling and transferring the hive.
NOTE: Blowing a bit of smoke into a beehive makes
the bees lethargic by way of honey ingestion. The bees 
smell smoke and think there’s a ﬁ re threatening their 
home. They then focus their efforts on eating the honey 
(to protect it from the ﬁ re), and they don’t pay attention
to you opening their hive.
135
Follow us @make

136 Make: makezine.com/27
William Abernathy
NEARLY HALF THE WORLD’S POPULATION
cooks and heats using solid fuel, much of it 
burning up in pits that have seen no improve-
ment since Homo erectus first tamed fire. 
This is not a small problem: inefficient cooking 
fires waste fuel, impoverishing both the planet 
and the person burning it; they inject startling 
quantities of soot, carbon dioxide, and worse 
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere; and 
they injure and kill the families who use them 
to cook and stay warm. 
 You can build a simple example of an 
appropriate technology that addresses all 
these problems: a biomass gasifier stove. It 
sounds more complicated than it is. Charring 
wood or other natural solid fuels releases 
gases that burn quite nicely. If you’ve ever 
watched a campfire closely, you’ve seen little 
jets of smoke erupt from the wood ahead of 
the flame. If conditions are perfect, a smoke 
jet catches fire and turns, briefly, into a tiny 
geyser of flame. A good gasification stove 
recreates these conditions reliably, generating 
smoke and moving air to produce these little 
fire geysers on demand.  
 There are many designs for efficient stoves, 
and gasification is only one way to boost the 
efficiency of a cooking fire. The wood gas 
stove in this article is an elegantly simple 
gasifier design called a TLUD stove (for top-lit 
updraft), also known as an inverted downdraft 
stove. If you don’t care how it looks, you can 
build it with a can opener, a punch, and a big 
rock. This design, which I’ve adapted from one 
Wood Gas Camp Stove
Make a simple tin-can stove that costs 99 cents,
runs for free, and sequesters carbon as you cook.
By William Abernathy
OUTDOORS
 DIY

MATERIALS
Paint can, 1qt, steel, clean Hardware stores sell quart 
paint cans for about a buck. Don’t use one that has 
held paint.
Food can, 19oz, steel Commonly used for baked 
beans, chili, and pineapple chunks, these cans snap 
neatly into the top of the quart paint can. The critical 
dimension, the lip of the can, must be very close to 
32". Do not remove the bottom. 
Chicken or tuna can, 12oz, steel to make a standoff 
that keeps the pot from smothering the flame
Scrap wood, 1½"×1½"×7" (or longer) for a backup 
block, to keep the cans from denting under the drill, 
or spinning and hurting you if the drill bit grabs. 
TOOLS 
I first saw on Instructables, is built around a 
1-quart paint can. It easily boils enough water 
for a small pot of tea or a bowl of noodles, 
using nothing more than a fist-sized charge of 
scrap wood. 
How It Works
This TLUD stove works in batches: fill it up with 
twigs and woody bits, and light it from the top. 
As the fire burns, it makes a layer of hot coals, 
and as this burning mass descends into the 
can, it becomes starved for air. Enough oxygen 
comes up from below to keep the embers 
alight, but not enough to sustain a flame. 
 This charring layer slowly descends, releas-
ing flammable gases as it goes — a process 
called pyrolysis. The hot gases rise to the top 
of the stove, where they are met by an inrush 
of preheated air and, if all goes well, combine 
completely with this air in a clean secondary 
burn that consumes the methane, soot, and 
carbon monoxide produced by the primary 
combustion.
 When a TLUD is dialed in, it’s lovely: a layer 
of smoke hangs over the coal bed like a fog, 
and appears imprisoned by a gauntlet of 
inward-facing flame jets that rush in from the 
edges of the stove. While the stove is gasify-
ing, it’s remarkably clean: there’s little or no 
smoke and only a faint odor, reminiscent of 
diesel or creosote. It leaves a trace of soot on 
your pot, compared to the heavy blackening 
an open fire imparts. And when your stove 
is done gasifying and the flame jets go out, 
clean charcoal remains in the stove.
 This residual charcoal is a fringe benefit: not 
only can you use it for gunpowder (see MAKE 
Volume 13, page 54), but you can cook with it 
a second time in a clean-burning charcoal fire. 
You can also throw it into your compost and 
bury it. Called biochar, this buried charcoal 
enriches the soil and actually makes your 
carbon-neutral biomass fuel carbon-negative. 
Make Your Gasifier Camp Stove
1. Prepare the backup block.
Open the paint can and drop the block of 
wood upright in the can (Figure A). Mark the 
top edge of the can on the block.
 Withdraw the block and make a parallel 
mark 2" below the first (Figure B).
 Cut a 3" deep slot between these lines 
(Figure C). Precision is not critical: anything 
wider than 2" will do. A table saw is easiest, 
but a router or a handsaw and chisel will
work too.
A
C
B
Saw (table or hand),
or router
Computer, printer, 
and drilling tem-
plates download from 
makeprojects.com/v/27
Caliper, ruler, or tape 
measure if you’re 
not using the drilling 
templates. Electronic, 
dial, or Vernier calipers 
will work.
Machinist’s dividers 
with layout dye or a 
Sharpie marker; and 
woodworker’s marking 
gauge or machinist’s 
surface gauge if you’re 
not using the templates
Prick punch
Hammer
Electric drill
Step bit, ½" It’s safer 
and cuts a cleaner hole 
than twist bits, which 
grab and tear sheet 
metal.  
Can opener
Tinsnips
C-clamp
Half-round file
Workbench
Vise
Eye protection
137
Follow us @make

138 Make: makezine.com/27
OUTDOORS
DIY
2. Mark and drill the 1qt paint can.
Use marking dye or a Sharpie to lay down
a stripe ¾" from the bottom of the paint can 
(Figure D). Then, using either a surface gauge 
or a marking gauge, circumscribe a line ¾" 
from the bottom of the can (Figure E).
 Clamp the backup block to the edge of 
your workbench with its slot facing up. Slip 
the paint can over the end of the block and 
drop its rim into the slot (Figure F). Find the 
can seam, and punch a point on the scribed 
line about ½" away from the seam (Figure G). 
This is your 12 o’clock mark. 
 If you have a caliper, set your dividers to 
1.075" (1/12th division of the can in chord sec-
tions); if you don’t, set your dividers to a hair 
more than 15". Following the scribed line, 
use the dividers to scribe marks to the right 
and left of the initial punch mark, marking as 
you go, to the far side (Figure H).
 When you reach the far side, your scribe 
marks may meet perfectly at 6 o’clock, but 
will likely over- or under-shoot each other.
If you’ve “nailed it,” punch it down; otherwise, 
split the difference and punch between the 
two marks.
 If the cumulative error is not excessive, 
punch the other marks back to the first punch 
mark (Figure I); otherwise, adjust your divid-
ers, re-scribe the ¾" line, and use the same 
method from 6 and 12 o’clock to mark and 
punch the 9 and 3 o’clock positions. When you 
like what you see, punch down the 8 remain-
ing marks. Perfect spacing is not critical. 
 To speed things up, you can approximate 
this method by wrapping a tape measure 
around the circumference, or you can avoid 
measuring entirely by downloading the drilling 
templates from makeprojects.com/v/27 and 
gluing them to the cans (Figure J).
 With the can resting on the backup, drill ½" 
holes at the punch marks. On your first hole, 
push only the tip of your step drill through the 
can and into the wood.
 Remove the can from the backup block and 
put the drill tip back into the hole you just 
made. Drill straight into the wood past the 
½" mark, creating a step-bit-shaped recess 
J
D
E
F
H
K
L
I
G

(Figure K). (If you skip this step and drill 
straight through the can into the wood, your 
first hole will be egg-shaped.)
 Next, steady the can with your hand, and 
allow it to “float” a little as the drill heads 
down its hole (Figure L). Don’t force the drill: 
the step bit will cut effortlessly and cleanly.
 When you’re done drilling, wash off your 
marking dye or any glue. (Steel marking dye 
comes off with brake cleaner, Sharpie with 
rubbing alcohol, and most glues with lighter 
fluid.) When this can gets hot, any remaining 
goo will be cooked on forever. 
 Using the can opener, remove the bottom 
of the paint can. 
3. Mark and drill the 19oz food can.
Using the methods described in Step 2, apply 
your drilling template, or mark and scribe a 
line ½" from the open end of the 19oz can 
(Figure M). Set your dividers to the chord 
division of 0.431" (a little less than 8"), and 
make 24 divisions at the ½" line.
 Punch your marks, and drill twenty-four ¼" 
holes (Figure N). Remember to create a ¼" 
step-drill recess in the wood before you drill 
all the holes. 
 Clamp the wood block vertically (a vise 
comes in handy here) and slide the 19oz can 
over the end (Figure O).
 Drill at least thirty ¼" holes in the bottom 
of the can (Figure P). You can do a fair job by 
eyeball if you follow the rings stamped into 
the bottom of the can. The important thing is 
that you create an open enough bottom for 
good airflow while not letting all your fuel fall 
out. Clean off any dye or glue remaining. 
 Snap the 19oz can open-side first into the 
paint can. They should make a satisfying 
press fit (Figures Q and R). 
4. Mark and drill the standoff.
Apply the template, or mark and scribe a line 
¾" from the top of the 12oz can, and set your 
dividers to the chord division of 0.767" (a hair 
past N"). Scribe 16 divisions at the ¾" line 
(Figure S). Start anywhere: these cans are 
seamless.
M
O
Q
S
N
P
R
T
 Punch your marks and drill sixteen ½" 
holes. Clean off any dye or glue.
 Turn the can upside down, and drill a ½" 
hole through the bottom of the can (Figure T). 
Dig in one jaw of your tinsnips and cut around 
the hole, spiraling out to make a hole about 
2½" in diameter (Figure U, following page). 
Use the ridges and valleys pressed into the 
bottom of the can as landmarks. When you’re 
139
Follow us @make

140 Make: makezine.com/27
OUTDOORS
DIY
satisfied, turn the wood block up to vertical 
and hammer down any rough edges (Figure V),
finishing the job with a half-round file. 
Using the Wood Gas Stove
Fill your stove with wood chips, acorns,
eucalyptus pods, small pinecones, or dried 
pelletized dung (Figure W). Your fuel must 
allow some airflow through it, so don’t use 
loose sawdust or a single big chunk.
 Starting these stoves is not easy — you 
may have to cheat with a little charcoal lighter, 
Sterno, or other fire-starting material (my 
favorite is old denim strips soaked in wax).
 As the fire burns down past the side jets, 
blow down on the coals to start pyrolysis.
Try to get a uniform coal bed all the way 
around the can. Once you see good coals with 
fire floating on top (Figure X), put the standoff 
on the stove, rim up (Figure Y). If you see an 
orderly column of flame rising with no smoke, 
you’re gasifying! Put a pot of water on top and
get your ramen on (Figure Z).
 When the fire goes out, you’re done with 
this charge. You can pile another charge on 
top, but you may need to relight it. To save
the charcoal for reuse or sequestration, pour 
in some water. To reduce it to ash, leave it
for another half hour and it’ll burn away. 
 When you’re done, the standoff nests neat-
ly between the other 2 cans for easy storage.
 You can experiment with changing the 
intensity and duration of the flame by chang-
ing the size of the hole on the top of the stove. 
The standoff lets you choose between a 2½" 
hole or a wide-open top simply by flipping it 
over. You can add old can lids with different-
sized holes cut in the middle to “throttle” the 
flame higher or lower. a
William Abernathy (yourwritereditor.com) writes and makes 
things in Berkeley under the watchful eyes of a feisty book-
binder, two little girls, and one old cat.
U
Y
Z
W
V
X
 WARNINGS! This stove produces and consumes 
carbon monoxide, a deadly poison. DO NOT EXPERIMENT 
WITH THIS STOVE INDOORS! Use it only outdoors. 
Your stove will get hot. Using it on a wooden bench will 
leave a scorch mark. Use it on concrete, a tile you don’t 
care for (thermal shock may crack it), or on dirt you don’t 
mind scorching. 
 TIP: Your gasifier will 
burn most of the soot, 
but not all of it! For easier 
cleanup, coat your pot with 
a thin layer of dishwashing 
liquid before you start. The 
soot will rinse off without 
scrubbing, and there’ll be
a small patch of burnt soap 
that comes off with a light 
scrub.

Doug Bradbury
A FEW YEARS AGO, WHEN MY SOFTWARE 
company was buying its first office furniture,
I coveted a $4,500 adjustable-height desk 
with a treadmill underneath. I thought this 
would be a good way to change a sedentary 
job into an active one. 
 Later, when I saw desk designer Dr. James 
Levine’s research on non-exercise activity
thermogenesis (NEAT), I learned that he’d 
originally mashed together a treadmill and 
a laptop desk to test the idea, and he raved 
about the results. I decided to make my own.
1. Source the parts. 
My first step was to acquire a treadmill.
I didn’t want to pay retail price for some-
thing I was going to tear apart, so I looked to 
Craigslist (craigslist.com), which was full of 
people unloading their treadmills. I found a 
Treadmill Desk
An “active workstation” from a treadmill and Ikea parts.
By Doug Bradbury
OFFICE
  DIY
MATERIALS
Treadmill must have sturdy upright supports and
support the iFit Chirp protocol. I used a Sears
ProForm 830QT.
Tabletop Ikea Galant
Pull-out keyboard shelf Ikea Summera
Lumber, 2×4, 4' long
Bolts, 2"×3", with matching washers and nuts (4)
Cable, stereo, with 1" male plug
TOOLS
Screwdrivers
Drill and drill bit
Jigsaw
Ruler
Rotary tool with cutting wheel
Tape masking or packing
ProForm 830QT (a Sears brand) for only $140. 
For treadmill specs and reviews, the Treadmill 
Sensei website (treadmillsensei.com) was a 
141
Follow us @Make

OFFICE
DIY
142 Make: makezine.com/27
great resource.
 My next stop was the discount “as-is” sec-
tion of Ikea, where I snatched a display-model 
Galant table, frame, and T-leg combo for $60.
2. Tear everything apart.
I began construction in the way that any good 
mash-up project begins: by tearing everything 
apart. I unscrewed and unplugged everything 
I could find on the treadmill until I was left 
with just the tread, the upright frame, and the 
touch-panel control unit (Figure A).
 One main control cable ran through a leg 
of the treadmill from the control panel to the 
motor below. There was also an audio cable, 
a cable running to the hand-grip heart rate 
monitor, and an extra heart rate cable that led 
to nothing. The idea behind treadmill desks is 
to walk slowly for long periods of time, rather 
than to get your heart pounding, so I yanked 
out all the heart rate cables and sensors.
3. Mount the tabletop.
Prying the rubber handgrips off each side 
revealed horizontal supports at a good height 
for the table. So I drilled a hole through the 
posts and bolted on a 2×4 that was long 
enough to span the Galant table frame.
 After removing the frame from the tabletop, 
I chose 2 holes on the frame that lined up well 
with the 2×4, drilled holes through the 2×4, 
and bolted the frame on top (Figures B and C).
 Things looked good except for the 2 upright 
posts that would prevent the tabletop from 
being installed. I had 2 options: either cut
off the posts or notch out the tabletop. My 
tools and expertise were better matched to 
notching the table, so I proceeded to carefully 
measure and cut the holes with a drill and
jigsaw. Then I screwed the tabletop to the 
frame from below.
4. Reconnect the control panel.
It was time to re-establish control of the
treadmill. First, I used a rotary tool to hack 
away at the plastic enclosure containing the 
touch panel and circuit boards until I had a
box just large enough to house them. 
A
C
D
B
 TIP: When cutting through a laminated surface (like 
most Ikea stuff), stick masking or packing tape over your 
cut line to prevent the laminate from chipping.

 The documentation on this protocol is 
sparse, but I found an open source project in 
C that generated the correct signals. I ported 
this library to Java and made it real-time. 
Then using my company’s Limelight GUI 
framework for Ruby, my apprentice built an 
attractive user interface to drive the library.
 After plugging the computer’s audio output 
into the treadmill control input, I now had 
control of the treadmill right on my computer 
desktop. Instructions for downloading and 
running this app are at walkncode.com. a
F
 Conveniently, the box had 2 screw holes 
on the bottom, which I used to mount the 
box onto a $10 Ikea pull-out keyboard shelf 
(Summera), which I installed underneath
the desktop (Figure D). 
 This way, I could easily pull the controls out 
when I needed to start and stop the treadmill 
or change the speed, then stow them away,
to not interfere with walking or typing.
 With the touch-panel enclosure mounted 
on the keyboard tray with its 2 original mount-
ing screws, there wasn’t quite enough slack 
in the control cable to pull the control display 
out far enough to see. So I took the cover off 
the treadmill base and found a way to reroute 
the control cable inside to free up sufficient 
slack (Figure E). After replacing the cover, the 
treadmill desk was complete.
5. Walk and code.
After building the treadmill desk at home,
I packed it up and reassembled it in our office, 
where it continues to draw a lot of attention. 
 For a total cost of $210, it’s been a great, 
healthy addition to our office and has suc-
ceeded in making my day a more active one. 
I comfortably type, code, Skype, talk, and do 
everything else that I did while sitting down. 
Now I just do it at 1 mph (Figure F).
 One problem arose. We often write software 
in pairs, which helps us work faster and make 
fewer mistakes. But the treadmill desk only 
lets one person walk at a time. So we now 
have a double treadmill desk, custom-built 
from my design by a manufacturer in Indiana.
Software Upgrade
Being a software craftsman by trade, I soon 
became dissatisfied with reaching under the 
desk all the time to change the speed and 
incline of the treadmill. I had a computer on 
top of the desk, so why couldn’t I control the 
treadmill from there?
 Fortunately, my treadmill supports the
iFit Chirp protocol, which is primarily used
to enable a CD player with a workout CD
to plug into the treadmill and send control
commands in between music tracks. 
Doug Bradbury is a software craftsman at 8th Light, Inc. 
who can’t stop at just making great software. You can contact 
him via email (make@dougbradbury.com) or Twitter 
(@dougbradbury). He lives in the Chicago suburbs with 
his wife, Jen.
Control Cable Reroute
Original path
New path
E
143
Follow us @Make

144 Make: makezine.com/27
Pauric O’Callaghan
AS A USER-INTERFACE DESIGNER, MY JOB 
is to understand people’s goals and create
a design that allows them to focus less on 
their tools and more on their work. I decided 
to apply this thinking directly to my own work-
space. First I sketched out my basic design 
idea and defined my requirements, then
I prototyped and iterated my design in elec-
tronics, software, and wood. The result is the 
Touchdesk, which I now use every day.
 The keyboard and mouse are generalist
input devices that enable all commands 
through the same interface, but the “80/20 
rule” observes that we use 20% of features in 
any application 80% of the time. In my work, 
common actions require navigating to sub-
menus or remembering multikey, app-specific 
shortcuts, while seldom-used commands
use up dedicated one-button access.
 To remedy this, I sketched out a smarter 
“soft” keyboard that runs on a touchscreen 
display inlaid into the desk’s wooden top. 
Icons on the touchscreen offer one-button 
access to the actions I use most frequently, 
with the button mappings changing based
on the current application. The buttons them-
selves graphically represent their functions. To 
zoom in, for example, you touch a magnifying 
glass icon instead of having to chord some-
thing like Ctrl + as you would on a keyboard.
 Above the touchscreen, 4 inlaid wooden 
buttons are hardwired to Copy, Paste, Delete, 
and Ctrl, 3 commands and a modifier that are 
common across all applications and which 
I felt didn’t need to take up virtual keyboard 
space. To the right of the touchscreen I inlaid 
a tablet, the preferred pointing device (replac-
ing a mouse) for drawing and design work.
Touchdesk
Customize your own integrated workspace.
By Pauric O’Callaghan
OFFICE
  DIY

MATERIALS
Resistive touchscreen, 4-wire, 6½" or 7" such as 
part #360-2446-ND ($38) or #BER277-ND ($59) 
from Digi-Key (digikey.com). I purchased mine on 
eBay for around $20.
USB gamepad, one-hand keyboard with keyboard 
mapping software I used the 15-button Belkin
Nostromo n52, $75; the current version is the n52te.
Pointing device for computer: tablet or mouse
I used a Wacom tablet, but use whatever you like best.
Digital picture frame, 7"
Arduino Mega microcontroller (or Illuminato) part 
#MKSP5 from Maker Shed (makershed.com), $65. 
Standard Arduinos don’t have enough inputs; I used 
an Illuminato, but the newer Mega will also work.
NPN transistors (15) any basic NPN, such as
a 2N3904, part #COM-00521 from SparkFun
Electronics (sparkfun.com)
Pushbutton switches, mini SPST (6) such as
SparkFun #COM-00097
Protoboard or stripboard to make a shield for the 
Arduino, such as the 3"×4" 1200D epoxy fiber 
board from Veroboard (veroboard.com). I used a 
commodity pad-per-hole protoboard, 24×30 holes, 
70mm×90mm.
Protoboard or stripboard for mounting 4 of the mini 
switches, such as Veroboard’s 2"×10" 2000L boards 
(epoxy or phenolic). I cut a piece (around 8×60 holes) 
from some stripboard I got from an old lab.
USB hub, 4-port
Wire, 22 gauge insulated, various colors
Wood glue
Wood, 1"×12", 4' long I used pine for prototyping,
oak for the final build.
Hardwood slat, 1" thick, at least 1½"×2' such as 
#64823 from Rockler (rockler.com)
Wood screws, 1¼" (4) #8 screws or whatever you 
have on hand that will work
Wood screws, ½", self-tapping (6) #6 or whatever 
size will work
Clear polyurethane spray, semigloss
Male breakaway headers (56 pins total) 
SparkFun #PRT-00117 (2x)
TOOLS
Plunge router with round-over and mortise bits
Drill and drill bits (for wood screws)
Screwdriver
Glue gun and hot glue
Ruler and pencil
Tools I used for prototyping (which you won’t need 
if you copy my design):
Boarduino Kit Maker Shed #MKAD9, $18
Arduino Mini USB adapter Maker Shed #MKSP3, $20
Plug-in breadboard power supply, 3.3V/5V
Maker Shed #MKSF5, $14
Solderless breadboard
USB-TTL serial cable, 5V
 I also wanted to make sure the physical 
desktop had room to accommodate a paper 
notepad, along with a traditional keyboard 
(which I inset in wood to match the desk)
that could stow away and be brought out for 
occasional text entry and document writing.
 At the start of the project I wrote out a list 
of all my design requirements and sketched 
out the physical workspace (Figure A). I rec-
ommend this practice for any major project 
as a way to stay focused on your vision and 
decrease the chance that you’ll lose interest 
and shelve it for another day.
System Architecture
Figure B (following page) represents the 
Touchdesk’s functional architecture, showing 
how its input and output devices all connect 
to the computer via a shared USB hub. The 
touchscreen display has 2 parts: a standard 
digital picture frame underneath that shows 
the icons, and a transparent resistive touch-
screen on top that reads the finger presses.
 The Arduino drives the resistive touch-
screen by applying 5 volts across it, alternating 
between horizontal and vertical. If a point is 
being touched, the screen will return a voltage 
between 0V and 5V for each axis, depend-
ing linearly on the point’s distance from the 
screen’s left (with horizontal voltage applied) 
or bottom (with vertical voltage applied). 
Pressing the exact center, for example, returns 
2.5V for both x and y.
 The x and y voltages from the touchscreen 
run to analog input pins on the Arduino. The 
A
145
Follow us @Make

OFFICE
DIY
146 Make: makezine.com/27
Arduino code then maps these coordinates to 
the button currently displayed at that position 
and turns on one of its digital output pins to 
match. 
 Each button on the touchscreen maps to 
one of the Arduino’s output pins, which is 
why this project requires an Arduino Mega 
or Illuminato; standard Arduinos don’t 
have enough I/O to support more than a 
RESISTIVE TOUCHSCREEN
Powered by the Arduino.
The screen converts 
touch to x/y 
coordinates.  
DIGITAL PICTURE FRAME
Contains a series of images
representing the common
features of various
applications.  
ARDUINO
Processes x/y touch
coordinates and converts to
key presses via shield. 
USB HUB
Connects all 
components 
to the
computer.  
Touchdesk
System Architecture Diagram
SHIELD
Converts the Arduino digital
I/O pin into key presses.  
USB ‘KEYBOARD’ CIRCUIT
Key presses are sent to
the computer over USB.  
WACOM TOUCH TABLET  
B
small number of touchscreen keys, and the 
Touchdesk uses up to 15 inputs: 11 soft keys 
plus 4 hardwired buttons.
 To convert the Arduino outputs into some-
thing the computer and my applications can 
interpret, I used a USB gamepad with 15 
keyboard buttons. Pressing a button on the 
gamepad closes the connection between 
2 points on its internal circuit board, so I wired 
•
•
•
•
C
5V y-axis
5V x-axis
Resistive 
Panel
Arduino
Arduino
Arduino
digital
outputs
Dn
D0
Shield
USB keyboard
Shield
USB
keyboard
Computer
Keystroke
mapping software
USB
0V x-axis
SCHEMATIC OVERVIEW
SHIELD DETAIL
0V y-axis
USB 
keyboard 
“brains”

the Arduino to trick the USB keyboard cir-
cuitry into thinking the user pressed a key.
 Each Arduino output connects up to an NPN 
transistor on a plug-in Arduino shield PCB that 
I built, and each transistor connects out to the 
USB gamepad’s PCB (Figure C). When a nor-
mally open transistor on the shield receives 
a digital HIGH from an Arduino pin, it closes 
the transistor gate, making the connection 
between a button’s contact pair. To the com-
puter on the other end of the gamepad’s USB 
cable, this looks exactly like a key press.
 Above the touchscreen, the hardwired Copy, 
Paste, Delete, and Ctrl buttons connect directly
to contact pairs on the gamepad, in parallel 
with the Arduino-controlled transistors.
 The final piece of the puzzle is configuring 
the gamepad driver software running on the 
computer to translate incoming key-press
signals into the appropriate actions. The 
Belkin Nostromo n52 has a nice user inter-
face for making these associations, and it can 
store a unique mapping for each application 
(Figure D). The driver then automatically 
switches mappings to match the app that’s 
currently running. For example, when I press 
the top left button on the touchscreen while 
I’m using Photoshop, I get the brush tool, but 
if I move over to Word, that button summons 
the highlight tool.
 There is one limitation: although the touch-
screen’s button mapping changes functionally 
when I switch applications, I didn’t figure out 
an automatic way to tell the display which 
application is running. For switching the 
button icon arrays to match different applica-
tions, I wired 2 pushbutton switches to the 
picture frame’s Next and Back buttons. 
 After I began using the Touchdesk, my 
fingers soon learned the soft button locations
for each app, so I don’t generally rely on the 
icons anymore anyway. But the ability to 
manually switch screen images lets me 
bring up the right set when I need to.
Touchscreen Electronics
Four-wire resistive touchscreens are simple: 
one wire runs to each side, and you use the 
Button 3
5V
Y plane
X plane
0V
5V
Button 4
Button 1
Button 2
D
E
F
same wires to both apply voltage and take a 
reading along each axis. To hook an Arduino 
up to the screen, you connect one digital I/O 
pin to each screen wire for applying voltage, 
plus one analog input pin each to the screen’s 
top and right-side wires. 
 I modified a sketch by Marco Nicolato to 
program the Arduino to read my touchscreen 
and determine which button is pressed; 
147
Follow us @Make

OFFICE
DIY
148 Make: makezine.com/27
you can download the code at makeprojects.
com/v/27. For these experiments I used an 
Arduino Diecimila and Boarduino (Figures E 
and F, previous page), although I knew that 
this project needed a microcontroller that 
could support more dedicated outputs. With 
the digital picture frame, I simply removed its 
workings from its case.
 I built the Arduino shield on a small proto-
board, arranging male pin headers to plug 
into the Arduino and arraying the top with 
transistors. Then with the USB gamepad,
I extracted its circuit board from its case and 
traced back contact pairs from each physical 
key location to find places I could solder to. 
After wiring each transistor on the shield to a 
contact pair on the gamepad PCB, I hot-glued 
the gamepad PCB to the shield (Figure G).
 To connect the picture frame board, 
Arduino, USB gamepad board, and tablet to 
my computer, I used a 4-way USB hub.
Woodwork
“To carve an elephant from a block of marble, 
remove everything that doesn’t look like an 
elephant.” This old saw sums up how I made 
the Touchdesk’s case. I took some wood and 
cut out sections to fit the internal electronics 
and keyboard on top.
 I built a prototype using soft pine to figure 
out dimensions and ergonomics (Figure H). 
This taught me that I needed to use a smaller 
tablet and align the touchscreen with my left 
hand (I’m right-handed) rather than my face.
 For the final design, I glued and screwed 
together a 2-layer case out of 1"-thick oak 
board. I carved the bottom board with a 
plunge router to resemble a tray. I carved the 
top layer to match, creating a hollow cavity for 
the electronics. 
 Then I marked and cut a hole to fit the 
touchscreen components, which I hot-glued 
to the inside of the case. For the tablet, which 
is thin, I used the plunge router to carve an 
indentation just deep enough to let it sit flush 
with the desk’s top surface. Figure I shows the 
final woodwork, and Figure J shows the case 
with electronic components placed.
CAUTION: Routers are powerful tools that can 
easily run through the wrong part of the wood, your fin-
gers, or both. Take care and time with them, and practice 
with a prototype before working on the final design.
H
I
G

Pauric O’Callaghan (pauric@pauric.net) is a user-interface 
designer by day and a carpenter/maker/hacker/kitesurfer 
by night.
Physical Buttons
Above the touchscreen I cut a hole for the 
4 hardwired wooden buttons (Copy, Paste, 
Delete, and Ctrl). These buttons consist of 
thin, flexible, hardwood slats with pushbutton 
mini switches on stripboard (screwed to the 
bottom board underneath) that are wired via
a pin header to the Arduino shield (Figure K).
 By carrying 4 very common functions, these 
wooden buttons reduce wear and tear on the 
touchscreen and add a nice aesthetic to the 
overall design.
 After wiring the 2 pushbutton switches
to the digital picture frame’s Next and 
Back button contacts (for changing the 
touchscreen icons), I hot-glued them under 
the desktop along the left edge, just behind 
the touchscreen (Figure L, upper right).
Final Design Recursion
Finally, with the software stable and the wood 
finished with clear polyurethane, I used the 
Touchdesk itself to complete its own design. 
On the Touchdesk, I created the touchscreen 
icon array images, which I saved onto an SD 
card and plugged into the digital picture frame.
Touchdesk 2
Having used the Touchdesk for more than a 
year now, I’ve compiled a list of improvements 
for the next version. One problem is that the 
heat from all the electronics inside the case 
dried and shrank the wood, causing the 
resistive screen to ripple and warp. I had
to remove the picture frame and reglue in 
the resistive screen.
 Again, the main technical limitation is my 
having to manually change the images on the 
digital picture frame to match the application 
on-screen. It’s a small issue, but I would like 
to find a way to get that information from the 
computer to the display.
 With that said, the exercise of building my 
own input device and integrated workspace 
gave me a better understanding of ergonomics 
and touchscreen technology and some good 
coding experience. a
K
L
M
J
 Download the Arduino code file touch_
read.pde at makeprojects.com/v/27.
149
Follow us @Make

150 Make: makezine.com/27
Charles Platt
ACCELEROMETERS HAVE BECOME 
ubiquitous. Your car contains an accelerom-
eter that triggers the deployment of an airbag 
if it senses a collision. The game controller 
on a Nintendo Wii contains an accelerometer 
that responds to your physical movements. 
If you build a robot, and you want it to react 
appropriately when it bumps into something 
or falls over, an accelerometer can take care 
of that, too. 
 Modern accelerometers are truly amazing, 
microscopic devices, packaged inside tiny 
integrated circuit chips that can cost less than 
50 cents each. This kind of chip is known as 
a MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical system), 
and if you want to see how they work, you can 
find some fascinating electron micrographs by 
searching online for “mems device.”
 I can imagine dozens of hobby projects 
using accelerometers. The only problem is 
that MEMS chips are so small, typically less 
than 5mm square, that they’re very difficult 
to work with. Fortunately you can buy one 
already mounted with associated hardware 
on a mini-board measuring ½"×¾", ready
to be plugged into an everyday breadboard. 
 The price may seem high (the one I rec-
ommend currently retails for $23, which is 
among the cheapest) but in the project I have 
in mind, the additional parts should cost you 
less than $5.
Experimenting with 
the Accelerometer 
I selected the DE-ACCM6G made by Dimen-
sion Engineering (Figure A). This is a 2-axis 
accelerometer, meaning that it will detect 
transitions in 2 perpendicular directions. 
Looking down at it from directly above, when 
you move it from left to right, this is consid-
ered motion along its x-axis, and the voltage at 
the lower-right pin will increase momentarily. 
Move it from right to left, and the voltage on 
the same pin will diminish momentarily (see 
Figure B). 
 When you push the accelerometer away 
from you, and then pull it back toward you, this 
is considered motion along the y-axis, creating 
voltage fluctuations on the lower-left pin. 
 You can easily test this with just a 9V battery, 
an LM7805 voltage controller, and a multi-
meter, as shown in Figure C. The LM7805 
supplies 5V, which you connect with the 2 
top pins on the mini-board. But which end 
is the top end? You can compare it with the 
photographs here, or look underneath, and 
you should find the pins identified as X and Y 
(the outputs), Gnd (negative voltage), and Vin 
(positive voltage). Make sure you apply the 
voltage to the correct pair of pins, the right 
way around!
A
ELECTRONICS: FUN AND FUNDAMENTALS
By Charles Platt, Author of Make: Electronics
The Do-Not-Touch Box
Use a simple accelerometer to perplex your friends.
Negative (ground)
5V DC
power
X-axis
output
Y-axis
output

X-axis
pin
Y-axis
pin
X direction
Y direction
DE-ACCM6G
accelerometer package
(viewed from above, while resting 
on a flat horizontal surface)
B
a Fig. A: (Opposite) Closeup of the DE-ACCM6G
accelerometer package, mounted on a mini-board
measuring ½"×¾". Four pins (unseen, below the board) 
insert into a standard breadboard. Solder pads above
each pin are labeled with the pin functions. 
a Fig. B: Functions of the output pins of the accele-
rometer when it’s moved in the directions shown.
a Fig. C: Necessary connections to test the accele-
rometer. In reality it should be mounted with the voltage 
regulator on a breadboard, using jumper wires to
make the connections shown. 
 Set your meter to DC volts, using the 2V 
range if the meter doesn’t do auto-ranging. 
Hold the black probe in contact with the nega-
tive side of your power supply, and touch the 
red probe to each of the little solder pads above 
the output pins of the accelerometer. While 
the component is horizontal and motionless, 
your meter should show approximately 1.65V 
on each pin. Now slide the accelerometer 
around, and watch how the voltages change.
 What happens if you lift the mini-board 
directly upward? Nothing! To detect motion in 
the third dimension, you would need a 3-axis 
accelerometer.
 Try tilting the breadboard away from you 
until it’s vertical, resting on its top edge.
After the Y output stabilizes, it should show 
about 1.88V, suggesting that the component 
is accelerating downward, even though it
isn’t moving. How can this be? 
 Well, one of Einstein’s great insights was 
that gravity is indistinguishable from accel-
eration. You could be sitting in a rocket out 
in space, accelerating smoothly at 1 gravity 
(1g), or you could be sitting motionless in that 
same rocket on the launch pad, experiencing 
the gravitational pull of the Earth, and you 
would have no way to detect the difference. 
Strange but true: you and all the objects 
around you are experiencing a constant 1g 
downward acceleration right now.
 Here’s another little experiment. Hold the 
accelerometer, the meter, and the battery on 
your knees while you spin around in an office 
chair. The accelerometer will measure your 
outward centripetal acceleration, which is 
often referred to (inaccurately) as centrifugal 
force. Acceleration is a fascinating concept, 
and your accelerometer can help you to 
explore it.
 But how can we make practical use of the 
chip on its mini-board? The smart way is to 
connect it with a microcontroller such as the 
Arduino, BASIC Stamp, or Picaxe. All of these 
chips contain analog-to-decimal converters, 
allowing you to write a little program that
tells the microcontroller what to do when it 
senses small changes in voltage. You can set 
up a numeric display showing acceleration 
in gravities (g), and mount it in a car, on a 
bicycle, or on your own body when you jump 
DE-ACCM6G
accelerometer
package
Volts
LM7805
voltage
regulator
9V
battery
Multimeter
C
MATERIALS 
DE-ACCM6G accelerometer available from 
trossenrobotics.com or robotshop.com
Resistor, ¼W or higher, 3.3kΩ
Piezoelectric beeper, steady-tone, drawing less 
than 20mA such as Kobitone 254-PB511-ROX or 
model 273-073 from RadioShack (radioshack.com)
Differential comparator such as TLC372IP, 
TLC372CP, or similar
LM7805 voltage regulator You can ignore any
additional letters appended to this part identifier.
9V battery and snap connector
Breadboard and jumper wires
151
Follow us @make

152 Make: makezine.com/27
 Because the comparator has a very high 
input impedance, you can wire it directly to 
the accelerometer mini-board.
 The comparator is an open-collector 
device, which means that you should use its 
output pin to sink current. (To learn more 
about this concept, consult an introductory 
book, such as my own Make: Electronics.) 
Therefore, you can think of the comparator 
as “switching on” when its output goes low. 
It can sink 20mA, which is easily enough to 
up and down on a trampoline. 
 But let’s start with something simpler.
I’m going to use the accelerometer to make
a Do Not Touch Box.
START
Building the Box
I have to admit that if I see a little box with
“do not touch” written on it, I can’t resist
picking it up. This little project will deliver
a harmless surprise to anyone who yields
to that temptation. 
 In Figure D, the schematic shows that 
2 outputs from the accelerometer can drive 
the 2 inputs of a chip called a comparator 
(part #TLC372). One of these inputs is known 
as the inverting input (usually marked with a 
minus sign) while the other is called the non-
inverting input (marked with a plus sign). The 
comparator constantly compares its inputs.
If the inverting input has a higher voltage than 
the non-inverting input, the output from the 
comparator will be low, and vice versa. 
DE-ACCM6G
accelerometer
package
TLC372
TLC372
3.3K
Piezo
beeper
Pinouts for TLC372 differential comparator chip
(actually contains two separate comparators)
Power in (2V to 18V)
Comparator 2 output
Comparator 2 
inverting input
Comparator 2
noninverting input
Ground (negative)
Comparator 1 output
Comparator 1
inverting input
Comparator 1
noninverting input
5VDC
regulated
D
E
a Fig. D: Schematic showing a TLC372 comparator 
attached to the accelerometer package, driving a beeper. 
Because the TLC372 output goes low when active, the 
beeper is connected to positive power, which it sinks into 
the comparator. The 3.3K resistor pulls the output of the 
TLC372 higher when it’s not sinking current.
a Fig. E: This breadboard layout corresponds with the 
schematic in Figure D. Wires from a 9V battery are applied 
to the top 2 rows of the breadboard. The LM7805 voltage 
regulator, seen from above, is the black rectangle at top 
right. The TLC372 comparator pinouts are: pin 1, output; 
pin 2, inverting input; pin 3, non-inverting input; pin 4, 
negative power; pin 8, positive power; pins 5, 6, and 7
connect with a second, separate comparator inside the 
chip, and can be left with no connection.

Charles Platt is the author of Make: Electronics, an intro-
ductory guide for all ages. A contributing editor of MAKE, he 
designs and builds medical equipment prototypes in Arizona.
F
power a piezoelectric beeper.
 Connect positive voltage to the red wire 
of the beeper, connect its black wire to the 
output from the comparator, and the beeper 
will beep when the comparator output goes 
low. However, you also need to use a pull-up 
resistor to insure that the comparator out-
put is high when the comparator is inactive 
(Figure E).
 The beeper may not beep when you first 
apply power to the circuit. Gently tilt your 
breadboard in each direction, and whenever 
the x-axis output is greater than the y-axis 
output, the comparator will activate the 
beeper. 
 Inside a suitable box, mount the compo-
nents at a slight angle, so that the beeper 
will remain silent while the box is resting on 
a level surface. Label the box, leave it in an 
obvious place, and wait for someone to take 
the bait. As soon as the box is disturbed, it will 
start beeping, and the person holding it will 
have a hard time figuring out what makes it 
beep and what keeps it quiet. 
 Because the electronics consume only 
about 5mA while they’re waiting for some-
thing to happen, the 9V battery should last for 
2 or 3 days of continuous use.
Going Further
If this little project rouses your curiosity, here 
are some more ideas: 
 
» Search online for comparator hysteresis to 
learn how a comparator can tolerate larger 
differences between inputs before emitting 
a signal. Hysteresis is an important concept 
when sensing changes in the environment.
 
» Connect the x-axis output from the accelero-
meter to one input of the comparator. Using 
a voltage divider, apply a fixed, constant 
1.65V to the other input. Use hysteresis so 
that the comparator isn’t triggered unless 
the voltages on its inputs differ significantly. 
Now the comparator only senses accelera-
tion or tilting along the x-axis.
 
» The TLC372 chip actually contains 2 compar-
ators. You can use the second one to sense 
changes in the y-axis. Now you have the 
beginnings of an attitude control system in 
some kind of flying or walking device.
 
» You can wire the comparator so that it 
only responds to large fluctuations. In this 
mode, it will detect impacts or collisions. 
You’ll find a circuit that does this on the 
Trossen Robotics website, which sells the 
DE-ACCM6G comparator (see the Materials 
list).
 
» Try using a 555 timer to generate an audible 
tone, and feed an output from the accelero-
meter to pin 5 (the Control pin) of the timer. 
When you hold the accelerometer while 
making hand motions, the tone will change 
pitch. (You may need an op-amp to increase 
the accelerometer voltage output for the 
555 input.)
 I’m sure you can come up with many more 
fun accelerometer projects of your own. a
Make: Electronics book at the Maker Shed: 
makezine.com/go/makeelectronics
153
Follow us @make

Make: makezine.com/27
154

Jen Siska
MakeShift
By Lee D. Zlotoff
Hot Water!
The Scenario: You’ve just returned to your country home from a shopping 
trip to town, some 20 miles upriver, with all the fixings for a weekend barbecue 
with your family, including a fresh bag of your favorite mesquite charcoal and 
some other sundries: coffee filters, kitty litter for your pet Persian, Sheba, and 
some fresh aquarium sand for your daughter’s collection of goldfish — all of 
whom she’s named Moby Dick. No sooner are you in the door than the power 
goes out. And, calling the electric company to report the outage, you quickly
discover the loss of power is now the least of your worries.
 There’s been a serious accident at the nuclear power plant 5 miles upriver 
from town, and radioactive steam is now escaping into both the air and the river. 
Containment of the leak and restoration of power are both currently indefinite. 
You are advised to stay indoors and drink only bottled water until further notice, 
as they now presume the river water is contaminated well past your location.
The Challenge: You consider getting everyone into the car and evacuating. 
But, given the prevailing winds, your only way out would certainly put you right in 
the path of the leak — so that’s really not an option. And while your large house 
can be sealed up easily — and there’s enough food for a week or more if need be 
— aside from some beer and a few bottles of soda, you have no bottled water!
So what are you going to drink? You must devise a way to provide enough safe 
drinking water for your family of four to weather the crisis for at least a week.
What You’ve Got: In addition to everything mentioned, you have a garage 
full of tools, a 5-gallon plastic jug your family uses to collect spare change,
and anything else that would normally be found in a typical house. So prepare
to hunker down, break out the board games, and protect your nuclear family.
Good luck (to all of us).
Send a detailed description of your MakeShift solution with sketches and/or
photos to makeshift@makezine.com by Oct. 28, 2011. If duplicate solutions are 
submitted, the winner will be determined by the quality of the explanation and 
presentation. The most plausible and most creative solutions will each win a 
MAKE T-shirt and a MAKE Pocket Ref. Think positive and include your shirt size 
and contact information with your solution. Good luck! For readers’ solutions
to previous MakeShift challenges, visit makezine.com/makeshift.
Lee David Zlotoff is a writer/producer/director among whose numerous credits is creator of MacGyver.
He is also president of Custom Image Concepts (customimageconcepts.com).
Follow us @make 155

WobBler by Randy Sarafan
visit Instructables.com  simplebots for more detailed instructions.
Materials:
TupPerware
Electrical Wire
Servomotors
Self-adhesive
Coat hoOks
Zip ties
Soldering Gun
aA BatTeries
BatTery holder
open
servo
First take out the
control circuitry in
your servo
Close
servo
remove solder from the
largest solder points
Pry circuit board
from servo case
Connect new
wires
Burp!
Wow!
This Robot
realLy rocks
and rolLs.
 
     &
instructables.com
together again
for the first
time!
Let's make a 
Make: makezine.com/27
156

Remove the horns
Insert the servos back
to back so the shafts
are near the botTom
Mark the tupPerware
to indicate where to
mount the shaft
Drill the holes
mount motors
using zip ties
conNect the wires
as shown below
Place the batTery
pack inside and
Replace the horns
Cut off coat hoOks
Attach adhesive coat
hooks to the servo
horns
Power it up!
Burp!
We DID it.
WobBle!
WobBle!
We
make
a great
team!
157
Follow us @make

158 Make: makezine.com/27
TOOLBOX
Multimeters and soldering irons and scissors, oh my! Plus
a reference manual for pyros, and the ultimate maker belt.
Need miniature aluminum girders for that 
next robot project? Look to Twintec, a tiny 
company based in Washington state that 
manufactures and sells the lightweight 
MicroRAX building system.
 Parts include 10mm extruded aluminum 
beams and all the braces, plates, brackets, 
and other connectors you need to make your 
masterpiece. They’ve even developed adapter 
plates to attach your ’RAX to VEX and NXT 
constructs, allowing you to merge multiple 
building media.
 The beams, Twintec’s signature component, 
are sold in 900mm lengths you can cut to size 
based on your project (precut lengths are also 
available). This seems eminently sensible — 
forget futilely pawing through a box of wrong-
sized beams for that right one, and hack
your own.
 At Maker Faire the company was showing
off some awesome new additions to the line, 
including a swiveling plate (kind of like a 
hinge) they used to build a robotic hand. They 
also showed how to make 3D-printed panels 
that slide into the girders’ grooves to form an 
enclosure. It’s a young product, so there’s still 
a lot you can’t do with MicroRAX, but you’ll 
be surprised at what you can build: anything 
from mundane shelving to robots to computer 
enclosures. For those super-elite projects,
you can buy MicroRAX in ninja-black anodized 
aluminum!                                    —John Baichtal
MicroRAX
Starter Kit $80; Pro Kit $180 microrax.com

Toribe Kitchen Scissors
$42 niwaki.com
You would imagine that 
scissors were a done deal — 
nothing left to improve. That 
is, until you try these stainless 
steel kitchen scissors from 
Niwaki. The shear (ha-ha) 
genius of the Toribe scissors 
is their simplicity, an elegance 
only Japanese tool fetishists 
seem able to achieve.
 The design allows for one 
wonderful feature: separation 
of the two blades so they can 
be washed (who wants last 
night’s chicken guts sitting 
on his scissors?). This feature 
also enables easier sharpen-
ing of the blades. These are 
scissors for life.
—Saul Griffith
The phrase “you get what you pay for” must have been 
coined by someone weaned on a $9 Shack soldering iron, 
who scorched through a dozen electronic kits before
realizing there’s a better way: this gorgeous Weller.
 The WES51 is a professional’s tool, made to be used all 
day. It powers up quickly, with a range of 350°F–850°F. 
If you leave it on, the Weller automatically powers down 
after 99 minutes of inactivity.
 Its comfy handle is made to be easy on the hands, and 
the ESD-resistant material keeps the shocks away from 
your project. Advanced users will appreciate its wireless 
temperature lockout, which limits the operator’s ability 
to accidentally use too much heat. I don’t know if it’s the 
sum of these features that makes the Weller superior to 
the el-cheapo model, but I know it’s true that I’ve never 
soldered better.                                                                     —JB
Weller WES51 Soldering Iron
$95 amazon.com
Desktop Trebuchet Model Kit
$40 rlt.com/10421
RLT Industries has gone above and beyond with this 
kit. Each piece of wood is precisely laser cut. All the 
required tools can be found around your home or at a 
hobby shop, and the instructions are well-documented 
and detailed. However, as instructed, I used wood glue 
but it didn’t hold well. So I resorted to a hot glue gun.
 The overall building process took about four hours. 
The Desktop Trebuchet kit comes with four wooden 
balls to fire, and it shoots about 15 feet. I showed it to 
my engineering club, and we fired circus peanuts with 
it. (One of my club members ate all the peanuts.) It’s a 
great kit for the model hobbyist who’s just starting out. 
—Robert M. Zigmund
159
Follow us @make

160 Make: makezine.com/27
TOOLBOX
Eureka! By Roy Doty
Phffft!
Tool + Belt
$40 686.com/store
This belt is the first of its kind, a utilitarian-yet-stylish maker-
wear belt. Rather than the unwieldy, too-large carpenter’s 
belt, the 686 belt, which I’ve affectionately dubbed “Toolbelt 
2.0,” is almost indiscernible from a regular leather belt. But 
there are key differences: its buckle consists of two screw-
drivers, flathead and Phillips, and a bottle opener cut into the 
side, while its metal belt loop has three wrenches cut into it.
 The leather belt, which comes in black, brown, and white, 
is designed so you can easily and quickly remove both tools. 
It’s durable, waterproof, and, quite frankly, looks pretty cool, 
all reasons why it’s almost always on my body. All in all, it’s 
by far my favorite article of clothing and my second favorite 
tool (next to my trusty Leatherman Wave, of course).
—Adam Zeloof
GorillaTorch Flare
$35 joby.com
The flexible, hands-free GorillaTorch Flare from Joby
combines a 100-lumen LED flashlight with the Gorilla line’s 
signature magnetic tripod. True to the name, the Flare is 
equipped with both white and red LEDs, combining a work 
light with a powerful emergency signal. Less dramatically, 
I’ve used mine as a miniature photo light, perched over
a project so I can snap some well-illuminated shots.       —JB
Kindle 
E-Reader
$140 amazon.com
The Kindle is a joy. The E-Ink 
screen has high readability in 
sunlight, and we makers can 
hack it to give our laptops 
and iPods internet access — 
although this isn’t necessar-
ily condoned by Amazon.
 It’s fairly drop-proof, but
if you do drop it, call Amazon 
Kindle Support, and they’ll 
say, “No problem. We’ll over-
night you a new one.” As an 
added bonus, the MAKE 
PDFs show up great on mine, 
but since it’s monochrome 
the pictures lose some of 
their bang.              
—Zach Zundel

BernzOmatic OX2550KC Cutting, 
Welding, and Brazing Torch Kit
$100
This torch is a great intermediate tool
positioned somewhere between a standard 
propane torch and a full-blown oxyacetylene 
rig, and while it won’t braze or blast through 
heavy-gauge steel, it will cut through thin 
material, braze thin-gauge ferrous (steel) 
material, and weld aluminum. It also lets you 
do precision silver soldering more easily and 
better than with a standard propane torch.
  Although it took a little practice to get the 
hang of adjusting it properly, this torch did 
an excellent job, and my silver solder joints 
have greatly improved.
These two torches from BernzOmatic (bernzomatic.com) are actually quite different.
The QuickFire torch is a fantastic tool for soldering copper plumbing fittings or heating 
heavy-duty nuts and bolts to free them up. The cutting/brazing torch, on the other hand, 
provides the higher temperatures required to silver solder, braze, and do thin-gauge cutting, 
all of which are outside the bounds of the QuickFire. The cutting/brazing torch requires 
more skill and practice to master, whereas the QuickFire is dead simple and a bit of a
brute-force tool.                                                                                                          —Chris Singleton
BernzOmatic QuickFire
Torch and Fuel Cylinder
$70
Although it hasn’t replaced my hobby knife, 
sanding block, or swivel vise, this torch has 
joined them as a permanent member of the 
tools left out on my bench at all times.
 With its shorter and more stable design, it’s 
a vast improvement over the propane torch 
that’s been around for years. Its nicest fea-
ture is instant lighting at the pull of a trigger, 
which eliminates the need for two-handed 
lighting with a sparker; this greatly simplifies 
intermittent heavy-duty soldering and heating.
 Additionally, the torch has a new adjust-
able burner design to provide more efficient 
heat for the specific job at hand. 
TORCH STANDOFF
Disc
Sander Cover
I don’t often use the disc
section of my big belt/disc 
sander, so I made a simple
cover so I don’t have to worry about things 
(or me) falling against the rotating disc
when I’m concentrating on using the belt.
Lubricating
Saw Blades
Before cutting fret slots, or 
much of anything else, rub 
an old candle along the edge 
of your saw blade. You’ll be 
surprised how much easier
it makes the process to have 
a bit of lubrication.
—Frank Ford
Find more tools-n-tips at makezine.com/tnt. 
161
Follow us @make

162 Make: makezine.com/27
TOOLBOX MAKE LOOKS AT BOOKS
Drill Into Your Head
Can You Drill a Hole Through Your 
Head and Survive? by Simon Rogers
$13 Skyhorse Publishing
Here’s a fun, interactive book that 
features 180 fascinating questions and 
answers about a wide range of topics, 
including Science and Technology, 
Sports and Games, and Health and 
Fitness. Each answer is backed up by 
a paragraph or two giving a thorough 
explanation using scientiﬁ c research.
 You’ll be surprised by what you’ll ﬁ nd 
out from this book, including my favor-
ite questions: Could we actually build 
a Star Trek phaser gun?, Is suspended 
animation safe?, and Are cloned animals 
safe to eat?
Whether you’re looking for a short, 
entertaining read that will open your 
eyes to some of the scientiﬁ c research 
being done around the world, or just a 
book to put on your coffee table, Can 
You Drill a Hole Through Your Head and 
Survive? is a good choice.
—Kindy Connally-Stewart
The Wonders of Fire
The Practical Pyromaniac
by William Gurstelle
$17 Chicago Review Press
In his latest book, engineer and contrib-
uting MAKE editor Bill Gurstelle offers 
up 25 DIY projects that introduce the 
concepts and science of ﬁ re.
 Gurstelle recounts theories about ﬁ re 
and tracks its evolution within the ﬁ eld 
of science. The book was written with 
the intent of using everyday household 
items and inexpensive materials; the 
ﬁ rst chapter includes a list of suppliers 
and a safety crash course in ﬁ re extin-
guisher use.
 The projects range in level of difﬁ cul-
ty so that as you progress through the 
book you accumulate pyrotechnic skills 
and move on to builds that progres-
sively require a more elaborate setup. 
Several projects have been featured 
in MAKE, such as Flame Tube (Volume 
26), Arc Light (Volume 20), and Fire 
Piston (Volume 19).
 Other projects include the Burning 
Ring of Fire (a portable backpacking 
stove), the Fire Tornado, a DIY Thermo-
couple, and the large Propane Flame 
Thrower (seen on the book’s cover). Full 
of historical detail, diagrams, and links 
to online videos, Gurstelle’s book is the 
perfect reference manual for all things 
pyrotechnical.                  —Nick Raymond
Kitchen Coding
Arduino Cookbook by Michael 
Margolis
$45 O’Reilly Media
The Arduino development platform
has taken the DIY community by storm. 
It’s quite possible to go from zero knowl-
edge of hardware and software dev to a 
blinking light in minutes. And while there 
are many online tutorials, they are often 
spread over different websites. The 
Arduino Cookbook creates an alternate 
learning path that’s nicely packaged and 
complete within one book.
 The Cookbook starts from the very
beginning, detailing the Arduino 
hardware, integrated development 
environment (IDE), and C programming 
language, then jumps straight into writ-
ing code and making circuits.
 The best part of this book (aside 
from its treasure trove of great code 
examples) is that each section starts 
with a problem followed by a solution 
and a discussion format.
 Overall, this is a great book for begin-
ners and intermediate microcontroller 
hobbyists and developers. The quick 
and clear instructions will get you 
hardware-hacking very quickly, and if 
you’re like me and have worked with the 
Arduino for a few years, you’ll still be 
pleasantly surprised with all the higher-
end instruction.                     —Riley Porter
The Nerdy Family
The Geek Dad’s Guide to
Weekend Fun by Ken Denmead
$18 Gotham
Ken Denmead is Wired’s resident 
GeekDad, and his second book of 
geeky projects is a wacky, fun, and 
inspirational collection. From making a 
Nerf dart blowgun or a trebuchet out of 
Legos to building robots from scratch 
or making stop-motion movies, there’s 
a wide range of projects that will appeal 
to kids of all ages. The projects range 
from simple to moderately complex, 
and many involve recycling, reusing, 
and hacking things you’ll already have 
around the house.
 Most can be completed on a weekend 
afternoon, so if you’re looking for some 
quick and educational activities, there’s 
plenty in here to thrill your kids and the 
kid in you. Besides Denmead’s inspired 
activities, there are also contributions 
here from GeekDad emeritus Chris 
Anderson and other guest authors like 
Rod Roddenberry, keeper of the Star 
Trek ﬂ ame.  
 —Bruce Stewart

The Fun of Physics
Physics for Entertainment
by Yakov Perelman (translated from 
the Russian by Arthur Shkarovsky)
$25 from amazon.com or free online 
at makezine.com/go/yakov
When I was a boy my father’s best 
friend, a physicist, gave me a two-
volume set called Physics for Entertain-
ment. I remember him saying that
it was hard to ﬁ nd. All I know is that
I loved those books and read them over 
and over until well past my bedtime.
 They explained how everything 
worked: engines, soap bubbles, eyes, 
the sun, guns, sailboats, etc., and
included neat tricks like how to boil 
water in a paper cup.
 Originally written in 1913 and trans-
lated into English in 1975, Physics
for Entertainment is a fantastic intro-
duction to classical physics. Years
ago, I lent my cherished copies to my 
friend Charles. He returned them to 
me recently, and ﬂ ipping through the 
books for the ﬁ rst time in decades,
I was astounded by how many of their 
images are things that still occur to
me frequently. 
 Charles also told me that Physics
for Entertainment was republished last 
year, which is wonderful news. When
I looked it up on amazon.com, I learned 
from comments written by other fans 
that the books were very popular in 
India from the 1970s to the 1990s.
Interesting!
 Hmm, let’s see — kids in the U.S.S.R. 
who read these books started working 
during the Sputnik era; kids in India 
who read these books have been join-
ing the country’s ever-growing geek 
force over the past decade — I think
I detect a pattern here. And if so,
our nation’s future just may depend
on the new easy availability of Yakov
Perelman’s Physics for Entertainment.
—Paul Spinrad
Decal Master
Monté: King of Atom-Age Monster 
Decals by Bill Selby
$15 Last Gasp
Every pimply-faced plastic-model 
enthusiast from the 1950s and 1960s 
likely remembers “Originals by Monté” 
decals.
 Images on water-slide decals of lurid, 
slavering monsters, ﬂ aming skulls, 
bleeding eyeballs, and jacked-up street 
racers were just begging to end up on 
your models, lunchbox, and bike. It was 
all the stuff of your mother’s night-
mares, which only made it cooler.
 But who was Monté? Until recently, 
little was widely known about Don 
“Monté” Monteverde, now recognized 
as the crowned king of the water-slide 
decal. A new book, lovingly produced 
by Last Gasp (which even includes a 
Monté decal pack!), is something of an 
amalgamation of a family scrapbook, 
art book, and biography.
 It tells the rich and ultimately tragic 
tale of this pioneer of “kustom kulture” 
art. We learn, among other revelations, 
that Monteverde was the actual creator 
of the iconic (and extremely lucrative) 
Rat Fink character and was hired by Ed 
“Big Daddy” Roth to do the preliminary 
sketches (and rarely acknowledged 
after that).
 Eventually, a series of tragedies took 
the ever-reclusive Monteverde out of 
the game: the loss of his son in a car 
accident, the amputation of both of his 
legs due to poor circulation, and ﬁ nally, 
a paralyzing stroke.
 Monté may have died in relative
obscurity, but he left an indelible mark 
on underground art and will hopefully
now be increasingly acknowledged as 
the true creator of Rat Fink.                         
—Gareth Branwyn
MAKE: Arduino Bots and Gadgets
by Kimmo Karvinen and Tero Karvinen
$28–$38 O’Reilly Media
Want to build your own robots, turn your 
ideas into prototypes, control devices 
with a computer, and make your own 
cellphone applications? It’s a snap with 
this book and the Arduino open source 
electronic prototyping platform.
New from MAKE and O’Reilly
Getting Started with the Internet
of Things by Cuno Pﬁ ster
$20–$28 O’Reilly Media
The Internet of Things consists of
billions of embedded computers,
sensors, and actuators all connected 
online. This hands-on guide shows
you how to start building your own
fun, fascinating projects.
163
Follow us @make

164 Make: makezine.com/27
TOOLBOX TOOLSDAY ROUNDUP
We now have regular tool reviews on the 
MAKE blog! For your weekly tool fix, check out 
blog.makezine.com/archive/category/toolbox. 
Here are a few that recently caught our eye.
I can see which tip is which. Each bit is 
double-ended, giving me a #0 and #00 
Phillips choice at one end and a 1" and 
5" slotted bit choice at the other. Pull 
out a bit, ﬂ ip it around, and push it back 
into place.
 The bits are high-quality hardened 
steel, but the plastic barrel (and size) 
means that this isn’t a tool for high-
torque action. I need it for dealing with 
tiny little screws that are keeping me 
out of an enclosure, tuning small pot 
switches, or tightening down screw 
terminals on an Arduino project.
 When I’m at my workbench, I usually 
reach for my fancy Wiha screwdrivers, 
but the one that gets used the most 
when I’m up and about is this one. 
  —John Park
3. EX210 Mini
Digital Multimeter
$70 extech.com
The EX210 multimeter from Extech 
Instruments is a midrange meter that’ll 
take all the standard hobby readings, 
such as resistance, continuity, voltage, 
and current, but also boasts an infrared 
thermometer and a backlit display.
 It came in handy testing the power 
lines and zipper switch while working 
on my TV-B-Gone Jacket (blog.craft
zine.com).
 The website shows off the IR thermo-
meter in a home repair scenario, pointed 
at a ventilation grate. The built-in laser 
pointer indicates the target, and the 
controls are fairly intuitive.
 It could also be handy in stovetop 
candy making, as the thermometer is 
contact-free, so there’s no probe to get 
all sticky.
 Extech’s got a great track record 
for producing quality tools. My only 
complaint about this model is the size. 
Even though they call it “mini” (which 
at Extech distinguishes it from some 
of the more industrial-level equipment 
they make), it’s still too big to stuff in 
my bag for a trip to the fabric store (if 
it’s shiny, it might be conductive!).
 Every electronics workbench needs
a multimeter, and the EX210 is a solid
choice.                                    —Becky Stern
1. Pin-Probe Mechanical 
Stud Finder
$15 garrettwade.com
Garrett Wade’s Japanese-made Stud 
Finder is entirely mechanical, requiring 
no batteries. It combines a classic
magnetic “click” sensor with a spring-
loaded pin, shielded by a graduated 
depth gauge that physically probes the 
space behind the wall and conﬁ rms 
or denies the presence of a stud 
pretty much unequivocally. Unlike a 
capacitative stud ﬁ nder, it will never 
have problems working through plaster, 
foil insulation, or wire lath.
 The probe does leave a small hole 
in the drywall, but it’s tiny — a spot of 
paint will ﬁ ll it without any spackle at 
all. Plus, as a bonus feature that’s (I 
think) unique to this type of stud ﬁ nder, 
the depth gauge provides an accurate 
measurement of the thickness of the 
drywall. This can be a crucial bit of 
information when choosing fasteners, 
whether they’re screws going into the 
studs or anchors going into the drywall.
 The tool unscrews in the middle, 
which allows for removal of the pin 
and/or access to a store of replace-
ment pins in the handle (the Stud 
Finder ships with 2 pins, and Garrett 
Wade sells a pack of 10 for $8). The pin 
plunger has a rotary safety lock to keep 
the sharp end safely covered when not 
in use. There’s also a lanyard hole in the 
pommel in case you want to hang it up 
(which I always do).
—Sean Michael Ragan
2. Technician’s
Pocket Screwdriver
$4 countycomm.com/1x4driver.htm
I have roughly one zillion screwdrivers 
at my disposal. But the one I use most 
for servicing small electronics when 
I’ve wandered away from my workshop 
is my Technician’s Pocket Screwdriver 
from County Comm.
 It clips to my pants pocket like a pen 
and is slightly smaller than a Sharpie. 
I truly appreciate the end caps that 
protect me from an accidental leg 
stabbing, and they have side holes so 
3
2
1

John Baichtal is a writer for MAKE, 
makezine.com, and geekdad.com.
Kindy Connally-Stewart is a 15-year-
old sports and science junkie who cut 
his teeth on Lego and Harry Potter.
Saul Grifﬁ th is a columnist of MAKE 
and chief cyclist at onyacycles.com.
Tim Lillis is a freelance illustrator
and DIYer.
Riley Porter is a malware analyst by 
day and a hacker, maker, and geekdad 
by night.
Christopher Singleton, a father of 
three boys, is a maker, inventor, writer, 
and product development specialist.
Bruce Stewart is a technology writer 
and contributor to radar.oreilly.com.
Adam Zeloof lives in central New Jersey 
and enjoys sailing, camping, birding, 
geocaching, and, of course, making.
Robert M. Zigmund is 13 years old, 
loves his subscription to MAKE, and has 
a blog at eztechreviews.blogspot.com.
Zach Zundel is a designer who just 
started the design ﬁ rm di|chromate.
* Want more? Check out our 
searchable online database of tips 
and tools at makezine.com/tnt. 
Have a tool worth keeping in
your toolbox? Let us know at 
toolbox@makezine.com.
Tricks of the Trade By Tim Lillis
Chop that copper.
Dave Hrynkiw at Solarbotics
shares with us a great trick 
to cut small-diameter cop-
per tubing without a pipe 
cutter.
Roll the tubing under a 
razor blade until it breaks 
in two. As you roll back and 
forth, make sure that you’re 
getting a full rotation on the 
tubing with each stroke.
To clean up the end, you 
can drag the pipe across
coarse sandpaper. Taping 
the sandpaper down to a 
table will ensure a stable, 
level surface.
If you don’t have a deburr-
ing tool, you can use a cone 
of rolled up sandpaper or
a countersink to smooth 
the edges.
Have a trick of the trade? Send it to tricks@makezine.com. 
Extech Desktop Power Supply
$200 extech.com
Don’t let the sexy name fool you. Extech’s 382213 Digital 
Triple Output DC Power Supply is all business — the 
business of powering your awesome hacks! The 382213 
serves up carefully measured voltages to power your 
electronics projects, reducing the number of batteries you 
might waste and preventing you from “letting the smoke 
out” by blasting your components with too much juice. 
 The 382213 has ports for banana plugs and dials for 
choosing how much voltage and current you want. It 
maxes out at 30V and 3A, with LCD displays clearly show-
ing how much of each you’ve selected. Intriguingly, the 
spring clips in front dish out fixed voltages, 5V/0.5A and 
12V/1A, and quickly catch or release the wires.
 I can see the spring clips being great for longer projects 
where you just want a couple of wires snaking down from 
your shelf and powering a breadboard without needing
to have the power supply cluttering up your desk.        —JB
165
Follow us @make

166 Make: makezine.com/27
DANGER! 
By Gever Tulley with Julie Spiegler
Gever Tulley
1. Pick a location. Find a length of track that 
is very straight — you want to be able to see 
and hear the train coming from a long way 
away. The best location is next to an auto-
mated crossing gate — the bells will warn you 
when a train is coming.
2. Pick a moment. Check the schedule for
a gap of at least 15 minutes between trains. 
Not all train traffic is scheduled, so you must 
still wait for a time when you can neither see 
nor hear any trains or crossing bells.
3. Place the penny. Tape the penny to the 
top of the rail, to prevent the vibration of the 
approaching train from shaking the penny 
off the rail. If there’s a bright, shiny part of the 
rail, tape the penny there; that’s where the 
train makes the best contact with the rail. 
4. Stand back and wait. Stand at least 30 
feet away from all tracks, and wait for a train 
to pass. If the tape doesn’t hold the penny in 
place, it may come flying out at high velocity.
5. Find the penny. After the train passes, 
and you can neither see nor hear any trains 
or crossing bells, find the squashed penny. 
Be careful, it may still be hot from being 
squashed. Get away from the track as soon
as you have your penny.
Using the tape, it may be possible to get two 
different types of coins to squash together. 
Preparing them by sanding their surfaces will 
increase the chances of a good metallurgical 
bond. To ensure that you don’t harm the train 
or the track, never put anything larger than a 
coin or two on the tracks. a
Excerpted from Fifty Dangerous Things (You Should Let
Your Children Do) by Gever Tulley with Julie Spiegler (fifty
dangerousthings.com). Gever is co-founder of Brightworks,
a new K–12 school in San Francisco (sfbrightworks.org).
REQUIRES
Pennies or other coins
Tape 
Active train track
Train schedule
DURATION
Short
DIFFICULTY
Easy
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Trains have no steering wheel.
The faster you want a train to go, the smoother the 
track has to be. If the pieces of the track are bolted 
together with plates, then only slow trains use it;
if they’re welded into a continuous piece of rail, the 
track is probably designed for faster trains.
While a coin has never derailed a train, more than
one person has been injured putting coins on a rail. 
Usually, it’s because they accidentally stand on
another track while waiting, and a train comes
down that other track and hits them.
 WARNING: Because of the unfamiliar size of train 
engines, our brains don’t accurately judge their distance 
and speed. If you see or hear a train, assume that it’s a 
danger and move to a safe distance immediately. Also, 
coins may squirt out from under train wheels, so stand at 
least 30 feet away from where you placed your penny.
Squash a Penny on a Train Track
Leverage the force of a locomotive.

While working on this issue, we hosted a simple little contest, putting out an all-points 
bulletin in search of robots with lots of character and personality. Contestants were asked to 
submit their build photos and instructions on our DIY wiki, Make: Projects (makeprojects.com). 
And since robot personalities come through best in action, submitting a video of the bot was 
mandatory. Because our community rocks, we got some great entries. Thanks to everyone who 
entered! Deciding the winners was not easy, but here they are (drum roll please):
CO
O
O
makeprojects.com
BOTS AND BOTS
OF CHARACTER
“Chopsticks”
the Spider Robot 
By Russell Cameron 
makeprojects.com/Project/748/1
This little bot has tons of character 
chops, and we love his legs made
of Polymorph plastic and chopsticks. 
Check out the vid of him contem-
plating his own end effectors and 
playing peekaboo.
RoboBrrd
By Erin Kennedy
makeprojects.com/Project/862/1
Bio-inspired design combined 
with sensing, interesting 
behaviors, and a colorful 
design caught our eye. Erin’s 
documentation is also top-
notch. Bonus points for the 
eraser eyelashes.
Belvedere,
a Butler Robot
By Andy Wolff 
makeprojects.com/Project/823/1 
Who doesn’t need a butler 
bot? Belvedere can navigate 
the rooms of his house, tell 
jokes, serve food and drinks, 
play music, and dance. No 
shortage of character here!
Robot Drummer (of 
Double Rainbow Band)
By Tim Laursen
makeprojects.com/Project/800/1
We’re not sure we’ve ever 
seen a bot look like this 
before (or incorporate 
this many colors), so the 
Drummer is certainly original. 
While not super complex,
he’s definitely entertaining.
RUNNERS-UP
TOP BOT
167
Follow us @Make

168
Make: makezine.com/27


170 Make: makezine.com/27
Getty
SEVERAL OF THE PROJECTS FEATURED 
previously in this column were battery pow-
ered. Humphrey Davy, who developed the arc 
light (Volume 20), and Samuel Morse, inventor 
of the telegraph (Volume 23), used voltage 
produced by chemical reaction.
 In 1800 Alessandro Volta made the first 
apparatus that turned chemical energy into 
a stable, long-lasting, and constant electrical 
voltage (Volume 24). But it was hard to use 
because the chemical reaction quickly
corroded the parts. 
 In 1836, English chemist John Frederic 
Daniell invented a dependable, easy-to-use 
battery, so good that it was used in one shape 
or another until the 1950s. 
 Like Benjamin Franklin, Daniell was a 
polymath and prolific inventor, as well as a 
horticulturalist and meteorologist. He taught 
chemistry, invented heat and humidity gauges, 
and wrote the Introduction to Chemical 
Philosophy (1839).  
 Inside the Daniell cell, electrons are trans-
ferred from the zinc electrode to the copper 
one, producing slightly more than 1 volt. Unlike 
Volta’s early batteries, the Daniell cell made 
use of 2 separate but electrically connected 
electrolyte solutions. This method radically 
lengthened the life of the cell.
 In this edition of Remaking History, we
build a Daniell cell battery using common 
hardware-store chemicals.
 No matter how big or small it’s made, each 
zinc-copper Daniell cell produces about 1.1 
volts. It takes 2 Daniell cells connected in 
series to power an LED. 
MATERIALS 
For each Daniell cell:
Copper strip, ¾"×3" A 3"-long copper tube will also 
work.
Zinc strip, ¾"×3" You can buy zinc sheet metal at 
some hardware stores. Alternatively, you can harvest 
zinc from the outer shell of a D-size non-alkaline 
battery. Carefully open the battery with a hacksaw 
or rotary tool (Dremel) equipped with an abrasive 
cutting-wheel attachment. Scoop out the black
powder with a spoon and remove the carbon rod 
inside. Clean the zinc and then cut it to size.
Mason jars and lids, quart-size (2)
Plastic hose, 1" diameter, 8" long
Cotton balls (6)
Copper sulfate In its pentahydrate form, it’s typically 
found in the drain cleaner section of hardware stores. 
Manufacturers include Rooto and Roembic.
Zinc sulfate Available in garden centers and hardware 
stores as moss remover. 
Table salt and distilled water
Alligator clip leads (2)
LED (optional)
TOOLS
Voltmeter 
Glass stirring rod
Scale for weighing chemicals
REMAKING HISTORY
By William Gurstelle, Workshop Warrior
The Daniell Cell
Make the electric battery that powered 
the scientific revolution.
JUICE MAKER
a English polymath
John Frederic Daniell
(1790–1845) invented
the Daniell electric 
cell in 1836, a radical 
improvement on the 
Volta cell. His brilliant 
career ended when 
he died of apoplexy 
at 55 at a meeting 
of the Royal Society, 
to which he’d been 
elected at 23.

Salt water tubes
LED (or voltmeter)
Alligator
clip
Mason jar
Copper
sulfate
Zinc
sulfate
Zinc
sulfate
er
Coppe
er
Coppe
Zinc
Zinc
Copper
sulfate
+
–
Two-Daniell- 
Cell Battery
 Gregory Hayes; Gerry Arrington (C)
START
1. Make the copper sulfate solution.
In a Mason jar, dissolve about 50 grams of 
copper sulfate in a pint of distilled water. The 
copper sulfate will be slow to dissolve, but if 
you stir or shake the covered jar long enough, 
most of it will eventually go into solution.
2. Make the zinc sulfate solution.
In a second Mason jar, dissolve 50 grams
of zinc sulfate in a pint of distilled water.
3. Make the salt water solution.
In a bowl, dissolve 25 grams of table salt in
a cup of distilled water.
4. Make the saline bridge.
Place two cotton balls in one end of the 
1"-diameter plastic tube. Fill the tube com-
pletely with salt water, and plug the other
end with 2 more cotton balls.
5. Position the saline bridge.
Put one end of the bridge in each of the Mason
jars. Note that some salt water may leak out of 
the bridge. Some leakage is acceptable; how-
ever, there must be a continuous salt water 
connection from one Mason jar to the other. 
6. Insert the metal strips.
Attach the metal strips to the alligator clips 
and voltmeter. Place the copper metal strip in 
the copper sulfate solution and the zinc strip 
in the zinc solution (Figure A). With the bridge 
in place, the voltmeter should read 1.0 to 1.1 
volts (Figure B). You’ve got a Daniell cell.
7. Prepare a second Daniell cell. 
8. Attach the 2 Daniell cells in series. 
Connect cell 1’s zinc strip to cell 2’s cop-
per strip. Then connect cell 1’s copper to 
the LED’s positive (long) lead, and cell 2’s 
zinc to its negative (short) lead (Figure C). 
If you’ve done it right, the LED will light. 
Congratulations, you’ve made a battery! a
C
B
William Gurstelle is a contributing editor of MAKE. His new 
book, The Practical Pyromaniac, is available in the Maker 
Shed (makershed.com) and at other fine booksellers.
A
 CAUTION: Wear rubber gloves and splash-proof 
eye protection when mixing chemical solutions. Do NOT 
pour any chemical solutions down the storm sewer. Empty 
them in a utility drain or toilet. 
Unlike Volta’s cell,
Daniell’s used 2 separate 
electrolyte solutions,
which radically
lengthened its life.
171
Follow us @make

Make: Marketplace
Parts, Upgrades
Tools & Guides
 
You’ll be Back for More at
 
iFixit.com
FREE!
use coupon code:
use coupon code:
We’ve got 
hard-to-find
tools from all 
over the world!
shipping 
to over 140
countries!
USA Customers Only
Part # if145-105-2 Limit one per customer
While supplies last. offer expires 8/31/2011
Calling All
Tool Junkies!
Cordless Rotary Tool
ool J
MAKE27
Ever wanted to be an astronaut?
Then you should help space research!
Contact Us at (617) 525-8904
Live in a lab for 13 days/nights, 24/7 and…Receive up to $2510
— Up to 6 outpatient visits before entering the study —
This study involves taking low doses caffeine
Participants needed for 13 Day Space Research 
Study at Brigham and Women’s Hospital! 
 $re you a healthy" 
 $re you between the ages of 2655 years old"
 $re you a nonsPoker"
 'o you have a %achelorҋs degree or eTuivalent"

Make: Marketplace
DIY never    
had   a   better 
friend...
Ho
bbi
es      
Elec
tron
ics     
Arts  
  &    C
rafts
     Hom
e
    R
epair 
      Je
wel
ry     
 Mod
els    
 Wood
    work
1 (800) 759-7535
www.PanaVise.com 
air
Jew
elr
y
Mode
ls W
ood
wor
ry
Model 301
Model 201
Model 324
Model 350
friend...
rts
& Cr
afts
Home
PanaVise® features a wide  
variety of high-quality &  
versatile vises & accessories.   
All designed around our  
patented “split ball” design,  
which allows for positioning  
your work on three planes.  
Tilt, Turn & Rotate your  
work all from a single knob. 
ies
Elec
tr
1 (80
80
800) 7 759
59
59-75
75
7535
35
35
www
ww
w
Pa
PanaV
naV
naVise
ise
ise co
co
com
onic
s A
Innovative Holding Solutions

Make: Marketplace
FrontPanelExpress.com
(206) 768-0602
QCost effective prototypes and production runs
QPowder-coated finish and panel thickness up 
to 10mm now available
QChoose from aluminum, acrylic or customer 
provided material
Q1, 3 and 5-day lead times available
Custom Front Panels 
& Enclosures
Sample price $57.32 + S&H
FREE 
Software
Designed by you using our  
FREE software, Front Panel Designer

Make: Marketplace
Shown here with 
optional stand
Table size 26” x 8”

O
10000 RPM computer-  

O
    controlled Spindle
Stiff cast iron frame

O
Space-saving footprint

O
Requires basic 115VAC 

O
   household electrical service
Designed for disassembly  

O
   for moving
Optional accessories:  

O
   4th Axis, Digitzing Probe, 
   Reverse Engineering  
   CNC Scanner
Real CNC for Makers 
Product Information and 
online ordering at
www.tormach.com
$6200
(plus shipping)
3-Axis Mill
Introducing the PCNC 770:  The ﬁrst real machine 
tool designed for your basement shop or other 
small space.  At over 650lbs, this isn’t your 
typical small desktop mill.  Tormach PCNCs 
are the ultimate maker machines – 
don’t let your tools hold back your 
creativity.   Whether you’re a 
jeweler, artist, prototyper, 
builder, engineer, or hobbyist, a 
Tormach PCNC will expand 
your possibilities and 
enable your ideas.
The PCNC 770 
Features:
Nitinol shape 
memory wire  
made the robot hand feasible, 
What 
will you 
do with 
it? 
KRL’s nitinol is available for purchase online 
and through select stores.  Potential uses include 
robotics, magic tricks, heat engines, solar 
power, medical sutures, thermal controls, etc.  
Nitinol is so versatile that the only limit to its 
use is the designer’s creativity.  Our wire is 
packaged raw or with a memory shape pre-set.  
Raw wire comes with basic instructions to set 
the memory shape.  More information is 
available with our Nitinol Resource CD.  
Educational discounts available.  See our 
website for additional information. 
www.KelloggsResearchLabs.com 
Custom memory shape setting available 

176 Make: makezine.com/27
Jerry Reilly
My DIY King Pong
By Jerry Reilly
SITTING AROUND A CAMPFIRE LAST
summer, we decided the world really needed 
a gigantic outdoor version of Pong that could 
turn up in the most unlikely places. Thus, 
King Pong was born. (For those born after 
1972, Pong was the first popular video game — 
just two moving paddles and a bouncing ball.)
 The pieces we needed to put together
were a netbook computer running a custom 
version of Pong, a video projector, a portable 
power supply, and two game controllers. The 
first job was to write a clone of the original 
Pong game in Visual Basic. For the projector, 
we searched for the most lumens per dollar 
and chose a Dell 1510X. To power it all, we got 
an old marine battery and a power inverter. 
 For the controllers, we wanted something 
that would grab attention and be easily rec-
ognizable. Ideally it would be wireless, as we 
learned from our tests that wires in the dark 
were a constant menace. So we mounted 
a bicycle wheel on a cheapo camera tripod 
using a standard L-bracket.
 The sensor that detects the wheel’s motion 
is a simple single-pole double-throw (SPDT) 
switch mounted so that it sticks out between 
the spokes. As you spin the wheel in either 
direction, one of the pairs of contacts toggles 
on/off. Finally, we used a pair of XBee wireless 
modules, one for each controller, to send the 
signal back to the netbook (aka the Pongputer).
 With this setup, we have a portable system 
that can be thrown in the back seat of a car, 
set up anywhere in less than five minutes,
and project a 100-foot-high Pong screen on 
nearly any surface. King Pong has filled an 
enormous sand dune on Cape Cod; it’s been 
projected from the top of a bridge across a 
river onto trees in a forest; it’s been played
on the surface of a pond. You never know 
where King Pong might turn up next. a
Jerry Reilly entertains himself and the public with the various 
activities of Pedestrian Magic. For VB source code, email 
jerry@pedestrianmagic.org.

Check out our new wiki of projects  
for people who like to make things.
» Build something from our  
growing collection of projects, tweak 
an existing project with your own 
hack, or publish your own original 
project. Discover inspiration, step-
by-step instructions, lists of required 
parts and tools, and a community of 
makers of all stripes. You can even 
purchase supplies and components 
for select projects. Browse hundreds 
of quality projects from MAKE,  
and great projects contributed by  
community members like you. 
What Do You Make?
Door-Top Stash 
By Sean Michael Ragan
makeprojects.com/Project/638/1
Wind Lantern 
By Dustyn Roberts
makeprojects.com/Project/675/1
Teardrop Camper Trailer 
By Werner Strama
makeprojects.com/Project/480/1
Restore a Vintage Handsaw 
By Josh Burroughs
makeprojects.com/Project/576/1
makeprojects.com
makeprojects.com

CONNEC 
D
TE
CONNECTING PRODUCTS TO POSSIBILITIES. 
WE’RE IN IT.
We live in a world of connections. And for 
more than 50 years, no company has helped 
connect and protect the ﬂow of power and 
data in more products than Tyco Electronics.™
We’ve changed our name to better reﬂect 
who we are and what we do. Connecting 
products to possibilities to help technology be 
smarter, faster and better than ever before.
Learn more at te.com/mz
EVERY CONNECTION COUNTS
© 2011 Tyco Electronics Corporation, a TE Connectivity Ltd company. All Rights Reserved. TE Connectivity, 
TE Connectivity (logo) and Tyco Electronics are trademarks of TE Connectivity Ltd companies.

