makezine.com
Build a 
Freeze Frame 
Photo Rig
                       page 90 » 
Lego NXT
satellite 
prototype 
built by 
college 
students 
and NASA
Dizzy Robot
Analyze Galaxies
for $20: Easy 
Spectrograph
MythBusters’
Adam Savage
Teaches
Moldmaking
Ping Pong Gun
Lego NXT
satellite
prototype 
built by 
college
Dizzy Robot
Analyze Galaxies
y
for $20: Easy 
MythBusters’
Adam Savage
Teaches
Moldmaking
SPACE
DO-IT-YOURSELF
10
PROJECTS
LAUNCH 
YOUR OWN 
SATELLITE 
INTO ORBIT
PLUS:
26 COOL
THINGS 
YOU CAN
BUILD!
FAST, CHEAP, AND FUN!

The Pulse™ smartpen records audio while you write or draw, and then lets you ﬁ nd and play back 
your notes with a tap. Imagine what you can make with it. See a video demo at livescribe.com.
Best Buy, the Best Buy logo, the tag design and BestBuy.com are trademarks of BBY Solutions, Inc.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

1
Make:
NASA controlling everything, Pittman says, then 
Space 2.0 depends upon “massive participation,” 
harnessing enthusiasm and expertise in places 
around the globe. 
 Space 2.0 represents the open sourcing of space 
exploration, a new model that could lead to faster, 
cheaper ways to develop space technologies. 
 It’s also a call for makers to participate in 
research and development. Just as we’re seeing 
amateurs play a role in astronomy and other fields, 
amateurs will be undertaking projects in support 
of a next-generation space program. For example, 
Lynn Harper of NASA Ames points out that the 
commercialization of space will mean a huge 
increase in suborbital flights, and a growing field of 
research in microgravity. She says this research 
requires “not just hundreds of experiments to send 
into space, but hundreds of thousands.” 
 In this “DIY Space” issue of MAKE, you’ll meet all 
kinds of makers, some inside NASA but many more 
outside the agency. We look at how to build your 
own homebrew satellites that take payloads into 
near-space and even into orbit. We show you how 
to build fast, cheap gadgets to analyze galactic 
spectra or eavesdrop on the space station. We also 
look at a variety of space-related projects seeking 
the participation of makers like you, from smart-
phone satellites to lunar mining robots. 
 For his report “Rocket Men,” Charles Platt inter-
viewed the makers of a new private space industry. 
He also visited the Mojave Air and Space Port, 
where individuals and small companies set up to 
do space research. Spaceport manager Stuart Witt 
says, “I offer people the freedom to experiment.” 
That’s all you really need. The future, if you’re so 
inspired, is up to you.
 W
ith one exception, Silicon Valley lacks 
monumental landmarks that signify its 
importance as a world capital of technol-
ogy innovation. That exception is Hangar One at 
Moffett Field in Mountain View, Calif., which is the 
home of NASA Ames Research Center. 
 Hangar One stands out like a Great Pyramid
visible from Highway 101. Built to house airships 
called dirigibles or zeppelins, Hangar One opened 
in 1933. The floor inside this freestanding structure 
covers eight acres, and its enormous clamshell 
doors were designed for the passage of these air-
ships. The hangar reputedly creates its own climate 
inside, bringing rain unexpectedly to parties that 
were organized there, back before it was closed.
 Today, the future of this historic structure 
depends on NASA and various groups debating 
whether to restore it or tear it down. (Its walls are 
covered with siding that contains asbestos and 
PCBs.) Those who would preserve it recognize its 
power as a cultural symbol. While the days of air-
ships are mostly gone — Airship Ventures now runs 
zeppelin tours from Moffett Field — Hangar One 
remains an inspiration. 
 Inspiration was a by-product of the space race
in the United States. Many, like me, thought of 
themselves as part of the space program, follow-
ing the Mercury and Apollo missions, even if our 
role was limited to watching TV. The goal of a moon 
landing inspired young men and women to become 
scientists and engineers. They entered NASA with 
great enthusiasm to become part of something as 
big as they could imagine. 
 Many had satisfactory careers inside NASA, while 
others grew frustrated as NASA became a slow-
moving bureaucracy. Increasingly, NASA made it 
harder (and more costly) to do anything. So, like the 
age of dirigibles, the U.S. space program that I grew 
up with is gone, and like Hangar One, its future is 
uncertain. Yet our fascination with space is not. 
 One cause for hope is that the future of space 
exploration doesn’t depend solely on NASA. 
Bruce Pittman, who works in the Space Portal 
group at NASA Ames, calls this future “Space 2.0.” 
If Space 1.0 was a “one-size-fits-all” approach with 
Dale Dougherty is the founder and general manager of 
Maker Media.
WELCOME
BY DALE DOUGHERTY
Open Sourcing Space
The U.S. space program that 
I grew up with is gone. Yet our 
fascination with space is not. 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

2
Make: Volume 24
ON THE COVER: Lego in (simulated) orbit.
With a Lego Mindstorms NXT system, students 
and engineers at NASA Ames built a full-function 
prototype satellite. Photograph by Garry McLeod, 
background by Corbis. More NASA Ames photos at 
makezine.com/24/space.
Volume 24
Vol. 24, Oct. 2010. MAKE (ISSN 1556-2336) is published quarterly by O’Reilly Media, 
Inc. in the months of January, April, July, and October. O’Reilly Media is located at 
1005 Gravenstein Hwy. North, Sebastopol, CA 95472, (707) 827-7000. SUBSCRIP-
TIONS: Send all subscription requests to MAKE, P.O. Box 17046, North Hollywood, 
CA 91615-9588 or subscribe online at makezine.com/offer or via phone at (866) 
289-8847 (U.S. and Canada); all other countries call (818) 487-2037. Subscrip-
tions are available for $34.95 for 1 year (4 quarterly issues) in the United States; 
in Canada: $39.95 USD; all other countries: $49.95 USD. Periodicals Postage Paid at 
Sebastopol, CA, and at additional mailing offices. POSTMASTER: Send address 
changes to MAKE, P.O. Box 17046, North Hollywood, CA 91615-9588. Canada 
Post Publications Mail Agreement Number 41129568. CANADA POSTMASTER: 
Send address changes to: O’Reilly Media, PO Box 456, Niagara Falls, ON  L2E 6V2
Columns
01: Welcome: Space 2.0
Open sourcing space exploration. By Dale Dougherty
11: Reader Input
Robomowers, web telegraphy, and MAKE saves the day.
13: Making Trouble: Make It Modelable
Success is being closer to almost perfect than 
other people’s models. By Saul Griffith
15: Maker’s Calendar
Events from around the world. By William Gurstelle
16: Make Free: Memento Mori
The hilarity of technological progress. By Cory Doctorow
26: Country Scientist  
Becoming an amateur scientist.  By Forrest M. Mims III
31: Things I’ve Learned 
OK Go’s Rube Goldberg music-making machine.  
By Adam Sadowsky
32: Tales from Make: Online
Make: Projects is your living how-to library. 
By Gareth Branwyn
46
46: Making Your Own Satellites
Build and launch your own orbiter for as little as $8,000.
By Chris Boshuizen 
48: Listening to Satellites
Make a yagi antenna and tune in to space radio. By Diana Eng
54: Weather Balloon Space Probes
Sense, signal, and snap photos in the stratosphere.
By John Baichtal
56: Makers at Mission Control
Meet the elite NASA team that figures out how to fix the 
space station when things go wrong. By Rachel Hobson
58: A $20 Spectrograph
Lab-worthy spectrum analysis for cheap.
By Simon Quellen Field
62: Rocket Men
Mavericks of the private space industry. By Charles Platt
68: Map the Chemical Composition of the Moon
Boost the saturation of digital photos to reveal lunar geology.
By Michael A. Covington
70: DIY Space Roundup 
The latest in Space 2.0 exploration, from smartphone rovers 
to amateur space science.
DIY UP HIGH:
Launch a balloon 
with a scientific 
payload to 
the stratosphere.
54
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

We are proud to present The Ben Heck Show. The all-new online-TV-series created for (and by) electronics enthusiasts, and sponsored 
exclusively by element14. Join Ben and friends for bi-weekly episodes as they modify and build all kinds of community-suggested gadgets. 
Got an idea for a mod? Then share it with Ben. Or, if you’re ready to build, we’re ready with the parts list to make it happen. Either way, 
be sure to tune-in at element14.com/TBHS
IT’S TIME TO
GET YOUR MOD ON
NEW EPISODES
EVERY OTHER MONDAY
BROUGHT TO YOU BY
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

4
Make: Volume 24
Make: Projects
90
Stroboscope
Make a mechanical strobe 
and take stunning photographs 
of objects in motion.
By Nicole Catrett and Walter Kitundu
Helium Balloon
“Satellite”
Snap aerial photos from 300 feet up 
by suspending a drugstore camera 
from tethered balloons. By Jim Newell
80
Aluminum
Levitator
Use magnetic fields to levitate 
aluminum rings and shoot them 
into the air. By Thomas R. Fox
100
Hard-Shell Molds
Learn the science behind 
the art of prop making.
By Adam Savage
108
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

What is the
missing component?
Sign up for our e-newsletter 
and get a bonus puzzle.
www.Jameco.com/enews
A Physics professor planned to illustrate a lecture with demonstrations of 
how light can be intercepted by certain phosphors or various optoelectronic 
sensors and transformed into entirely new light. He wanted an ultra-simple
demonstration of how an LED would glow when biased by a forward current 
provided by a suitable sensor. He rummaged through his optoelectronic drawer
and found two silicon solar cells, several cadmium sulfide photo resistors, a 
couple of AlGaAs red LEDs, some silicon phototransistors and half a dozen 
silicon photodiodes. In his parts cabinet he found some transistors, miniature
chokes and assorted resistors and capacitors. How did he combine the smallest
number of components to do what the phosphor card did? 
Go to www.Jameco.com/unknown8 to see if you are correct.
1-800-831-4242  | www.Jameco.com
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Spirit Radio Receives Transmissions 
from the Beyond
Eek! An ARM-Powered Brain Transplant
16653_DN10
Visit
to see more spooky gadgets and sign up for our FREE 
Gadget Freak Newsletter!
www.designnews.com/gadgetfreak
These  
   
are a real
Backyard Inventors 
Scream!
These  
   
are a real
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

7
Make:
Maker
18: Made on Earth
Snapshots from the world of backyard technology.
33: 1+2+3: Center Finder  
Make an easy tool to find the center of a circle. By Andrew Lewis
34: Cargo Bike Power
Car-free carrying makes a comeback. By Joshua Hart 
40: Growing Bicycles
DIYers flock to this Brooklyn studio to make bamboo bikes. 
By Jon Kalish
44: 1+2+3: Ping Ponger  
Propel a ping-pong ball from a compact launcher. By Edwin Wise
78: 1+2+3: Dizzy Robot  
Make cute pocket-sized pals that dance around until they fall 
over. By Steve Hoefer
116: 1+2+3: Milk Plastic  
Turn milk into moldable plastic. By Cy Tymony
146: Electronics: Microcontroller Whac-A-Mole
Make an electronic game and learn to program 
a BASIC-language microcontroller. By Charles Platt
151: Toy Inventor’s Notebook
Steampunk goggles. By Bob Knetzger
READ ME: Always check the URL associated 
with a project before you get started. There 
may be important updates or corrections.
PROTOTRIKE:
Inventor Saul Griffith 
takes his son, Huxley, 
for a ride in his tilt-
steer cargo tricycle.
Volume 24
152: MakeShift: Hawk Rescue
Channel your inner Girl Scout. By Lee D. Zlotoff
154: Howtoons: Tell Time With the Sun  
By Saul Griffith and Nick Dragotta
156: Toolbox
The best tools, gadgets, and resources for makers.
165: Make Money
Penny abacus. By Tom Parker
167: Aha! Puzzle This
Circular reasoning. By Bob Harris
168: Heirloom Technology: Stone Bowl
Make a gift to eternity in about two hours. By Tim Anderson 
170: Remaking History
Alessandro Volta and electrodeposition. By William Gurstelle
176: Homebrew: My Own FrankenBrewery
By Matthew Wirtz
           Family fun project
34
DIY
l117
126: Home
Wooden buttons, jar 
organizer, crochet crockery, 
freezer bag holder.
133: Toys
Leonardo da Vinci gears.
137: Workshop
Tool bucket pouch.
140: Outdoors
Seed starters, greenhouse 
temperature controller.
117: Imaging
Long-exposure light 
sculpture, low-cost 
photo booth.
123: Music 
Add a volume jack to toys.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

8
Make: Volume 24
PLEASE NOTE: Technology, the laws, and limitations imposed by manufac-
turers and content owners are constantly changing. Thus, some of the 
projects described may not work, may be inconsistent with current laws 
or user agreements, or may damage or adversely affect some equipment. 
 
Your safety is your own responsibility, including proper use of equip-
ment and safety gear, and determining whether you have adequate skill 
and experience. Power tools, electricity, and other resources used for 
these projects are dangerous, unless used properly and with adequate 
precautions, including safety gear. Some illustrative photos do not depict 
safety precautions or equipment, in order to show the project steps 
more clearly. These projects are not intended for use by children. 
 
Use of the instructions and suggestions in MAKE is at your own risk. 
O’Reilly Media, Inc., disclaims all responsibility for any resulting dam-
age, injury, or expense. It is your responsibility to make sure that your 
activities comply with applicable laws, including copyright.
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Mark Frauenfelder 
markf@oreilly.com
MANAGING EDITOR
Keith Hammond
khammond@oreilly.com
SENIOR EDITOR
Goli Mohammadi 
goli@oreilly.com
PROJECTS EDITOR
Paul Spinrad
pspinrad@makezine.com
STAFF EDITOR
Arwen O’Reilly Griffith
EDITOR AT LARGE 
David Pescovitz
DIRECTOR OF DIGITAL MEDIA
Shawn Connally
shawn@oreilly.com
DIRECTOR OF TECHNOLOGY 
Stefan Antonowicz
stefan@oreilly.com
WEB DEVELOPER 
Madelin Woods
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF
Gareth Branwyn
gareth@makezine.com
SENIOR EDITOR
Phillip Torrone
pt@makezine.com
ASSOCIATE EDITOR
Becky Stern
COMMUNITY MANAGER
Matt Mets
CREATIVE DIRECTOR 
Daniel Carter
dcarter@oreilly.com
DESIGNER
Katie Wilson
PRODUCTION DESIGNER
Gerry Arrington
PHOTO EDITOR
Sam Murphy
smurphy@oreilly.com
COPY EDITORS
Gretchen Bay
Bruce Stewart
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT
Laura Cochrane
MAKER MEDIA DIVISION 
PUBLISHER
Fran Reilly
fran@oreilly.com
SALES DEVELOPMENT MANAGER
Katie Dougherty Kunde
katie@oreilly.com
AD SALES MANAGER, EAST COAST
Selina Yee
212-964-8300
selina@oreilly.com
SALES ASSOCIATE
PROJECT MANAGER
Sheena Stevens
sheena@oreilly.com
CIRCULATION MANAGER
Sue Sidler
FOUNDER & GM, MAKER MEDIA
Dale Dougherty
dale@oreilly.com
PUBLISHED BY 
O’REILLY MEDIA, INC. 
Tim O’Reilly, CEO
Laura Baldwin, COO
Copyright © 2010 
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
All rights reserved. 
Reproduction without 
permission is prohibited.
Printed in the USA by 
Schumann Printers, Inc.
CUSTOMER SERVICE 
cs@readerservices.
makezine.com
Manage your account online, 
including change of address: 
makezine.com/account
866-289-8847 toll-free 
in U.S. and Canada
818-487-2037, 
5 a.m.–5 p.m., PST
Visit us online: 
makezine.com
Comments may be sent to: 
editor@makezine.com
MAKE TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD
Kipp Bradford, Evil Mad Scientist Laboratories, 
Limor Fried, Joe Grand, Saul Griffith, William Gurstelle, 
Bunnie Huang, Tom Igoe, Mister Jalopy, Steve Lodefink, 
Erica Sadun, Marc de Vinck
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS
William Gurstelle, Mister Jalopy, Brian Jepson, Charles Platt
CONTRIBUTING WRITERS
Tim Anderson, John Baichtal, Tom Baycura, Chris Boshuizen,
Jared Bouck, Nicole Catrett, David Cline, Abe Connally,
Larry Cotton, Michael Covington, Sharon Covington,
Cory Doctorow, Peter Edwards, Diana Eng, Alan Federman,
Simon Quellen Field, Adam Flaherty, Thomas Fox,
Saul Griffith, Bob Harris, Joshua Hart, Rachel Hobson, 
Steve Hoefer, Jon Kalish, Laura Kiniry,
Bob Knetzger, Andrew Lewis, Forrest M. Mims III,
James Newell, Meara O’Reilly, Tom Parker, John Pavlus, 
Eric Ponvelle, Kevin Quiggle, Matthew F. Reyes,
Kristin Roach, Adam Sadowsky, Adam Savage,
Terrie Schweitzer, L. Abraham Smith, Bruce Stewart,
Cy Tymony, Ariel Waldman, Megan Mansell Williams,
Matthew Wirtz, Edwin Wise, Lee David Zlotoff
CONTRIBUTING ARTISTS
Nick Dragotta, Tim Lillis, Garry McLeod,
Rob Nance, Damien Scogin, Jen Siska
ONLINE CONTRIBUTORS
John Baichtal, Chris Connors, Collin Cunningham,
Adam Flaherty, Kip Kedersha, Matt Mets, John Edgar Park, 
Sean Michael Ragan, Marc de Vinck
INTERNS
Eric Chu (engr.), Brian Melani (engr.), Tyler Moskowite (engr.), 
Ed Troxell (photo), Nick Raymond (engr.)
DIRECTOR, MAKER FAIRE, 
& EVENT INQUIRIES
Sherry Huss 
707-827-7074 
sherry@oreilly.com 
MAKER FAIRE SALES & MARKETING 
COORDINATOR
Brigitte Kunde
brigitte@oreilly.com
ASSOCIATE PUBLISHER & GM, 
E-COMMERCE
Dan Woods
dan@oreilly.com
DIRECTOR, RETAIL MARKETING
& OPERATIONS
Heather Harmon Cochran
OPERATIONS MANAGER
Rob Bullington
MAKER SHED PRODUCT 
DEVELOPMENT
Marc de Vinck
MAKER MEDIA CARES
MAKE is printed on recycled, process-chlorine-free, 
acid-free paper with 30% post-consumer waste, 
certified by the Forest Stewardship Council and the 
Sustainable Forest Initiative, with soy-based inks 
containing 22%–26% renewable raw materials.
EDITORIAL
ONLINE
PUBLISHING
EVENTS
E-COMMERCE
“The reasonable man adapts himself 
to the world: the unreasonable one 
tries to adapt the world to himself. 
Therefore all progress depends on 
the unreasonable man.”
—George Bernard Shaw
LOS ANGELES & 
SOUTHWEST SALES
Jeff Griffith
Joe Hustek
626-229-9955
SAN FRANCISCO & 
PACIFIC NORTHWEST SALES
Nick Freedman
707-775-3376
DETROIT & MIDWEST SALES
James McNulty
Mike Peters
248-649-3835
SINGLE COPY CONSULTANT
George Clark
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

9
Make:
Artist and musician Peter Edwards (DIY Volume Control) is a “self-taught electronics 
tinkerer and full-time maker.” He lives in upstate New York with his girlfriend and two 
cats, and makes a living building musical instruments (casperelectronics.com) and
occasionally teaching workshops. Lately he’s selling a synth kit called the Drone Lab
and watching Japanese horror movies. What’s on his mind? “I’ve been crazy lately about 
high-power tricolor LEDs. You can create very dramatic effects that I never would have 
imagined I could get from a little LED.” So now he’s working on a new sound-to-light
circuit that uses a microcontroller to output a responsive, colored light display.
Contributors
Dr. Chris Boshuizen (Make Your Own Satellites) is a contractor at NASA Ames Research 
Center at Moffett Field, Calif., where he serves as small spacecraft technical liaison, 
interfacing with NASA centers and commercial partners on the use of Ames-developed 
technologies. Chris is leading development of new, super cheap approaches to space 
exploration. “My goal,” he says, “is to make space travel as easy as catching a bus.” With 
a Ph.D. in physics from the University of Sydney, he’s a former director of the Space 
Generation Advisory Council of students and young professionals, and was a co-founder 
and interim director of Singularity University. He has always wanted to be an astronaut. 
Bob Knetzger (Toy Inventor’s Notebook) is an independent designer and inventor with
a background in industrial design. He’s had fun inventing toys and games at Mattel,
designing graphics for Intellivision games, creating educational software, and, with his 
Neotoy partner Rick Gurolnick, developing new product lines like Doctor Dreadful. Bob
lives near Seattle with his wife, Deborah, and plays pedal steel guitar and banjo when
he’s not working on a new, top-secret toy!
Nick Raymond’s (MAKE engineering intern) interests in engineering and the outdoors
collide at Doran Beach in Sonoma County, Calif., where he works part time and surfs.
“I became fascinated with the concept of harnessing the power of the ocean to convert 
to electrical power,” he says. Since that fascination took hold, he has built a wave energy 
converter, and is currently building a DIY wave tank. The president of the Santa Rosa Junior 
College Engineering Club, Nick likes the color blue, sushi, and his benchtop mini mill. He 
hopes to work on projects “that will one day provide renewable and clean energy for the 
populations of the world, or something like that.”
Joshua Hart (Cargo Bikes) is a Northern California writer and activist working on trans-
portation, climate, and wireless radiation issues. “My life has been enriched more by what 
I’ve given up than what I consume,” he reports. He no longer owns a car, flies on planes, 
smokes, or uses cellphones or wi-fi. It might sound like deprivation, but, he says, “When 
it comes to food as well as transportation, one thing I’ve found is that slow is better! I am 
happier and healthier than I have ever been in my life.” onthelevelblog.com 
Diana Eng (Yagi Antenna), aka operator KC2UHB, is a fashion designer who works with 
math, science, and technology. She also writes about ham radio for MAKE and Make: 
Online. While busy starting her own fashion line (dianaeng.com) and developing her first 
product (a fortune cookie coin purse!), she also likes to “climb up rooftops in New York City 
to communicate through satellites using amateur radio.” Her experiences as a designer 
have been diverse: sitting front row at New York Fashion Week, being a designer on TV’s 
Project Runway, and co-founding the NYC Resistor hacker group. She lives in Brooklyn, 
N.Y., with her fiancé, Dave Clausen, aka operator W2VV. 
Photograph by Garry McLeod (top)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Dreamers, Doers and Makers
No matter your location, budget or skill level, ShopBot personal fabrication tools are there to help you 
make the things you want to make. From Juneau to Jalalabad, ShopBots are making everything from 
furniture and signs to boats, airplanes and circuit boards. In schools, Fab Labs and TechShops around 
the world, Makers are crowded around ShopBots, learning skills, solving problems and starting 
businesses. Projects like 100kGarages.com are connecting Makers and 
Fabbers, and Maker Faires - small and large - are bringing together 
people who share the love of making.
ShopBot is proud to be at the forefront of the Maker Revolution, 
making it easier and more affordable than ever to put digital fabrica-
tion technology to work in homes, garages, schools, workshops and 
factories. We're dedicated to providing high-value personal robotic 
systems for a variety of applications and to being here every step of 
the way with industry-leading support and a worldwide peer 
network. Anyone can be a Maker, and now we're making it easier than 
ever for anyone to become a ShopBotter.
Call, click or visit us at Maker Faire Detroit, July 31-August 1, and 
Maker Faire New York, September 25-26, to see what’s new at ShopBot 
and discover how easy it is for you to become a ShopBotter. 
What will you make today?
888-680-4466
shopbottools.com
twitter.com/shopbot
Thanks to the ShopBotters and the dreamers, 
doers and Makers who helped make the 
Eighth-Annual ShopBot Jamboree and the 
Inaugural Maker Faire NC a great success.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

11
Make:
Robomowers, web telegraphy, idea 
sharing, and MAKE saves the day.
READER INPUT
  Your “Lawnbot” cover article by J.D. Warren 
(Volume 22) got me so fired up that I just had to 
build one of my own! I took some different paths, 
using an off-the-shelf motor controller and a 
battery-powered mower that I can switch on and off 
remotely, through an Arduino-compatible board.
 Not only does my “Robomower” keep my lawn 
looking the best it ever has, but it stops traffic! The 
best part: one out of every three or four passersby 
asks, “Do you ever read MAKE magazine?”
 This has been one of my most fun and rewarding 
summer projects ever (see my build log and video 
at makezine.com/go/robomower). From my comfy 
lawn chair, my glass is raised high to you and J.D.!
        —Michael Zenner, Portland, Ore.
  It’s great that Saul Griffith’s mailbox is over-
flowing with ideas from generous makers (Volume 
23, “Smiley Face Technologies”) but wouldn’t it be 
even better to share these ideas online with the 
rest of us? I’ll even make the website! That would 
be the ultimate Smiley Face Technology.
—Joey Mornin, Berkman Center for 
Internet & Society at Harvard, Cambridge, Mass.
  I thoroughly enjoyed Volume 23, except for one 
little point in “Remaking History.” Telegraph sound-
ers are intentionally constructed to give a different 
sound on closing and on opening; the relative time 
between “tik” and “tok” signifies the complete dot or 
dash. This one’s a nice relay but not a true sounder.
 That said, Bill Gurstelle’s a good technical writer 
and MAKE is a good book. I not only derive the plea-
sure of learning from it (I’ve been back to Volume 
23’s “Primer: Programmable Logic Controllers” 
about five times) but as a journalism professor who 
teaches freelance writing, I use MAKE as an example. 
 By the way, a great number of us connect on the 
web with our antique telegraph equipment — I often 
have MorseKOB software (morsekob.org) running 
in the background, with a vintage U.S. Army Signal 
Corps “bug” key and an old Menominee sounder 
hooked up to my computer.
                                   —Charles A. Hays, Ph.D. 
aka WB7PJR/VE7 aka “CH” on the wire
Thompson Rivers University, Kamloops, B.C.
  Thank you for instantly confirming the useful-
ness of my new subscription. The “iPhone Screen 
Repair” how-to (Volume 22) was spot-on and saved 
me hours of waiting in line for an iPhone 4!
—Adam Velez, San Juan Capistrano, Calif.
  I’m a charter subscriber, and unfortunately, a 
flooded basement recently destroyed my Volumes 
01 to 05.  When I visited the MAKE Digital Edition, 
I was so pleased to see they were now available as 
downloadable PDFs — it came close to a teary-eyed 
moment. Now I can read them (again), and being 
able to print out those project pages is wonderful!
—Clark Kielian, North Brunswick, N.J.
MAKE AMENDS
In Volume 23’s “Electronics: Fun and Fundamentals” 
column, the descriptions for the 4078 chip’s pins 8 and 
13 were mistakenly reversed in Figure F(d) on page 143. 
Pin 13 is the NOR output and pin 8 is unused.
In Volume 23’s “Squelette, the Bare Bones Amplifier,” 
the wrong perf board was specified; the right one is 
RadioShack #276-147, which has solder pads on one 
side and measures 4½"×63". Also, the total cost was 
estimated at under $50, but this figure assumed that 
you already have common components (resistors, 
capacitors, etc.) on hand. The cost is higher if you buy 
everything new and in small quantities.
Photograph by TK
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

©2010 O’Reilly Media, Inc. O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.  10601.1
Anyone can follow a recipe, 
but wouldn’t you like to know 
what’s really going on when 
you’re cooking? From cooking a 
perfect steak to understanding 
why the best cookies are baked 
at 375 degrees, Cooking for Geeks 
provides intriguing and practical 
info about ingredients, methods, 
and making it up as you go.
Real Science, Great Hacks, 
and Good Food
8mX`cXYc\`ek_\
DXb\iI>;:
dXb\ij_\[%Zfd
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

13
Make:
MAKING TROUBLE
BY SAUL GRIFFITH
Model It, or Make It Modelable 
T
his summer I had two great interns in my lab. 
As usual, they taught me more than I taught 
them. One in particular helped me refine my 
thoughts on the theme that pervades my every day.
 When Geoff first arrived in my office, I described 
his summer project to him. I had written 2,000 lines 
of code in MATLAB to model the Ackerman steering 
geometry of a tilting (leaning) vehicle. He was to take 
that code, check it, improve it, and finish it, and we’d 
build the vehicle as a tilting, steering, cargo-carrying 
tricycle. He said, “It’ll take three days.” I countered, 
“I’ll bet it takes six weeks.”
 Geoff dove into the code. He only looked up from 
his computer for two reasons: to hear instructions 
for using the vintage hand-pulled espresso machine, 
and to go stare at the physical prototype of the tilt-
ing trike to orient himself to the problem. He missed 
his own three-day target, but crushed my six-week 
estimate when he proudly showed me the first 
working computer model in just two weeks.
 And that’s the theme pervading my whole life right 
now: computational modeling. 
 Why? Here’s how I see it: Galileo Galilei arguably 
did more to usher in the scientific revolution than 
any other. The quote “Measure what is measurable, 
and make measurable what is not so” is attributed 
to him. In my mind, 19th- and 20th-century science 
did exactly that, and the scientific method — the 
cornerstone of thoughtful progress in knowledge — 
is heavily dependent on good measurement.
 We measured everything we could about the 
scale of the universe. We probed the atomic then 
subatomic structure of the elements with incredibly 
elegant, single-parameter experiments that isolated 
things like the mass of an electron. 
 This type of science has been so successful that 
now it seems the true frontiers of science exist less 
in the study of easily reducible, measurable things, 
and more in the study of complex, multiparameter 
systems — like biology, climate, metabolism, and 
ecology. In these systems, understanding is built 
with models that can be tested for their validity and 
correspondence to the messy, complex real world.
 Like many physical systems, there’s no perfect 
answer to a tilting tricycle, only “optimal.” You can 
optimize the parameters, but because of the limits 
of physically realizable machines, it can only ever be 
“almost perfect.” Success is being closer to almost 
perfect than other people’s models.
 But here’s the beautiful thing about modeling. 
Computational models are digital, and that makes 
them inherently shareable, independently verifiable, 
and easy to collaborate on and improve.
 Whereas my inclination was to immediately start 
to build something physical, Geoff’s approach — the 
approach of a new generation of engineers and sci-
entists — was to begin with a model. Start with bits. 
Make them perfect, beautiful, defendable, sharable 
bits, then render them physical once you’ve reached 
an optimum. Sure, someone might figure out a 
better optimum one day, but because they can start 
with working, executable code, they’ll get to it faster.
 There’s an even more important reason to encour-
age this culture of shared models. The more people 
who have experience simulating the world with 
success, and making things from those models, the 
more people will trust in the models of our physical 
world that will guide how we shape our future.
 I read once about the science of perception and 
the humble practice of catching a falling ball. A ball 
moving 60mph travels almost 90 feet in a second. 
The only reason we can catch it is because we have 
a mental model of where the ball will be when our 
hand intercepts it. Throughout the course of our 
lives, we’ve built a mental computational model, 
which we’ve refined thousands of times, that helps 
us predict the future position of a ball so we might 
catch it with our relatively slow reflexes.
 We have enormous faith in the ability of a profes-
sional baseball player to model the future of a ball, 
under complex windy, rainy, and noisy conditions, 
and to catch it. It would be nice to build similar
public faith in the ability of our professional scien-
tists to model the future — the future of the oceans 
if we continue to pollute them with toxins, of the
atmosphere if we continue to emit carbon dioxide, 
and of other problems that require humanity to have 
a faster response time than its cultural reflexes.
Saul Griffith is a new father and entrepreneur. otherlab.com
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

14
Make: Volume 24
Join.
Signing up is free 
and easy. Go to 
the site, click “Join us,”
enter your email ad-
dress, name, and 
password, and you're 
instantly part of the 
community. 
 Make: Projects is a 
community-based site, 
so our members are 
our most valuable asset 
(yes, that means you!). 
Your fellow makers 
include teachers, 
scientists, engineers, 
crafters, roboticists, 
and designers. 
Check out the 
hundreds of how-
to projects from the 
pages of MAKE, plus 
projects contributed by 
folks like you. 
 Topics range from 
robotics to music, 
science, reuse, home, 
electronics, crafts, 
food, photography, 
chemistry, toys, and 
much more. Browse by 
subject area or use the 
search bar to type in 
keywords. 
As part of the 
MAKE community, 
we know you have skills 
and knowledge, so why 
not share them?  
 
 Make: Projects is built 
on a wiki, so anyone 
can add or edit content.
Click “Contribute a 
new project” to share 
build instructions and 
photos. Or click edit to 
add your changes to an 
existing project. Help us 
make the site a valuable 
resource for makers of 
all stripes.
Browse.
Contribute.
Can’t get enough of MAKE? 
Head over to your new favorite 
projects library,  makeprojects.com
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

15
Make:
» North American International 
Motorcycle Supershow
Jan. 7–9, Toronto
Nearly 25 years old, the massive 
(425,000 sq. ft.) Supershow is 
North America’s largest consumer 
motorcycle show. The exhibits 
span just about everything the 
motorcycle industry has to offer, 
from the latest bikes and acces-
sories to choppers, scale models, 
DIY machines, and Bonneville 
racers. supershowevents.com 
« Art Shanty Projects 
Jan.–Feb., Minneapolis
It’s part sculpture park, part artist 
residency, part social experiment. 
This temporary “shanty town” on 
a frozen lake was inspired by the 
traditional ice fishing houses that 
dot Minnesota in winter. A bit like 
a very small, very cold Burning 
Man. artshantyprojects.org
MAKER’S CALENDAR
Our favorite events from 
around the world.
COMPILED BY WILLIAM GURSTELLE
Feb
Mar
Space Shuttle Discovery Launch 
Nov. 1, Cape Canaveral, Fla. 
It’s almost the last chance to experience the awesome power of the 
space shuttle’s solid rocket boosters. The penultimate launch of the 
shuttle Discovery delivers critical parts and supplies to the Interna-
tional Space Station. nasa.gov/missions/highlights/schedule.html
» Nikon Photo Contest
Entries close Nov. 30, worldwide
This year’s international photo-
graphy contest includes both 
an energy-themed and a free-
subject category. nikon-npci.com
» Wonderfest
Nov. 6–7, Berkeley, Calif. 
Each fall, Wonderfest challenges 
science and technology enthu-
siasts by taking on tough or 
controversial topics in astronomy, 
biology, psychology, and physics. 
Activities include talks, discus-
sions, science competitions, and 
a science expo. wonderfest.org
» Wings Over Homestead 
Nov. 6–7, Homestead, Fla.
Restarted last year after a 17-year 
absence, the 2009 Homestead air 
show was packed with 200,000 
people, and headlined by the U.S. 
Navy’s Blue Angels. This year is 
expected to be even bigger.
wingsoverhomestead.com
» The Woodworking Shows
Nov.–Mar., in 20+ U.S. cities
This traveling trade show tours 
the nation, bringing the latest in 
tools and techniques to winter-
weary woodworkers. DIY seminars 
run the gamut from basic wood-
working to cabinetmaking skills. 
thewoodworkingshows.com
* IMPORTANT: Times, dates, 
locations, and events are subject 
to change. Verify all information 
before making plans to attend.
MORE MAKER EVENTS:
Visit makezine.com/events to
find events near you, like classes, 
exhibitions, fairs, and more. Log in 
to add your own events, or email 
them to events@makezine.com. 
Attended one of these events? Talk 
about it at forums.makezine.com.
NOVEMBER
DECEMBER
JANUARY
May
Jun
Apr
July
Oct
Aug
Sept
Jan
Nov
Dec
» Asia Game Show
Dec. 24–27, Hong Kong
Close to 400,000 visitors from 
around the world head to the 
Hong Kong Convention Center 
to discover the latest in online 
gaming and digital entertainment. 
This Christmastime event is a 
combination of entertainment, 
gaming technology, educational 
features, seminars, and hands-on 
gaming. asiagameshow.com
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

16
Make: Volume 24
improvements we’d be able to get with an unthink-
able 500MB of RAM. Then we thought about 1GB of 
RAM and all we could do with it. Finally, we strained 
our imaginations to their outer limits and tried to 
imagine computing at 1TB of RAM.
 And we started to laugh. This substance that cost 
more than its weight in gold — that solved all our 
problems — sometime in our lifetimes would be so 
cheap and abundant that we would have literally 
unimaginable amounts of it.
 And that’s why I’ve been giggling at this half-
terabyte RAM (OK, RAM-like) drive that I just spent 
$1,500 on — the same sum Dad parted with for a 
64K upgrade card 30 years ago.
 Which brings me back to these beautiful old
objects I have around my office. I don’t have these 
here because they’re inherently well-made. I have 
them because they’re the best joke we have. 
 They’re the continuous, ever-delightful reminder 
that we inhabit a future that rushes past us so 
loudly we can barely hear the ticking of our watches 
as they are subsumed into our phones, which are 
subsumed into our PCs, which are presently doing 
their damnedest to burrow under our skin.
 The poets of yore kept human skulls on their 
desks as memento mori — reminders of mortal-
ity and humanity’s fragility. I keep these old fossil 
machines around for the opposite reason: to remind 
me, again and again, of the vertiginous hilarity of our 
age of wonders.
MAKE FREE
BY CORY DOCTOROW
Memento Mori
 I
’m often puzzled by how satisfying older tech-
nology is. What a treat it is to muscle around an 
ancient teletype, feeding it new-old paper-tape or 
rolls of industrial paper with the weight of a bygone 
era. What pleasure I take from the length of piano 
roll I’ve hung like a banner from a high place in every 
office I’ve had since 2000. 
 How much satisfaction I derive from the racing 
works of the 1965 mechanical watch I received as 
a Father’s Day present this year, audible in rare
moments of ambient silence or when my hand strays 
near my ear, going tick-tick-tick-tick like the pattering 
heart of a pet mouse held loosely in my hand.
 The standard explanation for the attractiveness 
of this old stuff is simply that They Made It Better 
In The Old Days. But this isn’t necessarily or even 
usually true. Some of my favorite old technologies 
are as poorly made as today’s throwaway products 
from China’s Pearl River Delta sweatshops. 
 Take that piano roll, for example: a flimsy enter-
tainment, hardly made to be appreciated as an 
artifact in itself. And those rattling machine-gun 
teletypes and caterpillar-feed printers — they have 
all the elegance of a plastic cap gun that falls apart 
after the first roll of caps has run through it.
 Today, I have a different answer. Sitting beside me 
as I type this is a 512GB Kingston solid-state drive, 
its case lights strobing like the world’s tiniest rave. 
Every time I look at this thing, I giggle. I’ve been 
giggling all afternoon.
 I got my first personal computer in 1979, an 
Apple II+, and it came with 48K of main memory. 
I remember the day we upgraded the RAM to 64K, 
my father slotting in the huge board reverently, 
knowing that it represented $495 worth of our fami-
ly’s tight technology budget (about $1,500 in today’s 
money). What I really remember is the screaming 
performance boost we got from that board.
 The first time RAM made me laugh was in the mid-
1990s. My mentor and friend, Miqe, and I were doing 
prepress jobs on brand-new Macintosh Quadras. 
It would often take a Quadra three or four days to 
complete a job. Of course, every machine already 
had as much RAM as it could handle (136MB). 
 Miqe and I got to talking about the performance 
Cory Doctorow’s latest novel is Makers (Tor Books U.S., 
HarperVoyager U.K.). He lives in London and co-edits the 
website Boing Boing.
The standard explanation for 
the attractiveness of older 
technology is simply that They 
Made It Better In The Old Days. 
But this isn’t necessarily or 
even usually true.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

!
If you can imagine it, you can MAKE it.
makezine.com
»
Make: an 
awesome 
holiday gift.
Your ﬁ rst gift is $34.95. Each additional gift is ONLY $17.50
a savings of 50% off the regular rate. To give a gift of Make,
ﬁ ll out the special gift card attached or call 1-866-289-8847. 
Plus, we’ll send a card announcing your gift, and your
recipients can choose to receive digital editions at no extra cost.
Share all the inspirational DIY projects 
and mischief you love in Make …
The more you give, the more you save!
Save
up to 
50%!
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

MADEONEARTH
Report from the world of backyard technology
18
Make: Volume 24
Photography by Jason Dietz (jason.dietz@yahoo.com)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

19
Make:
Inspired by the flying saucers, rocket ships, and 
robots of 1950s sci-fi comic covers, Jason Dietz set 
out to create a little of that magic for his home. He 
decided to make lamps that depict a classic flying 
saucer shooting down a giant plasma ray and pulling
up an unsuspecting victim into the ship. To get the 
desired effect, he knew he had to go big. 
 Dietz’ UFO Lamps stand over 6 feet tall from base 
to saucer. The 2-foot-diameter flying saucer that 
crowns each lamp is a sturdy sandwich of parabolic 
aluminum heat dishes, Edison flame bulbs, and an 
acrylic disk. The saucer sits atop a giant hand-blown 
recycled-glass vase that holds 10 gallons of water. 
 CFL, LED, and halogen lights, in combination with 
a 110-volt air pump, nail the illusion, as the abduction
victim, a lone cow, hovers and twirls helplessly above 
the grassy pasture from which it was plucked. 
 With its size, varied lighting, and constant motion, 
the lamp is beautiful and bizarre at once, not a sight 
easily overlooked. Dietz keeps one in his living room. 
“The soft glow of an alien abduction in progress in 
the corner of the room is quite the sight indeed,” he 
says. “Staring at it for a while lets your imagination 
run wild — it puts me into that retro sci-fi world.” 
 Like many makers, Dietz gains inspiration as 
much from seeing his visions come to life as from 
seeing others enjoying his creations. At Maker Faire 
Bay Area 2010, he displayed six of his UFO Lamps 
in a half circle at the back of Fiesta Hall, a dark 
environment that featured only projects that glow. 
Fairgoers were drawn in by the UFO beams, and 
thousands came closer for a good look.
 “It looked like a small-scale alien invasion in the 
back of the hall,” Dietz remembers. Apparently he 
wasn’t the only one excited to see this fantasy made 
reality, as the lamps were in high demand.
 His latest project is wall lights that integrate planets
passing in front of each other in the manner of an 
eclipse. He hopes to display them at next year’s Faire. 
 “We all have the power to create anything we want 
to see,” says Dietz, “it just depends on how much you 
really want to see it happen.”          —Goli Mohammadi
  Interview on Make: Online: makezine.com/go/dietz
Warm Glow of Abduction 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

MADEONEARTH
20
Make: Volume 24
Britta Riley grew up in Texas, so that might explain 
why she’s growing bok choy in her Brooklyn loft. The 
33-year-old maker believes that urban agriculture — 
specifically hydroponic “window farms” — can make 
a real contribution to environmental activism.
 In 2010 Riley raised $27,000 for her Windowfarms 
project via the micro-donation website Kickstarter, 
and put together a system to grow plants in vertical 
columns hung in front of a window. She uses recy-
cled spring water bottles, an aquarium air pump, air 
valve needles normally used to pump up basketballs, 
and hardware meant for hanging art.
 “We’re showing that you can actually get really far 
using things already available to us as consumers,” 
says Riley.
 Each column has four upside-down 1.5-liter plastic 
water bottles connected to each other; plants grow 
out of 4" holes cut in the sides with an X-Acto knife. 
The air pump circulates liquid nutrients that trickle 
down from the top of the column and wash over the 
plant roots.
 More than 16,000 people have registered at 
Windowfarms’ open source community website, and 
today there are window farmers around the globe, 
including Italy, Israel, Hong Kong, and Finland.
 The website has been crucial for exchanging 
ideas about improving the technology. It’s a pro-
cess Riley calls “R&DIY,” or Research and Develop 
It Yourself. She cites as an example of R&DIY the 
window farmer who figured out a way to cope with 
the gurgling sound these systems make.
 “He read up on gun silencers and then he just 
drilled a few holes into an empty vitamin bottle
and stuck it over the end, and all of a sudden it 
completely silenced the system,” reports Riley.
 Windowfarms have been used to grow straw-
berries, cherry tomatoes, peppers, lettuce, and 
herbs. (You can’t grow carrots, garlic, or other root 
vegetables with the system.) And for those who 
don’t relish the opportunity to DIY entirely, a variety 
of Windowfarm kits are sold.
—Jon Kalish
>>  Hydroponic Windowfarms: windowfarms.org
Crop Windows
Photograph by Ted Ullrich
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

21
Make:
Photograph by Brad Plummer
Deep underground beneath Switzerland and 
France, scientists at the Large Hadron Collider 
(LHC) at CERN are searching for particles that were 
present just moments after the Big Bang, when the 
universe formed. The massive machines built to 
conduct these experiments are astounding on their 
own — sheer marvels of precision and engineering. 
For one Bay Area artist, they’re also his muse.
John Zaklikowski, 55, re-creates particle accel-
erator detectors like the ones at the LHC and at 
Fermilab in Illinois. What makes his large-scale 
assemblages so unique is what they’re made of: 
computer motherboards, hard drives, video and 
sound cards, cellphone bits, vacuum tubes.
 In his work Large Hadron Collider, based on the 
ATLAS and Compact Muon Solenoid detectors, the 
central feature consists of razor blades and a race-
car air filter. “You’ve got to be very careful around 
this one,” he warns. “When I was first making these 
things, I bled every day.”
 In Fermilab, Zak, as he prefers to be called, 
depicts a real collider detector with hard drives
and motherboards, but also old telephone bells, 
cheese graters, and an ancient Chinese compass 
called a luopan.
 Born and raised in Buffalo, N.Y., Zak studied 
philosophy and literature, not science. Sporting a 
full head of white hair, black jeans, and a pale blue 
Polo button-up splattered with paint, he says, “I did 
grapple with the idea of studying physics but didn’t 
think it would really suit me. Obviously, my science 
interest is coming out in a big way in recent years 
with these pieces.”
 His work recently made the cover of the particle 
physics journal Symmetry, but Zak doesn’t restrict 
his subject matter to physics experiments. There’s 
also a baby grand piano in the middle of his San 
Francisco art studio, covered in parts. A newer 
work, Enamored, pays homage to his son, who, at 
13, abandoned his collection of the Lego bricks. 
Luckily, his dad knew just what to do with the stash. 
 —Megan Mansell Williams
>>  Zak’s Art in Symmetry: makezine.com/go/zak
Watching the Detectors
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

MADEONEARTH
22
Make: Volume 24
The SolarPump Charging Station provides free 
power for charging cellphones, laptops, electric 
bikes, and other gadgets by converting solar
energy to electricity right on the spot. Conceived
by Beth Ferguson, an Austin-based designer,
artist, and social entrepreneur, the SolarPump is 
meant to be both practical and thought-provoking.
 Ferguson believes green charging stations are 
critical to helping society transition from gasoline
to electric vehicles charged from renewable energy. 
“The SolarPump Electric Charging Station is 
designed to help people reimagine the future of 
transportation,” she declares. 
 The first SolarPump used a 1950s Citgo gas 
pump to make sure the message really hit home. 
The power comes from solar panels on the roof, 
so there’s no cost for charging. The face of the gas 
pump has an LED digital display that indicates
solar panel voltage, total wattage of plugged-in 
devices, and battery bank energy level.
 The current SolarPump station uses two deep-
cycle 100-amp-hour, 12-volt batteries to create 
a 24-volt system, and an 1,100-watt inverter that 
supplies standard 110-volt AC power. Three bifacial 
solar panels charge the batteries through a charge 
controller. A Pentametrix system gathers data from 
the current shunts, then sends it digitally over 
RS-232 to the custom digital display module.
 After building the first SolarPump prototype in 
2009 for a design show at the University of Texas, 
Ferguson launched the nonprofit Sol Design Lab 
with a talented crew of designers, fabricators, 
and electricians. Their mission: to educate people 
about energy use and encourage a shift to electric 
vehicles, by exhibiting solar charging stations.
 Four SolarPumps have been built so far, and 
they’ve been big hits at festivals and fairs like 
Coachella, South by Southwest, SolarFest, and 
Maker Faire. The latest charging stations incorporate 
outdoor furniture, lockers, and wireless internet.
—Bruce Stewart
>>   SolarPump Charging Stations: soldesignlab.com
  Interview on Make: Online: makezine.com/go/solarpump
Free Juice Bar
Photograph by Beth Ferguson
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

23
Make:
Photograph by Matt Langley
Ted Wojcik is no stranger to bicycles — the 63-year-
old former Navy aviation machinist is a legend in 
the cycling community for his custom hand-built 
frames — but he never anticipated being in the lawn 
care business. That’s all changed with the Mow-Ped, 
a pedal-powered lawn mower that’s since catapulted 
Wojcik to fame beyond the bicycling world. 
 The project first surfaced when Matt Langley, 
brother of former Bicycling tech editor Jim Langley, 
contacted Wojcik and commissioned him to build 
a lawn mower that was both environmentally and 
cyclist friendly. “He’d been using a mower marketed 
to be towed behind a wheelchair,” says Wojcik, “and 
was pulling it along with an old mountain bike.”
  To create Mow-Ped, Wojcik enlisted help from 
his son, Cody, 24, a recent mechanical engineer-
ing graduate from Worcester Polytechnic Institute. 
Using 3D design software, they crafted a fully oper-
ational tractor before ever cutting a piece of metal. 
 Mow-Ped combines a tadpole-style recumbent 
bike, which has two front wheels and one in back, 
with go-kart-inspired steering. It accommodates 
riders ranging in height from 5' to 6'4". The manual 
reel mowers, situated directly beneath the seat, can 
be removed for the vehicle’s recreational use. 
 Wojcik unveiled Mow-Ped at the 2010 North 
American Handmade Bicycle Show in Virginia to 
overwhelming interest, including environmentalists 
impressed with its ability to significantly reduce pol-
lution (according to the EPA, 5% of all U.S. pollution 
comes from gasoline-powered lawn mowers). 
 Now with plans for large-scale production, the 
Wojciks are updating the original design: shortening 
the tractor for sharper turns, adding the capacity 
for fertilizing or seed drilling, and substituting wider 
mowers for more accurate cutting. They’re also 
adding a standard fixed-gear rear hub so the Mow-
Ped can work in reverse, with optional multi-speeds.
 “It’s not a mower for everyone,” says Wojcik. 
“[But] if you’re fit and have a yard that’s somewhat 
flat and relatively obstacle-free, it works great.”
—Laura Kiniry
>>   Custom Bicycles: tedwojcikcustombicycles.com
The Lawn Rider
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

MADEONEARTH
24
Make: Volume 24
Photograph by Dan Parker
Daniel Parker’s hobby isn’t for everyone. He’s 
devoted most of the last five years to designing and 
building his own high-altitude airplane.
 Parker, 33, started flying in high school, joined 
the Experimental Aircraft Association at age 15, and 
built his first plane (an all-wood biplane) in college. 
Now he’s hoping his current project might just beat 
the altitude record for small piston-engine aircraft. 
 Parker’s background lends itself to such a
complex hobby. He has a bachelor’s in mechanical
engineering and a master’s in aeronautics and 
astronautics, both from Stanford. Taking time off 
from school to work at a composite airplane shop
in Santa Monica, Calif., Parker was fortunate to
find a friendly and skilled airplane builder/mentor, 
Dave Ronneberg.
 Building a lightweight high-alt plane was attrac-
tive because it combined low mass, which Parker 
assumed meant less stuff to buy and build, with a 
definite yardstick for measuring success. Dubbed 
the Parker P1, the plane is made from aluminum 
and carbon fiber, and uses a Rotax 503 two-cylinder 
single-carb engine. The initial assembly began in 
Parker’s one-bedroom apartment.
 Parker’s first priority is to conceptualize, build, 
and test-fly an airplane of his own design. But 
that’s not to say he doesn’t have his eye on a prize: 
the high-altitude record for the C1a0 weight class 
(under 661 pounds for plane, fuel, and pilot). The 
current record of just over 30,000 feet was set in 
1989; Parker needs to beat it by 3% to get into the 
record books. At over 12,000 feet, supplemental 
oxygen is needed, so Parker’s relying on the same 
system used by the U.S. Air Force.
 The build has taken 6,000 hours and $40,000 so 
far, not counting workshop rent or specialized tools. 
But Parker says that it’s really not all that difficult. 
“There were lots of frustrating moments, but I often 
say that there’s no single process in building this 
plane that I couldn’t teach anyone in an afternoon.”
—Bruce Stewart
>>   High Altitude: parkerprojects.com/altitude.htm
Aiming High, Real High
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

25
Make:
Photograph by Andrew Carol
What would the ancient Greeks make of an iPod? 
According to Andrew Carol, they might have been 
more gadget-savvy than we give them credit for.
 He’s paid homage to their ingenuity by building a 
functioning Lego model of the famous Antikythera 
Mechanism — a 2,000-year-old handheld “mechani-
cal computer” that people in Hipparchus’ time used 
to make sophisticated astronomical predictions.
 “Thousands of years ago, events like solar eclipses 
were terrifying to people,” Carol says. “But they were 
smart — they recorded the patterns of when these 
eclipses occurred, and eventually some Greek guy 
realized he could build those patterns into a box of 
gears. After that, anyone could predict these impor-
tant events just by turning a crank.”
 Carol builds software for Apple by day, but has 
explored the nexus “where computational mechan-
ics and Lego meet” since 2006, when a cover story 
in an old Scientific American inspired him to build 
a working “difference engine” out of plastic bricks. 
(Charles Babbage’s 19th-century device used cranks 
and gears to calculate mathematical functions.)
 An editor at Nature saw Carol’s model and asked 
if he could make a Lego Antikythera. Carol gladly 
accepted the challenge, but rebuilding antiquity’s 
Palm Pilot was no small feat. “Whoever designed it 
had the luxury of cutting their own custom gears,” he 
says, “whereas I just had to use what Lego makes.”
 Starting in late 2009, he designed a modular 
system comprising seven mechanical differentials 
and more than 100 gears to achieve the “exotic 
ratios” necessary for computing lunar movements. 
Two prototypes, 10 days of Christmas vacation, and 
$500 worth of Lego Technic pieces later, Carol had 
a working version of the machine.
 He recently presented it to adoring geeks at the 
annual Science Foo Camp held at Google’s head-
quarters in Mountain View, Calif. At roughly the size 
of a desktop printer, his replica “isn’t as compact as 
the original,” he concedes. “Then again, I had to use 
twice as many gears as they did.”         —John Pavlus
>>   Andrew Carol’s Work: acarol.woz.org
  Antikythera Device: makezine.com/go/antikythera
Lego Antikythera!
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

26
Make: Volume 24
COUNTRY SCIENTIST
BY FORREST M. MIMS III
Becoming an Amateur Scientist
otherwise hacked to provide specialized scientific 
instruments. For example, digital camera sensors 
are highly sensitive to the near-infrared wavelengths 
beyond the limits of human vision from around 
800nm–900nm. IR-blocking filters placed over 
camera sensors block the near-IR so that photo-
graphs depict images as they’d be seen by the 
human eye. Removing the near-IR filter provides a 
camera that can record the invisible wavelengths 
reflected so well by healthy foliage.
  Many of the makers who publish their projects 
in the pages of MAKE, Nuts and Volts, and across 
the web have the technical skills and resources to 
devise scientific tools and instruments far more 
advanced than anything my generation of amateur 
scientists designed. They also have the ability to use 
these tools to begin their own scientific measure-
ments, studies, and surveys. Thus, they have the 
potential to become the pioneers for the next 
generation of serious amateur scientists.
 Previous installments of this column have covered 
approaches for entering the world of amateur sci-
ence, and future columns will present more. For now 
I’ll end this installment with a brief account of how 
I began doing serious amateur science so you can 
see how a relatively basic set of observations of the 
atmosphere has lasted more than 20 years and, 
with any luck, will continue for another 20 years.
Case Study: 20 Years of Monitoring 
the Ozone Layer
In May 1988, I read that the U.S. government planned 
to end a solar ultraviolet-B radiation monitoring pro-
gram due to problems with the instruments. Within 
a few months I began daily UVB monitoring using 
a homemade radiometer. The radiometer used an 
So began an essay about amateur science I was 
asked to write for Science (April 1999, bit.ly/cTuHap),
one of the world’s leading science journals. Ironically, 
the quotation in the first sentence came from an edi-
torial that had been previously published in Science.
 In the 11 years since my essay appeared in
Science, amateur scientists have continued doing 
what they’ve done for centuries. They’ve discovered 
significant dinosaur fossils, found new species
of plants, and identified many new comets and 
asteroids. Their discoveries have been published
in scientific journals and books. Thousands of
websites detail an enormous variety of amateur
science tips, projects, activities, and discoveries. 
Ralph Coppola has listed many of these sites in 
“Wanderings,” his monthly column in The Citizen 
Scientist (sas.org/tcs).
 Today’s amateur scientists have access to sophis-
ticated components, instruments, computers, and 
software that could not even be imagined back in 
1962 when I built my first computer, a primitive
analog device that could translate 20 words of 
Russian into English with the help of a memory 
composed of 20 trimmer resistors (bit.ly/atF5VL).
 Components like multiwavelength LEDs and laser 
diodes can be used to make spectroradiometers 
and instruments that measure the transmission of 
light through the atmosphere. Images produced by 
digital video and still cameras can be analyzed with 
free software like ImageJ to study the natural world 
in ways that weren’t even imagined a few decades 
ago. Amateur astronomers can mount affordable 
digital cameras on their telescopes, which then 
scan the heavens under computer control.
 Cameras, microscopes, telescopes, and many 
other preassembled products can be modified or 
A
n editorial in a leading science journal once proclaimed an end to amateur science: “Modern science 
can no longer be done by gifted amateurs with a magnifying glass, copper wires, and jars filled 
with alcohol.” I grinned as I read these words. For then as now there’s a 10x magnifier in my pocket, 
spools of copper wire on my workbench, and a nearby jar of methanol for cleaning the ultraviolet filters in 
my homemade solar ultraviolet and ozone spectroradiometers. Yes, modern science uses considerably more 
sophisticated methods and instruments than in the past. And so do we amateurs. When we cannot afford 
the newest scientific instrument, we wait to buy it on the surplus market or we build our own. Sometimes the 
capabilities of our homemade instruments rival or even exceed those of their professional counterparts.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

27
Make:
Photography and images by Forrest M. Mims III (A, B); Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA (C)
Fig. A: Circuit diagram for 
one of the two UVB sun 
photometers in the original 
homemade TOPS-1 from 
1990. All the components
are still available. Fig. B: The
TOPS project earned a 1993
Rolex Award that provided
funds for the development
of a first-generation micro-
processor-controlled TOPS 
(Microtops) by Scott 
Hagerup. Fig. C: This global 
ozone image was acquired 
while NASA’s Nimbus-7 satel-
lite was providing accurate 
data during 1991. On this 
day TOPS-1 measured 284.4 
Dobson units (DU) of ozone, 
and the satellite measured 
281.5 DU.
 This meant that my simple UVB radiometer 
formed half of an ozone monitor. So I built two
radiometers inside a case about half the size of a 
paperback book. One radiometer’s photodiode was 
fitted with a filter that measured UVB at 300nm, and 
the second was fitted with a 305nm filter. I named 
the instrument “TOPS” for Total Ozone Portable 
Spectrometer. (Full details are at bit.ly/9JOth9.)
 TOPS was calibrated against the ozone levels 
monitored by NASA’s Nimbus-7 satellite. This 
provided an empirical algorithm that allowed TOPS 
to measure the ozone layer to within about 1% of 
the amount measured by the satellite. During 1990, 
ozone readings by TOPS and Nimbus-7 agreed 
closely. But in 1992, the two sets of data began to 
diverge so that TOPS was showing several percent 
more ozone than the satellite.
 When I notified the ozone scientists at NASA’s 
A
B
C
inexpensive op-amp integrated circuit to amplify the 
current produced by a UV-sensitive photodiode. An 
interference filter passed only the UVB wavelengths 
from about 300nm–310nm, while blocking the 
visible wavelengths.
 I described how to make two versions of the UVB 
radiometer in “The Amateur Scientist” column in 
the August 1990 Scientific American. This article 
also described how the radiometer detected sig-
nificant reductions in solar UVB when thick smoke 
from forest fires at Yellowstone National Park drifted 
over my place in South Texas in September 1988.
 Ozone strongly absorbs UV, and the amount of 
ozone in a column through the entire atmosphere 
layer can be determined by comparing the amount 
of UV at two closely spaced UV wavelengths. This is 
possible because shorter wavelengths are absorbed 
more than longer wavelengths.
GaP photodiode
(Hamamatsu G1962)
Collimator
(Note 1)
1N914
(Note 3)
Filter
Liquid crystal readout
(Acculex DP-650)
D.P. 0
D.P. 1
100pF
Rf (a)
Rf (b) (Note 2)
Gain 
select
In (+)
TLC271
In (–)
Hold
Ground
+5V
100K
zero
adjust
1M
1M
.01μF
6V –7V
Power
2
3
6
7
8
1
5
4
NOTES
1. Collimation in the TOPS 
instrument is provided by 5mm-
diameter apertures in the end 
of the housing approximately 
90mm from the photodiodes. 
2. Exact resistances depend on 
transmission of the filter. The 
range will be from 10M to 100M.
3. Use one 1N914 for a 6V supply 
or three 1N914s for a 7V supply.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

28
Make: Volume 24
Forrest M. Mims III (forrestmims.org), an amateur scientist 
and Rolex Award winner, was named by Discover magazine 
as one of the “50 Best Brains in Science.” He edits The Citizen 
Scientist (sas.org/tcs).
COUNTRY SCIENTIST
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) about the dis-
crepancy, they politely reminded me that the satellite 
instrument was part of a major scientific program 
and not a homemade instrument. I responded that 
I had built a second TOPS and both showed a similar 
difference, but this didn’t convince them.
 During August of 1992, I visited Hawaii’s Mauna 
Loa Observatory for the first time to calibrate my in-
struments at that pristine site 11,200 feet above the 
Pacific Ocean. The world-standard ozone instrument 
was also being calibrated there, and it indicated a 
difference in ozone measurements made by Nimbus-
7 that were similar to what I had observed.
 Eventually NASA announced that there was 
indeed a drift in the calibration of its satellite ozone 
instrument. A paper I wrote about this sparked my 
career as a serious amateur scientist when it was 
published in Nature, another leading science journal 
(“Satellite Ozone Monitoring Error,” page 505, Feb. 
11, 1993). Later GSFC invited me to give a seminar 
on my atmospheric measurements that they titled 
“Doing Earth Science on a Shoestring Budget.” That 
talk led to two GSFC-sponsored trips to study the 
smoky atmosphere over Brazil during that country’s 
annual burning season, and several trips to major 
forest fires in western U.S. states.
 
Going Further
The regular ozone measurements I began on 
Feb. 4, 1990, have continued to this day along with 
measurements made by various homemade instru-
ments of the water vapor layer, haze, UVB, and other 
parameters. In future columns we’ll explore how you 
can also make such measurements — and very 
possibly make discoveries of your own.
Fig. D: Nature plot compares 
ozone measurements by TOPS and 
Nimbus-7. In 1992 the calibration of 
the satellite’s instrument began to 
drift. Fig. E: Scientist Brooke Walsh 
measures the ozone layer with the 
world-standard ozone instrument
at Hawaii’s Mauna Loa Observatory. 
Fig. F: The ozone layer over South 
Texas, measured by the author. 
Red points from 1990 to 1994 were 
measured by TOPS-1. Blue points 
from 1994 to 1997 were measured 
by Microtops and Supertops. Points 
from 1997 to 2010 were measured
by Microtops II, manufactured by 
Solar Light. 
D
E
F
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Bug Frog (OC)
LEARN, EXPERIENCE AND INNOVATE WITH THE FOLLOWING DEGREES:  Advancing Computer Science > Artiﬁ cial Life Programming > 
Digital Media > Digital Video > Enterprise Software Development > Game Art and Animation > Game Design >  Game Programming > 
Human-Computer Interaction > Network Engineering > Network Security > Open Source Technologies > Robotics and Embedded Systems 
> Serious Game and Simulation > Strategic Technology Development > Technology Forensics > Technology Product Design > Technology 
Studies > Virtual Modeling and Design > Web and Social Media Technologies
Robots are taking over.
uat.edu/robotics
877.UAT.GEEK
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

O’Reilly Ebooks:
Your bookshelf on your devices
©2010 O’Reilly Media, Inc. O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. 10672.1
PDF 
ePub  
Mobi 
APK 
DAISY
You get lifetime access to ebooks you purchase through oreilly.com, and whenever 
possible we provide them to you in fi ve DRM-free fi le formats—PDF, ePub, Kindle-
compatible .mobi, DAISY, and Android .apk—that you can use on the devices of your 
choice. Our ebook fi les are fully searchable, and you can cut-and-paste and print them. 
We also alert you when we've updated your ebooks with corrections and additions. 
oreilly.com
Spreading the knowledge of innovators
Buy 2 books, 
get the 3rd FREE
USE DISCOUNT CODE: OPC10 
All orders over $29.95 qualify for free shipping within the U.S. 
This off er includes books from O'Reilly and Microsoft Press 
as well as our partner publishers No Starch, Paraglyph, 
PC Publishing, Pragmatic, Rocky Nook, SitePoint, 
TidBITS Publishing, and YoungJin.  
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

31
Make:
5. Assign teams. This machine was really big, 
so having a dedicated team for key components 
helped improve reliability and minimize danger 
(from falling pianos and steel drums). This special-
ization also allowed for flexibility when last-minute 
changes were needed. Why the changes? Well …
6. Aesthetics are important. Some interactions in 
the machine were too fast, or too crowded, or just 
didn’t have the right “feel” on camera. For example, 
the piano was intended to come down slowly, but 
it looked so good crashing down that we decided 
to make that change. Unintended consequences 
occured due to vibration, but a workaround was dis-
covered, and we continued, proving my last point …
7. Be flexible. Early on, we knew we wanted to end 
with paint cannons, and we suspected we’d start 
with dominoes (a classic!), but the rest was a realm 
of infinite possibilities. Many ideas were pursued and 
abandoned: some were hard to photograph, others 
simply didn’t work. It’s hard to give up on an idea 
after days or even weeks of work are invested, but, 
we found, it’s often necessary for the greater good.
 More photos at: makezine.com/24/learned
THINGS I’VE LEARNED
BY ADAM SADOWSKY
A Rube Goldberg 
Music-Making Machine 
M
usical group OK Go released the video for 
their song “Here It Goes Again” in 2005. 
The iconic video shows the four band
members dancing wonderfully on eight moving 
treadmills. Shot with a single locked-off camera,
and now exceeding 50 million views on YouTube, 
that video redefined what a viral video could be.
 In August 2009, Syyn Labs began discussions 
with the band to build them a machine they could 
“dance with” in a Rube Goldberg-style chain reac-
tion for their next video. A few requirements: no 
“magic,” and the machine should try to hit beats 
throughout, play part of the song, and be built to
be photographed in one continuous shot.
 The build was daunting, but ultimately it was a 
great success. (See the video at bit.ly/okgosyyn.) 
Here are some things we learned.
1. Do the small stuff first. We wanted the machine 
to build in excitement, to crescendo with lots of big, 
crazy interactions. Also, we’ve found that …
2. Bigger is better. Smaller components are more 
fidgety than larger objects. A marble and its trigger 
are simply far more affected by dirt, temperature 
changes, and vibration than a bowling ball, which 
doesn’t much care at this scale. Therefore we also …
3. Put the less reliable stuff up front. This was 
important, so that we spent as little of the precious 
shooting time resetting the machine as possible. 
With 89 different types of interaction, and many 
times more than that if you count each physical 
interaction (each domino, chair, rat-trap flag, etc.), 
we wanted any failures to happen near the 
beginning. Nevertheless, it’s important to …
4. Have lots of people involved. Ultimately, we 
had more than 55! They were all essential and 
worked long hours late into the night to get every-
thing working beautifully. Of course, when you have 
that many people working on a machine so large, 
you must …
Adam Sadowsky is president of Syyn Labs (syynlabs.com), 
a Los Angeles-based collective of interdisciplinarily talented 
scientists, engineers, designers, and technologists who love 
to explore the blurry distinction between art and technology.
Photography by Edwin Roses
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

32
Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS FROM MAKE 
Step-by-step projects from MAKE magazine 
and Make: Online.
5 Geared Candleholder 
Kinetic sculptor Ben Cowden 
shows how to make a burly, 
elegant candleholder with 
two gear-driven arms that 
raise and lower the candle 
platforms. You’ll learn to 
fabricate your own gears, 
using sheet aluminum and a drill to cut the teeth. 
From MAKE Volume 21. makezine.com/go/geared
5 Medicine Man Glider Build from scratch an 
old-school, balsa-wood-and-tissue-paper glider 
with an awesome 5-foot wingspan. Much larger 
photos than appeared in the magazine (Volume 17) 
make the details of this involved build easier to see 
and understand. makezine.com/go/glider
USER-CONTRIBUTED PROJECTS  
Makers are rolling up their sleeves and sharing their 
how-tos and DIY wisdom with us — keep ’em coming!
5 Install a Penny Countertop Replace a boring 
counter surface with a lustrous, durable, and cheap 
new top using two-part clear epoxy, marine-grade 
polyurethane, and a sack of pennies. 
makezine.com/go/penny
TALES FROM MAKE: ONLINE
Garden of DIY Delights
Make: Projects (makeprojects.com) is our newest online service, a living library of how-to 
tutorials being built by the entire maker community. Sure it’s got great projects from our magazine and 
websites, but more importantly it’s got great projects contributed by makers like you, plus wiki-based 
primers ranging from cooking and brewing to gear-cutting and servomotor basics. 
 Because all of Make: Projects is built on a custom wiki (thanks to our friends at iFixit), every article is a 
“living document” that can be edited by anybody. Have some expertise? Share it by writing a how-to. Find 
a mistake? You can fix it. Did you do a project and take better photographs? Add them. Have questions or 
feedback about a build? Add those too, and see the project improve. 
 We’re excited to see how this service grows and changes over time. To make it truly great, we need your 
help. You can get started at makeprojects.com/Info/start. Here’s a sampling — what will you contribute?
BY GARETH BRANWYN
5 Mylar Light Box  Ryan 
Jenkins of the Exploratorium 
shows how rolls of mylar film 
in a box, covered with tissue 
paper, can produce all sorts 
of beautiful patterns when 
held over a light source. 
And check out his fantastic 
photos. makezine.com/go/mylar
TECHNIQUES AND PRIMERS  
Over time, we expect the collected expertise of the
maker community to become a significant draw.
5 Technique: Label-Etch 
a Glass Bottle Sean Ragan 
shares a simple trick he 
discovered for etching 
designs onto glass bottles 
using the bottle’s original 
label as a built-in “resist” to 
the etchant. makezine.com/
go/etch
5 Primer: EL Wire Louis M. Brill and Steve Boverie 
explain electroluminescent (EL) wire, aka “lightwire” 
— how it’s built, how it works, and how it can be 
used in creative electronics projects to light up the 
night. makeprojects.com/Wiki/elwire
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

33
Make:
YOU WILL NEED
Thick cardboard cut to 10" square
Utility or craft knife
Pencil, ruler, tape
Cut-and-Fold Center Finder
By Andrew Lewis
1+2+3
Andrew Lewis is a keen artificer and computer scientist
with interests in 3D scanning, computational theory,
algorithmics, and electronics. He is a relentless tinkerer 
who loves science, technology, and all things steampunk.
Illustrations by Julian Honoré/p4rse.com
Finding the center of a circle is easy when you have 
the right tool. This cut-and-fold cardboard center 
finder is ideal for all those fiddly measuring jobs.
1. Measure and mark.
On your 10" square of cardboard, use the ruler and 
pencil to mark a diagonal line from the bottom left 
corner to the top right corner. Mark a vertical line ½" 
from the left side, a horizontal line ½" from the bot-
tom, and another horizontal line 1" from the bottom.
2. Cut.
Using your utility or craft knife, cut out a ½" square 
from the bottom left corner of the card, using your 
½" pencil lines as a guide.
 Next, cut a triangle out of the card. Starting at the 
top right corner, cut along the diagonal line until you 
reach the 1" horizontal line at bottom left, then cut 
along the 1" line to the right edge of the card. 
3. Fold and tape.
Use your knife to lightly score along the ½" border 
lines so that the card will fold easily, then bend the 
left and bottom ½" borders 90° to form a corner. 
Tape the corner to hold the cardboard edges at 90°.
Use It
To mark the center of a circular object (for example, 
the top of a paint can), place your center-finding 
tool so that its folded edges touch the object’s 
outside edges. 
 Now draw a line across the object, using the inside 
diagonal edge of your center finder as a guide. 
Rotate the object 90° and draw a second line. The 
point where the 2 lines intersect is the center of the 
circular object. 
NOTE: The maximum diameter of the circular 
object is roughly equal to twice the center finder's 
outside edge length — so your 10" center finder can 
be used with objects up to about 20" in diameter. 
To make a larger center finder, just follow the same 
instructions but use a larger square of cardboard.
1
2
3
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

34
Make: Volume 24
Maker
 But designing cargo capacity into pedal-powered 
transportation is a challenge that not only presents 
questions of where, what, how, and how much to 
carry, it also complicates all the usual bike design 
tradeoffs — balancing weight, strength, cost, gear-
ing, frame geometry, wheel size, and so on.
 It’s a vast, messy, multivariable problem that 
can’t be optimized for all applications. But over
the generations, a few popular strategies have 
evolved that do a good job with common types of 
cargo and terrain. Makers like Joshua Muir and 
Saul Grifﬁ th are adding their own ideas to the ﬁ eld, 
building a revolution not just in cargo-bike design, 
but in the way people live.
Classic Carriers
How do people carry loads on bikes? Many popular 
“cargo bikes” are just regular bikes with cargo
Car-free carrying makes a comeback. By Joshua Hart
Cargo Bike Power
I
f you want to wean yourself away from petro-
leum dependence, try a cargo bike. A good one 
lets a relatively ﬁ t adult transport 500 pounds
of stuff across level ground, so a few bags of 
groceries are cake. In recent years, increasing 
concerns about the environment and energy 
dependence have made cargo bikes a hot topic 
for makers and tinkerers who want to design an 
important piece of the future.
 The concept isn’t new, of course. Bikes specially
designed to transport cargo are nearly as old as 
the bicycle itself. Starting in the late 19th century,
cargo bikes were used in many developed coun-
tries to carry items that would otherwise have 
required horsepower, and they continued to be 
used to deliver things like bread, milk, and mail 
until after World War II, when cars and trucks took 
over in industrialized countries.
Photograph by Paul Gower
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

35
Make:
capacity added on. Good old-fashioned panniers 
and bike trailers, for example, come in various 
shapes and sizes, and you can detach them to 
regain your bike’s performance. But panniers have 
limited capacity, and trailers can be difﬁ cult to 
maneuver — tip-prone energy drags, rolling behind 
and clattering around.
 To make room for loads on the bike itself, you 
can shrink the bike’s front wheel and fork, lengthen 
the head tube, and attach a basket in front. This is 
the tradesman’s bike, aka deli bike, butcher’s bike, 
post bike, or porteur. With the basket attached to 
the frame, rather than the handlebars, steering is 
unaffected. One model, the Pashley Mailstar, is still 
used to deliver mail in the U.K., although they’re 
sadly being phased out in favor of vans.
 For even more capacity, you can move the front 
wheel forward, connect it back to the handlebars 
via a pair of curved steering rods, and carry the 
cargo low (and therefore stable) in between. 
 Such was the principle behind the Belgian keg 
bike (now commonly called long john or long haul), 
originally designed for a land of great beers and 
ﬂ at topography. Popular with messengers, 
these bikes carry heavy cargo (comparable to a 
Photography by (clockwise from top left) Christiania Bikes, Josh Muir, and Larry vs Harry
2-foot by 1½-foot, 160-pound beer keg) where the 
driver can easily monitor it, which especially helps 
riders carrying living “cargo” like kids and pets. 
 Inspired by this classic design, Portland, Ore., 
cargo-bike maker Metroﬁ ets created the Beer Bike 
for a local brewery, which carries two kegs (with 
taps made from bicycle parts), an inlaid wood bar, 
a pizza rack, and a wood-paneled sound system.
 Tadpoles, aka Christiania trikes (named after 
the car-free district in Copenhagen where many 
are made), are sturdy cargo tricycles that carry 
large loads, including children, between two front 
wheels. Like other tricycles, they’re less maneu-
verable than bikes — wider and prone to tipping 
during turns. 
 A different cargo-trike approach is to put the 
two wheels and cargo in back, as with recumbent 
tricycles, where the driver sits low with legs
extended forward.
Life After the Xtracycle
Perhaps no other U.S. company has done more 
to promote the potential of bicycles to transport 
cargo than Xtracycle (xtracycle.com), started by 
mechanical engineer Ross Evans.
BIKEGO, NOT CARGO: (Opposite) Onya Cycles trike. 
(This page, clockwise from top left) Christiania Bikes 
Light, Frances Cycles Cycletruck, Larry vs Harry Bullitt.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

36
Make: Volume 24
Maker
 In the spring of 1995, Evans began studying 
bicycle use in the developing world. He noticed, 
particularly in Central America, that while conven-
tional bikes were abundant, they weren’t as useful 
to people as they could be.
 He set about designing an inexpensive cargo 
carrier that was lightweight, maneuverable, stable, 
and able to travel down narrow paths. This led him 
to develop the “longtail” frame-extension kit, a 
bolt-on attachment that extends the length (and 
cargo-carrying capacity) of regular bicycles, sold 
by Xtracycle under the name FreeRadical.
 The kit attaches just behind the bike’s bottom 
bracket and clamps to the rear-axle drop-outs, 
moving the rear wheel back about 15 inches (and 
swapping in a longer chain). The frame extends 
back to hold the rear wheel and wraps around 
behind it to support four upright tubes that carry 
a variety of accessories, like racks and decks for 
holding child seats or large panniers.
 Many of today’s cargo-bike designers were 
inspired by Evans. The explosive cult popularity 
of the smooth-riding Xtracycles has inspired a 
subindustry of compatible add-ons that take the 
cargo bikes in different directions — like the Stoke-
monkey electric motor assist kit (MAKE Volume 
11, page 82), which lets a rider haul hundreds of 
pounds up steep hills that would be impossible 
for anyone but Lance Armstrong to pedal other-
wise. You can pedal normally without any motor 
resistance, but you can’t use the motor without 
pedaling. As manufacturer Clever Cycles explains, 
“We don’t believe in replacing human power with 
electricity; we believe in replacing cars.”
 But as with the Belgian keg bike, longtail bikes 
aren’t all work and no play. The pedal-powered 
Margarita blenders and bike-based sound systems 
of Rock the Bike (Volume 11, page 76) were all 
originally built on Xtracycles.
Joshua Muir’s Small Haul
Frame builder Joshua Muir (francescycles.com), 
who co-founded the inﬂ uential Bike Church Tool 
Cooperative in Santa Cruz, Calif., loves to go bicycle 
camping with his 60-pound black Labrador, Soupy. 
In Belgium, a long john might enable a trip like this, 
but the steep roads of the Santa Cruz Mountains 
require something lighter.
 So Muir designed a high-performance cargo 
bike, the Small Haul, which takes the classic 
long-john design as a departure point. In place of 
its rectangular cargo area, the Small Haul has an 
oblong, stretched-fabric load basket supported by 
thin, integrated frame tubes that curve out grace-
fully between the front wheel and the down tube. 
The resulting space frame looks more like part of
a racing yacht than a traditional work bike.
 Muir saved even more weight with the Small 
Haul’s steering system. The classic long john
includes idler steering, which uses lots of metal:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

37
Make:
an extended steering column connects down to 
two metal rods that run under the cargo basket 
then curve back up over the front fork. In addition 
to being heavy, the idler arms can get stuck when 
debris or cargo jam up the steering.
 Instead, Muir adapted a less-common design 
based on sheathed cables, which bikes already 
use to transmit forces to brakes and derailleurs. 
The Small Haul’s two steerer tubes, one under the 
handlebars and the other over the front fork, each 
attach to a perpendicular pulley. On each side of 
the bike, one cable end wraps backward around 
each of the identical pulleys, connecting the two.
 The resulting system weighs less than a pound, 
handles like a regular bike, and is strong enough for 
Muir to haul Soupy, dog food, and camping supplies 
in front, plus other gear in panniers on the rear rack. 
The only nonstandard parts are the two aluminum 
pulleys. The Small Haul, including generator light, 
fender, rack, and pump, weighs approximately 37 
pounds. (Muir also builds a heavier Cycletruck, 
which follows a more traditional idler-steering 
design and can carry 200 pounds.)
 Unlike many custom bike builders (and all major 
manufacturers), Muir minimizes the energy and 
toxic materials he uses, sourcing components 
locally whenever possible. “I don’t own a car, and 
drive little,” he writes. “Most all of the materials
I use are sourced within the U.S., and some come 
from the Bay Area. I build framesets by hand, one 
at a time, slowly.”
Saul Grifﬁ th’s Cargo Trike
Since the birth of his son, Huxley, in April 2009, 
regular MAKE contributor Saul Grifﬁ th has been 
designing and building cargo bikes. His aim, he 
says, is to create vehicles that can haul groceries 
and kids up steep San Francisco hills, eliminating 
the need for his family to use a car locally. With a 
fall 2010 launch date, Grifﬁ th’s line of bikes will be 
sold as custom builds through his company Onya 
Cycles (onyacycles.com). If demand for any of the 
models takes off, he plans to start mass-producing 
them to sell at much lower prices.
 Like Muir, Grifﬁ th has studied the past, including 
the bike-design “bible,” Archibald Sharp’s Bicycles 
and Tricycles, ﬁ rst published in 1896 (now printed 
by Dover Publications). But where Muir draws on 
his years of mastery, handcrafting lugged, steel-
tube bicycle frames, Grifﬁ th takes a higher-tech 
Photograph by Josh Muir
BACK AND FRONT: (Opposite) The Xtracycle FreeRadical frame extension installed on a bicycle, carrying an 
extended deck and panniers. (Above) Josh Muir’s black Labrador, Soupy, on the road in the cargo basket of
a Frances Cycles Small Haul.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

38
Make: Volume 24
Maker
approach. For example, he uses CAD to model 
every piece of a bike, from the frame and wheels to 
the smallest component, trying them out virtu-
ally to see how they ﬁ t together. “Someday,” he 
predicts, “everyone will design bikes like this, and 
there will be a new kind of ‘digital artisan.’”
 Grifﬁ th’s line features three types of bikes, all 
of which he designed to replace cars for differ-
ent uses: a light-hauling “runabout” that can be 
carried up stairs; a family-oriented longtail, where 
kids can ride in back; and a tadpole cargo trike for 
the heaviest hauling.
 All three models use BMX wheels, which Grifﬁ th 
favors because they’re cheaper and stronger than 
27-inch or 700mm wheels, and they facilitate 
greater stability by keeping the center of gravity 
lower. (Smaller wheels also present marginally 
greater rolling resistance, but smooth tire tread 
and proper inﬂ ation matter more.)
 The three bikes also have electric motor assist 
from an internal-hub motor with a planetary
gear that can be set to different gearing ratios. 
Power comes from a lithium polymer battery and 
provides a range of 10 to 40 miles, depending on 
weight and terrain.
 Of Grifﬁ th’s three designs, the cargo trike may 
be the most revolutionary. Traditional tricycles are 
naturally stable while standing still or going in a 
straight line but are notorious for tipping when you 
turn, with even greater danger if they’re motorized 
and carrying a heavy load. To remedy this instabil-
ity, bike designers since Archibald Sharp’s day 
have created tilt-steer systems that let wheels lean 
into the turn, although these have never appeared 
in a mass-market trike.
 Most two-wheel steering systems use Acker-
man steering, originally invented for horse-drawn 
carriages, in which the wheels connect to angled 
steering arms linked together by a tie rod. This 
allows each wheel to turn at a different radius 
around the same point, reducing friction and
energy loss from tire slippage.
 For Grifﬁ th’s tilt-steer system, he extended the 
Ackerman geometry into three dimensions so that 
each wheel tilts as well as turns at its own angle. 
This required some “gnarly geometry,” he says; to 
arrive at his ﬁ nal design, Grifﬁ th wrote and ran a 
7,000-line simulation program that modeled all of 
the system’s basic elements, analyzed the energy 
loss under any possible set of their dimensions 
TYKE LIKE TRIKE: Saul Griffith carries his young son, Huck, in an early prototype of his cargo trike. The triangular 
wheelbase and innovative tilt-steering system ensure that the trike stays safely upright while it’s stopped, travel-
ing in a straight line, or turning at any normal radius and speed.
Photography by Leila Hekmat
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

39
Make:
Joshua Hart (joshuanoahhart@gmail.com) is a Bay Area 
resident with 15 years’ experience advocating for self-
propelled transportation. His master’s thesis, “Driven to 
Excess,” was covered by more than 100 media outlets 
worldwide. He maintains a blog about transportation and 
climate issues at onthelevelblog.com.
GNARLY MATH: (Above) The 
tie rods and steering arms of 
Griffith’s cargo trike extend 
standard Ackerman steering 
into three dimensions. This lets 
the trike’s two front wheels 
lean as well as turn at different 
angles as they follow their own 
arcs, minimizing side-slippage 
and other sources of friction. 
(Left) Graph generated by the 
7,000-line computer program 
that Griffith wrote to find the 
optimal geometry for his tilt-
steering system.
and angles, and found the optimal combination, 
assuming a typical range of steering radii.
 The result, converted from MATLAB to metal, is 
a tricycle that feels uncannily like a bicycle, with a 
one-minute learning curve that teaches riders to 
ignore the sight of a big cargo basket swaying side-
to-side in front of them and to just ride normally.
Cargobiketopia Rising
As a transit planner and bike activist, I’m thrilled 
about what Muir and Grifﬁ th are doing, as well as 
many others who are designing not just new bikes 
but also local bike-sharing systems, maintenance 
collectives, and plans for reclaiming bike-friendly 
roadway and path infrastructure (often located 
along old rail rights-of-way, canals, or rivers).
 Building level, regional bike routes has so far 
been carried out piecemeal, and mostly in the 
name of recreation. But bike routes could also 
become an arterial network for transporting people 
and cargo throughout re-localized communities. 
Combine this with “intermodal” connections to 
express buses and trains, and you’ve got a sustain-
able transportation system with quality of life as 
the driving force.
 Such a system would knit communities together, 
rather than drive them apart. The able-bodied 
could transport cargo and other people around, 
and everyone could live, breathe, and congregate 
in safety, moving around without a wall of armor 
surrounding them.
 Many people seem to be yearning for a new
kind of transportation system, and whatever the 
future holds, the freight-carrying bicycle will be an 
important part of it. It’s cheaper, more fun, health-
ier, simpler, more elegant, and more conducive to 
community than the alternatives. And designing, 
making, and pedaling new variations of cargo bikes 
around our cities and towns should keep us busy 
for many years to come.
Thanks to Stephen Bilenky and Erik Zo for helpful 
background information.






















;D[LV
<D[LV
=D[LV











$PRXQW67)UDPHSRLQWULVHVXSR
7XUQ$QJOHGHJ
7LOW$QJOHGHJUHHV

















ORJ7XUQLQJ5DGL
6FUXE$QJOHGHJUHHV
6FUXEDQJOHDWGLIIHUHQWW

ONYA CYCLES - Steering geometry optimizer
Photography by Saul Griffith
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

40
Make: Volume 24
Maker
a nursery in New Brunswick, N.J., so they drive 
there and ask an employee if they can cut some 
down. They’re told to help themselves.
 Aguinaldo, a short, earnest cyclist who grew 
up in Fort Bragg, Calif., uses the caliper to tap the 
bamboo before it’s cut. He gets a sense of the 
plant’s density from the sound.
 “If the bamboo’s too watery, it’s not as dense 
and not as strong,” he explains. “It’s harder to ﬁ nd 
the stuff that’s denser, that’s better for bikes that 
are ridden harder.” Aguinaldo knows about riding 
hard. He and his two compatriots have logged 
thousands of miles on their bamboo bikes, mostly 
on New York City’s potholed thoroughfares.
 Murray, a former schoolteacher who declares 
on his outgoing voicemail greeting that he’s living 
DIYers come from as far away as the United Kingdom to 
make bamboo bikes in this Brooklyn studio. By Jon Kalish
Growing Bicycles
O
n a cold weekday morning, two of the three 
young men who run the Bamboo Bike 
Studio (bamboobikestudio.com) leave the 
Red Hook neighborhood of Brooklyn, N.Y., and 
drive a battered Toyota to New Jersey. 
 Bicycle makers Sean Murray, 27, and Justin 
Aguinaldo, 26, are embarking on one of their 
periodic bamboo harvests in the small sedan that 
belongs to the third member of the studio, Marty 
Odlin, who can’t make the trip. Odlin has a day job 
managing the sustainable engineering laboratory 
at Columbia University in Manhattan.
 Aguinaldo and Murray carry just two tools: a 
caliper, to measure the thickness of the bamboo 
stalks, and a small Japanese pull saw. They got a 
tip about bamboo growing wild on the grounds of
Photography by Christian Hansen
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

41
Make:
the dream of making bikes with his friends, has 
taken to trolling online gardening forums for leads 
on homeowners who are grappling with a bamboo 
invasion.
 “One story I’ve heard a lot is, ‘I got bamboo 
a few years back as a decorative plant and I still 
like the bamboo, but it’s started to crawl into my 
neighbors’ yards,’” he says while cutting down 
a 2-inch-thick stalk with his pull saw. “There’s 
a kind of urgency brought on by the protests of the 
neighbors, you know.”
 The two bike builders harvest a species of
bamboo known as Phyllostachys angusta that is 
common in the tri-state area of New York, New 
Jersey, and Connecticut. After a couple of hours 
cutting 3- and 5-foot lengths, they schlep the 
freshly cut green bamboo stalks in long canvas 
bags back to the car and ﬁ ll up the trunk with the 
fruits of their harvest.
 Aguinaldo and Murray return to Red Hook, a 
mostly low-rise neighborhood near Brooklyn’s 
industrial waterfront, and carry the bamboo stalks 
into an old brick building with high ceilings. Every-
thing in the long, narrow room that serves as the 
bike-building studio is homemade, including the 
head-high aluminum frame-holding jigs and the 
oven used to dry out the bamboo.
 For the drying process, they poke thin metal 
rods through the nodes inside the bamboo so it 
will dry out evenly when baked. A propane torch is 
used to cook and harden the skin of the bamboo, 
which turns from green to a beautiful tan. Then 
it’s put into the oven for several hours at a low 
temperature.
 Anywhere from two to six people make bikes 
during the weekend workshops run by Murray, 
Aguinaldo, and Odlin. It takes two long days 
and costs $932 to build your own bamboo bike. 
Bamboo, construction materials, and all bicycle 
components, such as wheels, handlebars, brakes, 
etc., are included in the cost. You can build just the 
frame for $632.
 DIYers have come from as far away as California 
and the U.K. to make bamboo bikes in the Brooklyn
studio. On a windy afternoon last November, Agui-
naldo and Murray returned from a harvest and were 
surprised by a visit from Alexis Mills, a 29-year-old 
bicycle messenger who lives in Ottawa, Ontario.
 He made a bamboo bike last October, as did his 
mother, Christina Mills, a 61-year-old doctor in 
THE BAMBOO WAY: Bike enthusiasts take weekend workshops at the Bamboo Bike Studio to build their own bikes. 
(Opposite) Frames are masked with painter’s tape and secured in aluminum jigs while the joints are wrapped in 
carbon fiber soaked in epoxy. (Above) Studio co-owner Justin Aguinaldo tests out a handmade bamboo ride.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

42
Make: Volume 24
Maker
Waterloo, Ontario, who readily admits being one of 
those “tread lightly on the Earth” types.
 “I just love the whole concept of making your 
own transportation,” says Christina, who doesn’t 
own a car but manages to get around pretty well in 
Waterloo on her four bicycles.
 The ﬁ rst day of bike building is devoted to mak-
ing the frame by connecting the bamboo with 
epoxy-soaked carbon ﬁ ber that looks like thin 
black ribbon. The bamboo-bike makers refer to 
this as “weaving the lug.” After the epoxy hardens, 
the joints are hand-ﬁ led to smooth them out. At 
ﬁ rst glance, the ﬁ nished joints look like they’ve 
been wrapped in black electrical tape. On the sec-
ond day the bike components are attached to the 
frame, also with epoxy.
 Early last December, two people in their 40s, 
both self-described tinkerers, made bikes in the 
Red Hook studio. Sari Harris, an information archi-
tect who designs interfaces for mobile phone apps, 
and David Anderson, a lighting technician who 
works on television and movie productions, were 
ﬁ ling away when I dropped by.
 Harris wanted a new bike because hers was 
more than 20 years old. She admits that, going into 
the bike-building sessions, her mechanical skills 
were limited to changing a tire.
 “Part of me is, ‘Wow, I can make the frame,’ and 
because I’ll put all the components on, I’ll learn 
a lot about the mechanics of how a bike works 
and maybe learn how to tune up my own bike,” 
Harris says.
 Anderson, who rides his bike all over New York 
City because his work takes him to a new set week 
after week, marveled at the bamboo he saw grow-
ing in Laos on one of his vacations there. The thing 
he likes about the Bamboo Bike Studio is that, 
“These guys are not a bike factory here. They’re 
producing a way of making bikes, rather than pro-
ducing bikes.” The studio has no immediate plans 
to make and sell bikes, though Odlin does not rule 
it out at some point in the future.
 Odlin, who is 28 and an accomplished skier, 
estimates that between the test bikes he and his 
partners have built and those made by DIYers who 
come for the weekend workshop, about 180 bikes 
have been constructed since the Bamboo Bike 
Studio began in January 2009.
 Each weekday Odlin pedals his bamboo bike 
12 miles over the Brooklyn Bridge and along the 
HAULING GRASS: (Clockwise from top left) The prepared bamboo, oven-cured, torch-hardened, and ready to make 
frames; a bamboo bike rack by Boo Bicycles; the personal ride of a Bamboo Bike Studio co-owner; and a close-up 
of its hardware connecting the bamboo chain stays, seat stays, seat tube, and down tube.
Photography by Alan Esner; Boo Bicycles (bike rack)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

43
Make:
Jon Kalish (jonkalish@earthlink.net) is a Manhattan-based 
radio reporter and podcast producer. He covers the DIY 
scene for NPR.
Hudson River Park bike path to Columbia Univer-
sity on Manhattan’s Upper West Side. He has been 
plagued by something that all people who ride 
bamboo bikes have come to endure — a constant 
barrage of questions about that bike.
 “I ride with headphones even though I don’t
listen to music while I’m riding, so I can ignore 
people when they try to talk to me about my bike.
If I talked to everybody who asked me about my 
bike, I’d never get to work,” Odlin explains.
 Ditto for Murray and Aguinaldo. Aguinaldo uses 
his bike for his business, the Mess Kollective, a 
bike messenger collective that has no ofﬁ ce and is 
run entirely on iPhones.
 Murray is soon relocating to the Bay Area, where 
he’ll be setting up a San Francisco-based Bamboo 
Bike Studio, with weekend workshops already 
scheduled into the new year. The three founders 
also “think globally,” with a portion of all class fees 
going toward efforts to seed the ﬁ rst bamboo bike 
factory in Ghana.
 This past summer the Bamboo Bike Studio start-
ed selling kits for DIYers who want to build a bike 
frame at home. The kits include a jig, some tools, 
epoxy, carbon, and a limited number of metal parts, 
such as the special dropouts for the rear wheels. 
They cost less than $500 — bamboo costs extra, 
although the studio plans to crowdsource a harvest 
map for those who want to ﬁ nd local bamboo.
 There are at least three detailed how-tos for
making a bamboo bicycle on instructables.com. The 
safety of DIY bamboo bikes has been questioned by 
Calfee Design’s Craig Calfee (calfeedesign.com), a 
high-end bike maker in La Selva Beach, Calif., and a 
pioneer in using bamboo for bicycles. 
 Calfee, who developed the technique of wrap-
ping epoxy-soaked ﬁ ber around bamboo junctions 
in 1995, told me that building a bamboo bike using 
“the wrong techniques” could result in serious 
injury. But he says he assumes the bikes made 
by Odlin, Murray, and Aguinaldo in Brooklyn are 
structurally sound.
 “I’m more concerned with the average DIYer,” 
says Calfee. “It’s possible to build a bamboo bike 
that rides just ﬁ ne soon after it’s completed. But 
after the bamboo ages or the resin shrinks, the 
bamboo can separate from the wrappings, causing 
very unexpected results.”
 Bamboo bicycles may seem like the ultimate 
mode of environment-friendly transportation, but 
if you buy one as opposed to making one yourself, 
they can cost a whole lot of green. 
 Calfee Design’s bamboo bike frames, which 
have joints made from epoxy-soaked hemp, sell for 
$2,695 and $3,195; but he also started a company 
called Bamboosero, which imports bamboo bike 
frames made in Africa and sells them starting at 
around $700. Models include mountain, cargo, 
city, and road bikes.
 In Portland, Ore., Renovo Hardwood Bicycles 
(renovobikes.com) sells laminated bamboo bike 
frames starting at $1,495–$2,650, plus extra 
for full builds.
 There are two bamboo bike makers in Fort
Collins, Colo. Panda Bicycles (pandabicycles.com)
makes bikes with bamboo “tubing” connected
using a proprietary steel-joint design. The company
offers three models ranging from $1,600–$2,150 
for frame only, and $2,100–$3,250 for full builds. 
 Boo Bicycles (boobicycles.com), also in Fort 
Collins, was started in 2009 by Nick Frey, a 
23-year-old pro cyclist and mechanical engineer. 
His bamboo bikes, which boast carbon ﬁ ber joints, 
are handcrafted by James Wolf, an American 
furniture maker who lives in Vietnam. Boo sells ﬁ ve 
models, with frames ranging from $2,625–$2,985, 
plus customs.
 Organic Bikes (organicbikes.com), which is 
owned by the Wisconsin retailer Wheel and Sprocket,
sells a bamboo bicycle called the Dylan for as little as 
$1,000. It’s made from compressed bamboo dowels 
connected by recycled aluminum lugs.
 A Danish bike maker, Biomega (biomega.dk), 
also uses aluminum lugs on its bamboo bike, 
which was developed by award-winning industrial 
designer Ross Lovegrove with the expertise of 
Brazilian bamboo specialist Flavio Deslandes.
 With all these companies jumping on the 
bamboo bandwagon, the guys in Brooklyn are 
concerned that bamboo bikes might become a fad 
that eventually dies out.
 “We feel like we’re building something with more 
enduring value than that,” says Odlin. “Everyone 
who leaves the studio says, ‘Wow, my bike is my 
favorite object now.’ They have such a connection 
to this thing that came together under their own 
hands. They may not come here to have that con-
nection to their bicycle, but that’s what they leave 
with. Everyone leaves with that.”
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

44
Make: Volume 24
YOU WILL NEED
Rubber racquetball
Ping-pong balls
Marker, knife, saw, and 
half-round file 
PVC glue, epoxy, and 
sandpaper
PVC pipe and fittings:
 For the handle:
 1" pipe, 1½" length
  1" repair coupling 
 1½" pipe, 4½" length 
 For the body:
  2" snap tee part #463-   
      020S from 
    flexpvc.com
 1½" female adapter 
    coupling
For the backstop:
  2" pipe, 1" length
  3"-wide ring from the 
       insert coupling 
       (below)
 For the barrel:
  2" pipe, 1¾" length
  2" insert coupling
  ProPlumber model 
#PPFC200, Lowe’s 
part #153807 (as 
used in the Boom 
Stick, MAKE Volume 
13). Cut it down to 2" 
long. Also cut a 3" 
ring from the scrap.
Ping Ponger
By Edwin Wise
1+2+3
Edwin Wise is a software engineer and rogue technologist 
with more than 25 years of professional experience, develop-
ing software during the day and exploring the edges of mad 
science at night. simreal.com
Photograph by Ed Troxell
The Ping Ponger uses almost half of a rubber rac-
quetball as a disc spring that’s bistable (it can be at 
rest in 2 possible states) to propel a ping-pong ball 
from a compact PVC launcher.
1. Make the PVC parts.
Cut all PVC pipe pieces to length. For the body, 
cut the ends off the snap tee so it’s 2½" long, then 
press-fit the female adapter into the bottom of the 
tee and cut it off flush. 
 Glue the backstop rings together so that one edge 
is flush. 
 Bevel the inside edges of the barrel pieces with 
a file, so they curve to match the shape of the rac-
quetball. Glue the 2 barrel pieces together.
  For the handle, sand the 1" repair coupling so it fits 
into the 1½" pipe and glue it in place, then glue the 
tip of the 1" pipe into this coupling. 
2. Make a disc spring. 
Seat a racquetball into the beveled end of the barrel. 
Trace a line around the ball (parallel to the seam) 
and cut on this line, leaving a dome. This is your
disc spring.
3. Put it all together.
Glue the backstop into the body (the snap tee), 
flush with the back end. 
 Set the rubber spring on the backstop inside the 
body. Slip the barrel in place over the spring, leaving 
just enough room for it to spring forward and back. 
Don’t glue the barrel; you can remove it to change 
the spring.
 Slip (don’t glue) the handle into the bottom of 
the body. The handle also acts as a ping-pong ball 
holder and ramrod.
Now Ping-Pong Away!
Put a strong, name-brand ping-pong ball into the 
barrel, and push it into the spring using the handle, 
until the spring sticks open (back), gripping the ball. 
 Through the backstop, poke the tensed back of 
the spring to make it un-spring. Pong!
3
(
)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

45
Make:
The opportunities to explore 
space have never been 
greater, thanks to new, 
inexpensive technologies 
and NASA’s realization 
that amateur enthusiasts 
and small companies are 
its greatest resource. 
 In the following pages, 
we’ll show you how to 
get involved in the 
next great era of DIY 
space science. 
The countdown 
begins now! 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

46
Make: Volume 24
AMATEUR NIGHT: Fig. A: With a Lego NXT system and $500 in parts, a team of International Space University 
students built this fully functioning prototype satellite, shown by NASA’s Chris Boshuizen (left) and Will 
Marshall. Fig. B: AMSAT-OSCAR 7 has been orbiting Earth since 1974. Fig. C: PharmaSat, developed by NASA 
Ames Research Center and launched in 2009, is a three-unit CubeSat to study antifungal drugs in microgravity. 
Photography by Garry McLeod (A); NASA (B, C) 
Making Your 
Own Satellites
Build and launch your own
sat for as little as $8,000.
BY CHRIS BOSHUIZEN
I
t’s often said that there’s nothing you can’t make at home, and even the final 
frontier is not too remote from the hands of a well-equipped group of DIYers. 
 Amateur groups have been launching their own 
satellites into space for 40 years. Today, cheap 
technologies and novel launch strategies are helping 
DIYers build and launch more satellites than ever.
 The most successful amateur satellite is AMSAT-
OSCAR 7 (Figure B), which has been in orbit for 
36 years and remains semi-operational to this day. 
Originally launched as an experiment on new types 
of transceivers, it’s still able to send, receive, store, 
and forward messages. 
 Let’s take a look at the present and future of 
amateur satellite building.
AMSAT and the OSCAR Spacecraft
AMSAT (the Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation) 
is a group of organizations that design, build, and 
operate amateur satellites. AMSAT organizations 
from 23 countries have launched their own “orbit-
ing satellites carrying amateur radio” (OSCARs 
for short). The first of these was launched in 1961, 
a mere four years after the launch of Sputnik 1.
AMSAT spacecraft range in size from 2kg up to 
50kg and have become more sophisticated over 
the years. To date, most have been placed in orbit 
around the Earth, but AMSAT even has guidelines 
A
B
C
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

47
Make:
for spacecraft that can travel to other places in the 
solar system. AMSAT-DL in Germany is planning the 
GO-Mars/P5A spacecraft to be launched to Mars.
AMSAT pioneered the launching of amateur satel-
lites as secondary payloads on commercial rockets 
by ﬁ lling the empty space around the larger satellite 
that was paying for the ride. While it’s not always 
free, it’s still a very cost-effective way of getting 
something to space.
Tubes and Cubes
The pioneering satellites of AMSAT were designed 
and built from scratch, but these days there are 
standardized nanosatellite designs and even starter 
kits. TubeSats and CubeSats are leading the way 
with standards for size and delivery to space. 
CubeSats are based on a 10cm-cubed design 
originally developed for universities. They can be 
connected into units three cubes long, and they’re 
launched from a rectangular “peapod,” pushed out 
into space like peas squeezed from a pod. 
 CubeSat missions have carried a variety of high- 
tech gadgetry, including high-resolution cameras 
and even instruments to measure earthquakes. 
NASA recently launched its own CubeSat mission, 
PharmaSat (Figure C), to examine the effectiveness 
of antifungal drugs in space. NASA hopes to do 
more cost-effective microgravity research this way. 
A CubeSat kit to build a functioning satellite could 
cost between $5,000 and $300,000, but you can 
build one much cheaper with some clever planning. 
Similar to CubeSats, TubeSats are delivered from 
a long cylinder attached to the upper stage of the 
rocket. A TubeSat kit from Interorbital Systems 
costs only $8,000, including launch! According to 
the company’s website, “Planet Earth has entered 
the age of the Personal Satellite.” I want mine!
Lego and Smartphones
At NASA Ames Research Center we’re trying to 
discover how cheaply we can build a spacecraft. 
With the Lego Mindstorms NXT system and about 
$500 in other parts, we built a fully functioning 
prototype satellite (Figure A). 
 We’re also very interested in smartphones, 
which are bristling with sensors and have onboard 
computers more powerful than nearly every satel-
lite ever put into space. In fact, a smartphone has 
nearly all the systems of a spacecraft except solar 
panels and propulsion! With a bit more work, we 
think we’ll be launching the first cellphone-based 
satellite one day (see page 74). 
Getting Up There
While you might be able to build a functioning satel-
lite for very little money, there are still two problems 
to overcome. The first is finding a launch on some 
kind of rocket. And if you end up sharing a ride, the 
next problem is convincing the operator that your 
satellite is not a danger to the much more expen-
sive one they’re putting on the rocket. 
 To reduce the risk of damaging either the rocket 
or the other spacecraft, your satellite needs to go 
through extensive testing to ensure that it’s safe. 
This will include putting it through extreme hot and 
cold cycles, subjecting it to simulated vacuum in a 
large vacuum chamber, and shaking it aggressively 
on a vibration table. If your satellite can survive this 
punishing regime and still function as you designed 
it, then it should also survive the rocket ride and 
operate in space for some time.
Getting a launch for your object is probably the 
most expensive part of doing anything in space. 
You could volunteer for an AMSAT project, and 
we’ve already mentioned TubeSats, which offer a 
complete delivery service. If you’re building your 
satellite through a university or other educational 
group, NASA’s Project ELaNa (Educational Launch 
of Nanosatellites) can get a CubeSat into space for 
around $30,000. Andrew’s Space is a ﬁ rm that 
brokers commercial launches for SpaceX’s exciting 
Falcon 1 and Falcon 9 rockets. While these launches 
cost more than ELaNa, the rockets can carry much 
heavier satellites — anything from 1kg to 300kg!
If you want to try your satellite out but not neces-
sarily have it in space for months, you might consider 
putting it on a short-duration high-altitude sounding 
rocket. Many amateur groups launch rockets to over 
10km in altitude. Another option is a high-altitude 
balloon ride. Balloons are much more gentle, and 
can take your experimental satellite up to 30km 
without much hassle. You then have plenty of time 
to get it settled in, started up, and ready to do what 
it was designed for. And if dropping it was part of the 
plan, you should get at least 30 seconds of free-fall 
time from that height! 
 Spacebridge is an offshoot of the San Francisco 
Bay Area hackers group Noisebridge. They’re devel-
oping their space voyages using balloon launches 
and smartphones, but hope to be soon launching 
their own rockets. And why couldn’t you?
Chris Boshuizen is the small spacecraft technical liaison 
at NASA Ames Research Center. He has always wanted to 
be an astronaut. 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

48
Make: Volume 24
Photography by Diana Eng
Listening to 
Satellites
Tune in to space with a
homemade yagi antenna.
BY DIANA ENG
O
ne of my favorite things to do is talk with other ham radio operators 
through satellites or the International Space Station (ISS). To do this, 
I stand on a rooftop and tune a handheld multiband radio while tracing the 
orbit of a satellite or the ISS with my homemade yagi antenna. 
 Orbiting satellites such as AO-51, SO-50, and AO-27 
act as repeaters, relaying signals from low-power 
transceivers like mine back to hams elsewhere on 
the planet. So if you know where to aim the antenna, 
you can communicate around the world via space. 
 The ISS also has a repeater, and occasionally, 
when we’re lucky, the astronauts themselves 
exchange transmissions to communicate with 
hams on the ground.
To listen to these signals from space, you don’t 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

49
Make:
MATERIALS
UHF FM radio like a police scanner, such as the Uniden 
BC72XLT handheld scanner, amazon.com, $85. 
Or, if you have a ham radio license, a UHF transceiver 
such as the Yaesu VX-7R, universal-radio.com/
catalog/ht/0777.html, $308.
Square wooden dowel, 1"×1"×30" or longer if you 
want a handle longer than 10" for attaching to a 
tripod or mounting the radio. Approximately $2–$3 
at hardware or craft stores.
Brass rods, 1" diameter, 36" long (3) Uncoated 
brazing rods work, but almost any brass rod
or tube will do as long as it’s approximately
1" diameter; $3–$4 each at a hardware or
craft store.
Coaxial cable, RG-58, with BNC connectors, 3' 
universal-radio.com/catalog/cable/cable.html, 
order #4616, $4 
Nylon cable ties (2) aka zip ties
TOOLS
Hacksaw
Soldering iron and solder
Glue gun and glue
Wire strippers and cutters
Ruler
Marker
Vise
Drill, or drill press, and 1" drill bit
File, smooth cut, flat, approx. 10"
Wooden dowel or broomstick, approx. ¾" diameter
Computer with an internet connection
Pencil
have to be a licensed ham radio operator, or even 
stand on the roof. You can do it in your own back-
yard with an off-the-shelf UHF FM radio. The whip 
antenna on the radio might let you hear satellites 
and the ISS, but you’ll get far better reception by 
making your own yagi antenna, which takes about 
an hour and costs less than $25 (not including the 
cost of your radio) using materials from your local 
hardware store.
If you do have a ham radio license and a UHF/
VHF transceiver, you can upgrade this antenna with 
VHF elements so that it can both send and receive 
transmissions.
A yagi antenna has three types of elements,
consisting of metal rods of varying lengths and 
quantities. The driven element is a dipole antenna 
that’s connected to the radio and receives the 
signal, just like a whip antenna. The reﬂ ector is 
positioned behind the driven element, where it acts 
as a mirror by bouncing signals from the satellite 
forward to the driven element. Directors are one or 
more rods that act like a lens, focusing the incoming 
signal onto the driven element. Both the reﬂ ector 
and the directors improve reception from whatever 
direction the antenna points.
The antenna design I use comes from Kent 
Britain’s (WA5VJB) "Cheap Antennas for Low Earth 
Orbit" (available at wa5vjb.com/references.html), 
which is a great reference for building many differ-
ent types of yagi antennas.
1  Reflector     2  Driven element     3  Directors
1
2
3
3
3
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

50
Make: Volume 24
Build the Yagi Antenna
Time: 1–2 Hours
 Complexity: Building Antenna = Easy; 
         Receiving Signals = Medium
1. Measure and cut.
Use a pencil and ruler to draw a centerline down 
one long side of the wooden beam. Then measure 
and mark hole locations on the centerline (except 
holes d and e) at the following intervals: hole a 
1" from one end; hole b 6½" from a; hole c 6¾" 
from b; holes d and e 2¾" from c, 3" apart and 
equidistant from the centerline; and hole f 2½" 
from d and e. 
 Drill 1" holes completely through the beam at 
each point (Figure A). Be careful when drilling d and 
e not to blow out the sides of the beam.
Use a marker and ruler to mark 5 pieces of brass 
rod at the following lengths: 21", 13½", 12½", 12¼", 
and 11¾". Secure the rod in a vise, cut to the mea-
sured lengths using a hacksaw, and ﬁ le the ends so 
they’re no longer sharp and dangerous (Figure B).
To make the driven element, place the 21" rod in the 
vise, mark it 13" from one end, center the mark on the 
broomstick, then bend it 180° around so it’s J-shaped 
(Figure C). Trim the rod so it measures 13" from one 
end to the center of the ¾" curve, and 7" from the 
other end to the center of the curve (Figure D).
2. Assemble the parts.
Insert the 11¾" element into hole a, the 12¼"
element into b, the 12½" element into c, the 
J-shaped (driven) element into d and e, and the 
13½" element into f. Center all the elements, and 
secure them in place with hot glue (Figure E).
To prepare the coaxial cable, cut off one of its 
connectors and strip 3" of outer insulation off that 
end, being careful not to cut the wires. Separate the 
outer wires, twist them to one side, and strip 2" of 
insulation off the inner wire (Figure F).
Connect the coax cable to the 2 parts of the 
driven element near where they enter the wooden 
beam. Wrap the cable’s inner wire around the short 
leg of the J, and the twisted outer wires around the 
long leg. Solder the wires in place (Figure G).
Secure the coax cable with a couple of zip ties 
(Figure H). Your antenna is done (Figure I)!
3. Receive signals from space.
To use your antenna, you need to find out where to 
point it and what frequency to tune in to. To find 
a good satellite target, visit heavens-above.com. 
A
C
B
D
1"
a
b
c
e
d
f
6½"
6¾"
2¾"
2½"
13"
7"
¾"
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

51
Make:
 To specify your location, select a Configuration 
option (map, database, or manual), plug in the 
necessary info, then click Submit. From your new 
location-specific homepage, select “All passes of 
the ISS” to track the International Space Station 
or “Radio amateur satellites” to track a ham radio 
repeater satellite (Figure J, following page).
On the Radio Amateur Satellites page, click on 
one of the radio satellites you want to track from 
the Satellite column (such as AO-Echo, aka AO-51; 
SaudiSat 1C, aka SO-50; or AO-27), then show its 
pass chart by selecting “Passes (all)” above the 
globe (Figure K).
The pass chart lists all the satellite passes for the 
next few days. Each pass is listed by its times and 
locations in polar coordinates, for its start, maxi-
mum altitude, and end, with each pass typically 
taking about 10 minutes. The start and end points 
are deﬁ ned as when the “bird” appears 10° above 
the horizon, and the maximum altitude (in degrees 
above the horizon) will vary. The azimuth for each 
location is listed in compass points (Figure L).
Make sure your location is listed correctly on the 
chart, and pick a pass during which the satellite 
will come close to directly overhead. Look for max 
altitudes that are 45° or higher — the higher, the 
better. In the example here, the second pass, on July 
17 at 3:50, looks good since its altitude reaches 75°, 
but the ﬁ rst pass, on July 16 at 16:55, only comes up 
to 18°, which is very close to the horizon and difﬁ cult 
to pick up.
Next, ﬁ nd the frequency to tune in to. Satellite 
repeaters work with 2 different frequencies — an 
uplink and a downlink. You listen to signals received 
via the downlink. (If you wish to transmit, you’ll need 
to program in the uplink frequency as well.) 
To ﬁ nd a radio satellite’s current frequencies, 
you have to refer to the authoritative web page for 
each individual satellite. Some references online, 
including AMSAT (amsat.org), aggregate frequency 
information for multiple satellites, but these can be 
incorrect and you often need to dig deeper. 
What you want is a current update or schedule 
with uplink and downlink frequencies, and this data 
E
G
F
H
I
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

52
Make: Volume 24
is unfortunately not published in a standardized 
manner. With AO-51, for example, AMSAT’s top-level 
listing links to a page that shows all the frequen-
cies the sat is capable of, but not which ones are 
currently active. For that, you must click through to 
the AO-51 Control Team News page at amsat.org/
amsat-new/echo/CTNews.php. 
For HO-68, to give another example, you need 
to click the Organization listing to CAMSAT 
(camsat.cn), an amateur satellite organization in 
China, where you’ll see the sat’s active frequencies 
listed under its former name, XW-1. In a pinch, you 
can always just Google the satellite’s name to ﬁ nd 
its authoritative source.
Once you’ve determined your target sat’s current 
downlink frequency (example: 436.7950MHz FM), 
tune your radio to that frequency, and you’re ready 
to go out and listen. Aim your yagi antenna directly 
at the satellite, with the shortest rods (directors) 
closest to the satellite and the longest rod (the 
reﬂ ector) farthest away. When the pass starts, aim 
the yagi toward the satellite (Figure M), then sweep 
it right and left slightly until you hear something. 
You can also move the antenna up and down slightly 
as you sweep right and left. Also try rotating the 
antenna by twisting your wrist, adjusting its polarity 
to receive a stronger signal. 
If you’re using a whip antenna, hold it perpendicu-
lar to the satellite, and keep it perpendicular while 
you rotate it to get a clearer signal (Figure N). 
Trace the path of the satellite’s orbit according 
to the pass chart, so that at its maximum altitude 
and its end time, the antenna is pointed in the cor-
responding locations. In our example, the antenna 
should be pointed east at 75° above the horizon at 
3:55, and south at 10° above the horizon at 4:00. It 
can be difﬁ cult trying to catch the satellites, and you 
may spend a lot of time not hearing anything. The 
best method is to move the antenna around in small 
side-to-side and up-and-down motions until you 
hear a bit of audio.
The Doppler effect makes the frequency vary by 
0.010MHz, so as you trace the satellite’s path you’ll 
also need to twiddle the tuning a bit. Add 0.010MHz 
to your target frequency early in the pass, then 
gradually dial it down until it’s approximately 
0.010MHz less than the listed downlink frequency
by the end time.
The FM satellites repeat whatever they receive, so 
you’ll hear whoever’s signal is strongest. (Another 
type of satellite, linear transponders, can handle 
multiple conversations at once, but these are harder 
to use and require a more expensive single side-
band, not FM, radio.)
Hamspeak
When you eavesdrop on ham radio satellites and 
ISS, you’ll probably hear a lot of letters, numbers, 
and strange words, like “KC2UHB Foxtrot November 
three one … roger roger.” One reason is that ham 
J
L
K
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

53
Make:
operators use a phonetic alphabet to make them-
selves clear through the static and interference, so 
that “P” sounds nothing like “T,” for example. 
 The ham ABCs are: Alpha, Bravo, Charlie, Delta, 
Echo, Foxtrot, Golf, Hotel, India, Juliet, Kilo, Lima, 
Mike, November, Oscar, Papa, Quebec, Romeo, 
Sierra, Tango, Uniform, Victor, Whiskey, X-ray, 
Yankee, and Zulu.
Also, orbits don’t last very long, so radio opera-
tors extending their reach via satellites tend to 
communicate quickly, following the same general 
dialogue. Here’s an example:
“Kilo Charlie two Uniform Hotel Bravo.” (Hi, my 
call sign is KC2UHB, does anyone want to talk to 
me?) A call sign is like a screen name assigned to 
ham radio operators when they receive their license. 
Some operators have vanity call signs like NE1RD.
“KC2UHB from Whiskey two Victor Victor please 
copy Foxtrot November three one.” (I hear you 
KC2UHB, my call sign is W2VV and I am in Maid-
enhead location FN31.) The Maidenhead system 
divides the Earth into grid squares as shorthand 
to describe locations, and FN31 covers most of 
Connecticut and some of New York State. You can 
look up grid square locations online at levinecentral.
com/ham/grid_square.php and elsewhere.
“W2VV, QSL this is KC2UHB, Echo Mike eight 
nine.” (W2VV, I received your transmission, my loca-
tion is EM89.) KC2UHB is in central Ohio.
“QSL. Thank you for the contact. 73.” (I received 
your transmission. Thank you for the contact. 
Goodbye.)
“73.” (Goodbye.)
Just as we text each other abbreviations like 
OMG, BRB, TTYL, LOL, BF, GF, and <3, ham opera-
tors have their own, much older shorthand that was 
originally based on Morse code but became spoken 
with the advent of voice transmissions — much like 
when people say “Oh em gee” or “Be eff eff” today. 
Here are some ham abbreviations you may hear:
73 = goodbye, best wishes
88 = xoxo
OM (old man) = a friendly term for a male ham, 
a boyfriend/husband if described as “my OM”
YL (young lady) = a female ham, a girlfriend if 
described as “my YL”
XYL = wife
QSL = confirmation of message received
QRP = operating with low power
HT (handy talky) = a walkie-talkie
  To learn more about how a yagi antenna works, 
watch Diana Eng’s MAKE video on directional 
antennas, aka “Seeing Radio Waves With a Light  
Bulb,” at makezine.com/go/yagi.
N
M
Diana Eng (dianaeng.com) is a fashion designer who 
works with technology, math, and science. She is author 
of Fashion Geek: Clothes, Accessories, Tech (North Light 
Books, 2009) and is the ham radio correspondent for 
Make: Online (makezine.com).
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

      Cut-Down
Legal flights require a cut-down mechanism to separate the balloon from its 
payload and parachute after a set time or in response to a signal. One simple 
cut-down circuit uses a relay to discharge a dedicated 9-volt battery through 
a high-resistance Nichrome wire coil that’s wrapped around a nylon cord. 
Close the relay, and the coil melts the cord.
      Balloons
Most groups choose the Kaymont 1,500g sounding balloon 
(kaymont.com, $105). It’s relatively inexpensive, can 
lift 3.8kg, and is rated for a bursting altitude of 34.2km, 
or more than 110,000 feet. (It’s possible, but not 
recommended, to eke out more lift by overinflating your 
balloon.) For helium, rent a tank from a local 
industrial/medical gas supplier. 
      Radar Reflector
To make your balloon more visible to other aircraft, you 
may want to dangle a radar reflector from it, like the 
lightweight Emergency Radar Reflector from Davis 
Instruments (makezine.com/go/davis, $30).
      Parachutes
A typical choice is a 5' parachute rated for 4.7lbs from 
Rocketman (the-rocketman.com/recovery.html, $50). If in 
doubt, order the next size up — most chutes let you change 
the canopy size by adjusting the shroud lines. For the cord, 
you can use mil-spec nylon paracord rated for 95lbs. A 100' 
spool, more than enough for any balloon project, should 
cost less than $10.
      Instrumentation
Common instrumentation includes still and video cameras, 
and devices for measuring and recording humidity, altitude 
(or air pressure), temperature, acceleration, and magnetic 
field. For power, you’ll want lithium-ion batteries rated to 
–40°C; you can test devices inside a cooler with dry ice 
and fans. When choosing instrumentation, make sure your 
total payload will weigh less than what the balloon can lift. 
You can use the free Canon Hack Development Kit 
(chdk.wikia.com) to control PowerShot cameras, or the 
lightweight BalloonSat Mini controller (nearsys.com, $19) 
to operate three sensors and a camera. Both are 
programmable in BASIC.
      Enclosures
An enclosure protects payloads from the extreme temperatures of the upper 
atmosphere and the impact of hitting the ground. Most amateurs use a foam 
cooler or construct an enclosure out of extruded polystyrene (XPS), which 
costs a pittance and doesn’t crumble. You can also use small Pelican cases 
(pelican.com, prices vary) to protect individual devices, but this adds weight. 
A coat of day-glo paint will make enclosures easier to spot; be sure to write 
your phone number prominently on the outside of all enclosures.
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
E
F
54
Make: Volume 24
Weather Balloon 
Space Probes
Sense, signal, and snap photos in the stratosphere.
BY JOHN BAICHTAL  |  ILLUSTRATION BY JAMES PROVOST
A 
bunch of hackers drive into the desert with a trunk full of equipment: 
a weather balloon, a tank of helium, and a styrofoam cooler loaded 
with cameras and sensors. After filling the balloon, they release it and 
watch it hurtle skyward, the cooler and a parachute dangling beneath. 
 The hackers track the balloon on laptops as it rises to black-sky 
altitudes 20 miles up, whereupon the balloon bursts and the payload floats 
down. Team members on dirt bikes race to recover the package, checking 
their mobile phones for SMS texts containing GPS coordinates of the 
landing site. 
 While this sounds like a scene from some hacker novel, launching and 
recovering near-space balloon probes is easier than ever, and dozens of 
amateur groups — ham radio enthusiasts and hackers alike — are doing 
it now.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

      Telemetry
You may be able to eyeball your 
probe until it lands, but a balloon can 
travel many miles, particularly in 
strong winds. Here are three popular 
lightweight tracking solutions: 
» The OpenTracker+ kit 
(argentdata.com, $32), which 
interfaces with APRS (aprs.org), 
the tracking system used by hams  
» G1 Android smartphone with the 
Icarus app (noisebridge.net/wiki/ 
icarus), which collects GPS info and 
sends the coordinates in a text 
message every 60 seconds  
» Spot personal tracker 
(findmespot.com, $200, including 
one year of service)
Recovery
Once the payload deploys, you have to find it — even if 
it’s miles away from the launch site. Terrain and roads 
permitting, you might be able to follow the flight with 
chase cars or motorcycles. Otherwise, you’ll have to rely 
on tracking, good luck, and the kindness of strangers.
Regulations
Be sure to follow FAA regulations regarding launch sites 
and notifications, payload weight and density, and 
cord strength and cut-down mechanisms. Refer to 
the Society for Amateur Scientists guide at 
makezine.com/go/balloonfaa 
      For other resources, including additional references, 
trajectory predictors, FAA contacts, and a list of regional 
balloon launch groups and recent launches, see 
makezine.com/24/weatherballoons
D
E
F
G
G
55
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

56
Make: Volume 24
Photograph by Thomas F. Murray
 For Pam Martin and her colleagues at the 
Johnson Space Center in Houston, this is just 
another day at the office, only instead of helping 
someone fix a simple part on a car, she’s helping 
astronauts repair and maintain delicate systems 
on the International Space Station (ISS), which 
is orbiting more than 200 miles above Earth and 
traveling at a whopping 17,500 miles per hour. 
Makers 
at Mission 
Control
Meet the elite NASA team
that figures out how to
fix the space station
when things go wrong.
BY RACHEL HOBSON
“A car is a very complex system, and we’re talking 
about a massive space station so it’s even more dif-
ﬁ cult,” Martin says. “And you can’t really talk on the 
phone all the time because you have communication 
gaps. If you’re lucky, you might have a video camera 
that gives you some pictures every now and then.”
Operations Support Ofﬁ cer Flight Controllers 
(OSOs) are in charge of training space station crews 
WHEN IT’S HOUSTON’S PROBLEM: Pam Martin sits on console 
in Mission Control at NASA’s Johnson Space Center, where she 
and other flight controllers guide astronauts through routine and 
emergency maintenance onboard the International Space Station. 
I
magine trying to walk someone through the steps of changing the brakes 
on their car — over the phone. Now, imagine they’re in outer space.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

57
Make:
on daily maintenance procedures like changing 
out ﬁ lters and making sure the toilet is functioning 
properly, as well as in specialized procedures for 
installing and activating new modules of the Station. 
OSOs are on console at ISS Mission Control, provid-
ing technical support, and are on call for emergen-
cies onboard the ISS. On the Space Shuttle side of 
Mission Control are In-Flight Maintenance Flight 
Directors (IFMs), who provide similar training and 
support to the shuttle crews. 
The OSO and IFM teams have their roots in the 
Apollo program, speciﬁ cally Apollo 13, when ﬂ ight 
controllers had to quickly come up with solutions 
for modifying carbon dioxide scrubbers in the Lunar 
Module when the Service Module was damaged by 
an oxygen tank explosion and crew members had to 
abandon the Command Module to take refuge in the 
Lunar Module. Using only materials the astronauts 
were known to have on hand, ﬂ ight controllers 
fashioned a modiﬁ ed scrubber and then radioed the 
build instructions up to the crew. Materials included 
a sock and duct tape. 
In 2007, Martin and the other OSO ﬂ ight con-
trollers had to come up with a solution to repair 
a torn solar array on the ISS and devised, in just 
a few days, a ﬁ x that would normally have taken 
months of planning and procedure writing. Using 
wire known to be in storage onboard the ISS, they 
devised a set of “cufﬂ inks” to mend the tear in the 
solar array. Martin says the experience was intense 
but rewarding. 
“It’s like Apollo 13,” she says. “We sit down and 
say, ‘OK, this didn’t work. It wasn’t designed right — 
so what do we have onboard that we can ﬁ x it with?’ 
It’s so much fun.”
The massive Building 9 at Johnson Space Center 
houses full-sized mock-ups of the individual ISS 
modules, and serves as a place not only for training 
but also troubleshooting during missions. 
“We’ll be in the middle of a shuttle mission and 
something doesn’t work, so you’ll have four OSOs 
sitting over there at 3 a.m. trying to ﬁ gure out what 
to do,” Martin explains. 
She says ﬂ ight controllers are great at the art of 
prioritizing properly, and asking the right questions to 
best determine how and when a problem onboard 
the ISS can be ﬁ xed. 
“Things go wrong all the time — it’s just a mat-
ter of the business,” she says. “But during critical 
timelines, like during a shuttle mission, where you 
have to do things by a certain time or it can affect 
the next EVA [extravehicular activity], it’s all about 
criticality, knowing how long we have to ﬁ gure out 
a solution and what course of action we can take. 
Sometimes the answer is that we have to ﬂ y a new 
piece of hardware up on the next shuttle mission.”
 OSOs don’t just address emergencies, though. 
They also research and write intricate procedures 
for operations such as installing new modules, and 
then train the astronauts on how to carry out those 
incredibly detailed lists of instructions. Every time 
a new module is launched to the ISS, the OSOs are 
involved in developing all the outﬁ tting procedures 
to attach it and get it up and running. 
Martin headed up the procedure development 
for the installation of the Cupola module, the “bay 
window on the Earth” that was launched on STS-130 
in February 2010. 
“I worked for months on that module,” she says. 
“And to see those window shutters ﬁ nally open was 
really amazing.”
Martin began with a list of tasks necessary to 
get the Cupola up and running and the software 
working, but she had to determine the proper order 
in which those steps had to occur and then train 
the crew on exactly how to carry them out while on 
orbit. It’s a high-stakes DIY tutorial.
“Imagine someone giving you a list of what has to 
be done to ﬁ x a car, and you’re sitting there with this 
list trying to do it,” she says. “That shows you how 
important the procedures have to be. They have to 
have good pictures, clear instructions.”
Rachel Hobson is a hand embroidery-obsessed crafter 
and writer with a passion for outer space and all things 
geektastic. She is a staff writer for CRAFT (craftzine.com) 
and has her own blog, averagejanecrafter.com.
“ It’s like Apollo 13. 
We sit down and 
say, ‘OK, this didn’t 
work. It wasn’t 
designed right — 
so what do we have 
onboard that we 
can ﬁ x it with?’ 
It’s so much fun.”
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

58
Make: Volume 24
Photography by Ed Troxell
High-Resolution 
Spectrograph
Lab-worthy spectrum
analysis for cheap.
BY SIMON QUELLEN FIELD
A
N
early 200 years ago, Joseph von Fraunhofer built the first spectroscope 
and saw dark lines in the spectrum of the sun. This led him to discover 
that you can determine the chemical elements in things by analyzing the 
light they give off. Each element has its own “signature” of lines in the light 
spectrum. The lines correspond to the characteristic wavelengths that 
electrons absorb and emit as they jump between lower- and higher-energy 
orbits around the atom’s nucleus.
of wavelengths distinct. Each image of the slit, in a 
slightly different color, is arrayed across the ﬁ eld of 
view in a wide spectrum image. If any wavelength 
is brighter or dimmer than the rest, it shows up, 
respectively, as a bright or dark line in the spectrum.
Although spectroscopes have always been easy to 
make, a homebrew recording spectrograph presented 
more of a challenge. Building your own spectrograph 
meant using microcontrollers and stepper motors to 
move diffraction gratings past a light sensor — many 
were planned, but few were actually built. 
Today, digital cameras and online tools can turn 
a simple spectroscope into a laboratory-quality, 
high-resolution spectrograph. All it takes is a few 
plumbing parts and other inexpensive materials and 
less than an hour at your kitchen table.
 The first spectroscopes used glass prisms to split 
light into colors, but Fraunhofer found that an array 
of closely spaced wires had the same effect. Today 
we call these arrays of tiny slits diffraction gratings 
(see sidebar on page 61). 
 After these discoveries, spectrographs (the 
instruments used to record spectra) became a 
standard tool for analyzing the chemistry of almost 
anything, ranging from microscopic lab samples to 
faraway galaxies.
The primary element in both spectroscopes and 
spectrographs is a narrow slit oriented perpen-
dicular to the direction in which the grating or 
prism spreads the light. As with a pinhole camera, 
the small aperture images the light source sharply 
along the spectrum’s axis, which keeps the spread 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

59
Make:
B
D
C
E
Build a High-Resolution 
Spectrograph
Time: Less Than 1 Hour 
Complexity: Easy
1. Make a spectroscope.
Use a ruler and X-Acto knife to cut a straight slit 
about 1¾" long through the center of the rubber 
cap. Cut two ½" squares of the thin cardboard and 
tuck them into opposite ends of the slit to hold it 
open. The slit is now as wide as the cardboard. 
 Secure the rubber cap on one end of the 2" tube 
with the hose clamp. Rotate the hose clamp so that 
its screw is perpendicular to the slit (Figure B).
Loosely roll up the black construction paper 
lengthwise and slide it all the way into the tube so it 
ﬁ ts neatly against the inside. This will serve to elimi-
nate reﬂ ections. Use a compass to draw a ring on the 
thicker cardboard with an outside diameter of 2" and 
an inside diameter of about 13", and cut out the ring 
using the X-Acto knife (Figure C). The ring should ﬁ t 
inside the tube snugly but without bending. 
Spread a very thin layer of glue onto one side of 
the cardboard ring and afﬁ x it to the diffraction grat-
ing (Figure D). After the glue dries, carefully cut the 
diffraction grating around the outside edge of the 
ring using the X-Acto knife.
MATERIALS
ABS plastic pipe, 2" diameter, 15" long 
Most hardware stores will cut ABS pipe to length.
ABS angled pipe coupling, 2" diameter 22½° is 
ideal, but 45° will do in a pinch.
Rubber cap for 2" pipe
Hose clamp for 2" pipe
Holographic diffraction grating film, 
1,000 line-per-millimeter enough to cut a 
2" diameter circle; item #DIFFRACTION at Scitoys 
Catalog (scitoyscatalog.com), $3
Black construction paper, 8½"×11"
Scrap cardboard some thin (like a cereal box or
business card) and some thicker (like a shoebox
or the back of a writing pad)
TOOLS
Digital camera
Computer with internet connection
X-Acto knife or razor blade
Ruler
Drawing compass and pencil
Glue Elmer’s white glue, Duco cement, or similar
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

60
Make: Volume 24
Insert the diffraction grating ring into one end of 
the angled coupling so that the ring’s edge is ﬂ ush 
with the interior wall, and press the uncapped end 
of the tube in until the ring is held in place. That’s it 
— the tube is now a spectroscope! 
To look at spectra, point the slit end up to a light 
source, look into the angle ﬁ tting, and rotate the 
rubber cap (or angle ﬁ tting) until the spectrum you 
see is a neat rectangle instead of a parallelogram or 
a thin line.
With the hose clamp’s screw perpendicular to 
the slit, the clamp acts as a stand, keeping the slit 
vertical while preventing the tube from rolling.
You can experiment with the cardboard spacer 
thickness. A wider slit will make a brighter image 
with broader lines, giving less resolution. Using 
a longer or shorter tube will make the slit look 
narrower or wider, respectively.
2. Turn it into a high-resolution 
spectrograph.
To turn the spectroscope into something that 
records and analyzes the light it diffracts, we need 
a digital camera and the internet. Aim the camera 
into the spectroscope so it captures any spectrum 
you want to analyze, and set the zoom so it fills the 
viewfinder as much as possible to get the maxi-
mum resolution (Figure E). 
To capture the spectra of stars, you don’t need 
the slit. The star is a point source of light, so it 
acts as its own slit. Just put some grating over the 
telescope eyepiece, and photograph the rainbow 
streaks on either side of the star.
Take several pictures of the spectrum, and if your 
camera lets you set exposure times and apertures 
manually, use a range of these settings. A properly 
exposed image will be dark, especially if you’re 
capturing an emission spectrum, like from a ﬂ uores-
cent lamp. 
Avoid the temptation to take a colorful rainbow 
picture, in which all the lines will be smeared out 
(Figure F). With the ﬂ uorescent light, for example, 
you want just 4 or maybe 6 of the mercury lines to 
stand out visibly (Figure G).
Download the photos onto your computer and 
crop them so that just the spectrum itself is visible. 
To analyze a spectrum image, upload it using the 
“Simple spectrum analyzer” form at my website at 
makezine.com/go/spectrograph (Figure H). 
If you upload your spectrum photo without 
clicking on either checkbox, you’ll get a simple 
spectrum plot. With my ﬂ uorescent lamp spectrum, 
for example, the graph shows 4 peaks. These peaks 
correspond to the brightest lines in the spectrum 
of mercury, which exists in vapor form inside the 
tube (Figure I).
You can use a spectrum source that’s known, like 
our ﬂ uorescent light, as a high-precision ruler for 
F
H
G
Photography by Simon Quellen Field
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

61
Make:
HOW DIFFRACTION 
GRATINGS WORK
O
ur diffraction grating is a
transparent sheet of plastic 
with dark lines on it spaced 1/500
of a millimeter (2μm) apart. 
 
Light waves pass through the 
spaces between the lines, called 
slits, and interfere with waves going 
through adjacent slits to produce 
bands of light or dark where the 
interference is constructive or 
destructive.
 
Light bands form where the
wavecrests from adjacent slits
are both an integer number of
wavelengths away from the
diffraction grating. Since this 
depends on the wavelength, it 
causes different colors to form 
bright bands in different places, 
separating them into the rainbow
we call the spectrum.
Simon Quellen Field (sfield@scitoys.com) is president 
and CEO of Kinetic MicroScience (scitoys.com), where he 
designs scientific toys. He’s the author of several books on 
science and computing.
analyzing other spectra, such as through a sample 
of transparent material or liquid. 
To do this, you position the reference light to 
shine through the top half of the slit, and shine a 
broad-spectrum light source through your sample, 
covering the bottom half. Use a bit of aluminum 
foil to divide the slit into two parts, separating the 
calibration light from the sample light. 
As an example, I used the ﬂ uorescent tube as 
a reference for testing some green clear plastic lit 
from behind with a white LED.
Upload the double spectrum image to the spec-
trum analyzer with the ﬁ rst checkbox checked, and 
you’ll get a plot of both against each other. This 
analysis results in 2 graphs: the calibration on top, 
like the graph we just looked at, and the sample 
I
J
spectrum on the bottom (Figure J). 
The plots have a nanometer scale at the bottom, 
which we can verify against the 4 brightest lines in 
mercury’s emission spectrum, as listed in the 
Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (CRC Press, 
2009): 435.8nm, 546.1nm, 577nm, and 579.1nm. 
Since both sources pass through the same slit 
and the same camera, calibrating this way guaran-
tees that the frequencies in each spectrum match 
up exactly, and therefore that the readings are 
accurate.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

62
Make: Volume 24
I
t’s the best of times and the worst 
of times for space enthusiasts. 
 Following the imminent retirement of the space 
shuttle, the United States will lose its manned 
orbital capability. President Obama cancelled the 
Constellation program, which was supposed to take 
us back to the moon. An astonishing $9 billion was 
spent on Constellation, and canceling it will cost 
another $2.5 billion. 
 Yet amid this gloom and doom, a rapidly shifting 
mosaic of startups is maturing, hoping to get into 
orbit with a tiny fraction of what NASA has spent. 
Some quick case histories:
» Former Cisco software engineer Dave Masten 
started Masten Space Systems in the Bay Area 
in 2004 and later moved it to a 60-year-old 
wooden hangar at Mojave Air and Space Port in 
the California desert. In 2009, his tiny team of 
enthusiasts demonstrated an unmanned vehicle 
that launched vertically, moved laterally, and landed 
vertically. They took home more than $1 million 
as winners of the X Prize Lunar Lander Challenge 
sponsored by NASA and Northrop Grumman. 
» Armadillo Aerospace was founded in 2000 by 
John Carmack, technical director of Id Software, 
famous for its Doom and Quake computer games. 
He hooked up with members of the Dallas Area 
Rocket Society and pursues space as a part-time 
occupation. Armadillo won the $500,000 second 
prize in the 2009 Lunar Lander Challenge. 
Rocket
Men
Mavericks of the
private space industry.
BY CHARLES PLATT
» Maverick Alabama rocket enthusiast Tim Pickens
founded Orion Propulsion in 2004. In 2009 he sold 
the company to Dynetics, a science and technology 
company employing more than 1,300 people and 
developing microsatellite capability. He’s now their 
commercial space advisor and chief propulsion 
engineer.
» Six years ago, former Lockheed Martin engineer 
Tim Bendel sold his house outside Denver, bought 
a decommissioned Atlas missile silo in Wyoming, 
and moved into it with his wife and business 
partners. Their company Frontier Astronautics 
offers rocket engines, guidance systems, propellant, 
and a safe testing environment to other startups.
» Small businessman Paul T. Breed and his son, 
Paul A., formed their company Unreasonable 
Rocket in 2006, hoping to win the Lunar Lander 
Challenge. They didn’t succeed, but built and flew 
three vertical-takeoff vehicles, built and fired nine 
types of rocket motors, and built an autopiloted 
helicopter to test their control software.
 These startups face significant barriers, includ-
ing scarce venture capital, tightening regulatory 
controls, environmental issues, and anxiety about 
safety. “This country is losing the ability to under-
stand that risk-taking is wonderful,” laments Shariar  
“Jack” Ghalam of Frontier Astronautics. “If you 
want to go into space, you’re going to lose lives and 
hardware. If you’re not willing to face that, just stay 
FINAL FRONTIERSMEN: (Left to right) Dave Masten, John Carmack, Tim Pickens, Tim Bendel, Paul J. Breed, 
and Jeff Greason.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

63
Make:
Photography by Charles Platt
A
C
B
D
home and do basket weaving.”
 Profiled here are a few of those who think that the 
risk-taking will be worth it.
The Spaceport Manager
Mojave Air and Space Port is a uniquely American 
resource: a funky, informal refuge for more than 40 
aerospace ventures. For 35 to 50 cents per square 
foot, you can rent anything from a one-person 
office in which to write attitude control software, to 
a hangar big enough to build your own spaceplane. 
 The Voyager Restaurant, appended to the old 
control tower at Mojave, provides a grandstand view 
of the adjacent runway. Here you may run into 
the spaceport’s general manager, Stuart Witt, 
who used to be a top-gun F-18 pilot back in the day. 
His mission is simple: “I offer people the freedom 
to experiment.”
 Suppose you come here wanting to test your own 
rocket motor. Witt doesn’t do design evaluations. 
Once you’ve signed your contract, he just needs to 
know two things: what kind of fuel you’ll be using 
(so he can put out the fire if the thing blows up) 
and how many people will be at the test stand (so 
he knows how many bodies to look for if people get 
killed). The rest is up to you. 
 “If you give people freedom and responsibility, 
Fig. A: The Masten XA-0.1E, nicknamed Xoie, was 
flight-tested from this concrete pad (middle dis-
tance) near Mojave Air and Space Port (far distance)
while team members monitored it from a control 
room in the industrial shipping container behind 
these concrete blocks. Xoie won the million-dollar 
Lunar Lander Challenge in November 2009. 
Fig. B: The Voyager Restaurant at Mojave Air and 
Space Port, named after the aircraft designed by 
Burt Rutan that made a record-breaking nonstop 
flight around the world in 1986, copiloted by Jeana 
Yeager and Burt’s brother, Dick. Burt’s company, 
Scaled Composites, is based at Mojave. 
Fig. C: Burt Rutan’s SpaceShipOne was the first pri-
vately built, flown, and funded craft to reach space, 
winning the Ansari X Prize in 2004. This full-sized 
replica is on display in a small museum at Mojave Air 
and Space Port. Fig. D: Xcor Aerospace plans to offer 
suborbital tourist flights in its Lynx spaceplane, cur-
rently under development in this wooden hangar on 
the flightline at Mojave Air and Space Port.
they rise to it,” Witt says. “If you want to be their 
nanny, they expect you to take care of them — and 
everybody loses.”
 Masten Space Systems tested its winning lander 
at Mojave, out near the edge of the airport in a 
parched area of desert scrub. A concrete slab about 
20 feet square is scarred with burn marks at the 
center, showing where the vehicle took off and 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

64
Make: Volume 24
landed. Fifty feet or so behind the pad is a stack of 
massive concrete blocks, which shielded the launch 
crew during tests. An industrial shipping container 
housed the control room. Cheap? Absolutely. But it 
got the job done.
The Rocket Test Pilot
Dick Rutan received the Presidential Citizens 
Medal for copiloting the Model 76 Voyager around 
the world without stopping or refueling in 1986, 
an historic first. Long before that, he served for 
two decades in the Air Force and flew 325 combat 
missions over Vietnam. He has the Silver Star, five 
Distinguished Flying Crosses, 16 Air Medals, and the 
Purple Heart. 
 He’s also flown a privately funded rocket-
powered vehicle that has emerged from Mojave: 
the EZ-Rocket, a kit-built airplane designed by his 
brother, Burt, with an Xcor rocket engine (see The 
Businessman, page 66) shoehorned into the rear. 
“I was really intrigued by that,” he recalls. “I flew 
it about 14 times. I never got paid for that, to my 
wife’s chagrin.” He chuckles.
 Rutan is a quintessential plainspoken individual-
ist for whom failure is abhorrent. “If you come in 
second,” he says, “you’re banished to the lake of 
obscurity forever.” 
 And he is utterly committed to space exploration. 
“In America, the Apollo program is the greatest thing 
we ever did. A young president wrote the check 
and then got the f--- out of the way, and the people 
who were involved in that did an incredible thing. 
We went to the f------ moon! Our leadership today, 
besides being naive and incompetent, squandered 
the capability of a great nation, because they think 
that food stamps are more important than going to 
Mars — the most naive, idiotic policy that I can even 
imagine. The viability of a country depends on its 
technology.”
 SpaceShipOne, designed by Burt Rutan and built 
by Scaled Composites, won the $10 million Ansari 
X Prize for the first privately funded human space-
E
G
F
H
Fig. E: The tiny town of Mojave, Calif., houses its 
Chamber of Commerce in this converted railroad car.
Fig. F: The EZ-Rocket spaceplane. Xcor shoehorned 
its rocket engine into a refurbished Long-EZ airplane 
for flight testing. The plane was designed by Burt 
Rutan. His brother, Dick, test-flew the conversion. 
Fig. G: In Xcor’s wooden hangar, a mockup of the 
cockpit of its upcoming Lynx suborbital vehicle has 
been fashioned from fiberglass. Fig. H: The test 
stand for an Xcor rocket motor.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

65
Make:
flight. It used a unique pair of swiveling booms to 
raise the tail and create drag during reentry. The 
original vehicle is now in the Smithsonian — which 
is where Dick Rutan thinks it should stay. 
 “They had some really close calls,” he says. “We 
had fires and problems, and it was damned danger-
ous sometimes. But nothing worthwhile was ever 
accomplished without risk or daring.”
 He continues: “My message to young people is, 
your responsibility is to arm yourself with the basis 
of education to give yourself the tools to do some-
thing that nobody here can even imagine. But you 
need to know the physics of how things operate. 
And then, if you look around and see a limitation or 
a barrier — do not ever comply with it.
 “Look at it,” Rutan says, “as a target of opportu-
nity for greatness.”
The Motor Man
Tim Pickens sounds like a NASCAR driver, which 
isn’t such a far-fetched comparison, since he owns 
a home-built rocket-powered pickup truck. He 
also built a rocket-powered bicycle, using a hybrid 
booster fueled with asphalt and nitrous oxide. 
 “I tried to run a company,” he says, referring to his 
Orion Propulsion startup, which earned the enviable 
distinction of being one of the few small, private 
space ventures that has actually made money. 
“But I always want to do this fun stuff.”
 As a rocket-obsessed amateur searching for fel-
low travelers, he went to a National Space Society 
meeting in 1992 and was shocked to find that 
nobody there had actually launched anything. 
 “I’d been flying my 11-foot, 55-pound steam rocket,” 
he recalls. “It would get 500 pound-seconds, and 
that baby would get up there fast. I had 22 pounds 
of water in there, and a fire extinguisher as a tank. 
I heated it to about 400psi. I used to test the steam 
motor in my driveway.”
 Hoping to put together some “smart engineers” 
with higher ambitions, he moved to 120 acres of 
I
K
J
Fig. I: Dick Rutan works on his Berkut, a kit-built 
aircraft descended from the Long-EZ design devel-
oped by his brother, Burt. Fig. J: A rocket motor 
stands on a workbench in a Masten Space Systems 
hangar at the Mojave Air and Space Port. The motor 
was turned from a block of aluminum at a local 
metal-fabrication shop. It is double-walled, enabling 
circulation of coolant to prevent the aluminum from 
melting. Fig. K: The XA-0.1-B (generally known as 
Xombie) won second place in Level 1 of the NASA-
funded Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander X Prize 
Challenge in 2009. Xombie is still being used for 
flight testing new systems. 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

66
Make: Volume 24
vacant land owned by his father. “I got some great 
videos,” he drawls. “Like, you know, unintended 
launches, and, uh, dynamic disassembly.”
 He pulls out his iPhone to show pictures of his big 
machine shop, which he refers to as his “man cave,” 
and harbors no illusions about his pathology. 
 “I’m a fanatic. Once I get interested in something, 
I bore in, man. See, I wondered — why is this stuff 
so hard to build? I made it simple. No hand-laid-up 
composites and hand-welded components and 
cryogenics. I avoided sliding surfaces of compo-
nents with high thermal coefficients. I had to ask, 
why are we making things too complex?”
 He started Orion with a savvy business model. 
Rather than try to build a whole rocket, he figured 
he would specialize in engines, which he knew 
about, and sell them to aerospace companies. “Like 
selling shovels to miners,” as he puts it. “When you 
become a miner, there’s a lot more risk, as you may 
not strike gold. If you sell shovels, you’re always 
going to make a little money.”
 He had a profitable five years, but when he got a 
good offer from Dynetics to take over his company 
and almost all its employees, he had no hesitation. 
He’s in the corporate culture now, but still tackles fun 
projects at home. His daughter, Sarah, 18, test-piloted 
his most recent invention, a water-powered rocket 
belt attached via a 4-inch water hose to a Jet Ski. He 
bought almost all the parts from Home Depot.
 Behind the stunts, though, he’s deadly serious 
about wanting to go into space. “We got all that 
heritage, man,” he says. “But we can’t ride on the 
back of Apollo forever. We got to do something.”
The Businessman
Jeff Greason is calm, amiable, and endlessly 
diplomatic. From 1988 through 1997 he worked for 
Intel. Still, as he puts it, “I had gotten passionately 
interested in commercial space transportation. 
And I couldn’t see spending the rest of my life 
worrying about how to get Intel from 85 to 90 
percent market share.”
 He took a substantial financial hit when he 
quit his job and founded Xcor Aerospace. It now 
has around 20 employees and has developed 
something that was thought to be impossible: 
a piston-based liquid oxygen pump. The technology 
lies at the heart of Xcor’s plans for a rocket plane 
named Lynx, to take paying customers on subor-
bital flights. Greason expects to sell tickets for less 
than half the $200,000 touted by Virgin Galactic, 
and summarizes the mission profile in three short 
sentences: “Fifteen seconds from brake release to 
rotation. Fifty seconds to supersonic. Three minutes 
of weightlessness.” 
 Meanwhile, Xcor has partnered with United 
Launch Alliance to develop engine technologies for 
an upper stage for satellite launches.
 Why is Greason so confident he can compete 
with established aerospace contractors? “A whole 
generation of aerospace engineers have no memory 
of what a competitive industry is like,” he says. 
“Under a government contract, typically you get 
paid for cost plus a small percentage. Therefore, if 
you find a way to make the product cheaper, you 
get paid less!”
 Since his competitors spend almost unlimited 
sums to develop vehicles that are used once and 
thrown away, he figures that “any reasonably eco-
nomic reusable vehicle would change the basis of 
space transportation profoundly — if it just works.” 
 Already he has demonstrated an aircraft with an 
Xcor rocket engine in it. This vehicle is capable of 
rapid turnarounds, like a regular jet aircraft. Scale 
models of the Lynx have been wind-tunnel tested, 
and the final design will carry one pilot and one 
paying passenger. 
 In a typically low-rent hangar at Mojave Airport, 
a full-scale mockup of the Lynx cockpit has been 
created, and fuel tanks are being made from 
layers of glass fiber, while aluminum components 
are being turned out in a machine shop next door. 
 “I’m confident that there’s a robust market where 
the price for a flight is in the high tens of thousands 
of dollars,” Greason says. “And we’re the only com-
pany that doesn’t have one rich guy paying for 
everything. We have individual investors. We’re not a 
hobby for someone, we’re actually a business.”
 His big technical advantage is proven reusabil-
ity. “In a typical rocket engine, the inside wall gets 
hot and the outside is cool. You get thermocyclic 
fatigue, and the lifetime of those engines tends to 
“ We can’t ride on the back of Apollo forever. 
We got to do something.”
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

67
Make:
be quite short. So we devised a series of design 
changes that accommodate thermal expansions 
and contractions. Since we got the design the way 
we wanted it, we’ve never worn one out.”
 Thus far, Xcor has received relatively little public 
attention. The company made a tactical decision 
not to go all-out to win the $10 million X Prize for 
private manned spaceflight that was claimed by 
Rutan’s SpaceShipOne. “We decided we could do it 
right, or do it soon,” he says, “but not both.” 
 Some people have compared the X Prize to the 
Apollo program, describing both as “stunts” — 
one-goal endeavors with no commercial followup. 
Greason is too diplomatic to make such a compari-
son, but he’s very clear about his goals.
 “I am not interested in stunts,” Greason says, 
quite firmly. “I’m interested in markets.”
Special thanks to Robin Snelson for help in 
researching this article.
 More on private space flight and manufacturing:
Rocket Sellers blog: rocketsellers.wordpress.com
Space Studies Institute: ssi.org
Scaled Composites: scaled.com
Masten Space Systems: masten-space.com
Frontier Astronautics: frontierastronautics.com
Paul Breed: unreasonablerocket.blogspot.com
Bigelow Aerospace: bigelowaerospace.com
Armadillo Aerospace: armadilloaerospace.com
Dick Rutan: dickrutan.com
Tim Pickens: realrocketman.tripod.com/
uncletim.htm
M
O
N
P
Fig. M: Gerry Mulryan, master mechanic at Xcor 
Aerospace, stands beside one of the tools of his 
trade. Fig. N: At Masten Space Systems, a rocket 
motor is mounted on a trailer, ready to be towed out 
to one of the test pads near the perimeter of the 
Mojave Air and Space Port. Fig. O: An older family 
photo of Tim Pickens and his daughter, Sarah (now 
18), with rocket-powered bicycles that Tim designed 
and built. (Hers was powered by safe compressed 
carbon dioxide.) Fig. P: A PowerPoint slide from 
Pickens, showing his rocket-powered pickup truck. 
Charles Platt is a contributing editor to MAKE.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

68
Make: Volume 24
Photography by Michael A. Covington
Map the 
Chemical 
Composition 
of the Moon
Boost the saturation
of digital photos to
reveal lunar geology.
BY MICHAEL A. COVINGTON
A
T
he moon is more colorful than most of us realize. Although the colors are 
barely visible to the naked eye, this simple digital photography technique 
makes them obvious. Not only are they pretty, they reveal the chemistry of 
the lunar surface.
vibration, but the shutter and mirror in a DSLR do. 
With Canon DSLRs, using Live View mode (“silent 
shooting”) eliminates this vibration by starting 
the exposure electronically rather than by moving 
the shutter.
 Using manual exposure, set the aperture wide 
open (f/2.8) and try 1/200 second at ISO 200. But 
experiment — try for a picture that’s a bit under-
exposed, so that the brightest areas don’t become 
colorless white. And use automatic white balance, 
so that the image won’t have an overall color cast.
 Above all, select a TIFF or raw (proprietary) file 
format. A 16-bit TIFF is best. Don’t select JPEG 
compression, which discards exactly the subtle colors 
we’re trying to bring out. Converting a JPEG-captured 
image back to TIFF doesn’t undo the damage.
Take Your Picture
You can photograph the moon using a telephoto 
lens or a telescope adapter, or by simply holding 
your camera up against the eyepiece of a telescope 
(5 to 50 power). Either the camera or the telescope 
needs a tripod. Holding the camera by hand seems 
kludgy, but it works well because the telescope’s 
mass reduces the camera’s vibration.
 If you’re holding the camera, zoom to the middle 
of its optical zoom range, disable its autofocus, 
and adjust the telescope’s focus while looking at 
the camera’s display. If the camera is physically 
attached to the long lens or telescope, use the 
time-delay shutter release so that everything can 
settle down after you take your hands off it. Non-
SLR digital cameras usually don’t produce much 
Highland 
feldspar 
(pink)
Low-
titanium
basalt
(grayish-
yellow)
High-titanium
basalt (blue)
Apollo 11
landing site
B
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

69
Make:
Photograph by Simon Quellen Field
 You can also scan a color film image, even one 
you took many years ago. As you process the pic-
ture, look out for “crossover” — color casts that are 
different in brighter than in darker areas. Crossover 
was the main bugaboo of color film and one reason 
that digital photography displaced it so quickly.
Do the Magic
Bring the image into Photoshop or another image-
processing application, then simply increase the 
color saturation. In Photoshop, this adjustment 
is accessed via Ctrl-U on a PC and Command-U 
on a Mac.
 Look at the results as you turn up the saturation. 
Don’t go too far — if the image becomes grainy 
or gaudy, you’ve gone beyond the colors actually 
recorded from nature and are now looking at cam-
era artifacts. It may work best to make the adjust-
ment in 2 or 3 steps.
 Finally, you may want to do some sharpening or 
unsharp masking to bring out lunar details. After 
processing, you can save your picture as a JPEG 
because the low-level colors are no longer hidden.
What You’ll See
There are three basic kinds of moon rocks: high-
land material (feldspar), low-titanium basalt, and 
high-titanium basalt. These come out as pinkish, 
grayish-yellow, and blue, respectively. (The powder, 
or regolith, on the lunar surface is mostly similar to 
the rocks beneath, although it also contains mate-
rial from micrometeorites.) 
 Note especially the blue color of the Mare 
Tranquillitatis (aka Sea of Tranquility), contrasting 
with the other lowlands. Apollo 11 landed in an 
especially blue patch here because it is flat terrain 
with few boulders to run into.
 Greenish tints can indicate places with higher 
iron concentration, although the edge of the sunlit 
region can also appear green because that’s how 
the rocks look when lit from the side. 
 Other unusual tints have been reported in Sinus 
Iridium (aka Bay of Rainbows) and around the 
crater Aristarchus, which has a reputation for odd 
behavior — it reflects sunlight so brightly that it’s 
been mistaken for an erupting volcano.
By day, Michael A. Covington is a senior research 
scientist at the University of Georgia. By night, he 
photographs the sky and writes books about it, such as 
Digital SLR Astrophotography (dslrbook.com).
DIY Ion Engine
BY KEITH HAMMOND
To get to Mars, we’ll use the same 
technology as Darth Vader’s TIE fighter 
— the ion propulsion engine. It uses 
electricity to produce a plasma of 
charged ions exiting 10 times faster than 
chemical rocket exhaust. 
   The most powerful ion engine today is 
Ad Astra Rocket Company’s 200-kilowatt 
VASIMR plasma engine, which uses radio 
frequencies to superheat argon ions to 
1,000,000°F. Ad Astra’s founder, former 
NASA astronaut Dr. Franklin Chang Diaz, 
estimates a nine-month one-way trip 
to Mars could be cut to 39 days using 
200-megawatt plasma engines.
   Until then, Simon Quellen Field shows 
how to make your own tiny ion motor 
using just a high voltage source and two 
paper clips, at his website Science Toys 
You Can Make With Your Kids (makezine.
com/go/ionmotor). The journey of 100 
million miles begins with a single ion. 
TINY ION: Replicate 
the basics of an ion 
propulsion engine using 
a piece of wire, the cap 
from a D battery, and 
a power source.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

70
Make: Volume 24
Photography by Suzanne Morrison ©Aerolite Meteorites (above); Iain Sharp (below)
Space Rock Hounds
A Q&A with the Meteorite Men.  
BY RACHEL HOBSON
Lunar Lander Simulator
BY JOHN BAICHTAL
G
eoff Notkin and Steve Arnold hunt for visitors 
from outer space, but they aren’t looking for 
little green men. Their treasure is of the geologic 
sort: meteorites that strike Earth, carrying clues 
to astronomical and planetary development in the 
universe. The pair share their adventures in the 
Science Channel’s TV series Meteorite Men. We 
checked in with them to get their tips and insights 
for DIY meteorite hunters. 
Q: What’s the simplest form of meteorite hunt-
ing that the DIY enthusiast can tackle? 
A: Meteorites fall randomly over the entire surface 
of the Earth, so theoretically you could search for 
them anywhere. The vast majority of meteorites 
contain a large amount of iron, which rusts in humid 
environments, eventually causing the meteorite to 
decompose. Head out to a barren area that’s devoid 
of vegetation, with few indigenous rocks, and see if 
you can spot anything unusual.
Q: What kind of research should you do before 
setting out on a meteorite hunt? 
A: Many types of common Earth rocks are fre-
quently mistaken for meteorites. Become familiar 
with what meteorites look like, and also practice a 
few simple field tests that can help in identifying 
suspected space rocks. Our Guide to Meteorite 
INSPIRED BY ATARI’S 
1979 Lunar Lander game, 
British engineer Iain Sharp 
created a lunar landing 
arcade machine to honor 
the 40th anniversary of the 
historic Apollo 11 mission. 
   Players work a steering 
wheel and rocket controls to 
safely bring the simulated 
Eagle lander to the moon’s 
surface while keeping an 
eye on the speed and fuel 
indicators. 
   But this isn’t a video 
game — Sharp’s lander 
dangles from fishing line 
manipulated by salvaged 
inkjet servos. Controlled 
by Atmel AVR microcon-
trollers coordinated by 
an Arduino, the simula-
tor uses infrared sensors 
to determine the lander’s 
location. For a retro Space 
Age look, it sports vintage-
looking instrumentation 
and nixie-tube readouts.
Identification [aerolite.org/found-a-meteorite.htm] 
is a good place to start.
Q: What kind of meteorite-hunting tools 
can you make at home, instead of having to
purchase them? 
A: We end up designing and building much of the 
equipment that we use in the field. The simplest 
tool, and one of the most effective, is a magnet 
cane. It’s basically a walking stick with a powerful 
magnet affixed to one end. When you’re hiking 10
or 15 miles a day, keeping your eyes peeled for 
unusual-looking rocks, it’s a time saver and an
energy saver if you don’t have to bend down and 
pick up every one of them. 
  For an extended interview with the Meteorite 
Men, visit: makezine.com/24/space
Geoff Notkin of Meteorite 
Men in his rover.
Iain Sharp’s 2009 Lunar 
Lander console game 
uses physical compo-
nents instead of video.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

71
Make:
Photograph by Adam Goss (planetarium)
Zillionaires in Space  BY LAURA COCHRANE
DIY Inflatable 
Home
Planetarium
BY GOLI MOHAMMADI
I
t’s not absolutely
necessary to be rich 
if you want to explore 
space, but it sure 
doesn’t hurt. Here are 
some financially well-
endowed individuals 
who don’t mind spend-
ing part of their fortunes 
getting into orbit.
Jeff Bezos
Amazon.com’s billion-
aire founder has sold off 
$640 million of stock 
this year while bankroll-
ing his Seattle-based 
aerospace company, 
Blue Origin. They’re 
developing escape
systems for NASA 
rockets and planning 
their own suborbital 
space tourist flights by 
2012 from their West 
Texas launch site.
Sir Richard Branson
The British billionaire 
behind the Virgin mega-
brand founded Virgin 
Galactic in 2004, and is 
selling $200,000 tickets 
for suborbital passenger 
flights, by 2012 or so, 
from their spaceport in 
New Mexico. 
 Branson sees space 
travel as a way of speed-
ing up transcontinental 
travel: “We’ll be going 
city to city by just shoot-
ing people out to space 
and straight back down 
again.”
Elon Musk
The South African 
founder of PayPal and 
Tesla Motors launched 
California rocket maker 
Space Exploration 
Technologies (SpaceX) 
in 2002. 
   Despite high-profile 
setbacks (some of 
Star Trek actor James 
“Scotty” Doohan’s
ashes met their final 
frontier in the Pacific), 
the company proposes 
to transport payload and 
crew to the International 
Space Station (ISS), 
and to reach Mars with 
nuclear-thermal rockets.
Peter Diamandis
The X Prize founder 
is also a director of 
Virginia-based Space 
Adventures, the com-
pany that’s flown seven 
well-heeled tourists to 
the ISS, including video 
game mogul Richard 
Garriott and telecom 
millionaire Anousheh 
Ansari, for prices of $20 
million to $35 million. 
   They’re now booking 
suborbital flights too, 
as well as $100 million 
seats for a circumnavi-
gation of the moon. 
John Carmack 
The founder and top 
developer of Id Software 
(Quake, Doom, and 
the space-themed 
Commander Keen) 
launched Texas-based 
Armadillo Aerospace 
in 2000. 
   Now they’re partnering 
with Diamandis’ Space 
Adventures to develop 
suborbital space tourist 
flights for an estimated 
$102,000 a seat. 
Sergey Brin
While Google sponsors 
the $30 million Lunar 
X Prize, its billionaire 
co-founder is person-
ally headed for space. 
In 2008 he invested 
$5 million in Space 
Adventures, as a 
down payment on an 
estimated $35 million 
ride to the ISS aboard 
a Soyuz launched in his 
native Russia, as early 
as 2012.
Most home 
planetarium 
enthusiasts 
use a geodesic 
dome design, but 
Adam Goss says 
geodesics fall 
short because of 
their flat surfaces. 
The gore dome 
design (made from 
curved sections, 
or gores) makes a 
truer hemisphere, 
and is used in 
many planetariums 
worldwide. 
   In 2009 Goss 
posted a tutorial 
for making a 
5-meter inflatable 
gore dome. His 
site features free 
construction 
manuals for domes 
ranging from 3 to 
5 meters, along 
with the GoreDome 
Calculator software 
that he developed 
for designing 
your own optimal 
planetarium dome. 
diyplanetarium.com
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

72
Make: Volume 24
Saturday Morning 
Science in Space
BY GOLI MOHAMMADI
WHEN CHEMICAL ENGINEER 
and NASA astronaut Don Pettit spent 
six months aboard the International 
Space Station in 2002–2003, he used 
his off time productively. Though most 
of the week was busy with research 
and maintenance, Saturday mornings 
were allotted as personal time, and 
Pettit used the micro-g environment 
to conduct and document a series of 
fun experiments for kicks, which he 
called Saturday Morning Science. 
 
The footage is fascinating, informa-
tive, and available for free on YouTube. 
Using what was available on the ISS 
(like tea leaves, sodium chloride, 
and honey), Pettit demonstrates 
Marangoni convection, nucleate 
boiling, and gyroscopic platform 
stability, to name a few. The section on 
making water spheres is mesmerizing. 
Pettit even shows that motor-skilled 
repair work is possible in micro-g by 
repairing his broken watch. Tune in at 
makezine.com/go/pettit.
Five Cool Participatory 
Space Projects
Find new galaxies and design
spacecraft.  BY ARIEL WALDMAN
F
rom launching your 
own satellite to ana-
lyzing aerogel, here are 
five ways you can make 
scientific discoveries 
and actively contribute 
to space exploration.
Galaxy Zoo 
Classify and potentially 
discover new galaxies 
with Galaxy Zoo, a data 
set of thousands of 
galaxies imaged by the 
Hubble Space Telescope. 
   With a simple interface, 
a community of over 
250,000 collaborators, 
and easy tutorials, this 
is a great way for kids 
and adults to participate 
in space exploration. 
galaxyzoo.org
Team Frednet
Google Lunar X Prize is a 
$30 million competition 
to build and send rovers, 
robots, and spacecraft 
to the moon. 
   Team Frednet is an 
open source team com-
peting in the challenge, 
and anyone can join 
as a contributing team 
member leading up 
to the rocket launch. 
frednet.com
« Solar Stormwatch
Coronal mass ejections 
on a collision course 
with Earth send danger-
ous radiation to astro-
nauts and can knock 
out communication net-
works and power lines. 
   Learn how to spot 
these solar explosions 
using near-real-time data 
from NASA spacecraft. 
solarstormwatch.com
Collaborative Space 
Travel and Research 
Team
CSTART organizes and 
finances the efforts 
of space enthusiasts 
around the world who 
use collaborative design, 
volunteer labor, innova-
tive low-cost technology, 
and open data sharing 
to further the cause of 
manned and unmanned 
space exploration and 
research.
   CSTART creates open 
source plans for projects 
ranging from sounding 
rockets (the OHKLA 
project) to manned 
moon landings (the 
CLLARE project). They 
also write open source 
software to help plan 
space missions and to 
run onboard spacecraft. 
cstart.org
Citizen Sky
Epsilon Aurigae is a 
supergiant star located 
2,000 light-years from 
Earth that mysteriously 
gets eclipsed every 27.1 
years by an equally 
large, unknown, dark 
object. The event has 
baffled scientists for 
175 years, but through 
the Citizen Sky project, 
you’ll make observations 
and analyses that could 
decipher this scientific 
puzzle! citizensky.org
  Want to check 
out more cool 
participatory space 
projects? Explore the 
directory at Space-
hack (spacehack.org).
Photograph courtesy of SECCHI beacon (above)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

73
Make:
in this annual contest. Teachers may download 
instruction packs to integrate the science of space 
stations into their lesson plans.
Purse: $3,000
NASA Lunabotics Mining Competition
nasa.gov/lunabotics
Challenges college students to build a lunar excava-
tor to dig up 10kg of regolith within 15 minutes.
Purse: $500–$5,000 per category
PROFESSIONALS
Google Lunar X Prize googlelunarxprize.org
Awarded to the first team to land a robot on the 
moon, travel 500m, and transmit back to Earth.
Purse: $30 million
Power Beaming Challenge  
spaceelevatorgames.org
Compete to beam power to robots that climb up
a cable, a critical development needed to someday 
assemble a space elevator.
Purse: $2 million
Strong Tether Challenge
spaceward.org/elevator2010-ts
Challenge to develop a lightweight cable strong 
enough to stretch from orbit to Earth.
Purse: $2 million
Sample Return Robot Challenge
centennialchallenges.nasa.gov
Rovers must autonomously locate and collect
specific geologic samples.
Purse: $1.5 million
  Learn about other challenges at 
makezine.com/24/space
Cash Prizes for 
Space Scientists
Solve a challenge, become
the first space millionaire
on your block!  BY JOHN BAICHTAL
T
he Ansari X Prize for Suborbital Spaceflight 
(space.xprize.org/ansari-x-prize) paid 
$10 million to Scaled Composites LLC when its 
SpaceShipOne exceeded 100km in altitude. NASA 
realized entrepreneurs could develop technology 
far more efficiently, and the agency now offers tan-
talizing prizes to spur development of space tech.
 NASA's Space Elevator Games (spaceelevator
games.org) provides prizes to stimulate the devel-
opment of a space elevator — a line stretched from 
the ground to orbit, with a climbing elevator car 
that delivers cargo to space cheaper than a rocket. 
In 2009 the agency awarded $900,000 to Seattle 
startup LaserMotive, who created an efficient way to 
beam electricity to a climber.
 NASA’s Regolith Excavation Challenge (regolith.
csewi.org) awarded $750,000 to three teams that 
designed robots to dig lunar soil. The winning robot, 
created by college student Paul Ventimiglia, dug up 
439kg of simulated regolith within 30 minutes.
 Also in 2009, Peter Homer won NASA’s Astronaut 
Glove Challenge (astronaut-glove.us). Homer 
took home $250,000 in prize money, on top of 
$200,000 he earned in the 2007 competition.
He has started his own spacesuit glove company.
 Interested in getting in on the action? Here are 
some contests:
STUDENTS
NASA Great Moonbuggy Race
moonbuggy.msfc.nasa.gov
High schoolers and collegians design collapsible, 
human-powered moon buggies.
Purse: Bragging rights
MoonBots moonbots.org
Mixed teams of kids and adults create simulated 
lunar robots out of Lego Mindstorms NXT sets.
Purse: A free trip to Lego HQ in Billund, Denmark
NASA Space Settlement Contest 
settlement.arc.nasa.gov/contest
Middle and high schoolers design orbital habitations
Photograph by Jamie Foster/CSA
Ventimiglia 
(3rd from 
left) and his 
Moonraker 
digger.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

74
Make: Volume 24
Space Science Gadgets You Can Make for NASA  
BY MATTHEW F. REYES
N
ASA faces uncertainty not only about its mis-
sion, but about how to pay for it — the agency 
gets less than 0.6% of the federal budget. We must 
find ways to cut the cost of working in space.
 Today the maker community is changing the 
economics of how to do-it-yourself in outer space, 
by hacking Android smartphones into tools that 
NASA could use for science discovery.
 In December 2009, some Googlers started
cellbots.com to create smartphone-controlled
rovers. Two months later hackers at Noisebridge
in San Francisco launched the first G1 Android phone 
aboard a high-altitude balloon. 
 In July 2010, volunteers at NASA Ames Research 
Center and Google launched a Nexus One aboard 
a suborbital fiberglass kit rocket from the site of 
Burning Man (see below). Two weeks later the 
education nonprofit Quest For Stars in San Diego 
launched a Motorola Droid aboard a balloon to more 
than 100,000 feet!
 The joint cadre of volunteers at NASA Ames and 
Google are now hacking Android smartphone com-
ponents to control robotic rovers, aerial vehicles, 
and small satellites, and to collect science data 
from them. Within a limited budget, we’re relying on 
students and the maker community to create and 
program this new class of universal, open source 
participatory exploration platforms. 
 We need immediate help to develop wi-fi, 
Bluetooth, or USB interfaces that can connect 
scientific data collection payloads to devices run-
ning the Android OS. From there, there’s boundless 
potential for makers to create previously unthink-
able gadgets to support NASA’s mission, including: 
» “Mini-Hubble” space telescopes that can send 
space images to amateur astronomers
» Ruggedized “cellbots” that can explore extreme 
environments on Earth and on near-Earth asteroids
» Remote-sensing, environmental-sampling aerial 
vehicles, such as balloons and helicopters, that can 
help analyze climate change.
What can you imagine exploring with your smart-
phone? Let me know at motorbikematt@gmail.com.
Photography by Ryan Hickman (above left); Andrew Gerrard (above right); Steve Jurvetson (below)
Matthew F. Reyes is founder of Exploration Solutions, Inc., 
an education subcontractor at NASA Ames Research 
Center. twitter.com/motorbikematt
Androids at 28,000 Feet  BY ADAM FLAHERTY
As part of a series of experiments to determine the viability of 
using off-the-shelf smartphone components in low Earth orbit 
(LEO) satellites, the “AndroidSat” project successfully launched 
a pair of Nexus One smartphones over Nevada’s Black Rock 
Desert. Traveling to 28,000 feet aboard James Dougherty’s 
Intimidator 5 rocket, their payload successfully recorded 
onboard sensor data and video of the launch. 
    Matthew Reyes (see above), Chris Boshuizen, Will Marshall, 
and the NASA Ames interns associated with the launch are 
championing the use of smartphone components to lower the 
cost of deploying a satellite, and they expect it to become even 
more affordable with each revision.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

75
Make:
Live from Outer Space!
Tune in to heavenly sounds with
amateur radio.  BY DIANA ENG
H
am radio operators 
are no strangers to 
space communications. 
Astronauts use ham radio 
to communicate with 
hams on the ground, and 
operators use it to control 
satellites. If you’ve ever 
wanted to listen to the 
sounds of space — from 
Jupiter’s natural “radio 
station” to text mes-
sages sent via the moon 
— you don’t have to be a 
rocket scientist; you just 
need an amateur radio. 
 Here are a few radios 
you can build and/or 
operate to receive extra-
terrestrial radio signals.
Satellite Radio This 
Alinco DJ-G7 handheld 
radio (Figure A, about 
$300, alinco.com) and 
adjacent computer are 
receiving messages from 
the ARISSat-1, a home-
brew satellite made by 
an international team of 
volunteers. Set to deploy 
from the International 
Space Station later 
this year, ARISSat-1 will 
broadcast a recorded 
message from school-
children around the 
world, data from experi-
ments onboard the sat-
ellite, and images from 
the satellite’s camera, 
and will allow ham radio 
operators to communi-
cate with each other via 
the satellite’s repeater.
 To receive radio sig-
nals from a satellite, you 
need a VHF/UHF FM 
radio. Attaching a yagi 
antenna helps (although 
it won’t work with 
this particular beacon 
broadcasting to school-
children) — and you can 
make your own. (See 
the yagi antenna project 
on page 48.)
Catch a Whistler
On this computer is a 
visualization of a natural 
phenomenon called 
a whistler (Figure B): 
a radio signal created 
by lightning, traveling 
through space, skip-
ping from one side of 
Earth to the other. The 
Inspire VLF-3 radio kit 
($120, theinspireproject.
org) lets you listen to 
frequencies emitted by 
lightning, ranging from 
0Hz to over 100kHz: 
nearby lightning signals 
sound like a crackling 
fire; lightning signals 
that have traveled 
2,000km–3,000km 
sound like a skipping 
record; and whistlers 
sound faintly like bottle 
rockets. Add a $10 
antenna and you’re 
good to go.
Jupiter’s Jukebox
The kit-built RJ 1.1 
receiver (Figure C, $155, 
radiojove.gsfc.nasa.gov)
can be used to make 
a radio telescope to 
observe the sun and 
Jupiter, both of which 
have magnetic fields 
that generate radio 
waves. The sun’s trans-
missions are best heard 
between 18MHz and 
200MHz, while Jupiter 
emits in the 18MHz to 
40MHz frequency range. 
 Solar bursts usually 
last from 30 seconds 
to two minutes and 
sound like a light rain 
that becomes a down-
pour then lightens to 
a gentle pitter-patter. 
Jupiter’s radio waves are 
influenced by both plan-
etary conditions and its 
orbiting moons — long 
bursts sound like ocean 
waves; short bursts 
sound like wind flapping 
a flag. 
 In addition to the RJ 
1.1 receiver, you’ll need to 
build an antenna suited 
to receive radio signals 
from the sun or Jupiter 
(instructions are on the 
Radio Jove website).
Moonbounce  
Here’s a home radio
station that KB2FCV 
(aka James Kern) is 
working on to com-
municate via the moon 
(Figure D). 
 In a “moonbounce,” 
one operator sends 
a radio signal to the 
moon. The signal literally 
bounces off the moon 
and is received by a sec-
ond operator, who can 
moonbounce a reply. The 
antenna is homemade, 
following the specifica-
tions at yu7ef.com.
  Hear radio signal 
audio clips from 
satellites, lightning, 
Jupiter, and beyond: 
makezine.com/24/
space
Photography by Diana Eng (A–C) and James Kern (D)
Diana Eng is an amateur 
radio operator, fashion de-
signer from Project Runway, 
and author of Fashion Geek.
A
B
C
D
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

76
Make: Volume 24
Spaceport Sheboygan
BY KEITH HAMMOND
IN FEBRUARY 2006, 
crew members of the 
International Space Station 
hand-launched a disem-
bodied spacesuit into Earth 
orbit during a spacewalk. 
   While the sight of a 
human form floating away 
into space untethered was 
unsettling, the signals 
SuitSat  BY RACHEL HOBSON
emanating from the space-
suit satellite were meant to 
captivate the imaginations 
of people around the globe. 
 
SuitSat-1 was a modified 
Russian Orlan spacesuit 
previously used for extrave-
hicular activities. Engineers 
and ham radio operators 
outfitted the suit with 
equipment to broadcast 
prerecorded messages for 
downlink by listeners on 
Earth. But after just two 
orbits, operators began to 
lose contact with SuitSat-1, 
and it burned up on reentry 
in September 2006. 
 
A planned SuitSat-2 was 
renamed ARISSat-1 when a 
second spacesuit couldn’t 
be procured. Slated for 
launch in January 2011, 
ARISSat-1 will transmit 
radio messages and carry 
student experiments and 
solar panels that should 
help it run for at least six 
months. To learn more, 
check out arissat1.org.
N 
eed to catch a flight to space? Virginia and 
Florida both have licensed spaceports, and the 
West is peppered with them. But if you live in the 
Midwest, then Spaceport Sheboygan may be your 
ticket — a proposed spaceplane hub nestled on the 
shore of Lake Michigan. 
 The Wisconsin legislature created an aerospace 
authority in 2006 to promote a commercial space-
port for suborbital flights, currently projected by 
2015. Why here? Restricted airspace left over from 
an old Army base provides a window to outer space, 
and the lake itself is handy in the event of a water 
landing. And when wealthy space tourists want to 
make a weekend of it, Sheboygan is a lovely town 
with great amenities: golf, boating, fishing, an annu-
al air show, even surfing. (You can’t say the same 
for Mojave, Calif., for example.) 
 First they’ll need to extend a runway and apply 
for FAA approval, but Spaceport Sheboygan (space
portsheboygan.org) is already home to amateur 
rocket launches (they’ve sent Lokis to 300,000 
feet), Rockets for Schools, and the Great Lakes 
Aerospace Science and Education Center, featuring 
hands-on exhibits and summer space camps. Until 
the spaceplanes touch down, it’s a great place to fly 
a shuttle simulator, check out astronaut gear that’s 
flown in space, and watch the rockets streaking 
skyward while you’re eating squeaky cheese curd.
  All about spaceports: hobbyspace.com/
SpacePorts 
Photography by NASA/ISS program (above); William Friend (below)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

77
Make:
Backyard Astrophotography
Peter Shah brings distant galaxies
down to Earth.  BY RACHEL HOBSON
W
hen people 
see Peter 
Shah’s breathtaking 
photographs of the 
Andromeda Galaxy 
and countless nebulae, 
they sometimes think 
they’re from the Hubble 
Space Telescope. But 
Shah takes them from 
his backyard shed in 
Mid Wales in the U.K. He 
built it with a roll-off roof 
and a separate “warm” 
room (that isn’t really 
very warm at all).
 “The scope is a 
200mm f/3.8, AG8 
Newtonian Astrograph, 
on a Losmandy G-11 
mount,” Shah says. 
“I use a Sky-Watcher 
ED80 for guiding. The 
main imaging CCD 
is a Starlight Xpress 
SXVF-H16. The whole kit 
performs very well for a 
moderate imaging setup, 
but having nice dark 
skies does help too.”
 Shah doesn’t pretend 
to be a whiz at math or 
astronomy, but says he 
learns as he goes along. 
 “The images that 
I produce are more 
art than science,” he 
says. “By the time I’ve 
stretched the contrast, 
changed the levels, and 
enhanced the certain 
areas, the whole image 
becomes really a lot dif-
ferent to what it actually 
is. But I do think these 
sorts of images are very 
important to astronomy, 
as I truly believe it’s the 
artists that inspire the 
young scientists.”
  More: astropix.co.uk
Amateur astro-
photographer Shah 
says he learns what 
he needs to know as 
he goes along.
Photography by Peter Shah
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

78
Make: Volume 24
YOU WILL NEED
Vibrating motor such
as #G16777 from 
goldmine-elec.com, $1
AG13 button cell battery
Needlenose pliers
0.008" sheet tin
 from a hobby, art, craft, 
or hardware store
Tinsnips or heavy-duty 
craft scissors
Dizzy Robot
By Steve Hoefer
1+2+3
Steve Hoefer makes things, solves problems, and is the main 
brain behind grathio.com.
Photography and diagram by Steve Hoefer
Dizzy Robots are cute pocket-sized pals that dance 
around until they fall over. Just about anyone can 
build one — it only has 3 parts and requires no 
special skills.
1. Prepare the metal body.
The metal body holds everything together and 
conducts power from the bottom of the battery up 
to the motor. 
 Trace the pattern shown at right, tape it to a thin 
piece of tin, and cut it out using tinsnips or heavy-
duty scissors. Be careful, the edges and corners 
will be sharp! 
 Bend the square base of the body at a right angle, 
then bend the bottom pair of wings into a rough 
circle to hold the battery in place. Bend the top part 
of the body into a circle to hold the motor. Use a pen 
or pencil as a rough guide to help form the shape.
 
2. Prepare the motor.
If the motor came with a rubberized insulating 
cover, remove it. Use needlenose pliers to carefully 
bend one of the motor’s contacts around and under 
the motor. This will complete the circuit with the
top of the battery.
 
3. Put it all together.
Place the battery in the base of the metal body 
with the negative (–) side up. Slide the motor into 
the upper housing and position it so the straight 
conductor is inside the housing and the bent con-
ductor touches the top of the battery. Use pliers to 
compress the housing and hold the motor in place, 
being careful not to crush it.
Use It
If everything checks out, it should already be
running. Put it on a flat surface — it’ll spin around 
and occasionally fall over. If it falls over more than 
occasionally, adjust the alignment of the base
with pliers.
 When your Dizzy Robot has had its fun, slide a 
small scrap of card between the top of the battery 
and the motor contact to turn the robot off.
1
2
:lk
9\e[
B\p1
3
Bend these tabs so 
they hold the pager 
motor securely.
Bend these tabs 
so they hold the 
battery in place.
Bend here at 90°. 
(Do not cut all the way across!)
Battery sits here, 
flat (+) side down.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Make:
Projects
Get a bird’s-eye view of your neighborhood with 
our helium balloon photography rig, designed 
by a NASA engineer. Then, back on Earth, make 
a stroboscope to take freeze-frame photographs 
of fast-moving objects. Finally, build an electro-
magnetic levitator that shoots rings of non-
magnetic aluminum (and learn why it works).   
Stroboscope
90
Electromagnetic
Aluminum Levitator
100
Helium Balloon
Imaging “Satellite”
80
Photograph by James Newell
79
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

80
Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: BALLOON CAM
makezine.com/24/ballooncam
HELIUM BALLOON 
IMAGING “SATELLITE”
By Jim Newell
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

81
Make:
Photograph by Sam Murphy
Jim Newell (jamesmnewell.com) has degrees in mechanical engineering, physics, and business administra-
tion, and has worked in the aerospace industry for the past 28 years. With interests including electronics 
and home automation, he’s also an avid guitar player and singer/songwriter.
Set up: p.83
Make it: p.84
Use it: p.89
INFLATION WATCH
Snap aerial photos from 300' up by 
suspending a hacked drugstore camera 
from 3 tethered helium balloons.
 The first time I saw a satellite photo of my house on Google 
Earth, I expressed shock at the “Big Brother” implications of 
an all-seeing, commercial eye-in-the-sky. But meanwhile, I was 
also secretly disappointed with the picture quality and clarity 
because (Orwellian angst aside) I needed better overhead 
images for my own use — to help me lay out a new driveway 
and complete a birds-eye-view CAD drawing of our lot. 
 So I decided to design and fabricate a simple helium balloon 
“satellite” camera platform, tethered to the ground for ease
of control and retrieval, and dedicated to a single purpose: to 
capture aerial images of my house and surroundings.
 Here’s how I completed this project using inexpensive and 
readily available components — helium balloons on a nylon 
kite string, a drugstore camera perched on a platform made 
out of an old CD, and a PICAXE microcontroller housed in an 
empty pill bottle.
makeprojects.com
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

82
Make: Volume 24
makezine.com/24/ballooncam
PROJECTS: BALLOON CAM
Illustration by Tim Lillis
C
D
E
F
H
I
G
Balloon Cam: How It Works
Calculating the Number
of Balloons Needed
Total weight = weight of payload 
+ weight of tether at max height 
= ½lb + ¼lb = ¾lb
Lift from helium at sea level (approx.)
= 0.067lbs per cubic foot (ft3)
Volume of helium to lift ¾ pound 
= 0.75/0.067 = 11.2ft3
Volume of a sphere = 4/3  ×  πr3
Balloon radius needed (single
balloon) = (¾ × 11.2 / π)1/3 = 1.4'
To account for the added weight 
and helium backpressure from the 
balloon itself, ensure sufﬁ cient lift for 
multiple ﬂ ights, and add redundancy, 
I tripled this minimum ﬁ gure and 
used three 3'-diameter balloons.
A cheap, lightweight A  digital 
camera, modiﬁ ed for electronic 
shutter triggering, snaps photos.
The camera’s lens aims down 
through the center hole of a spare 
B  CD (or DVD), which serves as 
the camera’s support platform.
The CD is suspended from the bot-
tom of a C  pill bottle that holds 
the trigger board and battery.
The D  trigger board uses a tiny 
PICAXE-08M E  microprocessor 
that’s programmed (in BASIC) to 
send repeating pulses from one 
of its output pins. The pulses are 
applied to a F  reed relay, which 
opens and closes the connection 
between the camera’s shutter 
control contacts, repeatedly 
triggering the shutter. Power for 
the board comes from a G  9-volt 
battery via a H  voltage regulator 
that drops the circuit’s voltage to 
5V. The compiled microprocessor 
code is uploaded to the PICAXE 
through a I  programming header 
connected to a computer.
A
B
A tiny $3 microcontroller chip tells your aerial camera when to snap.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

83
Make:
SET UP.
MATERIALS
[A] Digital camera, mini 
“keychain” $10–$15 from 
chain drugstores; brands 
tested were Shift3, Aries
[B] PICAXE-08M micro-
controller SparkFun
Electronics item #COM-
08308 (sparkfun.com), $3
[C] PICAXE 8-Pin Proto Kit 
SparkFun #DEV-08321, $4
[D] Voltage regulator, 
5V, TO-220 package, 
LM2940T or NTE1951 
Digi-Key #LM2940T-5.0-ND 
(digikey.com), $2; or Mouser 
Electronics #526-NTE1951 
(mouser.com), $4
[E] Diode, 1N4001 
RadioShack #276-1101, 
(radioshack.com) $1
[F] Electrolytic capacitor, 
22μF RadioShack 
#272-1026, $1
[G] Relay switch, 5V reed 
aka reed relay. RadioShack 
#275-0232, $3. RadioShack 
sells 2 versions of this under 
the same part number; the 
cylindrical package will work, 
but the box-shaped one is 
too large to fit.
[H] Connector header, 
female, 9×1, 0.1" spacing 
Digi-Key #S7042-ND, $1
[I] Breakaway headers, male 
SparkFun #PRT-00116, $2
[J] Electrical wire, 18–20 
gauge, insulated
[K] Solder
[L] Heat-shrink tubing 
or electrical tape
[M] Battery, 9-volt
[N] Pill bottle with child-
proof cap large enough to 
hold microcontroller and 
battery
[O] Solid wire, 12 gauge 
[P] Compact disc or DVD
[Q] Kite string, 150lb test, 
I used Dacron Archline from 
Conwin (conwinonline.com), 
200yds for $15.
[R] Small carabiner
[S] Balloons, 3' 
diameter (3) 
Try BalloonsFast 
(balloonsfast.com/
36inchlatexballoons) 
$4 each
[NOT SHOWN]
Helium, 42 cubic feet You 
can have balloons filled at a 
balloon supplier or a super-
market, but the supermarket 
balloon person will probably 
not be happy with you using 
so much helium.
Duct tape
Double-sided foam tape
TOOLS
[T] PICAXE USB pro-
gramming cable PICAXE 
part #AXE027, SparkFun 
#PGM-08312, $26. Or, with 
a Windows or Linux PC, you 
can save money by buying 
the $15 PICAXE-08M Starter 
Pack, SparkFun #DEV-
08323, which includes the 
PICAXE 8-Pin Proto Kit (see 
Materials list) and a serial 
programming cable rather 
than USB.
[NOT SHOWN]
Computer with internet 
connection
Soldering equipment
Wire strippers
Wire cutters
Phillips screwdriver, small 
to unscrew camera case
Flathead screwdriver, small 
to pry open camera body
Tweezers
Multimeter or ohmmeter
Drill and drill bits: 1", ¼" 
Pliers
Scissors
Helping hands with 
magnifier (optional)
Tabletop vise (optional)
A
J
K
L
M
N
O
T
P
Q
S
R
F
G
H
I
E
B
D
C
Photograph by Ed Troxell
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

84
Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: BALLOON CAM
makezine.com/24/ballooncam
BUILD YOUR 
BALLOON-SAT
START>>
MAKE IT.
Time: 1–2 Days  Complexity: Moderate
1. MAKE THE TRIGGER BOARD
For all connections, refer to the project schematic seen here 
(downloadable at makezine.com/24/ballooncam). To stabilize 
voltage regulator operation, I added an additional 22μF electro-
lytic capacitor across the power leads, in parallel with the Proto 
Kit’s included 100nF cap.
1a. Assemble the PICAXE Proto Kit, soldering the following com-
ponents at the locations indicated on the printed circuit board 
(PCB): 8-pin IC socket, stereo download socket, 3-pin header, 
10kΩ resistor, 22kΩ resistor, and 100nF capacitor. These compo-
nents are small, so a helping hand with magnifier or a tabletop 
vise will come in handy. Don’t connect the battery clip yet.
Once all parts are in place, carefully place the microprocessor chip in its socket, with pin 1 (indicated by 
the notch) pointing away from the prototyping area (or you can place it later; see Step 1e). Also, move the 
jumper on the 3-pin header to the PROG side to enable it for programming. 
1b. Thread the leads of the battery clip through the 2 holes in the 
Proto Board PCB, and solder the black wire into place on the bot-
tom of the board.
1c. Insert the voltage regulator through 3 holes near the center of 
the PCB. Run the red wire from the battery clip across the top of 
the PCB and connect it to the regulator’s input pin (indicated by 
a dot). Using a wire jumper, connect the middle (ground) pin of 
the regulator to the black wire from the battery clip. Use another 
wire jumper to connect the LM2940 output pin to the PCB, at the 
location marked “RED,” where the red wire from the battery clip 
would normally attach. 
"0M
@e
",M
Flk
",M@e
J\i`Xc`e
J\i`Xcflk
Flkglk)
Jk\i\faXZb
G@:8O<
'/D
CD)0+'
(E+''(
I\cXp
).,$')*)
KfZXd\iX
EF
))«=
('b
(
)
*
+
/
.
-
,
))b
(''e=
>E;
>E;
>E;
>E;
Gif^iXdd`e^
_\X[\i
X
X
Y
Y
Z
Z
Photography by Jim Newell
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

85
Make:
1d. Insert the 22μF capacitor through the 2 PCB holes indicated 
by (+) and (–), and solder it in place. Be sure to watch polarity; 
the stripe on the cap goes on the (–) side.
1e. Insert the relay into the PCB at the forward edge so that the 
single switch terminal dangles off the side of the board and the 
other 3 pins run through holes. The bottom left pin should run 
through the hole that’s 3 up from the bottom of the board and 
2 from the left. 
1f. Insert the 1N4001 diode into the through-holes that connect 
to the relay coil terminals so that its body drapes over the top of 
the relay. This diode protects the PICAXE from back electromotive 
force when the relay is de-energized. Using jumper wires, con-
nect one of the relay coil terminals to the PCB ground pin and 
the other to PICAXE output 2 (pin 5 on the chip).
1g. Solder about 1' of 18- to 20-gauge wire to each of the relay 
switch terminals. Use wire cutters to cut a 2-pin length from 
the male breakaway headers, and solder the 2 pins to the wires’ 
other ends. Cover the solder joints with heat-shrink tubing or 
electrical tape to prevent shorts and to add strength.
  
2. PROGRAM THE TRIGGERING
2a. Download and install Revolution Education’s free AXEpad software from rev-ed.co.uk/picaxe.
2b. Download the BASIC file Camera_Timer.bas from makezine.
com/24/ballooncam, then open it up in AXEpad.
This simple, 14-line routine waits 20 seconds from the time 
of initial power-up to give time to replace the pill bottle cap, 
takes one picture to confirm that it’s running, waits another 
20 seconds to let the balloon rise, then begins snapping pictures 
every 2 seconds. You can modify this to suit your needs.
2c. To load this code into your Proto Board, connect the PICAXE 
programming cable between your computer and the board’s pro-
gramming jack, then click the Program button in AXEpad, in the
upper right.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

86
Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: BALLOON CAM
makezine.com/24/ballooncam
3. MODIFY THE CAMERA
The specifics of this step will depend on the camera you use, but 
it’s a simple mod, and readers with basic electronics skills should 
have no problem. The camera shown here is Shift3 brand and 
was purchased for $11 at a Rite Aid pharmacy.
3a. Remove the stick-on label from the front of the camera (or 
the side, for the Aries camera) to reveal a screw that holds the 
case together.
3b. Remove the screw with a small Phillips screwdriver.
3c. Gently pry the camera shell open using a flathead 
screwdriver.
3d. Remove the 2 screws holding down the circuit board, and 
also unscrew the keychain clip, which we don’t need (with the 
Aries camera, remove 3 screws to detach the board).
3e. Turn the board over so that the lens is visible. Handling the 
board by the edges only, and without touching any parts, use 
tweezers to remove the black potting material from around the 
shutter switch, exposing solder terminals at its base.
3f. Solder wire leads to the 2 newly exposed switch terminals.
3g. To make room for the shutter switch wires to exit the case, 
use pliers to cut a hole in the plastic on the side opposite the 
lens (with the Aries camera, instead of cutting the case you can 
remove the pop-up viewfinder lens assembly and route the wires 
out of its hole.)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

87
Make:
3h. Replace the board and screw it back into the case, routing 
the shutter switch wires out, and reassemble the case.
3i. Cut a pair of adjacent female connector headers, and solder 
one of the wires to each. This will connect to the male header pair 
from the trigger board.
.
4. ASSEMBLE THE SATELLITE STRUCTURE
4a. Drill 4 equidistant 1" holes around the bottom of a pill bottle 
large enough to hold the microcontroller board and battery 
(about 2" in diameter and 4" tall). Drill another hole through 
the center.
4b. Insert 6" lengths of stiff 12-gauge solid wire into the 4 perim-
eter holes and extend them downward from the bottom of the 
bottle. Inside the bottle, bend the tops of the wires so they stay
in place when you pull the wires from below.
4c. Mark and drill 4 uniformly spaced 1" holes around the 
periphery of a spare CD or DVD.
4d. Thread the 4 wire standoffs from the bottom of the pill bottle 
through the 4 holes on the CD, bend them to lay flat underneath 
the surface of the CD, and secure them in place with duct tape,
or by twisting them up and around.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

88
Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: BALLOON CAM
makezine.com/24/ballooncam
4e. Grab the spool of kite string, and route the free end up 
through the center hole in the CD and through the center hole in 
the bottom of the pill bottle. Tie it off to the 12-gauge wires inside 
the bottle.
5. ATTACH THE CAMERA AND BALLOONS
5a. Mount the modified camera to the top surface of the CD with 
double-sided foam tape so that the lens of the camera looks 
down through the hole in the center of the CD.
5b. Insert the PICAXE board and 9-volt battery into the pill bottle, but don’t connect the battery yet 
(powering up the board will start the program running).
5c. Drill a ¼" hole in the center of the pill bottle cap and 4 more 
small holes around the periphery, uniformly spaced and as close 
to the outside diameter as possible.
5d. Route 4 pieces of kite string, 8"–12" each, through the perim-
eter holes and tie them all together securely inside the cap. Then 
tie together the other ends of the 4 strings, extended from the 
top side of the cap, to a small carabiner.
5e. Inflate the balloons with helium, tie each one off with a knot, 
and tie on a 1'–2' piece of kite string. Tie the balloons together 
to form a tight group, and tie them all to the carabiner. When 
finished, you’ll have the balloon group attached to the cap of the 
pill bottle, and because the balloons attach to the satellite only 
through this cap, it must be of the childproof variety to make 
sure it stays on securely.
5f. Finally, attach the bottle cap, routing the camera connector 
wire through the center hole. You’re ready to fly!
FINISH X
NOW GO USE IT »
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

89
Make:
NUDE SUNBATHERS 
BEWARE!
USE IT.
BALLOON-SAT OPERATION
Once the balloon-satellite is fully assembled you’re 
ready to launch. Here’s how:
1. Plug the headers together from the trigger board 
and the camera, and turn the camera on.
2. Unscrew the top of the pill bottle, being careful 
not to let it fly away. Inside the bottle, connect the 
9-volt battery to the Proto Board battery cable, and 
quickly screw the top back on.
3. Let the satellite go — up, up, and away!
If you look carefully at my photos, you can see the 
kite string along with a knot I had to tie due to some 
poor planning. I hope that readers can plan their 
string routing a little better than I did and keep the 
images knot-free.
ENHANCEMENTS
You can extend the trigger board for greater 
functionality by adding a second relay to switch 
the camera on and off. That way the keychain 
camera could turn on once it reaches altitude and 
start capturing aerial home movies in video mode. 
Not even Google Earth can compete with that!
Photography by Sam Murphy (balloons), James Newell (house)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

STROBOSCOPE
By Nicole Catrett and Walter Kitundu
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

91
Make:
Photography by Walter Kitundu
Nicole Catrett is an exhibit developer at the Exploratorium in San Francisco. You can play with her 
stroboscope exhibit there and see more of her work at nicolecatrett.com. Walter Kitundu is an artist 
and bird photographer. You can see more of his work at kitundu.com.
Set up: p.93
Make it: p.94
Use it: p.99
PLAY WITH SPACE AND TIME
Make a mechanical strobe with a toy motor 
and construction paper, pair it with a 
digital SLR camera, and take stunning 
photographs of objects in motion.
 We were inspired to play with stroboscopic photography 
after seeing photographs taken by 19th-century French 
scientist Étienne-Jules Marey. In the 1880s, Marey invented 
a camera with a rotating shutter that could capture multiple 
images on a single photographic plate. He used this camera 
to study locomotion in humans, animals, birds, sea creatures, 
and insects.
 Marey used clockwork mechanisms and photographic 
plates for his contraption, but you can make a much 
simpler version with a slotted paper disk, a toy motor, and 
a digital camera. The camera is set to take long exposures 
while the slotted disk spins in front of its lens. Each time the 
slot spins past the lens, the camera gets a glimpse of your 
subject and adds another layer to the image. The resulting 
photograph is a record of your subject moving through space 
and time, and these images often reveal beautiful patterns 
that would otherwise be invisible to us.
makeprojects.com
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

G
C
H
E
F
B
D
92
Make: Volume 24
makezine.com/24/stroboscope
PROJECTS: STROBOSCOPE
Illustration by Rob Nance
Freeze Frame
A  The subject moves 
through space. Lights 
and a black background 
ensure that each succes-
sive image is sharp and 
distinct. (See page 98 
for setup tips.)
B  A camera is aimed at 
the subject.
C  A black strobe disk 
covers the camera’s lens, 
preventing light from 
entering.
D  A battery-powered 
DC motor spins the 
strobe disk.
E  A cork in the center 
of the disk makes it easy 
to mount and remove 
from the motor.
F  The motor is 
mounted to a base with 
a broom-holder clip.
G  A slit in the spinning 
strobe disk lets a bit of light 
into the lens as it passes 
over. When the camera is 
set to a long exposure time, 
each slit passage allows a 
new image to overlay onto 
the camera’s image sensor.
H  A cardboard camera 
hood reduces ambient light 
that can cloud the captured 
images.
A spinning disk with a single slit lets your camera see serial glimpses of a moving 
subject — and record them all in a single image.
A
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

93
Make:
SET UP.
MATERIALS
[A] Cork from a wine or 
champagne bottle
[B] Battery holder, 1xAA 
and battery RadioShack 
(radioshack.com) part
#270-401, $1 
[C] Motor, small, 1.5V–3V 
DC RadioShack #273-223, 
$3
[D] Alligator test leads (2) 
RadioShack #278-001, 
$7 for a set of 4
[E] Foam sheet (“Foam-
ies”), 2mm×9"×12" Craft 
Supplies For Less #F2BB10 
(craftsuppliesforless.com), 
$4 for a pack of 10
[F] Broom-holder spring 
clip with mounting screw 
McMaster-Carr #1722A43 
(mcmaster.com), $11 for a 
pack of 10. You can also use 
a zip tie.
[G] Zip tie
[H] Digital SLR camera 
with manual focus that can 
take long exposures 
Some good options are 
the Nikon D40, D3000, 
and D5000, and the Canon 
EOS Rebel Ti, XTi, XS, or XT. 
You might be able to use a 
point-and-shoot camera, but 
it needs to have a manual 
focus and exposure mode.
[I] Plywood, ½" thick, 
10"×10"
[J] Lumber, 2×4 , 
10" lengths (2)
[K] Wood screws, 1¼" (4)
[L] Black fabric, enough 
to work as a backdrop A 
queen sheet is a good size, 
and black cotton works well. 
Avoid anything shiny or 
reflective. You could also use 
matte-finish black paint for 
your backdrop.
[M] Clamp lights (2 or 
more) Home Depot #CE-
303PDQ (homedepot.com), 
$13 each
[N] Velcro tape, 3½" strips 
OfficeMax #09015086 
(officemax.com), $4 for 
a pack of 10
[O] Construction paper or 
cardstock, black (1 sheet)
[NOT SHOWN]
Cardboard box approxi-
mately 12" square
TOOLS
[P] Drawing compass 
and pencil
[Q] Ruler or calipers
[R] X-Acto knife
[S] Scissors
[T] Hot glue gun
[U] Sewing needle, large
[V] Phillips screwdriver
[NOT SHOWN]
Drill and drill bits
P
O
C
D
E
F
V
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
A
U
T
B
S
Q
R
 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

94
Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: STROBOSCOPE
makezine.com/24/stroboscope
BUILD YOUR 
STROBOSCOPE
START>>
MAKE IT.
Time: 2–3 Hours  Complexity: Easy
1. MAKE THE STROBE DISK
1a. Use a compass to draw an 8½"-diameter circle on black 
construction paper or cardstock; apply enough pressure with 
the compass point to mark the circle’s center.
1b. Measure the diameter of your cork. Use the compass to draw 
a circle of that diameter at the center of the larger circle. This 
will come in handy later when you mount the strobe disk on the 
motor shaft.
1c. For the strobe disk slot, use a ruler to draw a line from the 
center mark to the outer edge of the big circle. Then draw a 
second line 1" away from and parallel to the first line.
1d. Make a perpendicular mark across the 2 slot lines ½" in from 
the edge of the big circle. The slot will run from this mark to the 
closest edge of the inner circle.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

95
Make:
1e. Cut out the slot with an X-Acto knife, using the ruler as a 
guide to make the cuts clean and straight.
1f. Use scissors to cut out the large circle.
2. ATTACH THE DISK TO THE MOTOR
2a. Use an X-Acto knife to slice a round section from the cork, 
½" thick.
2b. Hot-glue the flat side of the cork section to the center of the 
strobe disk, using the small center circle you drew as a guide.
2c. Use a large sewing needle to pierce the center of the cork 
through the disk. This will make a pathway for the motor shaft.
2d. Push the strobe disk and cork onto the motor shaft, with the 
cork facing out. This should be a snug fit.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

96
Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: STROBOSCOPE
makezine.com/24/stroboscope
2e. To test the motor and strobe disk, use alligator test leads to 
connect the toy motor to your AA battery holder. The strobe disk 
should begin to spin.
You now have the fundamental parts of your stroboscope. Peer 
through the contraption at anything moving, and the scene will 
turn into an old-time movie. Watching your friends dance will be a 
whole new syncopated experience. Also try looking at a vibrating 
guitar string or a stream of water.
3. BUILD THE BASE
3a. Cut a 10" square piece of plywood for the base platform. 
Position a broom-holder clip (screw-hole down) with its long side 
parallel to an edge of the plywood, spaced approximately ¼" in 
from the edge and 2" in from a corner. Screw the clip down tight. 
(If you’re using a zip tie instead of a broom clip, see Step 3c.)
3b. Remove the strobe disk from the motor and set it aside. Wrap 
a thin foam sheet (cut to fit) around the motor and pop it into the 
broom holder, shaft pointing out. The foam keeps the motor from 
vibrating.
3c. (Alternative) If you don’t have a broom holder, you can use a 
zip tie. Drill 2 parallel holes (each large enough to accommodate 
the diameter of your zip tie) ¼" in from the edge of the plywood 
and 2" and 3" from the corner, respectively, and pass the zip tie 
through the holes and around the motor to secure it to the ply-
wood.
3d. For the “legs” of the base, cut two 10" lengths of 2×4 lumber. 
Position the legs parallel to each other (upright on their long 
sides) about 7" apart, and place the plywood square on top so 
it lines up with the outside edges of the legs. Mark and drill pilot 
holes in the corners of the plywood square and legs, about ¾" in 
from each outside edge, and use the 4 wood screws to securely 
attach the base together.
3e. Put the strobe disk back on the motor shaft.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

97
Make:
4. MOUNT THE CAMERA
4a. If your camera has a zoom lens, set it to the widest angle 
possible. Place your camera on the wooden base so that its lens 
points at the strobe disk, completely within the slot’s path. To 
keep extra light from entering the lens, the disk and lens should 
be as close as possible without touching.
4b. Use a pencil to mark the location of the camera’s body on the 
base. Set your camera aside.
4c. Adhere two 3½" strips of velcro tape (hook side) onto the 
wooden base in the camera body location, parallel to each other 
and perpendicular to the image plane. The velcro will hold the 
camera in place and let you make fine adjustments to its position.
4d. Place one strip of velcro (loop side) along the bottom of 
the camera body. Make sure you can still access the battery 
compartment.
4e. Position your camera on the base. If it tips forward, slice a 
round section of cork to place flat under the lens for support; 
dry-test the fit, then remove the camera and hot-glue the cork 
to the base.
4f. Put your camera back in position, and locate a place for your 
battery holder a couple of inches behind your camera and oppo-
site the motor. Remove the battery and use hot glue to attach the 
battery holder to the base.
4g. Replace the battery and reattach all but one of the alligator 
test lead connections.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

98
Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: STROBOSCOPE
makezine.com/24/stroboscope
5. MAKE THE HOOD
5a. Find a cardboard box big enough to turn upside down and fit 
over your whole rig, with room to spare. Use an X-Acto knife to 
cut out the back wall so you can access the camera. Cut a round 
opening in the front of the box, to give your camera and strobe 
disk a clear line of sight.
5b. Place the box over your rig to check the fit. Make sure the 
camera still has a clear view and that the slot in your strobe disk 
isn’t obscured. Voilà — your stroboscope is complete!
FINISH X
NOW GO USE IT »
Backdrop, Subject, and Lighting
Good stroboscope photography requires a black 
backdrop, preferably fabric, which makes your 
subject show up clearly without being lost in a 
bright clutter of background noise. With a black 
background, light and brightly colored objects will 
“pop,” while dark objects will disappear.
 Your subject also needs to be well lit, or else 
it won’t show up. Clamp lights work well and 
are easy to adjust. With the camera pointing 
straight toward the backdrop and your subject in 
between, place 2 clamp lights pointing in from the 
left and right, respectively, lighting up the subject 
rather than the backdrop. 
 You can also set up your stroboscope outside, 
using sunlight instead of clamp lights. As long 
as you have a black background and bright light, 
you’re in business.
GETTING SET UP
Camera Settings
To set up your camera, temporarily remove the 
strobe disk and focus your lens on the place 
where your subject will be moving. Make sure the 
focus remains set to manual. Here are some 
good typical settings you can experiment with 
for starters:
Shutter/exposure: Two seconds. With a too-
short exposure, you won’t see much happening 
in the image, but if it’s too long, the image will be 
washed out.
Aperture: Set this to the lowest number possible 
to gather the maximum amount of light with each 
pass of the strobe disk slot.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

99
Make:
HAPPY 
TRAILS!
USE IT.
THE FUN PART
Now you can start to play with stroboscopic pho-
tography. Have a friend press the shutter while you 
try tossing or bouncing balls, juggling, releasing 
balloons, throwing sticks or paper airplanes, doing 
cartwheels, or dancing. Almost anything that moves 
is fun to photograph with a stroboscope. One of our 
favorite things to play with is string. Try twirling it in 
spirals or jumping rope.
 Don’t be discouraged if your first few images are 
out of focus or washed out. You can solve these 
issues by adjusting your camera settings, making 
sure the cardboard hood is in place, and adjusting 
or adding lights.
 The camera will be focused at a single fixed 
distance, so it helps to mark the floor to remind 
yourself or your subject to stay in the plane of 
focus. This will instantly improve your images.
DISK VARIATIONS
Large, slower-moving subjects (like people) look 
better when the disk only has one slot. However, 
certain fast-moving subjects — such as thrown 
objects or vibrating strings — look better if you 
use a strobe disk with 2 or 3 slots, which doubles 
or triples the number of exposures per second. 
Follow Steps 1a–2c to make additional disks that 
have multiple slots, and make sure that the slots 
are spaced apart evenly, so the disk stays balanced 
while it spins.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

100 Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: ALUMINUM LEVITATOR
makezine.com/24/levitator
ELECTROMAGNETIC 
ALUMINUM 
LEVITATOR
By Thomas R. Fox
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

101
Make:
Photograph by Sam Murphy
Tom Fox (magiclandelectronics.com) is the author of numerous articles about electronics, and of three 
books, most recently Snowball Launchers, Giant-Pumpkin Growers, and Other Cool Contraptions. He is 
also the workshop editor at Boys’ Quest and Fun for Kidz magazines. Tom and his family own and operate 
Magicland Farms (magiclandfarms.com), a farm and roadside market in Michigan.
Set up: p.103 Make it: p.104
Use it: p.107
POWERS OF INDUCTION
This simple AC-powered coil device 
uses magnetism to levitate aluminum 
rings and shoot them into the air — 
and aluminum isn’t even magnetic!
 About 13 years ago I learned of some military research into a 
satellite- and missile-defense device that would propel projec-
tiles using Lenz’s law, which governs the direction of electrical 
current induced by a changing magnetic field. I decided to 
make a little gadget based on the same principle for my kids, 
to get them interested in science and electronics. The gadget 
worked — both at levitating and shooting rings, and at inter-
esting my kids (some of them, anyway).
 This design is actually the third one I tried. I had no real 
information on what the military was up to, so I tested my 
own ideas. One iteration used wire wound around a steel 
pipe with a short piece of aluminum rod inside. (That one 
didn’t work — trust me!)
 Not only is this project physically exciting and intellectually 
stimulating, it’s also quick, easy, and inexpensive to build. 
Except for the 200 feet of #18 magnet wire, you can purchase 
everything you need at a hardware store or scavenge it from 
common junk.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

102 Make: Volume 24
makezine.com/24/levitator
PROJECTS: ALUMINUM LEVITATOR
Illustration by Damien Scogin
AC Not DC
Connecting direct current (DC) to the levitator’s 
coil would turn it into an electromagnet — but that 
wouldn’t affect an aluminum ring, because aluminum 
isn’t magnetic. Alternating current (AC), in contrast, 
creates a constantly changing magnetic ﬁ eld that 
induces current in the conductive aluminum ring — 
the same way that moving coils toward and away from 
stationary magnets induces current inside a generator.
 
Following Lenz’s law, the current in the ring runs 
opposite its direction in the coil, which causes repul-
sion between the two. The force is strongest next to 
the coil, so the ring will fall to an equilibrium point and 
levitate when dropped over a powered coil, but if you 
put the ring on ﬁ rst and then apply power, it shoots up.
 
The levitator will also act on rings of copper and 
other conductive materials, but aluminum works far 
better because of its light weight.
Frequency Response
A changing magnetic 
ﬁ eld induces a force on 
electrons proportional 
to its rate of change, so the higher the frequency of AC 
you apply to the levitator’s coil, the greater the voltage 
(and opposing magnetic force) you’ll induce in the 
ring. But higher frequency also increases a conduc-
tor’s impedance, which dissipates energy and reduces 
current. So there’s some happy-medium AC frequency 
that would provide optimal levitation — it probably isn’t 
standard 60Hz, but it might be close.
 
The coil wire has a DC resistance of only about 1.5Ω. 
So by Ohm’s law (I=V/R), you might think that a scary 
80A will ﬂ ow through it when you connect it to 120V 
AC. But coiling the wire around a metal rod creates an 
inductor with an AC impedance of about 12Ω at 60Hz, 
permitting a much lower (but still dangerous) 10A.
Flying Rings
A  The power strip supplies 
120V AC to the device when 
its switch is turned on. 
B  The coil generates a 
strong, alternating-direction 
magnetic ﬁ eld from the AC 
power. A stand holds the 
coil steady.
C  A time-delay 7A fuse pre-
vents the coil from heating 
to dangerous, insulation-
melting levels if the switch is 
left on. About 10A of current 
runs through the coil, but 
the fuse’s time delay allows 
the current to be switched 
on for safe intervals of 
4 seconds or less.
D  A steel or iron rod 
extends the magnetic ﬁ eld 
created by the coil.
E  The coil’s magnetic 
ﬁ eld induces an electric 
current in the aluminum 
ring that runs opposite 
the direction of current 
in the coil. This creates a 
magnetic ﬁ eld from the 
ring that opposes the ﬁ eld 
from the coil, following 
the right-hand rule.
F  The opposing magnetic 
ﬁ elds between the coil and 
aluminum ring cause the 
ring to levitate or to shoot 
up into the air.
Electric current generates 
a magnetic ﬁ eld, and a 
changing magnetic ﬁ eld 
will induce electric current. 
By Lenz’s law, the direction 
of induced current will 
oppose the direction of 
the changing ﬁ eld. 
 
Using these principles, 
the Electromagnetic Alu-
minum Levitator converts 
ordinary AC power into 2 
opposing magnetic ﬁ elds 
— one from a stationary 
coil, the other from a ring-
shaped projectile.
B
A
C
D
E
F
F
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

103
Make:
SET UP.
MATERIALS
[A] 2×4 lumber 
(1½"×3½"), 3' long 
[B] Magnet wire, #18, 1lb 
spool (199') Mouser 
Electronics #566-8075 
(mouser.com)
[C] Iron or steel rod (not 
stainless), ¾" diameter, 
2'–3' I used a cold-rolled 
steel rod, but purified iron 
would work best.
[D] Aluminum tubing, 
inside diameter q"–1", 
at least 1' long Hardware 
stores sell this, but I cut 
mine from the handle of an 
old snow rake I used before 
global warming set in. Fishing 
and pool nets also frequently 
use aluminum tubing, and 
check out yard and garage 
sales for other sources of 
cheap aluminum tubing. 
[E] Power strip with switch 
and fuse or circuit breaker 
UL listed and rated at 12A 
or more
[F] Fuse holder RadioShack 
#270-739 (radioshack.com)
[G] ¼" plywood, 4"×4" 
squares (2) or similar 
material. I used scrap 
epoxy-glass printed circuit 
boards (PCBs). 
[H] Time-delay fuses, 7A, 
¼"×1¼" (1+) It helps to 
have some spares handy.
[I] Heavy-duty grounded 
extension power cord at 
least 15'–25' long rated at 
13A or more 
[NOT SHOWN]
Wire, #14 or #16, 
insulated, 3'
Hose clamp, small
Electrical tape
Epoxy cement
Wood screws, #8, 2½" 
long (4)
Brightly colored tape 
(optional)
Heat-shrink tubing 
(optional)
TOOLS
Hacksaw
Drill and drill bits: E", 
0", ¾", countersink
Awl or thin pencil
Screwdriver
Soldering tools and solder
Small knife or sandpaper
Multimeter or ohmmeter 
that measures down 
to 1/10Ω
A
I
E
F
G
H
D
B
C
Photograph by Ed  Troxell
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

104 Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: ALUMINUM LEVITATOR
makezine.com/24/levitator
BUILD YOUR 
ELECTROMAGNETIC 
ALUMINUM LEVITATOR
START>>
MAKE IT.
Time: An Afternoon  Complexity: Easy
1. MAKE THE STAND
Cut the 2×4 into three 1' lengths. Drill a ¾" hole centered through 
one of them.
Attach the ¾" drilled wood piece crosswise over the other 
2 pieces to make an “H” shape. First, mark and drill two Y" 
holes staggered at each end of the center piece using a counter-
sink (see figure at right). Next, with an awl or thin pencil, mark 
pilot hole locations on the middles of the other pieces through 
the countersunk holes. Drill E" pilot holes, line them up with the 
holes on the center piece, and screw the stand together with four 
2½" #8 screws.
2. WIND THE COIL
2a. Cut the plywood or PCB material into two 4" squares and drill 
a ¾" hole in the center of each.
2b. Jam the 2'–3' metal rod through the hole in the stand so it 
protrudes 1" from the bottom, and slide one of the 4" squares 
down the rod from the top, resting it on the stand (about 3" from 
the end of the rod). Use epoxy to cement the square in place on 
the rod — then, using your wire spool for spacing and temporary 
support, slide the second 4" square onto the rod and epoxy it in 
place, about 2½" up from the first. Let the epoxy cure.
Drill ¾" hole in 
center of top board
Attach the 2×4 boards 
together with four 2½" 
#8 wood screws
Photography by Ed Troxell
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

105
Make:
2c. Wrap electrical tape around the rod to completely cover the 
area between the 2 squares. This adds extra insulation between 
the coil and rod, for safety.
2d. Leaving 2"–3" of length free at the start and finish of the coil, 
tightly wind the full spool of #18 magnet wire (approximately 
200') around the rod between the 2 squares. These lengths of 
wire will connect the coil to the 120V AC power source later. 
Once the coil is done, use electrical tape to prevent the wire from 
unraveling.
3. CUT THE RINGS
Use a hacksaw or similar tool to cut several rings from the alu-
minum tubing. They should be at least 1" long, but you can cut 
different sizes to experiment. You’ll need a whole bunch; the rings 
can shoot up so high that you might lose some! 
You can try cutting rings from other materials, although steel or 
iron tubing won’t work well because it’s not only heavier and has 
a lower electrical conductivity than aluminum, it’s also inherently 
magnetic and will be attracted to the coil during those 2 instances in every cycle when the voltage isn’t 
changing. Copper tubing conducts electricity even better than aluminum, but it’s also heavier than alumi-
num and doesn’t react physically (due to inertia) as strongly to the changing magnetic field as aluminum. 
Rings cut from any type of tubing should have an inside diameter of q"–1". 
Optional: To make the rings easier to see and photograph, wrap the outsides with brightly colored tape.
4. WIRE IT TOGETHER
This project has only 3 electrical parts: the plug (P1 in the sche-
matic at right), the coil (L1), and the fuse (F1). The time-delay 
7A fuse is required to keep the coil from heating to possibly 
dangerous levels if you leave the power-strip switch on.
4a. Use a knife or sandpaper to scrape 1" of enamel insulation off 
each end of the coil’s magnet wire.
F1
P1
L1
Connect to steel rod
(7A, time-delay)
BLK or 
BRN
WHT
GRN
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

106 Make: Volume 24
PROJECTS: ALUMINUM LEVITATOR
makezine.com/24/levitator
4b. Cut off the socket end of the heavy-duty power cord, and 
strip ½" of insulation from each of its 3 wires. Use a multimeter 
to confirm that the wires are color-coded correctly: with the 
cord’s plug pointing away from you, and with the round prong 
(ground) at the bottom, the white wire should connect to the left, 
usually larger (neutral) flat tab; the black or brown wire to the 
right, usually smaller (hot) flat tab; and the green wire to ground.
4c. Solder the cord’s hot (black/brown) wire to one side of the 
fuse holder, and solder the neutral (white) wire to one end of the 
coil. Use heat-shrink tubing or electrical tape to insulate this and 
all other solder connections.
4d. To ground the metal rod, strip an additional 3" of insulation 
off the green wire, wrap it around the bottom of the rod, and 
secure it with a hose clamp. If the rod is corroded, sand or scrape 
the contact area first to ensure a good connection.
4e. Solder a short length of #14 or #16 insulated wire to connect 
the free end of the coil to the free end of the fuse holder.
5. PRELIMINARY TESTING
5a. Connect the multimeter’s leads to measure resistance between the 2 flat tabs (hot and neutral) on the 
plug end of the power cord. It should measure between 1.1Ω and 2Ω. Leave one test lead connected to its tab 
and apply the other one to the center ground prong; it should register infinite ohms, no connection. Move 
the ground probe from the prong and touch it to the outside of the coil (the wire’s enamel coating) and the 
metal rod. It should measure infinite ohms for both of these. If the multimeter detects any conductivity 
(less than infinite ohms), DO NOT apply power to the device until the problem has been resolved.
5b. To make sure the rod is grounded, use the multimeter to check continuity from the plug’s ground 
prong to the metal rod. If this checks out too, you’re done!
SAFETY WARNING: The rod must be grounded! This ensures that the circuit breaker will trip if there’s a 
short through any insulation, and that touching the rod won’t cause a shock.
!
FINISH X
NOW GO USE IT »
Photograph by Thomas R. Fox (4d)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

107
Make:
LET’S FLING 
SOME RINGS
USE IT.
PLUGGING IN
First, make sure any outlet you plug the power 
strip into is properly grounded. Test the AC voltage 
between the smaller, right (hot) slot and the bottom, 
rounded (ground) slot. It should read 110V–120V AC. 
If it’s outdoors, the outlet must be a UL-listed GFCI 
(ground-fault circuit interrupter) type. These outlets 
have test and reset buttons, and are often used 
where moisture might cause short circuits.
CAUTION: When setting up, place the stand a 
healthy distance away from the switch-operated power 
strip. This is why you used an extension cord at least 15' 
long. Also, place the stand on a high table or other flat, 
raised surface so that no one can look down over the rod 
and accidentally get hit in the eye.
FLOATING AND FLYING
To make the ring levitate, switch the power strip 
on first, then immediately slip the ring over the rod 
using one hand (keep the other behind your back). 
This is easier with 2 people (and safer and more 
fun). Notice that the ring stops and hovers instead of 
falling. The ring is levitating! Then shut off the power 
immediately, or else the fuse will blow within a few 
seconds and need to be replaced.
 For more fun, try shooting the ring upward. For 
safety’s sake in your first attempt, wrap the ring with 
2 layers of electrical tape. This will weigh it down 
so it won’t shoot very high. Put the ring on the rod 
and let it slide down to the coil. Step back about 10', 
then turn on the power strip. The ring should shoot 
up enough to come off the rod. If you want it to go 
higher, remove some or all of the ring’s tape.
FASTER AND HIGHER!
This is a demonstration project. While its opera-
tion is impressive, you can shoot the ring higher 
and faster if you make a few changes. For all these 
enhancements, the most important precaution is 
to locate the coil and rod even farther away from 
the switch, yourself, and any observers. To do this, 
use a 50' extension cord in the build, or add it in 
between the power strip and the levitator plug.  Any 
enhancements are for shooting only — not the levi-
tating trick. No one should get close to the live rod.
 One improvement is to use a rod made from spe-
cial purified iron instead of the cold-rolled steel rod. 
Second, you can try using heavier-walled aluminum 
for the ring, and experiment with different lengths. 
Third, you can make a larger coil with more turns.
 With any such “enhanced levitator,” make sure 
you take the same precautions used by model 
rocket hobbyists. Following are some rules adapted 
from the National Association of Rocketry’s safety 
code (nar.org/NARmrsc.html).
1. Use a countdown before launch, and make sure 
any guests are paying attention and are a safe 
distance away at the time of launch.
2. Place the levitator on a table or platform, and 
aim the rod close to vertical (within 30°). Never 
point the rod at anyone!
3. Test the levitator first outside in an open area 
that exceeds a 50' radius. Locate it at a safe 
distance from overhead power lines.
You may notice that the ring shoots up faster at 
times, with the least impressive performances gen-
erally occurring while you’re showing someone you 
want to impress. The difference in heights depends 
on the instantaneous AC voltage, which in a typical 
house can vary from below 110V up to 120V. 
!
 SAFETY WARNING: Do NOT try to shoot the ring to 
the moon by hooking the coil up to a voltage source higher 
than 120V AC. For example, do not try this project with 
240V AC. Even if the magnet wire’s insulation holds up, you 
can start a fire or cause serious injury. Leave higher-volt-
age experimentation to the military or MythBusters!
!
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

makezine.com/24/primer
108 Make: Volume 24
HARD-SHELL MOLDS
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

109
Make:
The science behind the 
art of prop making.
By Adam Savage
Silicone block molds are fine for making casts of 
small objects. But for larger items, like this 3-foot 
multi-piece prop gun (Figure A, page 111), you’d 
need hundreds of dollars’ worth of silicone to 
make a block mold.
 An excellent and inexpensive solution is to use 
a thin layer (or “blanket”) of silicone that’s keyed 
to a hard-shell or “mother” mold. It’s a multi-step 
process, but it yields great results for the cost-
conscious moldmaker. It also makes much lighter 
molds, which are easier to move around.
 With this type of moldmaking, you’re basically 
sculpting the 2 sides of your mold, taking into 
account the forces involved in the pouring and 
casting of the part. It takes a while, but if you get 
good at hard-shell moldmaking, you can cast just 
about anything, no matter how big.
Photography by Adam Savage
HARD- 
SHELL 
MOLDS
»
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

makezine.com/24/primer
110
Make: Volume 24
HARD-SHELL MOLDS
GETTING STARTED
You’ll need liquid silicone rubber, water-based clay, stone plaster, and a few other materials and tools; a 
complete list is at makezine.com/24/primer. The silicone is poured into 2 halves, and each half registers 
into its respective mother mold. Before doing anything else, take a permanent marker and draw a parting 
line down the exact middle of the original part, marking 2 symmetrical halves. This is the line you’ll sculpt 
everything to — even with simple objects like this, every mold maker I know does it, and you should too.
B.  Subtract ¼" for your clay dam, which gives 
us 1¾".
C.  Subtract the thickness of the foamcore (6"), 
which takes us to 19".
D.  Cut a few dozen little strips of foamcore 3"–4" 
long to this exact height, in our case 19".
E.  Place the model on the table, and spread the 
upright strips around it evenly, covering an area 
the size of the cut-out foamcore piece.
F.  Use hot glue to adhere the upright chunks to 
the table and to the large foamcore piece, which 
should be placed on top of them to create a nice 
solid foamcore surface.
3. MAKE A FUNNEL FOR 
POURING THE CASTING RESIN.
Now you need to decide where the top of your mold 
will be, into which you’ll pour the casting resin. It 
should be located at the perimeter of the model 
where it comes to a steep point, so bubbles will 
surface and pop in a small area. Because you’ll be 
pouring into this part, it’s a good idea to add a piece 
to your foamcore table that gives you a nice clean 
surface for pouring the resin into the mold. 
 And you’ll need a vent nearby to give the air 
you’re displacing with the casting resin somewhere 
to go (other than back through the hole you’re pour-
ing from). This helps eliminate bubbles, and makes 
pouring the mold a cleaner, less splash-prone 
process. In Figure C, you can see the funnel-shaped 
pouring gate and next to it a smaller vent.
4. MAKE THE CLAY DAM.
Since you want the clay to be a uniform thickness,
a rolling pin is ideal for the job. I use water-based 
clay, the kind used for pottery, because oil-based 
clay and silicone don’t always get along. Flatten 
the clay with your hands, and when it’s a little more 
than ¼" thick, place the clay pieces between 2 rails 
1. PRE-FILL ANY VOIDS.
Before we make the mold itself, we need to make 
your original model mold-worthy. To prep it, you’ll 
need to pre-fill up any small or difficult-to-access 
voids in the model, such as the hole in the bottom 
of our prop gun body, which you can see in Figure 
B (circled). This is a void on the model that has 
threads to join to another part of the model. 
 I knew that if I poured that void in 2 parts and from 
the side, I’d end up with air bubbles galore. So I pre-
filled it with a plug made of blue silicone. The plug 
should stick to the blanket of silicone that I pour later, 
and become a nice part of the mold. Prior to pouring 
the silicone, you’ll need to clean the plugs thoroughly 
with mineral spirits to make sure that they’ll stick.
2. MAKE A FOAMCORE “TABLE.”
Next, we’ll make a table out of foamcore on which 
to sculpt the first half of the mold. Use a piece of 
foamcore that’s large enough to extend at least 
8"–10" beyond the borders of the part. (A common 
mistake people make with these molds is not giving 
themselves enough surface area to work on.)
 Place the model on its side with the parting line 
parallel with the foamcore and trace around it with 
a pencil, as close to the model as possible. Cut the 
model shape out of the foamcore and discard.
 Secure the model on a sturdy work table (oil-
based clay is great for this step), making sure the 
parting line is as level as possible.
 Now, we need to position the foamcore so that 
it sits about ¼" below the centerline of the model 
(Figure B). We’ll be creating a clay dam to use as a 
reservoir for the silicone, and that ¼" allows for the 
thickness of the clay to come right to the middle 
parting line. Here’s how to do it:
A.  Measure from the parting line to the table. Let’s 
say it’s 2".
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

111
Make:
(wood will do) that are exactly ¼" high, positioned 
perpendicular to the rolling pin and close enough 
together that they’re underneath its rolling surface. 
Roll the clay to a ¼" thickness — use a squirt bottle 
of water to keep it from getting sticky. 
 Figure D shows the clay dam, mostly laid out onto 
the foam board. It goes on in pieces, which you can 
join together with your fingers. Use a clay tool to bring 
the clay dam right up to the model. The line where 
the clay meets the model should be very smooth, 
perpendicular, and have no gaps. The cleaner this 
area is, the easier it will be to get good castings.
 After finessing the clay dam, clean all clay residue 
off the model with a damp brush (otherwise it will 
be cast in when you pour your silicone!).
C
A
D
B
5. MAKE THE BARRIER KEY
AND BORDER.
Use a wire-loop clay tool to make the first of the 
“barrier keys” (or more accurately, registration 
topography) that will hold the 2 halves of this mold 
perfectly aligned (Figure D, inset). Keys for molds 
come in many shapes and sizes, but for large molds, 
a key that runs all the way around the part helps 
prevent the resin from leaking out. I usually go a 
bit deeper than a half-circle’s depth, then clean the 
edges with a wet soft paintbrush.
 Figure E shows the completed barrier key around 
the part, and a raised clay border (made using the 
rolling pin method described in Step 4) built up all 
the way around the part, with spacing of about 3". 
E
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

makezine.com/24/primer
112
Make: Volume 24
HARD-SHELL MOLDS
This provides enough space between the border 
and the model to add some plastic hemispherical 
keys to help the mold halves align (“register”) prop-
erly; we’ll discuss this in Step 9.
 The clay bump you see in the middle is built 
around the pre-filled silicone plug I pointed out be-
fore. This clay plug will leave a void when I pour the 
first silicone blanket. That way, when I remove the 
clay plug and pour the second silicone blanket, the 
void will lead my silicone right to that pre-filled plug.
 Also note the clay plug in the gun barrel. Unlike 
the other plug, I didn’t pre-fill this shallow barrel 
with silicone. I didn’t need to because it’s large, easy 
to get bubbles out of, and has no threading. But the 
completed first blanket will have a trough that leads 
the silicone right into the barrel.
6. POUR THE FIRST BLANKET.
The first layer of silicone is the most important 
one, because it’s what grabs all the detail from your 
model. To avoid bubbles, pour slowly from one loca-
tion and from high up, letting the silicone drift slowly 
into the detail on the model (Figure F). You can use 
accelerator in the silicone (or use more kicker) to 
make it kick faster, but that will make for a weaker 
mold. If you need only 1 or 2 castings, it’s OK to use 
an accelerator (they can speed up the setting time 
from 10 hours to 3), but if you want to make dozens 
of castings, be patient. 
 With the first thin layer covering the model, blow 
compressed air over the part (don’t get too close) to 
eliminate any bubbles (Figure G). 
 When the first layer is just past the tacky stage, 
brush on another layer of silicone, making sure it’s of 
uniform thickness all over the model (Figure H). For 
this application, you can add thixotropic agents to 
increase the silicone’s viscosity (but not on the first 
layer, as these agents make it difficult to get the sili-
cone into all the nooks and crannies for high detail).
7. APPLY SILICONE KEYS.
Once the second layer is applied for the first blanket 
of silicone, and while that layer is still wet and tacky, 
start applying the silicone keys. These will help 
the silicone stay adhered to the inside of the hard 
plaster mold. While the advantage of this method 
is that it uses less silicone, the disadvantage is that 
the thin silicone layer lacks structure and must be 
married to the plaster mold so it doesn’t collapse.
 I made these keys from an old silicone mold by 
cutting small wedges about 1½" long by about a 
pinky width (make sure that the silicone for the keys 
and the mold are the same brand — it helps them 
stick better). For this mold, I set keys in the wet 
silicone about every 3". As every mold is different, 
you have to imagine your mold upright and think 
through the weak spots, where it will buckle, and 
place the keys accordingly.
 Figure I shows the mold with the keys in place — 
all the silicone is poured (for the first half), and it’s 
G
F
H
I
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

113
Make:
setting up nicely. The silicone doesn’t go all the way 
to the border on the left, but that’s OK — next we’ll 
be cutting dovetail keys around the perimeter.
8. CUT THE DOVETAIL KEYS.
After the silicone has cured, trim the edge of 
the blanket to get a smooth line, and discard the 
trimmed pieces. Use a sharp X-Acto knife to cut 
dovetail-shaped keys around the perimeter, gingerly 
lifting up the edge of the blanket and slicing upward 
so you don’t cut into the clay below (Figure J). This 
serrated edge will help the silicone blanket register 
to the mother mold. My blanket here is a wee bit thin 
at the outer edge. I could probably have trimmed it 
closer, like about an inch away from the model.
 Figure K shows the finished blanket. I’ve probably 
used the minimum number of dovetail keys neces-
sary to keep the blanket stable in the mother mold, 
but you should err on the side of caution and add 
more than you think the mold might need. Too many 
keys just makes the mold more stable, but too few 
and you’ve wasted a lot of work.
9. ADD HEMISPHERICAL KEYS.
I’ve left space around the edges of the silicone so I 
can place hemispherical keys (Figure L). These will 
register the 2 halves of the mother mold together. 
I’m using injection-molded ¾" plastic hemispheres, 
available at any plastics supply store, placed lightly 
on the clay every 5" or so, just inside the border. 
Brush a small amount of vaseline or other mold 
release onto them to help remove them from the 
first half of the plaster mother mold.
10. PLASTER OVER THE SILICONE.
After the first blanket of silicone comes the stone-
plaster mother mold. The plaster will go on in a 
couple of layers. The first layer is a thin coat for
detail — apply it slowly to avoid creating bubbles. 
The second is supported by a hemp strengthener. 
 Figure M shows the first layer of plaster applied 
over the blanket, the clay, and the keys. It’s fairly 
thick and will take somewhere around an hour to set.
 Stone plaster is much stronger than regular plas-
ter. You can get away with using less, which keeps 
your mold lightweight, but it’s still brittle like regular 
plaster. So the next step is to reinforce it with some 
spun hemp, available from moldmaking supply 
stores. The hemp works much like fiberglass, sup-
plying a matrix that increases the plaster’s flexibility 
and makes it shatter-resistant. 
 Add a layer of hemp, then apply the second and 
final layer of plaster. Don’t wait more than a day 
between plaster coats, or else the second layer 
might not stick well to the first. Also note that the 
first layer of set-up plaster will suck water from the 
new layer, making it set faster than the first.
 Once the second layer’s set, turn the whole thing 
over and gently pull off the clay dam, keeping the 
model inside the mold (Figure N). Take a moment to 
J
K
M
N
L
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

makezine.com/24/primer
114
Make: Volume 24
HARD-SHELL MOLDS
study what you’ve done. Isn’t it pretty? The various 
mold keys are all visible now: the hemispherical 
keys in the outer ring of plaster, the dovetail keys 
where the silicone meets the plaster, and the barrier 
key around the model itself.
11. MAKE THE SECOND 
SILICONE BLANKET.
Before applying a layer of silicone to the other side 
of the model, you’ll have to clean it and prepare it 
well — but be careful not to mess with it too much, 
as you want as tight a registration as possible.
 Use a brush and soft damp cloth to remove any 
clay residue. Apply mold release (or a thin layer of 
vaseline) to the silicone so that the next layer won’t 
stick to it. Make sure you cover it all, or else you’ll 
ruin your mold. Silicone loves to stick to itself.
 Apply 2 layers of silicone exactly as you did in 
Step 6. As before, use very little accelerator in the 
first layer, but you can use more, or a higher mix of 
the kicker, in the second. Remember: the goal is to 
get a ¼" blanket all around the part.
 As with the first blanket, place the silicone key 
wedges along the center of the model before the 
second layer of silicone hardens. Cut the dovetail 
keys from the second layer, gingerly lifting up the 
edge to avoid cutting into the layer below (Figure O).
 Figure P shows the mold with the second silicone 
blanket done and cut. Now it’s time to lay on the 
plaster for the other half of the mother mold. You’re 
almost there!
12. MAKE THE SECOND HALF
OF THE HARD-SHELL MOLD.
To prep for the second plaster, apply mold release to 
the first plaster half. Again, a thin layer of petroleum 
jelly works great (Figure Q). Cover the inside of all 
the hemispherical key indentations because, again, 
if they don’t release, all your work is down the toilet.
 Using aluminized tape, available in the plumb-
ing or heating section of any hardware store, build 
a simple mold dam to contain the wet plaster and 
give it a nice crisp edge that matches the clay dam 
from the first blanket (Figure R). 
 Slowly drip the plaster onto the second blanket 
of silicone. Again, this first layer is for detail, and the 
fewer bubbles it has, the better it will hold. 
 Use your hand to spread the plaster over the 
O
Q
P
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

115
Make:
blanket, making sure it covers everything, especially 
the silicone wedge keys along the center. But be 
careful around the edge of the blanket, where the 
dovetail keys are! This edge may want to lift up, and 
you don’t want to get any plaster under it between 
the 2 layers of silicone. Better to drip the plaster 
gingerly around the edge. This is an important point 
to remember, and the more familiar you are with 
this whole process, the less likely you are to forget a 
key step and end up wasting your hard-earned time. 
 Figure S shows the first layer of plaster. Note how 
well the aluminized tape dam holds it in. Also note 
how clean the workspace around the mold is. This 
type of moldmaking is very detail intensive, and 
attention to cleanliness during the molding process 
will quite simply yield a better product. 
 Allow the second layer of stone plaster (with 
hemp below it) to dry in all its glory. Once it’s dry, all 
you have to do is pull off the tape and gently pry the 
halves apart. Since plaster is brittle, care must be 
taken not to over-torque the mold, lest it crack. 
 Use 2 screwdrivers or sturdy putty knives, one 
leapfrogged in front of the other, to proceed down 
the seam. As you go, listen for the telltale sound of 
the halves letting go of each other.
 Go slowly! You don’t want a cracked mother mold 
before you’ve even started casting. Making your 
way down a full side of the mold halves should be 
sufficient for a proper separation. After a time, you’ll 
hear a sucking sound and see that the 2 halves have 
popped apart. 
 The 2 silicone blankets should be somewhat 
stuck together now, but simply grabbing one of 
them and pulling it off the other should do the trick 
(if you’ve properly applied the mold release). Then 
pull out the model to reveal your finished mold. 
 Figure T shows our completed mold. Everything 
worked perfectly. Note the lack of air bubbles in 
the positive hemispherical keys on the bottom half. 
These should register the 2 halves of the mother 
mold beautifully. And they did. Figure U shows a 
completed assembly of a resin casting from this 
mold. To reduce air bubbles on a large part like this, 
you can first pour some resin in each half and let it 
cure, then assemble the 2 halves and pour a final 
resin middle to get the completed casting.
 With proper cycling (letting the silicone cool down 
between castings — heat kills molds), this mold 
should easily yield 20 or more castings before dete-
riorating. Because the blanket is thin and the plaster 
sucks heat out during the resin’s curing process, it 
could even yield 50 castings.
S
R
U
T
Adam Savage is a lifelong maker, having worked in the theater, fine art sculpture, machine art, robotics, animation, commer-
cials, and films like A.I., Space Cowboys, the Star Wars prequels, and the Matrix sequels. He’s taught advanced modelmaking, 
and has a modelmaking textbook kicking around in his head. For the last eight years he’s hosted MythBusters. He’s the father 
of 11-year-old twins, and collects and makes movie props and other impossible objects in his spare time.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

116
Make: Volume 24
YOU WILL NEED
Metal saucepan
Spoon for stirring
Measuring spoons
Strainer
Wax paper
Paper towels
4tsp white vinegar
1c milk
Optional:
Acrylic paint
Cornstarch
Small neodymium magnet
Sneaky Milk Plastic
By Cy Tymony
1+2+3
Cy Tymony is the author of the Sneaky Uses for Everyday 
Things book series.
Don’t have a 3D printer to make plastic parts? 
Use moo juice instead. Ordinary cow’s milk contains 
a protein called casein. When separated from milk 
by using an acid such as vinegar, casein becomes 
a moldable plastic material that can be used to 
create everything from glue to fabric to billiard balls. 
Make your own custom parts for projects!
1. Cook the milk with vinegar.
Pour 1 cup of milk into the saucepan and warm it to a 
simmer, not a boil, on the stove.
 Next, add 4 teaspoons of vinegar to the milk and 
stir. After a few minutes you should see white clumps 
form. When you do, keep stirring a few minutes 
longer, then turn off the heat to allow the pan to cool.
2. Strain the casein from the milk.
Pour the milk through a strainer into a bowl to sepa-
rate all the white clumps (this is the casein plastic 
material), and place them on a sheet of wax paper. 
3. Dry and mold the casein plastic.
Dry the casein plastic material by blotting it gently 
with paper towels until it’s dry. 
 Mold the plastic material into the shape(s) you 
prefer, and let it dry for at least 2 days. Once it hard-
ens, you can color it with acrylic paint if desired.
TIP: If the casein is too runny to shape in your 
hands, next time add a pinch of cornstarch to 
the milk and vinegar mixture. This will make it 
hold together better.
Going Further
Shape your sneaky milk plastic into a sneaky finger 
ring that will attract paper U.S. currency! Just hide 
a small, super-strong (neodymium) magnet inside 
your ring before it dries and hardens. When the ring 
is placed close to a legitimate folded bill, the bill will 
move toward the ring because of the iron particles in 
the currency’s ink.
Excerpted with permission from Sneaky Uses for 
Everyday Things by Cy Tymony (Andrews McMeel 
Publishing, 2003).
(
*
)
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photograph by Jared Bouck
A SIMPLE LIGHT SCULPTURE
Swirling colors for long-exposure photos.
By Jared Bouck
I’ve always enjoyed long-exposure photography, but 
sometimes the images can seem predictable. So I 
decided to build some dynamic light sculptures that 
would add effects, colors, and patterns to my pho-
tos. I put together this simple rig in an afternoon, and 
a little trial and error taught me how to use it to create 
a good variety of photographic results.
 I used PVC pipe and hobby gearmotors to make 
this gadget, but the recycling-minded person can 
build something similar for free using a few decon-
structed donor devices and a dose of imagination.
1. Build the frame.
The frame is just a handful of PVC pipe lengths
connected with some tee ﬁ ttings (Figure B, follow-
ing page). Cut four 24" lengths to make legs, two
4" lengths to connect the tee ﬁ ttings together, and 
one 5' length to serve as the upright. Gluing the 
frame is optional, as the ﬁ ttings will hold tight if
the pipe is lightly tapped into place. 
 Once you have the frame, you need to shape
a motor mount at the top of the upright. Drill a
hole through the pipe 2" below the top using a ¼" 
drill bit. Then use wire cutters to make 2 shallow,
U-shaped snips in the end of the pipe, at the front 
and back, creating a cradle for the motor (Figure C). 
2. Mount the main arm and motor.
Place the medium gearmotor in the cradle, and
use zip ties to tightly secure it on top of the upright 
(Figure D). This is the main drive motor that turns the 
main arm, which is a balanced length of U channel.
 Center the motor sprocket on the outside bottom 
of the U channel and mark the channel between 
sprocket teeth on opposite sides. Using a drill bit 
that matches your screw size, drill 2 holes in the
IMAGING
DIY
117
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography by Ed Troxell
U channel and attach the sprocket securely on both 
sides with machine screws and nuts (Figure E).
 Attach the completed arm to the main motor 
shaft, using an Allen wrench to tighten the sprocket’s
setscrew. Zip-tie the motor’s battery pack to the 
stand (Figure F), and then switch on the motor to 
ensure that the arm is balanced and doesn’t make 
the stand wobble. Use pennies and electrical tape
to balance the arm if needed.
3. Mount the secondary arm
and motor.
Measure and mark the center of the wood dowel. 
Using a drill bit slightly smaller than the drive 
shaft of the small gearmotor, drill a hole crosswise 
through the dowel. Fit the motor shaft into the hole, 
and zip-tie the motor to the main arm just loosely 
enough to let you slide the motor up and down the 
arm to produce different effects (Figure G).
 The primary arm will now likely be totally out of 
balance. Attach a counterweight of pennies to the 
primary arm, opposite the secondary motor, to bal-
ance it out again (about 75¢ worked for me).
 Zip-tie the small motor’s battery pack in the cen-
ter of the primary arm (Figure H), leaving enough 
clearance so that the secondary arm won’t hit it. 
Fig. A: Materials for the light sculpture (but you can
easily substitute). Fig. B: The PVC pipe frame holds a
5' PVC pipe upright. Fig. C: Notches in the top of
the upright hold the main drive motor.
Fig. D. Zip ties hold the motor in place. Fig. E: Machine 
screws attach the main motor sprocket to the bottom
of the U channel. Fig. F: Zip-tie the main motor battery 
pack to the upright.
A
B
F
E
C
D
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
PVC pipe, ¾" diameter, 14' length
PVC tee fittings, ¾" (3)
Medium gearmotor I used the Copal 60:1,
part #0-COPAL60 from Robot Marketplace 
(robotmarketplace.com).
Small gearmotor part #GM2 from Solarbotics
(solarbotics.com)
¾" aluminum U channel, 55" length from your local 
home improvement store
½" wood dowel, 36" length
Chain sprocket, #25, 9-tooth, ¼" bore Robot 
Marketplace #SP-25FB9x.25
Battery packs with switch, 2×AA (1) and 4×AA (1)
LEDs in your choice of colors. For consistency in 
your photos, I recommend using LEDs that are 
matched in their brightness. My favorite LED, the 
RGB color fader, produces really nice effects.
3V lithium watch batteries CR2032 or equivalent, 
one for each LED
Machine screws and nuts
Mass for counterweights Rolls of pennies work well.
Wire and wire cutters
Drill and drill bits: ¼" and smaller
Hacksaw or PVC pipe cutter
Soldering iron and solder
Electrical tape and zip ties
Camera with long exposure capability
Allen wrench
Optional: PVC glue, ping-pong ball
118 Make: Volume 24
IMAGING
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Fig. G: Zip-tie the secondary motor to the main arm with 
just enough play to let it slide to different positions. 
Fig. H: Zip-tie the secondary motor battery pack to the 
middle of the primary arm.
Fig. I: Run the secondary motor wires through the
U channel. Figs. J and K: Tape a glowing LED to the end 
of the secondary arm, then start experimenting with 
long-exposure photos.
G
J
K
I
I
Photograph by Garry McLeod (K)
H
Jared Bouck is the CEO of Invent Geek Media and
specializes in web marketing and product development.
Run the wires between the secondary motor and
battery through the inside of the U channel (Figure I). 
 Finally, switch on the motor to the secondary arm 
to make sure it has enough clearance. If you feel 
satisﬁ ed, turn on the motor to the primary arm as 
well. If need be, make any ﬁ nal balance adjustments 
to reduce the amount of wobble in the sculpture — 
though a little wobble won’t hurt the overall effect.
4. Light it with LEDs.
Place a 3V coin cell battery between the leads of 
your LED, accounting for polarity (the positive (+) 
lead is the longer one). If it lights up, secure it with 
electrical tape. Then tape the glowing LED and 
battery to the secondary arm with the LED facing 
forward (Figure J). You’re done! 
 You can experiment with different colors and 
placements of LEDs on the secondary arm to 
produce many different effects. Try putting LEDs on 
both ends of the arm, or use several LEDs at once. 
TIP: LEDs are directional, which can negatively 
impact the viewing angles for your sculpture. To 
compensate for this, poke a hole in a ping-pong 
ball and insert your LED to diffuse the light. 
Now you can see it from almost any angle.
5. Shoot it!
For clear, sharp shots, always shoot from a tripod. 
That’s the ﬁ rst and foremost rule. To produce a 
full pattern, take long exposures of approximately 
20–30 seconds, depending on the speed of your 
sculpture (though you can partly compensate
for incomplete patterns by placing LEDs on both 
ends of the secondary arm). To ensure intense, well-
balanced colors, use your camera’s white balance.
 Ultimately the best tip is to take the time to 
experiment and try several conﬁ gurations, settings, 
and exposure lengths to achieve the desired effect. 
With a little effort, the results can be spectacular.
Additional Experimentation
You can easily reconﬁ gure this project to produce 
a large variety of patterns and designs by simply 
changing the orientation of the motors and the 
placement of LEDs on the arms. 
» Find more detailed instructions, alternate
conﬁ gurations, and more projects like this at
inventgeek.com/makerart.
119
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography by David Cline
PHOTO BOOTH
Make an arcade-style snapshot station 
for special occasions. By David Cline
If you’ve ever helped to plan a wedding, you’ve 
probably run across ads for traditional photo booth 
rentals. These booths are overpriced and have
limited options for customization, and you only get 
to play with them for one day! Here’s how I took a 
DIY approach for my sister’s wedding.
 My photo booth needed to be completely auto-
mated, and easy enough for anyone to use — think of 
all the grandparents! I also wanted a keyboard-only 
interface, to prevent errors from people clicking on 
the wrong things.
 To meet these needs, I based my booth around a 
MacBook running Automator, a built-in Mac OS X
programming tool that lets you create and run work-
ﬂ ows (Figure B), like a drag-and-drop AppleScript 
Lite. And to make the booth even easier to use, I 
recorded voice prompts that greet guests and guide 
them through the workﬂ ow. A talking photo booth!
1. Program the Mac.
For the software side of the project, here are the 
basic steps I programmed into Automator:
a. Greet the user and prompt them to enter their 
name on the keyboard. Wait for input.
b. Warn the user that 3 photos are about to be taken.
c. Take 3 pictures using the Mac’s iSight camera.
d. Assemble an image of all 3 photos lined up in
a strip.
e. Print the strip (Figure A).
f. Save the separate images and the photo strip
image onto the computer.
g. Loop back to the beginning.
 Automator does have its limitations, and there 
are many details within these steps, so I also wrote 
some AppleScript routines to make the program 
fully functional. You can download all the software 
for a small donation at davidcline.wordpress.com.
IMAGING
DIY
120 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Fig. A: Photos print out in traditional photo booth-
style vertical strips. Fig. B: Mac OS X Automator 
controls the photo booth workflow.
MATERIALS
Macintosh computer running OS X 10.5 or 10.6,
with a built-in iSight camera or a Mac-compatible 
webcam (UVC device)
Software: Automator and some AppleScript routines  
that I wrote You can download all the software for 
a small donation at davidcline.wordpress.com.
USB keyboard optional, but recommended
Computer speaker
4"×6" photo printer I used an Epson Dash.
4"×6" photo printing paper
Garment rack, about 36"×60"×20" with a frame on 
top that will carry a dust cover (dust cover not 
needed)
Shower curtains in bright, solid colors for backdrops
Shower curtain hooks
Stools, about 2' tall (2) not barstool height
Work lights, clip-on (2)
Compact fluorescent (CFL) bulbs (2)
Aluminum foil
Wire, stiff and thin
Computer desk, small
Document bins or cardboard boxes or other ways of 
arranging the speaker, computer, printer, signage, 
and printed photos on the desk
Foamcore board or cardboard
Paper cutter
Scissors
Sharp knife
2. Assemble the booth.
To create the booth, I envisioned a simple frame 
that I could hang backdrops on. I dug through my 
parents’ basement and found an old wardrobe stor-
age rack. It was tall enough to support a backdrop, 
and the perfect width for 2 people to sit underneath. 
It also had a metal frame on top for holding a dust 
cover, from which I could easily hang the backdrop.
 For backdrops, I liked the look of Ikea’s solid-color 
shower curtains. They’re slightly translucent, so 
backlighting the material creates a nice glow in the 
photos.
 I hung the curtains on rings from the dust cover 
support rod along one side. Then I trimmed the 
bottoms so they didn’t touch the ground, and cut 
them down to half width so there wasn’t too much 
rippling. Because the curtains hooked onto the 
wardrobe frame so easily, I could offer guests their 
choice of backdrop colors: red, blue, green, and 
white.
 To enclose the sides of the booth, I cut 1'-wide 
strips from the extra white shower curtain and hung 
them on the side of the wardrobe (Figure C, follow-
ing page).
3. Hook up the printer.
I used an Epson PictureMate Dash, a portable 
printer that handles 4"×6" paper. Its tiny footprint is 
great for this setup, and Epson’s inks dry instantly 
and can be handled right away, which is important 
for a photo booth.
A
B
121
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Fig. C: The booth backdrop consists of a tall wardrobe 
rack and shower curtains. Fig. D: Remove the trays from 
the photo printer and set the paper guides to 2" wide 
strips. Fig. E: Cover the CFL bulbs with aluminum foil 
discs to reduce glare. Fig. F: Raise the laptop so its
webcam is at the subject’s eye level. Fig. G: The full 
photo booth setup. Fig. H: Photo strips from happy 
party guests.
D
C
H
E
G
F
David Cline (davidfcline.com) is a problem-solving, idea-
generating, digital-photographing, and video-editing sushi 
connoisseur who is against functional fixedness. He is
currently an information systems major at Drexel University.
 I didn’t like the way the printer’s paper tray and 
output tray took up so much room sticking out, so I 
carefully snapped them off.
 I used a paper cutter to cut 4"×6" sheets of 
photo paper right down the middle, making two 
2"×6" strips. The printer’s adjustable paper guides 
accepted a stack of the strips without a problem 
(Figure D).
4. Rig the lights.
To light the booth, I used 2 clip-on worklights with 
compact ﬂ uorescent bulbs, so they wouldn’t get 
hot. To avoid blinding the guests, I blocked the bulbs 
with rounds of aluminum foil suspended in front by 
wires bent around the edges of the lamps’ reﬂ ectors 
(Figure E). 
 You can achieve the same effect with waxed paper 
or another diffusive material, as long as you’ve got 
cool CFL bulbs (not hot incandescents or halogens).
5. Set it all up.
I plugged the printer and speaker into my MacBook
and arranged them all using acrylic bins on a com-
puter desk. I clipped one worklight to a bin on each 
side. Unless the desk is high, you’ll need to prop 
the laptop up, so that it photographs guests head-
on rather than from below, which skews the view 
(Figure F).
 To keep guests’ hands off of the laptop, I covered 
its keyboard and trackpad with a piece of foamcore. 
I plugged in a USB keyboard at the desk for them to 
type their names into (Figure G).
 That’s it! Everything worked as planned for my 
sister’s wedding, and the photo booth was a big 
hit. In a world of ubiquitous digital photography, 
there’s still something special about posing in front 
of a curtain and watching your little strip of front-lit 
photos come out (Figure H). 
 Set this up at your next party, and you’ll be
delighted at how much fun your guests will have!
122 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography and illustration by Peter Edwards
ADD VOLUME, JACK 
Plug in and turn up any sound-making 
battery toy. By Peter Edwards
Many cheap, fun sonic and musical toys have built-in 
speakers and no output jack. This limits their volume, 
unless you constantly hold them up to a microphone. 
Here’s how to mod these devices so you can plug 
them in, adjust their volume, and rock out.
 The simplest way to install an output jack is to 
remove the speaker and solder the jack in its place. 
But every time I do this I regret it, because then the 
toy no longer works by itself. Inevitably, there will be 
a time you want to play and there’s no amp around.
 You can also leave the speaker connected in par-
allel with a regular audio jack, but then the speaker 
might act like a microphone and trigger feedback 
and unwanted noise when you’re plugged in.
 My favorite solution is to use a switching jack, 
which automatically disconnects the speaker when 
you plug in a cord. You can also use a non-switching 
jack and an on/off toggle that switches the speaker 
MUSIC
DIY
between standalone and plugged-in modes. But 
switching jacks are only slightly more expensive than 
non-switching jacks. Why use two pieces of hardware 
when one achieves the same effect?
1. Identify your jack’s contacts.
First you need to identify three lugs of the jack: tip, 
sleeve, and switch. There are many different styles 
of jack available (Figure A, following page), so it’s 
hard to offer general rules for identifying these. 
Figure B shows our circuit with one common lug 
conﬁ guration. If your jack varies from this one, look 
for a spec sheet online.
2. Expose the circuit.
Open the device and ﬁ nd its speaker (Figure C). 
To keep screws in a safe place, you can usually 
stick them to the speaker magnet.
123
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

MUSIC
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
Audio toy, mono (single speaker) battery-powered
or very low amperage
Potentiometer and matching knob A 1kΩ or 10kΩ  
pot usually works, like item #271-215 from 
RadioShack ($3, radioshack.com). Some people 
prefer audio taper (logarithmic) pots, but regular 
linear pots work fine, too.
Switching audio jack, normally closed (NC) Choose a 
¼" jack for guitar cable or 1" (3.5mm) for mini/
headphone plugs. 
Wire, stranded, 22 gauge 3' total is plenty. Scrounge 
from anywhere, or RadioShack #278-1224 ($7).
10Ω resistor (optional) Attaches across the outer 
legs of your potentiometer if your output is 
distorted. RadioShack #271-013 ($1 for 5).
Soldering iron and solder
Drill or Dremel rotary tool
Continuity tester, ohmmeter, or multimeter
Screwdriver, pliers, masking tape, and pencil
Fig. A: There are many different styles of ¼" and 1" 
switching audio jacks available. Fig. B: One common 
connection configuration for a switching audio jack. 
If your jack varies significantly from this layout, look 
for a spec sheet online. Fig. C: Open the device and find 
the speaker. (For safekeeping you can stick the screws 
to the speaker magnet.)
A
B
C
MUSIC
Speaker ground
Hot output (+)
Switch
Sleeve
Tip
10Ω
Volume 1kΩ
¼" mono jack
3. Identify the speaker ground
and hot signal lines.
Two wires connect the speaker to the circuit board: 
the hot signal that creates the ﬂ uctuating sound 
wave and the stable speaker ground that estab-
lishes the signal amplitude. The ground attaches 
to the power supply (the negative contact in most 
pro audio gear, but toys can run either way). Once 
you’ve identiﬁ ed one wire, you know what the other 
one is, and you can use some tape to mark them 
both on your board. Here are clues to check for:
Follow the leads to the power supply.
 
»
Follow both speaker leads out to see where they 
connect, continuing along traces on the board if 
needed. Whichever wire runs to the power supply 
is your speaker ground (green wire in Figure D).
Use a continuity tester. 
 
»
Most multimeters have 
a continuity setting marked with an image of a 
speaker or sound waves. Disconnect the speaker, 
touch one meter probe to the positive or negative 
power supply, and then touch the other probe 
consecutively to the speaker’s contact points on 
the board. The speaker contact with zero resis-
tance to either power contact is ground.
!
WARNING: Unless you’re experienced with 
electronics, you should only work on circuits 
that are battery-powered or use a very low-
amperage power supply (50mA or so). Poking 
around inside high-voltage and/or high-current 
circuits can be fatal.
Sleeve
124 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Look for a transistor or audio ampliﬁ er IC. 
 
»
On 
the board, one of the speaker wires probably con-
nects directly to the output of a transistor or an 
amp IC such as the LM386. This is your hot signal.
4. Wire up the pot and jack.
On your potentiometer, decide which leg will be 
the ground and which will be hot (the middle leg 
is always the sweep). Solder wire connections as 
follows: jack tip to pot sweep; jack switch to one side 
of the speaker; jack sleeve to the other side of the 
speaker and to pot ground; pot ground to speaker 
ground on the board; pot hot to hot output on the 
board (Figures B and E). Make the wires long enough 
to give wiggle room for mounting the controls.
5. Test it!
Plug the device into an ampliﬁ er and play it. If it 
sounds distorted, solder a 10Ω resistor between the 
hot and ground legs of the potentiometer (Figure F). 
If the signal is too loud for your liking, you can also 
add a 1Ω–10Ω resistor between the potentiometer 
and the output jack.
6. Mount the pot and jack.
Choose and mark locations where the volume and 
Fig. D: It’s easy to find the speaker ground line in this 
example (green wire) because it connects directly to 
the negative battery contact (power). Fig. E: Wire up the 
potentiometer and jack. Fig. F: If the output is distorted, 
add a 10Ω resistor across the outer legs of the pot. 
Fig. G: Mark and drill holes in the housing for the jack 
and pot. Fig. H: Mount the potentiometer and jack in 
the housing and close it up. Fig. I: Done!
F
G
H
I
D
E
output jack can ﬁ t on the toy’s casing, then use a 
drill or Dremel tool to create the appropriate-sized 
holes (Figure G).
TIP: If you place your holes along a seam, use
a high-speed Dremel to remove the plastic with 
a cutting/routing bit. An ordinary drill would 
simply push the halves apart or split the plastic.
Mount the hardware (Figure H) and put the knob 
on the pot. Once that’s done, carefully close up the 
housing, but don’t screw it back together yet.
7. Retest and assemble.
In the process of closing the housing, it’s likely that 
you moved around and possibly severed some of 
your wiring. Test the device again, both plugged-in 
and unplugged, to make sure it still works. If so, 
screw the housing back together, and you’re ready 
to rock (Figure I).
Peter Edwards is a circuit-bending and creative-electronics 
pioneer based in Troy, N.Y. He builds electronic musical 
instruments for a living at Casper Electronics 
(casperelectronics.com).
125
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography by Kristin Roach
WOODEN BUTTONS
Make your own tree bling from fallen 
branches. By Kristin Roach
After a big windstorm, it can be a little overwhelm-
ing to look at all the branches and sticks that need 
to be picked up in the yard. Instead of dreading this 
cleanup task, you can see it as a chance to collect 
all sorts of great materials for creative projects.
 For example: I really like wooden buttons, but the 
ones from stores are often so highly polished that 
they barely look like wood at all. Here’s how to make 
nicer ones out of fallen branches that you ﬁ nd your-
self. These buttons are smooth, but they retain the 
beautiful characteristics of the tree they came from 
— grain, texture, and even bark, if you choose. They 
are the perfect thing to adorn your totes, shirts, bags, 
or any other project that needs a little tree bling!
1. Choose a branch.
Find a hardwood branch with a straight section 
6"–8" long by ¾"–1½" wide. You can use a fallen 
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
Branch with a straight section 6"–8" long and 
¾"–1½" wide, from a hardwood tree Hardwoods 
are angiosperms, which produce seeds with some 
sort of covering, like fruits, nuts, or acorns. You 
want a section with even grain and no forks.
Drill and drill bits: 5", E", r"
Sandpaper: grits of 220, 320, 400, (optionally) 600
Knife, small and sharp An X-Acto knife works well, as 
does the small spear blade on a pocketknife.
Jigsaw or coping saw and vise or C-clamps
Beeswax (optional)
branch or cut one yourself, but make sure it has no 
sticky sap and a small pith (the hollow or spongy 
center), no more than 1" for a 1"-wide branch.
 Moisture level is important. Branches that are too 
dry will snap when bent, and freshly fallen or cut 
HOME
DIY
126 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

branches will need to dry out in the sun for a day or 
two before being made into buttons. Buttons cut 
from wood that’s too green or wet will crack once 
they dry all the way. Expect some trial and error 
with determining the right moisture.
2. Remove the bark (optional).
You can leave the bark on your buttons, but if you 
want to remove it, use a sharp knife to peel away 
2"–3" of bark at one end of the branch, working 
around it evenly with shallow strokes. It’s important 
that your knife is really sharp; if it’s dull, removing 
the bark isn’t just a pain — you’re also more likely
to slip and cut yourself.
3. Drill the holes.
Place the branch in a vise and use the 5" bit to
drill 2 or 4 evenly spaced holes into the cut center
of the branch. Keep the drill level with the branch,
or your holes will be skewed, and don’t drill too 
close to the perimeter of the branch, or you may 
break through it.
4. Cut the buttons.
Use a jigsaw or coping saw to cut 1"-wide circular 
slices from the branch.
5. Clean out the holes.
Next you’ll need to clean the wood pulp out of the 
holes and widen them. Hold the E" bit in your hand 
and gently turn it through all the buttonholes to 
widen them. Repeat with the r" bit.
TIP: You may want to use a bit of cloth for 
grasping the drill bit or you could hurt your 
ﬁ ngers over the course of making a half-dozen 
buttons — as I did the ﬁ rst time. 
6. Finish the buttons.
Sand the buttons, starting with the 220-grit sandpa-
per and working through to the ﬁ nest grit. Depending 
on how rough you want your buttons, you can do 
just a few strokes or work all the way up to 600-grit 
sandpaper to make them really smooth. If you want 
to ﬁ nish the buttons with a natural seal, rub on a little 
beeswax then wipe off the residue with a clean cloth.
 Try out a few different ways of sanding and ﬁ nish-
ing with individual buttons. Once you ﬁ nd a ﬁ nish 
you like, go crazy and make a whole set that way!
Fig. A: While a standard X-Acto blade will work, I recom-
mend getting a set of carving blades if you plan on doing 
a lot of button making. Figs. B and C: If you don’t have 
access to a vise, clamp your stick to the end of a table
with 2 C-clamps. Figs. D and E: Pre-drilling the holes and 
then widening them by hand helps prevent splitting.
Figs. F and G: Using varied grits of sandpaper will yield
a smooth-finished button that retains its rustic look.
A
B
C
E
F
G
D
Making creative projects out of found and on-hand materials
is one of Kristin Roach’s favorite challenges. You can find 
more of her crafting adventures on craftleftovers.com.
127
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography by Josie Moores
JAR ORGANIZER
Put those old jars to good use.
By Abe Connally and Josie Moores
Many people have a bunch of jars they can’t quite 
bring themselves to throw away. And why would they? 
Jars are useful in so many ways. Here’s a simple, 
quick idea for reusing old jars — the Jar Organizer.
 Whether you use it for storing screws, seeds, 
spices, buttons, electronic parts, or anything else, 
the Jar Organizer is extremely versatile. It’s easy to 
make in an hour, and costs less than $10. 
 This design accommodates a dozen jars up to
7" tall, but you can use more or fewer jars by chang-
ing the length of the 4×4. For stability, the base 
wants to be at least the length of your tallest jar. Our 
unit also has space beneath it to store something, 
so if you don’t want anything below yours, you can 
make it shorter.
 We originally used baby food jars, but they ended 
up self-sealing and we couldn’t get them off. So 
make sure you use jars with proper screw-on lids.
1. Prep your lumber. 
Cut four 16" lengths of 2×4 for the base, and an 18" 
length of 4×4 to attach the jars to. Paint them if you 
want, and let them dry (Figure A). 
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
Lumber: 2×4, 16" lengths (4) for the base;
4×4, 18" length to attach the jars to
Jars with screw-on lids an even number, up to 12. 
Plastic is preferable to glass, but not necessary.
Lag screws, ¼"×3" (2) 
Wood screws: 3" long (4), ¾" long (24)
Washers, ¼" ID (4)
Paint (optional) leftovers are fine
Drill with drill bits: 5", U", 7" 
Wood saw
Tape measure, ruler, and marker 
HOME
DIY
128 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

2. Build the base.
To make the uprights, mark 2 of the 2×4s on their 
wide faces (4" faces), centered 2" down from the 
top. Drill a hole straight through each board at your 
marks, using the 5" drill bit ﬁ rst, and working up 
to the 7" bit. Make sure your lag screws can pass 
through the hole. If not, drill it out a little more.
 To make the base pieces, measure and mark the 
centers of the other 2 pieces of 2×4 on their wide 
faces. Center each upright on top of a base piece, 
with the hole at the top. Turn the upright so its wide 
face is parallel to the long side of the base piece,
not crosswise (Figure B). 
 Holding the boards together, turn them upside 
down like a T. Using the 5" drill bit, pre-drill 2 holes 
into the joint of the 2 boards. Using the 3" screws, 
screw the boards together. Repeat this process for 
the other upright and base piece.
3. Make the jar holder.
Arrange your jars. On each face of the 4×4 you’ll 
have 3 jars, and you want them to be fairly balanced 
with the jars that will be on the opposite face. Leave 
enough space between jars to be able to unscrew 
them comfortably. Mark your arrangement on the 
4×4. Remove the lids from the jars and use two 
¾" screws to screw each lid into place on the 4×4 
(Figure C). 
TIP: It’s a good idea to pre-drill the lids to avoid 
cracking them. 
At each end of the 4×4, ﬁ nd the center by drawing
2 diagonal lines from corner to corner (Figure D). 
Pre-drill this center point on each end, using the 5" 
bit ﬁ rst for an accurate pilot hole, then the U" bit. 
4. Put it all together.
Place a lag screw through its hole in one of the
uprights, then through two ¼" washers, then into 
the 4×4. Screw it in. Repeat for the other side. 
 Screw the jars into their lids. You’re now ready to 
organize that pile of jumbled-up whatevers into tidy, 
transparent containers. 
  More photos and tips: velacreations.com/
jarorganizer.html
Abe Connally and Josie Moores are a young, adventurous 
couple living in a secluded off-grid hideaway with their 
2-year-old. Their experiments with energy, architecture, and 
sustainable systems are documented at velacreations.com.
Fig. A: Get all of your parts together: lumber, screws, 
and jars. Fig. B: Make the “legs” and “feet” of the 
organizer with 2×4s and 3" wood screws.
Fig. C: Screw the jar lids onto the 4×4. Fig. D: Using
2 diagonal lines, find the center of the 4×4 for the
pivot screw.
C
D
A
B
129
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photograph by Sam Murphy; doilies crocheted by Hilary Lewis 
CROCHET CROCKERY
Unique containers made from yarn
and resin. By Andrew Lewis
These pretty bowls are perfect containers for 
sweets, potpourri, or loose change. Amazingly, the 
main construction material is ordinary knitting yarn, 
and the construction method is crochet. There are 
plenty of guides on the internet that can show you 
how to crochet, but you can always use a store-
bought doily if you don’t feel up to it.
 The real secret to creating these little dishes is 
water-clear polyester casting resin, which can be 
purchased from hobby or craft stores. The polyester 
resin hardens when combined with a catalyst, and 
ﬁ xes the yarn into a rigid shape.
!
WARNING: Work in a warm, well-ventilated 
area. Polyester resin produces unpleasant 
fumes, and it won’t cure properly if it gets too 
cold. Wear disposable gloves, goggles, and a 
face mask.
HOME
DIY
MATERIALS
Doily crocheted or store-bought
Water-clear polyester resin and catalyst such as 
Castin’Craft Clear Polyester (eti-usa.com) or
TAP Plastics Clear-Lite (tapplastics.com). You 
could also substitute a water-clear epoxy resin 
and hardener.
Petroleum jelly aka vaseline
Ceramic or glass dish to use as a mold
Disposable plastic sheet
Disposable plastic cup and bowl
Disposable vinyl gloves
Goggles and face mask
1. Apply a thin layer of petroleum jelly to the outside 
of the dish that you’ll use as the mold (Figure B). 
This will prevent the resin from sticking to the glass. 
Imagine you’re greasing a cake pan.
130 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography by Ed Troxell
2. Place the dish onto the plastic sheet. You may 
want to apply a little petroleum jelly to the plastic 
sheet if your doily is bigger than the dish.
3. Measure out your polyester resin into a dispos-
able plastic cup (Figure C). You’ll need between 
50g–150g (2oz–5oz) of resin for a 6" bowl. The 
exact amount depends on the absorbency of the 
yarn you’re using. Acrylics generally absorb much 
less than natural ﬁ bers.
4. Add the catalyst to the resin and mix very
thoroughly. The ratio of catalyst to resin depends 
on the manufacturer. The brand I use needs just 
under 3ml of catalyst per 100g of resin. Note that 
resin is heavier than water, so 100g is not the
same as 100ml.
5. Pour the catalyzed resin into a larger plastic
bowl and mix again (Figure D). This ensures that 
you have a thorough mix, and the larger bowl is 
more convenient for working with. 
6. You don’t want to get any petroleum jelly onto 
the yarn, so change into a fresh pair of disposable 
gloves.
Fig. A: Gather your materials and set up in an area with 
good ventilation. Fig. B: Grease the mold. Fig. C: Mix 
your resin. Fig. D: Pour the resin mixture into a dipping 
container. Fig. E: Dip the doily in the resin. Make sure 
that every bit gets saturated. Squeeze out any excess 
resin using your hands. Fig. F: Lay the doily carefully 
over the mold. Fig. G: Sculpt the doily around the bowl 
paying attention to how you want your edges to look.
A
E
D
F
G
B
C
7. Take your doily and dip it into the bowl of resin. 
Wash the doily around in the resin, and make sure 
that every part of the yarn gets soaked.
8. Pull the doily through your closed hand, and 
wring out any excess resin (Figure E). Repeat this 
step if necessary. You should be able to open out
the doily without any resin dripping off it.
9. Arrange the doily over the mold, and leave it to 
cure (Figures F and G). Depending on temperature, 
yarn, and resin mixture, this can take several hours.
10. Once the resin has cured completely, gently 
ease the crochet crockery from the mold. You might 
ﬁ nd that a cocktail stick or toothpick is useful for 
levering stubborn parts free from the mold.
That’s it! Once you’ve made a few bowls you can 
try your hand at vases and other shapes. Just make 
sure the shape of the mold permits you to remove 
your creation once it has hardened.
Andrew Lewis is a keen artificer and computer scientist with 
special interests in 3D scanning, algorithmics, and open 
source hardware. upcraft.it
131
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

FREEZER 
BAG HOLDER
Coat hanger keeps
zip-lock bags open.
By Larry Cotton
Mama Necessity’s offspring, Invention, came to
my rescue recently when I was preparing summer 
veggies for the freezer. I like to use kitchen scissors 
to slice vegetables, but I wind up with a big pile
to pick up, handful by handful, and stuff into
freezer bags.
 ’Twould be nice to skip some handling and let the 
snipped veggies fall directly into the bags, I thought. 
But how? Thus from a wire coat hanger was the 
Freezer Bag Holder (FBH) born. These instructions 
are for quart-size freezer bags; for larger ones, you’ll 
need more than one hanger and 2 taped joints.
 First, clip the hook off the coat hanger and 
straighten the wire with pliers and your hands. It 
doesn’t have to be perfectly straight, but you need 
about 38".
 Use at least one pair of pliers to make a bend of 
approximately 60° about ¾" from one end. This will 
be one part of the overlapping taped joint.
 Make the other bends along the coat hanger, 
working your way down as shown in the illustra-
tion: a 6½" foot, a 7¾" riser, a ¾"–1" mount for the 
binder clip, a 5" cross beam bent out about 2", and
a clip mount, riser, and foot symmetrically back 
down. Don’t bend the feet yet, but bend the 2"-deep 
bow with your ﬁ ngers, trying to keep the curve nice 
and smooth.
 The clip-mount sections should be just long 
enough to accommodate the ¾"-wide clips. Make 
the 2 hairpin bends above these by using your larger 
pliers to turn the wire 180° around the tip of the 
smaller pair.
 Tweak the bends as you go. When you’re done 
tweaking, the last foot of the hanger should, with-
out much forcing, lie parallel to and overlap the
¾" end you bent ﬁ rst. Cut any excess wire and make
a joint by tightly wrapping electrical tape around
the overlapped portion.
Larry Cotton is a semi-retired power-tool designer and part-
time community college math instructor. He loves music 
and musical instruments, computers, birds, electronics,
furniture design, and his wife — not necessarily in that order.
Illustration by Damien Scogin
 To get the FBH to stand without wobbling, bend 
a barely noticeable upward curve in the 2 feet, 
making a base that touches the countertop at 
3 points. Finally, put the 2 binder clips over the 
hairpin bends at the top.
 To use the FBH, clamp the freezer bag just below 
its zip-locking strip, and open the top of the bag as 
much as possible. Happy bagging!
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
Wire coat hanger
Binder clips, small (2)
Electrical tape
Pliers (2) Ideally, one should be needlenose. Wrap 
the jaws with a little tape to avoid damaging the 
hanger wire’s protective finish.
6½"
5"
7¾"
Taped 
joint
132 Make: Volume 24
HOME
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography by Ed Troxell
DA VINCI RECIPROCATING 
MECHANISM
Re-create Renaissance tech to convert
rotation into a square wave. By Alan Federman
Last year I was blown away by the clever mecha-
nisms displayed in the Leonardo da Vinci exhibit 
at the Tech Museum of Innovation (thetech.org) 
in San Jose. I was especially taken by da Vinci’s 
simple mechanism for powering a sawmill with a 
water wheel. I made my own tabletop model of the 
mechanism, and it never fails to gather a crowd 
when I show it off.
 The typical mechanism for converting between 
rotation and reciprocal motion is a ﬂ ywheel and 
a crankshaft, like on a steam locomotive. But 
da Vinci’s simple device starts with 2 modiﬁ ed cage 
gears (aka lantern gears) that rotate on a common 
shaft. Each cage has half of its teeth missing, on 
opposite sides of the shaft from the other gear, so 
that when turned, they alternately engage with 
the pegs on opposite sides of a large wheel. 
 When you turn the shaft at a constant rate, 
this mechanism generates square-wave motion, 
rather than the sinusoidal motion of a piston. This 
is because each cage gear turns the wheel at a 
constant speed, and it lets go right before the other 
one comes pushing full-speed to turn the wheel the 
other direction.
Cut the Pieces
I built my initial prototype by hand, and it took a
lot of trial and error to get the peg spacing right.
So I made a more precise second version by lay-
ing out the plywood pieces in Google SketchUp 
TOYS
DIY
133
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

(sketchup.google.com), then importing them into 
CorelDraw and using the Corel ﬁ les to cut them on 
an Epilog laser cutter. 
 The main plywood pieces you need to cut are 
4 identical discs for the cage gears and a larger 
disc for the wheel (Figure A). Each cage gear disc 
is 2.06" in diameter, with 10 equidistant ¼" holes 
spaced 0.84" away from its center point. The wheel 
is 6.4" wide with 36 equidistant ¼" holes spaced 
2.95" from its center.
 To match da Vinci’s plan, I also cut 8 interlocking 
rectangular pieces that assemble into the 2 towers 
that hold the crankshaft. You can download my 
SketchUp and Corel ﬁ les at makezine.com/24/
davinci, along with full-size PDF templates that 
you can use to make the pieces by hand (Figure C).
 If you’re cutting by hand, print out the 3 full-size 
templates, cut the shapes out of the paper, and 
temporarily afﬁ x them to the plywood with spray 
adhesive. Drill all the holes before you cut the discs 
out of the plywood, O" holes in the center and 
¼" holes around the perimeter. Functionally, the 
mechanism needs only 26 holes cut, 4 in each cage 
gear disc and 10 in the large wheel. But I cut holes 
all the way around the perimeters of all the discs, 
76 total, so that I could use the parts for other 
purposes, such as a crank assembly for a crane.
 In addition to the discs, you need plywood pieces 
for the base and the towers. The base is simply a 
10" square with a O" hole in the center to hold a 
vertical axle peg for the wheel. 
 The 2 towers sit on either side of the wheel and 
MATERIALS 
¼" birch plywood, 12"×18"
¼" wood dowel, 36" long
½"×½" square wood molding, at least 4" long 
aka square dowel 
Wood glue
TOOLS
Band saw or jigsaw 
Drill press with circle cutter and ¼", O", 
and u" bits
Laser cutter (optional) instead of the band/jig saw 
and drill press
Small saw for cutting dowels
File, sanding block with medium-grit sandpaper, 
or Dremel with sanding bit
Glue gun with hot glue
C-clamps (2)
Spray adhesive and computer with printer for the 
paper templates, if you don’t use a laser cutter
A
B
Fig. A: The main plywood pieces for the base, large 
gear, 2 cage gears (aka lantern gears), and one of the 
2 towers. Fig. B: Dowels, wooden washers, and crank 
assembly parts. The same dowel is used to make the
crankshaft and gear pegs. Fig. C: Gear layout drawing. 
Drill the holes before you cut out the gears; you really 
only need 10 holes in the large wheel, and 4 in each 
cage gear disc. 
C
Diagrams by Alan Federman
134 Make: Volume 24
TOYS
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Fig. D: The 2 lantern gears after assembly.
Fig. E: It’s helpful to taper the pegs for the large gear; 
this wil help them to mesh smoothly with the cage 
gears. Fig. F: The main gear assembled. 
Fig. G: To measure the proper height for drilling the 
mounting towers, mesh a cage gear with the large gear’s 
pegs, and mark where the shaft will meet the tower. 
Then drill slightly above your mark. 
hold the drive shaft above it horizontally. I used 
the laser cutter to fashion them out of interlocking 
pieces of ¼" plywood, and you can also make them 
by cutting and gluing simple plywood rectangles; 
the PDF templates include plans for both. You can 
also cut the towers out of solid blocks. But don’t drill 
the tower holes yet; you’ll do this later, to ensure 
they’re at the correct height.
 From the ¼" dowel, you need to cut one 12" length 
for the drive shaft, one 2" length for the hand crank, 
eight 1¼" pegs for the cage gears, one 1" peg for the 
wheel’s axle, and ten 3" pegs for the wheel’s gearing 
(Figure B). If you mark the pegs for cutting all at 
once, include some extra length for the width of the 
saw blade, or else the pegs might wind up too short.
 From the ½" square dowel, cut and drill 2 thin 
slices to make washers that will ﬁ t over the drive 
shaft. Also cut a 2" block, and drill 2 parallel O" 
holes through the block at opposite ends. Then cut 
another short piece, ﬁ le it to make a round knob, 
and drill a blind O" hole halfway into the knob.
Assemble and Adjust
Build the 2 lantern gears by gluing four 1¼" pegs, 
positioned contiguously, between each pair of the 
smaller discs. Use wood glue and make sure the 
discs are aligned parallel (Figure D). 
 For the wheel axle, glue a 1" peg into the hole 
in the center of the base. Don’t glue the towers 
together yet.
 Sand or ﬁ le one end of each 3" peg so that it’s 
slightly rounded and tapered on 2 opposite edges; 
this helps the pegs engage with the cage gears 
(Figure E). Glue the pegs into the wheel, 5 in a row 
on opposite sides, with 13 empty holes (or undrilled 
hole positions) between them in each direction
(Figure F). The pegs should sit ﬂ ush with the under-
side of the wheel, stick up 2" from the top face, 
and be oriented with their tapered edges facing 
the neighboring pegs. Let everything dry overnight. 
Get some sleep; tomorrow we have fun.
 Fitting the gears together is a bit tricky and takes 
some patience. First, ﬁ t the wheel over the axle. 
Then mesh a lantern gear with the wheel’s pegs on 
one side and use it to ﬁ nd the correct height for the 
crankshaft. This is the hardest part, but it’s critical 
to smooth operation. 
 The best way is to drill 2 of the wide tower pieces 
a little above where you think the crankshaft should 
go. You can mark the point by running a ballpoint 
pen ﬁ ller through the cage gear (Figure G). Use a 
u" bit so that the crankshaft spins freely.
D
F
E
G
135
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Fig. H: It’s important to drill the tower holes squarely, so 
the crankshaft won’t act squirrely. Fig. I: Mounting the 
first tower. If it’s a bit too high, you can sand down the 
bottom. If it’s too low, you can shim it up. 
Fig. J: Adjusting the height of the peg teeth and round-
ing them slightly with a file is an alternative way to 
fine-tune the operation. Fig. K: Once everything works 
properly, add the crank.
 Then repeatedly clamp the 2 tower pieces down, 
test the drive shaft through them, and sand down 
the tower’s bottoms evenly until you reach a good 
height. (As an alternative, you could make the tower 
heights adjustable with a tongue-and-groove and 
a small setscrew, but this cheats the nice all-wood 
feel of the project.)
 Once you have the proper height, stack the 
other tower pieces and cut and drill them to match 
(Figure H). Glue the tower pieces together.
 For ﬁ nal adjusting, hot-glue the towers to the base 
(Figure I). Assemble the crankshaft through the 
towers, hot-gluing the cage gears in place. Work the 
mechanism in both directions and watch closely to 
see where any pegs stick, then sand down the pegs 
and cage gear dowels as needed (Figure J).
 When everything works smoothly, mark the
precise locations of the cage gears on the crank-
shaft, the towers on the base, and the shaft where 
it exits the towers; you’ll glue the wooden washers 
here to prevent the shaft from sliding back and 
forth. You can put the washers inboard or outboard 
of the towers; outboard makes it easier to test-glue 
and adjust the washers.
 Using wood glue, permanently reglue the towers 
to the base (rethreading the crankshaft if necessary 
to add your washers), and reglue the cage gears 
in place. Hot-glue the washers in place, test the 
mechanism again, then reglue them permanently. 
 Finally, glue the crank pieces onto the longer 
protruding end of the crankshaft, and crank away 
(Figure K).
  Download the Sketchup and Corel ﬁ les as well as 
a full-size template from: makezine.com/24/davinci
Alan Federman lives in San Jose, Calif., and is an instructor 
at the TechShop in Menlo Park (techshop.ws).
H
J
I
K
Picture Frame Messages
Save PowerPoint slides as JPEGs and you can 
load any phrase you want into a digital picture 
frame. First measure the height and width of 
your frame’s screen, double them, and enter the 
doubled dimensions in Page Setup — this gives 
a higher-resolution image. Then type your slides, export 
them by selecting Save As → *.jpg, and copy the JPEGs 
to your picture frame. You can even upload my alignment 
slide at makezine.com/24/tips to ﬁ nd the true edges of 
your frame, and then adjust your slides to ﬁ t your frame 
perfectly. 
 
 
  —Herschel Knapp
Find more tools-n-tips at makezine.com/tnt. 
136 Make: Volume 24
TOYS
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

137
Make:
Photograph by Sam Murphy
BUCKET FULL O’ POCKETS
Make your tool bucket even handier with 
a nifty cover. By Abe Connally and Josie Moores
For almost any project, organization goes a long 
way toward making things go more smoothly. A tool 
bucket helps with that organization. It’s portable, and 
it keeps your tools organized, visible, and accessible.
 This caddy cover, which ﬁ ts over a 5-gallon 
bucket, costs about $10 and will take about a day 
to make. If you can get your hands on a heavy-duty 
sewing machine, we strongly recommend you do 
so — it will save you considerable time. 
1. Customize your design.
When making your cover, it helps to have an idea of 
what kind of tools you want to store in your bucket. 
Make a mental list so you can customize the design 
to meet your needs. Adjust the pocket sizes accord-
ing to what you’ll store in them. For heavy, large 
objects you’ll want to make the pockets as tall as 
possible, and you’ll need to increase their depth. 
WORKSHOP
DIY
MATERIALS
5-gallon bucket
Heavy fabric, 3'×5' such as canvas or denim 
Elastic, 1" or 2" wide, 40" in length
8" straps, 1"–2" wide (3) Nylon straps work well, or 
you can use excess fabric, hemmed to prevent 
fraying.
Snap buttons (3)
Thread
TOOLS
Scissors, sharp
Needle
Pins
Tape measure
Sewing machine preferably heavy-duty
Pen or fabric chalk
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

2. Hem your panels and pockets.
When we say “hem” we mean fold over the edge of 
the fabric 1" and sew the folded piece to the main 
piece of fabric. This helps prevent fraying and 
makes the edges a little stiffer.
 It helps to ﬁ rst pin down where you’ll be sewing.
This keeps the fabric in place as you sew and helps 
you visualize where you’ll be sewing (Figure B). 
2a. Cut 2 pieces of fabric, each 23"×22". Hem the 
22" sides of both pieces. These are the tops and 
bottoms of your panels. Hem the 23" sides of both 
panels, leaving 9½" at the top unstitched (these 
sections will be hemmed at the end of the project).
2b. Cut pieces to the following 3 sizes and hem on 
all sides: 6½"×28" (the ﬁ nal hemmed piece will be 
4½"×26"); 8"×19” (ﬁ nal piece will be 6"×17"); and 
5½"×13" (ﬁ nal piece will be 3½"×11").
3. Sew the pockets.
Figure C shows a hemmed pocket piece pinned and 
ready to be sewn to the ﬁ rst panel.
First Panel
3a. Lay one of the large panels on a ﬂ at surface, 
hemmed edges facing down, with the unstitched 
sections at the top. Use a pen or fabric chalk to 
mark the bottom edge from left to right at 2", 4", 
7", 13", and 17" (there should be 3" remaining at the 
right edge). Place the 4½"×26" pocket piece on a 
ﬂ at surface, hemmed edges down. From the left, 
mark the bottom edge at 3", 6", 10", 17", and 22" 
(there should be 4" remaining at the right edge).
3b. Place the 4½" pocket piece horizontally on top 
of the panel, lining up the left and bottom edges of 
both pieces, and pin the 2 pieces together along the 
left edge, keeping the pin vertical (parallel to the 
left edge). Line up the ﬁ rst mark on the large panel 
with the ﬁ rst mark of the 4½" pocket piece and pin 
it vertically. Do the same for the next 4 marks, then 
pin the right edges of the pieces together.
3c. Sew vertically along the 7 pinned lines, then sew 
the 2 pieces together horizontally along the bottom 
edge. Because of the depth of the pockets, there will 
be excess fabric. Try to bunch this up evenly along 
the whole pocket or into the corners of each pocket.
Second Panel
3d. Take the other large panel and lay it on a ﬂ at 
Fig. A: The basic items necessary to create your caddy 
cover, including 2 sizes of rolled white elastic. (Not pic-
tured: 5-gallon bucket, 8" straps, and sewing machine.) 
Fig. B: Pin the 23"×22" panels to prepare for hemming.
Fig. C: After pinning, line up the edges of the pocket piece 
with the sides of the panel. Fig. D: The elastic band will 
let you hang tools for easy accessibility. Fig. E: The fin-
ished panels pinned and ready to be stitched together.
A
B
D
E
C
Photography by Josie Moores
138 Make: Volume 24
WORKSHOP
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

surface, hemmed edges down, with the unstitched 
sections at the top. From the left, mark the bottom 
edge at 6", 8", 11½", 13", and 17" (there should be 3" 
remaining at the right edge). Take the 6"×17" pocket 
piece and place it on a ﬂ at surface. From the left, 
mark the bottom edge at 9" and 12½" (there should 
be 4½" remaining on the right side).
3e. Place the 6" pocket on top of the panel, lining
up the left and bottom edges, and pin the 2 together 
along the left edge. Match up the ﬁ rst mark on the 
large panel with the ﬁ rst mark of the 6" pocket and 
pin it vertically. Line up and pin the second mark, 
then line the right edge of the 6" pocket with the 
11½" mark on the panel and pin.
3f. Sew along the 4 pinned lines, then sew the
2 pieces together along the bottom edge, trying to 
bunch the excess fabric evenly or into the corners 
of the pockets.
3g. Place the 3½"×11” pocket piece on a ﬂ at surface 
and mark the bottom edge 7" from the left (there 
should be 4" remaining to the right). Place the 
3½" pocket on top of the panel, with bottom edges 
aligned and the pocket’s left edge lined up with the 
13" mark on the panel (1½" to the right of where the 
6" pocket ends) and pin it vertically to the panel. 
Line up and pin the mark on the 3½" pocket with 
the last mark on the panel (at 17"), then line up and 
pin the right edges of the panel and the 3½" pocket.
3h. Sew along the 3 pinned lines, then sew the bottom 
edges together as you did with the previous pockets.
4. Sew the elastic.
4a. Cut 2 pieces of elastic 20" in length (you can 
use 1" or 2" elastic, or one of each). Line up one 
piece of elastic horizontally on the pocket side of 
one of the panels, 3½" from the top (Figure D). 
4b. Mark lines vertically on the elastic. The distance 
between the marks depends on what you’ll want 
to hang. Mark lines ¾" apart for screwdrivers, 1½" 
apart for pliers, 3" apart for scissors, and so on.
4c. Sew along these lines, making 2–3 passes for 
extra strength. 
 Then follow the same steps for the other piece of 
elastic on the other panel.
5. Add the buttons and straps.
Three 8" pieces of nylon strap (or hemmed pieces 
of excess caddy fabric) are used to attach rolls of 
tape (such as electrical, duct, or teﬂ on), and small 
objects with an opening that a strap can ﬁ t through.
5a. Sew one part of a snap button to one end of 
each strap, centered about ¾" from the end. With 
the button end below, place each strap vertically on 
the panel (above the 3½" or 4½" pockets), spaced 
a few inches apart and 10½" down from the top.
5b. Make sure that the snap button piece on the 
bottom of each strap is facing outward. Sew the 
other part of the snap button to the top of each 
strap, securely sewing through the panel as well.
6. Sew the panels together.
Figure E shows the panels placed together with all 
parts attached, pinned and ready to be sewn.
6a. Using sharp scissors, carefully cut a horizontal 
slit on both sides of each panel, 1" long, where the 
stitched and unstitched parts of the sides meet, so 
that the unstitched sections are no longer folded in. 
This will give you a total of 4 slits. Place one panel 
on top of the other, so that the pockets and elastic 
are facing in toward each other.
6b. Pin the 2 left edges of the unstitched sides 
together, then do the same for the right edges. Sew 
the 2 pinned sections together, being sure to sew 
along the 1" slits you just made to prevent fraying.
6c. Turn the caddy inside out, so that the pockets 
are on the outside. It should resemble a tube.
7. Put the caddy on the bucket.
7a. Line up the 2 joins of the panels where the handle
comes out of the bucket. Place the caddy over the 
bucket, and feed one panel through the handle.
7b. Fold the elastic sides down into the bucket, and 
place your tools in their new bucket home. Your tool 
caddy is complete and rarin’ to go! 
139
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography by Josie Moores
HOMEMADE SEED STARTERS 
Avoid transplant mortality by making soil 
blocks. By Abe Connally and Josie Moores
Gardening can be fun and rewarding, but some
aspects can really hurt your conﬁ dence. Transplant 
mortality is one of those inevitable discourage-
ments. It really pays to evaluate your transplant 
system before you kill too many of your lovely little 
garden starts.
 One of the best systems we’ve seen is soil blocks. 
They have many advantages, but the main one is 
that they greatly reduce transplant shock, leaving 
you with more survivors in your garden. They won’t 
create root balls like starter pots or trays, they 
don’t limit roots in the soil like peat or paper pots, 
and they don’t destroy roots the way ﬂ ats do. 
 Making soil blocks requires a soil block maker, 
or blocker. The blocker compacts soil into plugs 
that come with a preformed depression for placing 
your seeds. Getting your plants off to a good start 
has never been easier!
 The soil blocker is easy to make in about a 
half-hour. With practice, you’ll be able to make 
soil blocks at a rate of 3 or 4 per minute. The cost 
should be less than $5, or free if you have various 
materials lying around.
OUTDOORS
DIY
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
Smooth can, metal or plastic, with lid 2"–4" in
diameter, depending on the plants you’re starting
2" eye bolt, 6"–8" long
2" nuts (2 or 3) for eye bolt
Washers (2) for eye bolt
Several large trays 
We use plastic bakery containers.
Soil mix 
Drill and drill bits: 1", 2"
Hacksaw
Pliers
Wrenches (2)
140 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Make Your Soil Blocker
Almost every part of your blocker can be salvaged. 
Paint cans, medicine bottles, or just about any 
smooth container will work for the cylinder. The 
eye bolt serves as a plunger handle, and you could 
just as easily use a long bolt with a wooden handle. 
The bakery containers are convenient trays, as 
they come with clear lids and are reusable.
1. Make the cylinder.
You can make soil blockers any size you want,
depending on the seeds you have. A 2" block 
(½-pint can) is best for most seeds. We like the
4" size of the quart can for large seeds like squash
and beans. Smaller blocks are good for starting 
faster-growing, smaller seeds like lettuce, greens, 
and onions. If you go with a smaller can, you may 
want to reduce the size of the eye bolt as well,
cutting it down to 3"–6" long.
 The main thing with the can selection is to avoid 
a corrugated can, like a soup can, as the soil won’t 
release easily. Before starting, be sure to clean the 
can well.
 Using the hacksaw, cut off the bottom of your 
can, about 1" to ¼" from the bottom. Cut slowly, 
and make sure you get a good, straight cut. The
can bottom will become the plate that presses
the soil blocks.
2. Make the press plate.
With your pliers, go along the edge of the cut-off can 
bottom and bend the 1"–¼" remaining part of the 
can toward the center. This should give you a nice, 
smooth circular plate without any sharp edges.
 Mark the center of your plate, then drill a hole at 
your center mark, starting with the 1" drill bit for
a pilot hole, and then stepping up to your 2" bit.
 Drill a hole in the center of the lid, and trim it to 
ﬁ t within the cylinder if necessary.
3. Assemble the plunger.
Put one nut on your eye bolt, and thread it about 
1½" to 2" from the end of the bolt. Place a washer 
on the eye bolt, followed by the lid of the can. If the 
lid has a protruding rim, make sure the rim faces
the eye of the bolt.
 Now, slide on your press plate and follow it with
a washer. Thread your last nut onto the eye bolt. 
The very last nut should be ﬂ ush with the tip of the 
bolt. Tighten the ﬁ rst nut back against the last nut 
you put on, sandwiching the other parts tightly
between (Figure A, following page). You should 
now have a very stable plunger (Figure B). This 
plunger slides inside the main cylinder of the can.
NOTE: If you’re making a bigger blocker, put
2 nuts on the tip to make a deeper depression 
for larger seeds.
Press Your Own Soil Blocks
4. Mix the soil.
This recipe (below) is almost foolproof. One “unit” 
can be any sort of can or bucket, depending on the 
amount of soil you need (start small). There are lots 
of different recipes online, so feel free to experi-
ment. You can also buy commercial mixes, but we 
haven’t tried those.
 Sift all ingredients before mixing. Mix the peat 
with the lime or wood ash ﬁ rst. Mix the sand or per-
lite with the fertilizer. Then mix everything together.
5. Set up a nice large work area. 
You’ll want a hard surface like a concrete slab to 
dump your soil mix on, and then another area to 
keep your trays and blocks once they’re made. 
Dump your mix onto your hard surface. Patios are 
good for this, as well as outdoor worktables. 
6. Wet your mix. 
Be careful with this step, as most people won’t 
add enough water initially. You want your mix 
thoroughly moist, almost dripping water. If your 
materials are fairly dry, a good ratio is 3 parts mix 
to 1 part water by volume. 
 Make a large pile of your wetted mix. The pile 
should be an inch taller than your blocker.
7. Press a soil block.
Place the plunger into the cylinder of your blocker. 
The eye should come through the top toward you. 
ELIOT COLEMAN’S ORGANIC SOIL RECIPE
30 units peat
1 unit lime or ½ unit wood ashes 
20 units coarse sand or perlite
¾ unit organic fertilizer (equal parts blood meal, 
colloidal phosphate, and greensand)
10 units good garden soil
20 units well-aged compost
141
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Now dip the blocker in water.
 Next, ram the blocker bottom-ﬁ rst into the
mix until it hits the hard surface below. Give it a
few twists to make sure it’s making contact with 
the surface.
 Pack the soil lightly but ﬁ rmly with the plunger 
(Figure C). This should “seat” the soil in the 
blocker. 
 Gently lift the blocker (with soil) out of the pile
of mix. The block of soil should stay inside. If it falls 
out, try again and gently twist and tilt the blocker 
as you lift it. If the soil won’t stay in the blocker, 
add a bit more water and pack the soil a bit harder.
8. Eject the soil block.
Place the blocker with the packed soil facing down 
in your tray. With one hand, press down with the 
eye bolt; with the other hand, gently raise the
cylinder, twisting it as it rises (Figure D).
 You should be left with a nice, compacted soil 
block on your tray. The eye bolt and nuts will leave
a good depression to place seeds in. 
 Dip your blocker in water after each block to help 
keep it clean and ensure a good release. Space 
each block about ¼" from the others (Figure E).
9. Plant and water your seeds.
Once you’ve made several blocks, place a seed or 
2 in each block depression, then cover the seeds 
lightly with a bit of soil mix. Gently water the blocks 
with a very ﬁ ne mist. Put a bit of water in the tray, 
¼"–½" deep, to help keep the blocks moist.
 Cover your blocks with a clear lid if your tray has 
one; if not, plastic wrap will do just ﬁ ne. Be sure 
to keep your blocks moist, watering them once 
or twice daily. Once the seeds sprout, you can 
remove the lid.
 Depending on your plants, you can usually
transplant them 2–4 weeks after they sprout. 
Handle the blocks with care during transplanting, 
and use a spatula to make it easy to lift the blocks 
out of the tray and into their new homes.
Resources
The New Organic Grower
 
»
 by Eliot Coleman
More on soil blocks: 
 
»
• pottingblocks.com
• toppertwo.tripod.com/soil_blocks.htm
• velacreations.com/soilblocks.html
Figs. A and B: Thread a plastic lid onto an eye bolt with
2 nuts and a big washer, and you’ve got your plunger. 
Fig. C: Ram the soil blocker into a special soil mix, 
then pack firmly with the plunger to form a soil block. 
Fig. D: Gently eject the soil block. Fig. E: Space your 
soil blocks ¼" apart, then plant and water. The bolt 
and nut make a nice divot for planting; clear, lidded 
bakery trays admit sunlight and retain moisture.
B
A
E
C
D
142 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photography by Ed Troxell
GREENHOUSE CONTROLLER
Build a temperature-switched power
outlet and save some green. By Andrew Lewis
My dad is a keen gardener. When he needed a new 
temperature-controlled switch for his greenhouse 
heater, I knew it was my chance to offset my repu-
tation as the Destroyer of Plants.
 I had seen thermostatic plugs online for $40, 
but I was sure I could come up with something 
better. Here’s how I built a thermostatic controller 
for my dad’s greenhouse for about $25, with some 
scrounging.
 I built the controller around an inexpensive 
thermostatic control board, which I boxed up with 
a grounded power outlet for it to control, and a wall 
wart adapter to supply it with DC power. Plug the 
box in, and the board switches the power outlet 
on and off based on ambient temperature. The 
ground prong on the device’s plug simply connects 
through to the ground receptacle on its controlled 
outlet. The plug’s neutral conductor splits between 
the wall wart’s neutral blade and the outlet’s 
neutral slot, and its hot conductor splits between 
the wall wart’s hot blade and the outlet’s hot slot, 
connecting indirectly to the outlet through the 
thermostat board’s common (COM) and normally 
open (NO) terminals (Figure A, next page).
 This arrangement supplies constant power to the 
board as it switches the hot connection to the outlet 
on and off. I also used an audio jack and plug to let 
me connect the thermistor (temperature sensor) 
outside the box and position it in different locations.
1. Prepare the power adapter
and thermostat.
Depending on what sort of wall wart you have, 
either unscrew its plastic housing, or just break it 
away using brute force. Cut its DC output power 
cord to about 12".
OUTDOORS
DIY
143
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

 Follow the Velleman kit instructions to assemble 
the thermostat board with one modiﬁ cation: 
instead of soldering the LED directly to the board, 
attach two 18" lengths of insulated wire so that the 
LED can be mounted remotely later (Figure B).
2. Prepare the project box.
The front panel of your project box will house the 
power outlet, audio jack, LED (in its holder), and 
the thermostat’s potentiometer knob. Position 
these according to your personal preference, mak-
ing sure you can glue the thermostat board inside 
the box so that its knob will extend out where you 
want it. Drill holes in the front panel for the jack 
and LED holder and for the knob to ﬁ t through, and 
use a rotary tool to cut a hole for the power outlet.
 In the rear panel, drill a hole just large enough for 
the power cord to slip through snugly.
3. Wire in the electronics.
Cut a 12" length of power cord and cut away the 
outer sheath, exposing the black (or brown), white, 
and green wires. These are the cord’s hot, neutral, 
and ground wires, respectively. Save them for 
later. Cut away about 8" of the outer sheath of the 
remaining cord, and strip the ends of each wire to 
expose about ½" of copper.
 For the rest of the wiring, you’ll be working in 
and around the box, but don’t glue the board 
and adapter inside yet. Connect the hot (black 
or brown) lead from the power outlet to the COM 
screw terminal on the thermostat board (Figure C).
Fit the power cord through the back of the box, and 
solder the ground (green) wire from the socket to 
the ground wire of the cord, insulating the connec-
tion with heat-shrink tubing (Figure D).
 Solder the hot wire from the power cord to one 
blade of the power adapter plug (Figure E). Solder 
one end of the black wire you cut to the same 
blade, and insulate the connections with heat-
shrink. Connect the other end of the black wire to 
the thermostat’s NO terminal.
 Solder the neutral lead from the power outlet to 
the other blade of the power adapter plug, solder 
the white wire from the power cord to the same 
blade, and insulate the connections with heat-
shrink (Figure F).
 Separate and strip the DC output wires from 
the adapter. Use a multimeter to determine which 
is positive and which is negative, and connect 
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
Thermostat kit, Velleman item #MK138 from Abra 
Electronics (abra-electronics.com), $10
AC power adapter (“wall wart”), 12V DC Countless 
small appliances use these.
Grounded power outlet with leads, 125V AC, 15A, 
panel-mount such as Leviton #1374, available
at electrical supply or hardware stores, $1–$2
Plastic electronics enclosure, approx. 7"×5"×3" 
such as #270-1807 from RadioShack 
(radioshack.com), $6
Mono audio plug and jack, matching sizes, panel 
mount such as #274-319 and #274-346 from 
RadioShack ($3 and $4 each for a 4-pack)
LED holder #LMH-1 from Abra Electronics (key-
word search: “LED holder 5mm”), $0.11
Grounded power cord, 6' without plugs
Insulated wire, 22 to 24 gauge, 4' is plenty
Heat-shrink tubing, various sizes #278-1610 from 
RadioShack, $4
Grounded power plug, 15A
Fuse, 3A, and in-line fuse holder #270-1009 and 
#270-1238 from RadioShack, $2 and $3
Cable ties
Blue LED, 5mm (optional) #LED-5B from Abra 
Electronics (keyword: “5mm blue LED”), $2
Soldering iron and solder, hot glue gun and glue, 
files, screwdriver, wire cutters and strippers,
drill and drill bits, rotary tool with cutting bit,
multimeter
A
AC power 
adapter
Thermo-
stat
module
+12V DC 0V
COM
NO
–
+
H
H
G
C
C
15A socket
Power cord
H = hot (live)
C = common (neutral)
G = ground
H
C
G
144 Make: Volume 24
OUTDOORS
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

them accordingly to the (+) and (–) 12V DC screw 
terminals of the thermostat board (Figure G). Be 
careful! Wiring the board in reverse can damage it.
 Connect the LED to the wire stalk you soldered 
to the board earlier, and plug it into the LED holder 
in the front panel. I substituted a blue LED to look 
cooler than the red one from the kit. Solder short 
wires to the audio jack terminals in the panel and 
connect them to the sensor terminals on the board.
 Solder the small blue thermistor from the 
Velleman kit to the phono plug (Figure H), and 
insulate the connections with heat-shrink. You can 
attach the thermistor directly so it will sense the 
temperature near the front panel, or use longer 
wires to let you position it some distance away. 
Insert the plug into the jack on the panel.
 At the free end of the power cord, solder an
in-line fuse holder with a 3A fuse to the hot wire. 
Insulate the connections with heat-shrink, but leave 
the holder itself exposed so you can change the 
fuse. Connect the 3 wires to a grounded power plug.
4. Hot-glue and test.
Hot-glue the adapter and thermostat board into 
the box, with the adapter toward the back and 
the board positioned so the potentiometer pokes 
through its hole in front (Figure I).
 Use cable ties and hot glue to ﬁ x the power cord 
in place, so that it can’t be accidentally pulled 
away. Use more cable ties to tidy up the wiring, and 
more hot glue to steady the front and rear panels. 
Put the lid on the box, and get ready for testing.
 You can test the unit by plugging in an electric 
light or other small appliance. The LED should 
activate when the temperature falls below the level 
set by the potentiometer. Turn the pot down until 
the LED comes on, then warm the thermistor in 
your hand. If everything is working, the LED should 
go off when the sensor registers your body heat.
5. Add the ﬁ nishing touches.
The thermistor control ranges from about 41°F–
104°F, so you can mark a dial on the front of the 
panel if you want to make things look neat. 
 To control heavy electrical loads, replace the re-
lay in the thermostat kit with a suitable alternative. 
Most greenhouse heaters are low-power (~300W), 
so this shouldn’t be necessary for most people.
Fig. B: Assemble kit with extension wires for indicator 
LED. Fig. C: Connect hot power lead to COM terminal 
on thermostat board. Fig. D: Solder power cord ground 
lead to controlled outlet ground. Fig. E: Solder hot 
power wire to wall-wart prong. Fig. F: Insulate wall-wart 
plug connections with heat-shrink. Fig. G: Connect 
DC output to board. Fig. H: Solder thermistor to audio 
plug. Fig. I: Glue components inside box.
C
B
H
I
D
E
G
F
Andrew Lewis is a computer scientist and a relentless 
tinkerer, whose love of science and technology is second 
only to his love of all things steampunk.
145
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

146 Make: Volume 24
In my previous column I showed you how to 
use old-school logic chips to build Zap-a-Mole, an 
electronic version of the old Whac-A-Mole arcade 
game. Now I’m going to get rid of the old chips 
and substitute a microcontroller, which will make 
everything simpler while also enabling a lot of new 
features. This will give us Zap-a-Mole Enhanced. I’ll 
then go even further to create a game so ambitious, 
it can only be known as Zap-a-Mole Extreme.
 The PICAXE 28X1 is my choice of microcontroller. 
The “PIC” part of its name tells us it’s a Program-
mable Interface Controller by Microchip Technology. 
The “AXE” was whimsically added by Revolution 
Education, which created a version of the BASIC 
computer language to control the chip. I like it 
because it’s cheap and simple. (If you find that you 
enjoy playing with it, you may want to move up to 
the Arduino, which has many more features.)
Enhanced Zapping
Take a look at the program listing in Figure C. I delib-
erately squeezed its formatting, and there’s a much 
more readable version online at makezine.com/24/
electronics. Still, the tiny piece of code is all that the 
PICAXE actually needs to play the game. The ques-
tion is, how do we get the instructions into the chip?
 First, go shopping. From SparkFun Electronics 
you can obtain a PICAXE 28X1, a USB programming 
cable, and a mini audio jack. You also need an LCD 
display screen, such as the one sold with a driver by 
Peter H. Anderson (see Materials). Your total outlay 
will be around $50, but you can reprogram and 
reuse the microcontroller almost indefinitely. Check 
mouser.com or newark.com for other components.
 Once you have your components, carefully follow 
the schematic in Figure B, either using separate
buttons and LEDs, or buttons with LEDs inside them
as suggested in my previous column. Figure A shows 
the circuit breadboarded, with the LCD screen 
substituting for the 7-segment numerals I used in 
Photography and diagrams by Charles Platt
Extreme Zap-a-Mole
Learn how a single microcontroller does the work of 20 old-school chips.
ELECTRONICS: FUN AND FUNDAMENTALS
By Charles Platt
»
EL
By
E
B
the old-school version. The number of components 
and lengths of hookup wire have been drastically 
reduced.
 Figure D (page 148) shows the pinouts of the 
28X1. (Some pins have additional functions, which 
I’ve omitted for simplicity.) You’ll see that the chip 
imposes its own pin-numbering system, so that in 
a program, pin3 means “input number 3,” which is 
actually assigned to hardware pin 14. 
 Note that the Reset pin must be held high through 
a 4.7K resistor. Pins 6 and 7 connect with your 
computer through a mini stereo jack and a pair of 
resistors as in Figure E (page 148). Pins 8, 19, and 
20 require a regulated 5-volt supply; a 9-volt battery 
can be used with an LM7805 regulator, and the 
Fig. A: The breadboarded project is extremely 
simple compared with the version using logic chips 
pictured last issue. 
A
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

147
Make:
setfreq m8 : high 7 : settimer t1s_8
pause 12000 : gosub screen1
ready: ‘ --------------------------------------------
outpins = 128
do : random w8 : loop until pin0 = 1
gosub screen2
w9 = 0 : w6 = 25000 : b6 = 180 : b3 = 0 : timer = 0
chooseled: ‘ ----------------------------------------
random w8 : b2 = w8 / 13107
if b2 > 4 or b2 = b1 then chooseled
low b1 : high b2 : b1 = b2 : w7 = 0
if b6 > 0 then : w6 = w6 - b6 : b6 = b6 - 1 : endif
checktime: ‘ ----------------------------------------
if b3 = timer then getbutton
b3 = b3 + 1 : b4 = 120 - b3 : gosub screen3
if b4 = 0 then ready
getbutton: ‘ ----------------------------------------
b5 = 5 : b0 = pins
if b0 = 4 then : b5 = 0 : endif
if b0 = 8 then : b5 = 1 : endif
if b0 = 16 then : b5 = 2 : endif
if b0 = 32 then : b5 = 3 : endif
if b0 = 64 then : b5 = 4 : endif
newscore: ‘ -----------------------------------------
if b5 <> b2 then delay
w9 = w9 + 1 : gosub screen4 : goto chooseled
delay: ‘ --------------------------------------------
w7 = w7 + 100 : if w7 < w6 then checktime
goto chooseled
screen1: ‘ ------------------------------------------
serout 7, T4800_8, (“?fZap-a-Mole Enhanced”) : return
screen2: ‘ ------------------------------------------
serout 7, T4800_8, (“?y2?x00Remaining Time: 120”)
serout 7, T4800_8, (“?y3?x00Hits: 0   “) : return
screen3: ‘ ------------------------------------------
serout 7, T4800_8, (“?y2?x16”, #b4, “ “) : return
screen4: ‘ ------------------------------------------
serout 7, T4800_8, (“?y3?x06”, #w9) : return
(
)
*
+
,
-
.
/
E:
E:
((
()
(*
(+
)/
E:
E:
),
)+
)*
))
)(
)'
(0
(/
(.
(-
(,
I(
J(
J)
J*
J+
J,
C:;
I)
I+
A(
C<;(
C<;)
C<;*
C<;+
C<;,
J-
I,
I*
,M;:i\^lcXk\[gfn\ijlggcp
G@:8O<)/O(D`ZifZfekifcc\i
I('ÆI(*
I-ÆI0
B
Fig. B: The Zap-a-Mole 
Enhanced schematic 
using a PICAXE 28X1 
microcontroller.
Fig. C: All the code
the microcontroller 
needs to play the game. 
(A fully commented, 
properly formatted
version is available 
online at makezine.
com/24/electronics.)
COMPONENT VALUES
R1: 220Ω
R2: 4K7
R3: 22K
R4–R13: 10K
LED1–LED5: Generic 
5mm LEDs
S1–S6: SPST normally 
open push buttons
J1: 3.5mm mini
stereo jack
LCD: Liquid crystal
display (4-line, 
20-column,
4,800-baud)
MATERIALS
For Zap-a-Mole Enhanced:
PICAXE 28X1 microcontroller IC SparkFun 
Electronics part #COM-08352, sparkfun.com, $10
USB programming cable SparkFun #PGM-08312
3.5mm stereo audio jack SparkFun #PRT-08032
PICAXE Program Editor (Windows) or AXEpad
(Mac/Linux) software free from rev-ed.co.uk/
picaxe/software.htm
Breadboard and hookup wire
LCD display screen, 4-line, 20-column, sold with
an LCD117 driver at phanderson.com/lcd106/
lcd107.html. Scroll down to 4,800-baud version.
Resistors: 220Ω (1), 4.7kΩ (1), 22kΩ (1), and 10kΩ 
(10) All can be 5%, and can be ¼-watt or 1-watt.
Illuminated push buttons (5) such as E-Switch
part #LP4OA1PBBTR (that’s oh-A-1, not zero-A-1)
Push button, SPST, normally open (1) Or use 6 of 
these if you’re not using the 5 illuminated buttons.
LEDs, 5mm (5) if you’re not using illuminated buttons
9V battery and battery snap
5V power regulator IC, LM7805 type
Capacitors, minimum 12V: 100μF electrolytic (2), 
and 0.1μF ceramic (2)
Wire strippers
Optional: Needlenose pliers, magnifier, multimeter
Additional components for Zap-a-Mole Extreme:
Decoder IC, CD74HC4514 type 
Resistors: 150Ω, 1% (16); and 100kΩ (1)
The 150-ohm resistors must be 1% tolerance.
Illuminated push buttons (11) Or use 11 more SPST 
push buttons and 11 LEDs.
C
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

148 Make: Volume 24
E
To PICAXE 28X1 Pin 6
To PICAXE 28X1 Pin 7
USB
Programming
Cable
22K
10K
To computer
r
F om computer
Negative power
3.5mm stereo
mini jack socket
0.1uF
0.1uF
100uF
100uF
9-volt
alkaline
battery
5-volt regulated supply
LM7805
PICAXE manufacturer recommends 4 capacitors 
as in Figure F. You can mount them at the top of a 
breadboard as in Figure G.
 Now install the PICAXE Program Editor (Windows) 
or AXEpad (Mac/Linux). My book Make: Electronics 
offers detailed instructions for setting everything up,
or you can check the datasheet (see Sources, page 
150). Finally, go to makezine.com/24/electronics 
and view the Zap-a-Mole Enhanced program, then 
copy and paste it into the Program Editor. Now 
download it to your PICAXE chip.
 The game should start running automatically — 
when an LED lights up, the player must push the 
corresponding button to score — but with some 
important new features. It allows only a limited 
time for the player to press a button, and that time 
gets shorter as the game continues. It won’t let you 
cheat by pressing more than one button at a time, 
and the screen displays your remaining playing time 
as well as your score. The online program listing 
includes comments telling you how to change these 
features, just by retyping a few numbers.
Extreme Sixteen
To make the game “extreme,” I wanted more LEDs 
and buttons. Sixteen seemed a good number, in a 
4×4 grid. The 28X1 doesn’t have enough inputs and 
outputs, but there are ways around this limitation, 
and the techniques I’ll describe may be useful to 
you in other applications in the future.
 For the outputs, we can add a 74HC4514 decoder 
chip, which has 16 output pins, each able to drive 
a single LED (Figure H). Its 4 input pins receive a 
binary-coded number. This means, for example, that 
if the input pins have states 0010 (where 0 means 
low and 1 means high), the chip activates the LED 
attached to output 2. Similarly, pin states 0101 will 
activate output 5. To understand this relationship, 
I encourage you to read an introduction to binary 
arithmetic, which is fundamental in computing (see 
Sources, page 150).
 Conveniently, the PICAXE can create binary 
patterns in its output pins that are exactly compat-
ible with the decoder’s input pins. For instance, the 
statement outpins = 5 will assign value 0101 to the 
first 4 output pins. So, we can connect the PICAXE 
directly with the decoder chip.
 Now, how do we receive inputs from 16 push 
buttons? One method is by using a resistor ladder. 
Figure I shows a ladder consisting of 5 resistors. If 
Fig. D: Pinouts of the PICAXE 28X1 microcontroller 
(some functions omitted for clarity). Fig. E: The 
PICAXE receives its program via a USB cable that 
terminates in a 3.5mm audio plug. Resistors must 
be included as shown, even when the plug is dis-
connected. Fig. F: Manufacturer’s recommendation 
for a 5V regulated power supply. An AC/DC con-
verter may be substituted for the battery.
D
PICAXE 28X1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
1 2
1 3
14
Output 7
Output 6
Output 5
Output 4
Output 3
Output 2
Output 1
Output 0
Positive Power
Negative Power
Input 7
Input 6
Input 5
Input 4
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
1 9
1 8
17
16
1 5
Reset
ADC0
ADC1
ADC2
ADC3
From computer
To computer
Negative Power
Resonator (optional)
Resonator (optional)
Input 0
Input 1
Input 2
Input 3
F
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

149
Make:
H
PICAXE 28X1
generates binary
output on 4 pins
Output pins 0 through 15
to drive 16 LEDs.
74HC4514 Decoder chip reads
binary coded number on four input pins
and delivers a positive output on one pin.
In this example, 0101 binary = 5 decimal.
Check the manufacturer’s data sheet
for actual pin locations on the chip.
Fig. G: Installation
of a 5V power supply 
at the top of a bread-
board. Fig. H: Basic 
principles of the 
74HC4514 decoder. 
Fig. I: With a resistor 
ladder, each push 
button supplies a
different voltage. 
Fig. J: A ladder of 16 
resistors enables one 
ADC pin to identify 
each of 16 push but-
tons. The resistors 
must have a 1%
tolerance to create
an even spread of 
voltages. All are 
150Ω, except for the 
100K pull-up resistor.
\i
0MYXkk
p
CD./',mfckX^\
i\^lcXkfi
(''«=
\c\Zkifcpk`Z
ZXgXZ`kfij
'(«=
Z\iXd`Z
ZXgXZ`kfij
G
5V
5VDC
4V
3V
2V
1V
0V
5VDC
To
ADC
Input
100K
J
I
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

150 Make: Volume 24
these all have the same value, and we apply 5V at 
the top and 0V at the bottom, we can tap into the 
ladder with push buttons and extract the voltages 
shown. If we have more resistors — 16, for instance 
— each step can be 7 of a volt. 
 The 28X1 has some ADC inputs, each of which is 
connected internally with an analog-to-decimal
converter. The chip senses voltage applied to a pin 
and converts it into a digital value from 0 through 
255. If we make a ladder with 16 evenly spaced 
steps, using 150-ohm resistors, and we tap into 
them from 0 volts upward, the PICAXE will convert 
the voltages to values 0, 15, 31, 47, 63, and so on,
up to 255.
 Actually it’s a little more complicated than this, 
because we can’t allow the ADC input pin to “float”
in an unconnected state when no button is pressed.
I added a 100K resistor to take care of this (Figure J, 
previous page). 
 How can all of this be incorporated into the exist-
ing program? Really, you need a new program, and
I already wrote it for you under the title Zap-a-Mole 
Extreme, available for download along with a sche-
matic and parts list. 
More With Your Moles
Is that it? Not really. You could make a snazzy, play-
able enclosure for the game (Figure K.) And there 
are always more things to think about. 
 You could look up matrix encoding, for instance, 
to find an alternate way of sensing multiple devices 
with a smaller number of inputs, or driving multiple 
devices with a smaller number of outputs. Matrix 
encoding is an important topic, because it’s used so 
often — for example, to address memory locations 
inside a computer. 
 You can also find matrix-encoded 4×4, 16-key 
keypads available cheap online. Maybe you could 
use one for the game? You could buy surface-mount 
LEDs and glue one to each button on the keypad. 
Getting voltage to them could be tricky — but I leave 
that to you. 
 How about adding a feature to adjust the game dif-
ficulty? The running speed could be controlled using 
a potentiometer hooked up to another ADC input. 
 And lastly, no game is complete without audio. 
The PICAXE can handle this, too; check the sound 
command in the BASIC manual (link below).
 All of these improvements are enabled by the 
flexibility and power of a microcontroller. It can 
substitute for dozens of old-school logic chips, and 
if you take some time to learn the language that it 
understands, you can make it behave almost like a 
real computer. Not bad for a component that costs 
around $10. 
Sources
Program listings and schematics for
 
»
Zap-a-Mole Enhanced and Extreme:
makezine.com/24/electronics
Data sheet for CD74HC4514 (PDF):
 
»
makezine.com/go/decoder
Binary arithmetic primer:
 
»
makezine.com/go/binary
PICAXE installation and other info (PDF):
 
»
makezine.com/go/picaxe
PICAXE BASIC manual (PDF):
 
»
makezine.com/go/picaxebasic
Charles Platt is the author of Make: Electronics, an intro-
ductory guide for all ages. A contributing editor to MAKE, he 
designs and builds medical equipment prototypes in Arizona.
K
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

151
Make:
Steamy Honeymoon Goggles
TOY INVENTOR’S NOTEBOOK
INVENTED AND DRAWN BY
Bob Knetzger
 W
hen I received a last-minute invita-
tion to a friend’s bachelor party,
I needed to come up with a gift idea, 
and fast. He was planning a steampunk-
themed wedding, and I wanted to give him 
something to fit the occasion. You know the 
old design adage: speed, price, and quality — 
pick any two. Well, for once, this project came 
out fast, cheap, and great!
 The gag gifts at the adult store were pretty 
lame, but the novelty glow-in-the-dark latex 
“balloons” had the right “wacky science” vibe. 
Aha! In a flash, I had my concept: Balloon-
Dispensing Steampunk Honeymoon Night-
Vision Goggles!
 A pair of plastic safety goggles provided 
a sturdy and ready-made base on which to 
hot-glue various parts. A pair of eight-sided, 
threaded, plastic plumbing connectors along 
with some green-tinted cellophane became 
“night-vision” scope tubes. I glued on a
handful of plastic gears, along with a number 
dial from a disposable camera, to add some 
interesting mechanical details. The rest
I found in my broken-toy-parts bin.
 To dispense the glow-in-the-dark balloons,
I made an open-ended cylinder from a piece 
of clear mylar rolled and taped around two 
acrylic rings. A bulb and reflector scrounged 
from a penlight, with coiled wires and bogus 
connections, completed the night-vision look.
 For a more Victorian feel I added some 
scrolled chrome buckles for the strap and 
Photoshopped a few labels to make dials and 
gauges as well as an appropriate nameplate. 
 To finish it off, I added touches of flat-black 
and metallic-brass spray paint — done, just in 
time for the party.
Bob Knetzger is an inventor/designer with 30 years’ experience making all kinds of toys and other fun stuff. 
Bulb and 
reflector
Plastic toy gears
Goggles
6-volt
battery cap
Mylar
“Balloon” dispenser
Acrylic rings
Labels
Buckles
Number dial
Plumbing fittings
Want to see photos
of the final goggles
and more? Go to 
makezine.com/
toyinventor.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Photograph by Jen Siska
By Lee D. Zlotoff
MakeShift
The Scenario: You’re one of a group of eight intrepid girl scouts, all 11 or 12 years old, who are 
off on their own for a hike in a mountain forest to prepare for a future overnighter. Suddenly you’re 
all stopped by the sharp, plaintive peeping of baby birds. Searching for the source, you come upon a 
large tree beside a rocky mountain stream, at the base of which you find a mother hawk struggling 
with a broken wing, helpless to feed or defend her brood in the nest perched high above. It’s clear 
that if you don’t intervene, both the mother and chicks will soon fall prey to predators — and, given 
the location, hiking back out for help is not an option.
The Challenge: The nest is a good 25 feet off the ground, among a circle of sturdy branches, 
below which the tree is an almost perfect cylinder about 3 feet in diameter with no obvious way
to climb. Still, all of you are determined to rescue this family and get them to the wildlife center 
near your base camp some five miles back down the mountain. Yet how can you possibly do that 
without endangering the birds or yourselves? Well, you are scouts, after all, no?
What You’ve Got: All of you are physically fit and range in height from 4 to 5 feet tall. You each 
have a backpack, hiking boots, a water bottle, and a 3-foot-square bandana. You also have among 
you a Leatherman tool, a Swiss Army knife, a basic first-aid kit, a roll of duct tape, and two four-man 
tents of ripstop nylon with the bungee cords and metal tent pegs that go with them. In addition, you 
have an emergency whistle and several pounds of trail mix. But all your cellphones were left back
at the base camp (lest you spend the entire hike texting one another), and alas, you have no cookies. 
So now what?
Send a detailed description of your MakeShift solution with sketches and/or photos to makeshift@
makezine.com by Feb. 25, 2011. If duplicate solutions are submitted, the winner will be determined 
by the quality of the explanation and presentation. The most plausible and most creative solutions 
will each win a MAKE T-shirt and a MAKE Pocket Ref. Think positive and include your shirt size and 
contact information with your solution. Good luck! For readers’ solutions to previous MakeShift 
challenges, visit makezine.com/makeshift.
Lee David Zlotoff is a writer/producer/director among whose numerous credits is creator of MacGyver. He is also 
president of Custom Image Concepts (customimageconcepts.com).
Hawk Rescue!
152 Make: Volume 24
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Make: 153
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Make: Volume 24
154
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

155
Make:
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

TOOLBOX
Photograph planets, record audio tracks, grab a tarp, 
build a shack, find true north, and learn for free.
Whether you need a planetary camera for astron-
omy or a “grown up” webcam for machine vision 
experiments, you’ll find Imaging Source’s products 
appealing. These sub-megapixel USB, FireWire, 
and gigabit Ethernet cameras shine because of 
their versatility. 
 With a sturdy, metal-bodied construction, they’re 
ideal for applications where a normal webcam would 
be too flimsy. The USB version requires no other pow-
er source. They work with all webcam software, and 
an especially versatile control program is included. All 
that’s missing is audio — there’s no microphone. And 
in some circumstances, that can be a blessing.
 For astronomers, these are planetary cameras. 
The astronomy versions of the DMK (monochrome), 
DFK (color), and DBK (color plus infrared) cameras 
come with an adapter that fits a telescope eyepiece 
tube. Aim the telescope at a planet, record a few 
Want more? Check out our searchable online database of tips and tools at makezine.com/tnt. 
Have a tool worth keeping in your toolbox? Let us know at toolbox@makezine.com.
minutes of uncompressed video, then use RegiStax 
(freeware) to sort and align the video frames, pick-
ing out the best so you get the full benefit of brief 
moments of steady air. These cameras will take 
still pictures and time exposures, but they’re not 
designed for faint stars or nebulae.
 For the rest of us, these are also general-purpose 
daytime cameras that accept C- and CS-mount 
video camera lenses. In this role they’re great for 
machine vision, security camera applications, and 
general experimenting. 
 If you write your own software, you can use either 
the regular webcam interface or a more versatile set 
of software tools available from the manufacturer. 
You can control the exposure over a much wider 
range than with a webcam, and unlike a DSLR, 
there’s no shutter to introduce vibration.
—Sharon Covington
Imaging Source USB, FireWire, and Ethernet Cameras
$350 and up astronomycameras.com
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

RSVP Collapsible Silicone Funnel
$7 amzn.to/rsvpfunnel 
Someone gave us this silicone funnel as a housewarming gift, and I looked cross-
eyed at it before shoving it to the back of a drawer. But it turns out that we use it 
all the time. It’s been used to funnel olive oil, homemade limoncello, beans, rice, 
and filling for a door sock. (It’s also a big hit as a toddler toy.) The funnel is 4" in 
diameter and 4" tall when fully expanded, and it does in fact fit in the back of a 
drawer when collapsed. That gives it a big advantage over my old plastic funnel 
set, which practically needed a drawer to itself. It’s also easy to clean. I’m thinking 
of buying a second one (in a fun color) to keep in the car.
—Arwen O’Reilly Griffith
157
Make:
M-Audio Fast Track
$100 m-audio.com
I can remember a time when recording basic multitrack 
audio on a desktop computer was a daunting task and 
cost-prohibitive for most. Thankfully those days are behind 
us, and songwriters looking to record digitally have a num-
ber of affordable USB audio interfaces to choose from.
 At about 100 bucks, the M-Audio Fast Track is one of the 
most affordable options in that category and (as it says 
on the box) aims to do one thing well: “record guitar and 
vocals on your computer.” 
 The unit sports both ¼" instrument and XLR mic jacks 
(with 48V/phantom power) along with a ¼" stereo jack for 
headphones. Resulting audio quality and usability are quite 
nice, and many will appreciate the device’s compatibility 
with the popular Pro Tools recording software (a limited 
version is included). Those looking to get acquainted with 
industry-standard DAWs will find this little number to be 
their “fastest track” to entry.
 Oh, and if you have any trouble installing the included 
software on Mac OS 10.6.4 (like I did), be sure to check
M-Audio’s site for an update.                 —Collin Cunningham
Freescale Tower
Microcontroller System
$99 freescale.com/tower 
Got a project to prototype? The basic 
Freescale Tower kit consists of the 32-bit 
microcontroller board with USB and RS-
232 interfaces, accelerometer, four display 
LEDs, switches, and a potentiometer. 
Additional Tower modules are available, 
including different microcontrollers, an 
LCD graphic display, sensor board, wi-fi 
board, and a prototyping board.
 
The kit’s DVD contains the CodeWarrior 
IDE and supporting MQX software. It also 
includes 4 tutorial labs.
 
The Tower system is easy to set up and 
begin using. After experimenting with the 
labs, I was motivated to wire a solderless 
breadboard with light and temperature 
sensors to the Tower’s side expansion 
port, then modify the lab code to read 
these sensors remotely via the internet. 
No soldering needed! Freescale’s online 
documentation library makes project 
development easy.
—L. Abraham Smith, N3BAH
So
eye
all 
an
dia
dra
set
of b
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

158 Make: Volume 24
TOOLBOX MAKE OUTDOORS
EZ Grabbit
Premium Tarp Holders
$10 (4 to a package) grabbittool.com
I live in an old, leaky yurt. Given the rainy Northern California 
winters, this means I need a good tarp and a way to keep it 
tied down securely.
 Thank goodness for these tarp holders. Each holder is 
made of two pieces, a “dog bone” and a “sleeve.” The dog 
bone goes under the tarp; holding it stationary, you slide the 
sleeve over the tarp and the dog bone to secure it in place. 
The dog bone can be connected to a rope or mounted to a 
structure for more permanent placement.
 You can use these holders anywhere on your tarp (not just 
on the edge), and you can move and reuse them easily. The 
4"-long surface area of the holder creates a very secure hold 
on the tarp — much better than a grommet, which can rip out 
with too much tension.
 EZ Grabbit Tarp Holders can also be used to connect two 
tarps together to make a larger one, or to connect the edges 
of a tarp to create a big bag for moving yard waste.
—Terrie Schweitzer
Zeiss MiniQuick
$170 zeiss.com
If you’ve ever wanted to have a telescope with you at 
all times, you need the Zeiss 5x10 MiniQuick. I found it 
easier to hold steady than other monoculars because of its 
finger-friendly design, and the eyepiece to eye distance is 
comfortable for glasses wearers. The image is very sharp but 
not as bright as regular binoculars, making it unsuitable for 
night sky observing. Turned around, it also functions as a 
2x–5x magnifier, although with some barrel distortion. It can
also be an optical test instrument or component in a larger 
system. Since it’s so lightweight, there’s little excuse to leave 
the house without it.                                                                    —SC
Wood Blaster
Log Splitter Wedge
$10 amzn.to/splitterwedge
If you want to perform amazing feats of 
wood splitting, then you need a splitting 
“grenade” and a sledgehammer.
 
This splitting wedge has a unique 
design that exerts force in multiple 
directions, so it works better than a 
more traditional splitting wedge. 
 
To use it, just tap it into the end of a 
log and pound it in with the sledgeham-
mer. You’ll soon hear the satisfying 
crack of wood splitting. 
 
This device makes a tough job much 
easier; you’ll be amazed at the size of 
logs you can split. And because there 
are no sharp edges, using this tool feels 
a lot safer than using a splitting axe 
with a lot of force.
 
Best of all, when you show your 
friends how it works, they’ll want to try 
it out themselves. You might feel a little 
like Tom Sawyer enticing his friends to 
whitewash the fence.                         —TS
Fiskars 28-Inch
Pro Splitting Axe
$31 amzn.to/splittingax
When you need an axe to split firewood, 
you want one that’s sharp for good 
cutting and lightweight so it’s easier on 
your arms and shoulders. This splitting 
axe from Fiskars fits the bill nicely.
 
The fiberglass composite handle 
keeps the axe light but makes it stronger 
than wood-handled axes. The 2¼lb axe 
head takes and holds an edge well.
 
I’m not a champion wood-splitter, but 
this ax makes it easy for me to split my 
own kindling, and my burly friends can 
use it to fly through a stack of wood in 
no time.                                                —TS
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

159
Make:
TOOLBOX
Parallax RFID 
Read/Write
Module
$50 bit.ly/RFIDreadwrite
Parallax has introduced a new RFID mod-
ule, representing the first economical, fully 
assembled RFID reader/writer for hobbyist 
use. The device allows writing of up to 116 
bytes of 32-bit password-protectable data 
using a simple 9,600-baud asynchronous 
serial connection.
 
The manufacturer’s downloadable docu-
mentation provides full details on basic 
read/write commands. A “read legacy” 
command allows for reading of older style 
read-only tags. Command source code is 
downloadable for the BASIC Stamp 2 as 
well as Propeller object code. This makes 
it easy to serial interface with other micro-
controllers such as Arduino.
 
The RFID read/write module is well con-
structed. The easy access and documented 
commands allowed me to integrate RFID 
into a hacked toy brainwave monitor 
I experimented with, so I could write the 
monitor’s session data to a log on the 
RFID card via a BASIC Stamp 2 interface.
—LAS
Protoflex Adapter
$60 protoflex.net
Protoflex is a cool new electronic prototyping product. 
These IC component adapters are made from thin flex-
ible PCB materials with an adhesive backing. All you do is 
peel and stick. Why didn’t someone think of this before?
 I assembled a prototype in only minutes by sticking 
the Protoflex adapters directly onto a thin plastic case 
without drilling holes or using a protoboard. It worked so 
fast I wanted to do it again. 
 Clever dual-hole solder patterns allow for through-
hole or surface-mount wiring. The smaller hole pattern 
just fits a 30AWG wire and works great to hold it in place 
before soldering.
 Protoflex panels come in SOIC, TSSOP/SSOP, SOT,
SC-70, and DD-PAK IC devices plus adapters for Ribbon 
and D-Sub connectors. If you need to mount through-hole 
components, Protoflex even provides a special tool to 
align the flexible adapters to a 0.100" pitch protoboard. 
These adapters will probably change the way we all 
build circuits.
                                                                                     —Tom Baycura
New image per Ed
BodyGuardz Protective Films
$15–$30 bodyguardz.com
I bought an iPhone 4. “Helicopter glass,” I said in awe. But even helicopters 
get scratched up, so I never dared put anything else in my pocket but a 
hankie or a doggie doo bag. Nothing that could scratch my precious.
 BodyGuardz gives you two sets of skins for your smartphone or iPad, 
plus lifetime replacements, for about 25 bucks. It’s the same tough poly-
urethane film that 3M sells to protect car paint from rocks, so it’s got a nice 
glassy shine and clarity. I can’t tell any difference in touchscreen sensitivity.
 Application is a bit fussy — you spray a soap solution to temporarily 
deactivate the adhesive  — but unlike “dry-apply” films, it allows unlimited 
do-overs to get it placed just right on your precious.           —Keith Hammond
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

160 Make: Volume 24
TOOLBOX
House Proud
Humble Homes by Derek Diedricksen
$19 relaxshacks.com 
This 100% indie-produced book is a hoot, an education, and an inspira-
tion, crammed with Derek “Deek” Diedricksen’s cartoony designs — 
from practical to pie-in-the-sky — for “micro-houses,” small backyard 
retreats, kid forts, treehouses, and other no-cost/low-cost outbuildings. 
 The emphasis here is on the fun and clever use of recycled materials. 
The book is obsessively illustrated with wonderfully wacky cartoons 
and design drawings or, as Deek describes it: “A carpal tunnel-inducing 
barrage of dime store pen sketches.” It all brims with Yankee ingenuity, 
junkyard philosophy, and plenty of eye-rolling yucks.
 The funky energy of Humble Homes reminds me a lot of the Lloyd 
Kahn Shelter books, Malcolm Wells’ solar architecture books, and
other handmade home books of the Whole Earth Catalog era. It’s all 
hand-lettered and drawn, hand-assembled, GBC-bound, and the printing 
was “trash-funded” by selling recyclables. It doesn’t get any more DIY 
than that!
—Gareth Branwyn
Spin Doctor
Programming the Propeller with Spin by Harprit Singh Sandhu
$30 McGraw-Hill
This book is designed to transition users of traditional unicore micro-
controllers such as Arduino and PICs to the opportunities and design 
concerns presented by the octo-core Parallax Propeller microcontroller 
and its high-level Spin programming language.
 After explaining the hardware differences in parallel processors and 
their relationship to the Spin programming language, the author presents 
a series of basic experiments demonstrating pulse-width modulation, 
control of LCD and LED displays, and reading analog input. 
 This is neither a rehash of the official Propeller Manual, nor a substi-
tute; in fact, it’s a companion volume. Sandhu makes ample reference 
to Parallax documentation, providing deeper explanation of topics such 
as memory management, interfacing between the 3.3V Propeller and 5V 
peripherals, and the device’s 32-bit counters.
 While the projects are presented in the context of the Parallax Educa-
tional Kit, no special components beyond a Propeller chip are needed 
for basic experiments. Supporting devices such as a 2×16 LCD display, 
switches, resistors, and potentiometers would be found in the junk box of 
most readers. Advanced projects are presented as well, covering parallel 
processing in the use of stepper and servomotors and accelerometers.
 This book should find a place on any Propellerhead’s bookshelf, 
between Parallax’s Propeller Manual and its Programming and 
Customizing the Multicore Propeller volumes.
—LAS
MAKE LOOKS AT BOOKS
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

161
Make:
Muscles Over Motors
The Human-Powered Home by Tamara Dean
$30 New Society Publishers
I’ve been playing around with the idea of making my own pedal-powered 
devices for a while now, and am waiting no longer now that I’ve come 
across this great primer. The book kicks off with an extensive and fasci-
nating history of human-driven devices and “appropriate” technology, 
moves to an accessible data-driven section on the efficiency of various 
human-machine interactions, and gives a crash course on bicycle engi-
neering for the layperson.
 Throughout, Tamara Dean weaves in inspiring and ingenious uses of 
human power in countries all over the world, as well as current devices 
on the market covering everything from lawn mowers to ice cream makers 
and cellphones. In case you find yourself getting too wrapped up in 19th-
century bicycle designs, the book culminates in detailed descriptions 
and illustrations of projects for adapting various devices to a standard 
pedal setup. Go get your salvaged exercise bike now! All in all, Dean 
makes a fantastic argument for putting your body where your needs are.
—Meara O’Reilly
A Thing Only Its Maker Could Love
The Upside to Irrationality by Dan Ariely
$28 Harper
“To increase your feelings of pride and ownership in your daily life, you 
should take a larger part in creating more of the things you use in your 
daily life,” writes Dan Ariely in his entertaining and insightful new book. 
 My own DIY experiences (which I wrote about in my book, Made by 
Hand: Searching for Meaning in a Throwaway World) confirm what 
Ariely wrote, but Ariely actually conducted a series of experiments 
to arrive at this conclusion. He’s a professor of psychology and a 
behavioral economist at Duke University, and this book (like his earlier 
bestseller, Predictably Irrational) explores the emotional side of human 
behavior regarding decisions about things of value.
 The entire book is a joy to read, but the chapter about the satisfaction 
one gets from making stuff is especially interesting. Ariely’s experi-
ments on test subjects who were asked to make simple objects under 
a variety of conditions revealed “four principles of human endeavor”:
(1) Putting effort into making something not only changes the physical 
thing, it also changes the maker and the maker’s evaluation of the object. 
(2) The more effort we put into making something, the more we love it. 
(3) Not only do we tend to overvalue things we make ourselves, we 
assume that other people will like them as much as we do. 
(4) If we can’t finish a challenging project, we don’t feel attached to it.
 Ariely’s conclusions now run through my mind as I make things, such 
as musical instruments. I really like my cigar box guitars (and I’m glad 
that I like them), but now I know that other people may not be as enam-
ored of them as I am. That’s OK! Other people should be making, and 
loving, their own stuff.                                                             —Mark Frauenfelder
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

162 Make: Volume 24
TOOLBOX
TOOLBOX
Wikiversity
Collaborative Learning
Free wikiversity.org
If I am nothing else, I am a student.
For any skill I want to learn, I delve into 
books and websites, but unfortunately,
not all skills can be learned without 
a classroom. Luckily, this problem is 
slowly disappearing with the introduc-
tion of the next level of Wikipedia — 
Wikiversity.
 
When I found this site by accident,
I was elated. Normally, when I wanted 
to learn a new skill such as a foreign 
language, I was forced to find courses 
on local campuses that required tuition,
or use online programs that cost several
hundred dollars. With Wikiversity, I’m 
able to learn a language, practice with 
classmates, and use external references 
to keep learning. 
 
The biggest drawback to Wikiversity 
is the lack of public awareness about it, 
which leads to a lack of participation. 
Some subjects aren’t covered in great 
depth, or covered at all. The best way to 
rectify this is to spread the news about 
Wikiversity. I encourage everyone, 
whether you’re a student or someone 
who has never been in a college setting, 
to give a Wikiversity course a try; you 
will be pleasantly enlightened.
—Eric Ponvelle
Iomega eGo BlackBelt
Portable Hard Drive
$220 go.iomega.com
This excellent 1TB, 5,400rpm hard drive is not only the 
perfect portable drive, it’s great for desktop storage. When on 
the road, you don’t have to worry about dropping the device: 
Iomega claims the drive is shock resistant and able to with-
stand 84" falls onto industrial carpeting. That, plus its small 
profile and 9.6oz weight, make it a cinch to carry around.
 My favorite feature is that it gets power from the data 
cable. Not having an AC wall wart reduces desktop clutter 
and further reinforces its convenience as a traveling drive. 
On the Mac edition there are two FW800 ports (FW800 to 
400 cable included) as well as one USB 2.0 port, while the 
PC version features USB 3.0. Either way, daisy-chaining is a 
given. Bonus extras include downloadable security software 
as well as a 3-year warranty.                                —John Baichtal
Edsyn FXF14 Fuminator Fume Extractor
$109 (not including filters) edsyn.com
A fume extractor is a simple device; it’s just a fan that pulls air from 
your work area through a filter and out the back of the unit. Ever 
since Marc de Vinck made one that fits in a mint tin for around $10 
(see MAKE Volume 19, page 123), the price tag on retail models 
has seemed unnecessarily high. That said, Edsyn’s FXF14 (which is 
made in the USA) works great, has a small desktop footprint, and 
(in shiny, static-safe black) just plain looks good.
 Edsyn claims its proprietary rotating filter system works eight 
times better than a stationary filter, and the pivoting head on the 
FXF14 makes it easy to get it close to your work. The fan is so 
quiet that sometimes I forget to turn the thing off.
 I really enjoy mine and use it for soldering electronics as well as 
jewelry in my small apartment workshop. I usually feel a bit guilty 
after splurging on a fancy new tool, but your lungs can easily 
justify the investment of an effective (and attractive) benchtop 
solder-fume extractor.                                                         —Becky Stern
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

163
Make:
John Baichtal is a contributor to 
MAKE, makezine.com, and the GeekDad 
blog on wired.com.
Tom Baycura is an independent electri-
cal engineering consultant with more 
than 15 years’ experience in electrical 
and electromechanical prototype design.
Sharon Covington is aiming to be a
science writer and the kind of person 
who knows exactly how to use both
a pipette and a semicolon.
Tim Lillis is a freelance illustrator and 
avid DIYer.
Meara O’Reilly (mearaoreilly.com) is a 
sound designer, an artist-in-residence 
at the Exploratorium, and lives in a yurt-
dome tent in Northern California.
Eric Ponvelle is a graduate of Nicholls 
State University in English with a
concentration in technical writing.
Sean Michael Ragan is a jack-of-all-
trades and master of, er — almost one.
Terrie Schweitzer lives in a yurt on a 
goat ranch in Sonoma County, Calif., 
and digs permaculture.
L. Abraham Smith, amateur radio
licensee N3BAH, works with open-
source hardware and software 
development every chance he gets, 
when not practicing law.
Have you used something worth
keeping in your toolbox? Let us know at 
toolbox@makezine.com.
Tricks of the Trade By Tim Lillis  
Track true north.
Trying to find true north 
but don’t have a compass? 
Don’t worry. As long as you 
know the time, you can find 
your way.
This trick works on a watch 
if you have one, but if you 
don’t you can draw a clock 
face in the dirt or on some 
paper. Draw a circle, and 
within that, an hour hand 
pointing toward the sun.
Mark the current time
where you drew your first 
line. Based on that, figure out 
where 12 would be and draw 
that in. If it’s currently day-
light savings time (summer) 
use 1 instead of 12. 
Bisect the angle between 
the current time and 12, and 
draw another line. North will 
be on the far side of that 
line from the sun as long as 
you’re in the non-tropical 
Northern Hemisphere.
Have a trick of the trade? Send it to tricks@makezine.com. 
Titan X2 Flash Laptop Case
$310 amzn.to/x2flashlaptop or titanluggageusa.com
The X2 is a badass laptop case with a hard shell, a thick foam-
padded interior, and enough extra organizational compartments 
inside that it could work as a briefcase. In fact, it’s about the size 
of one and has a briefcase-style handle in addition to a removable 
shoulder strap. 
 Some people might get scared off by the hard shell, thinking it’ll 
weigh a ton. In fact, the Flash weighs only 3.3lbs empty, so you’ll 
be able to carry it easily on the bus. The hard shell offers great 
protection from ordinary dangers, but don’t expect much more 
(don’t let it get run over by a truck). Beyond the utilitarian angle, 
the Flash just looks sweet. Aside from a laptop, it’s perfect for 
transporting nuclear codes, biological samples, or the blueprints 
for a giant laser — and even if you don’t have anything like that to 
carry, the Flash totally looks the part.                                             —JB
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®


VDOHV#HSLORJODVHUFRP
Visit epiloglaser.com/make.htm for more information and 
to receive your brochure kit with engraved and cut samples! 
/$6(5,7
&XWLW(QJUDYHLW0DUNLW
Laser Engraving, Cutt ing and 
Marking Systems from Epilog Laser
From creating and personalizing 3D models, 
to engraving photos on keychains, to marking 
high-tech gadgets, our laser systems create the 
products you see here and more!
Laser Systems Starting at $7,995
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

165
Make:
Photograph by Tom Parker
Chinese Abacus  By Tom Parker
$17.95 
Wood-frame Chinese 
abacus bought online.
$0.93 
Chinese abacus made 
of pennies, twigs, and 
coat-hanger wire.
Sometimes it costs more to buy it than to make it from the money itself.
MAKE MONEY
T
he Chinese abacus, or counting frame, is an 
ancient calculator using beads on rods for both 
decimal and hexadecimal computation. In many 
parts of the world, schoolchildren still use these 
ingenious devices to do large-scale addition, sub-
traction, multiplication, division, and even square- 
and cube-root operations at astounding speeds.
 I made mine in the “Adirondack porch furniture” 
style, with a frame of dried chokecherry twigs. Since 
twigs aren’t perfectly straight, I clamped each one in 
a jig so I could drill orderly and parallel holes using a 
drill press. First I drilled flat-bottomed holes for the 
joints of the frame, using Forstner bits. For the rods, 
I drilled carefully spaced sets of holes, sized so that 
I could press-fit coat-hanger wire. If you size your 
holes right, the frame and rods just snap together.
 The traditional Chinese abacus has seven beads 
on each rod, two above and five below. These are 
usually made of wood, glass, or stone, rounded for 
easy manipulation. I wanted to make my beads out 
of pennies, but flat disks would be hard to separate 
and slide with your fingers. So I chose pre-1982 
pennies, which are 95% copper and easy to deform. 
(The newer zinc pennies tend to snap when bent.)
 I center-drilled each penny first. Then I fashioned 
a crude deforming tool using a bench vise. To one 
jaw of the vise, I glued an old cylindrical bushing the 
same diameter as a penny. I sawed off a 7" hex 
bolt, filed it to a smoothly rounded stub, and glued it 
to the other jaw, just opposite the bushing. This gave 
me a “tooth” I could use to deform each penny with 
a simple clamping operation.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

167
Make:
Puzzle This By Bob Harris
MAKE’s favorite puzzles. (When you’re ready to check your answers, visit makezine.com/24/aha.)
By Tom Parker
AHA!
Circular Reasoning: Planet Earth
You’re an astronaut from the Andromeda Galaxy, lounging about the Intergalactic Space Station. 
Another astronaut from the Boötes Dwarf Galaxy has just returned from Earth. Instead of lecturing about 
the geography, music, sports, politics, literature, history, and food of Earth, she decides to debrief her 
colleagues by presenting them with a puzzle about the small Milky Way Galaxy planet.
 Each question refers to the answer to the previous question. But this puzzle’s solution is a final large ana-
gram for the first and last letters of all 15 responses, which reveals the astronaut’s most important discovery.
 Take the first and last letters of all 15 answers and anagram them here to fill in the 30 blanks, spelling 
a six-word sentence describing the expertise of this magazine’s readers:
K_XkZ`kp`jefnk_\
ZXg`kXcf]Xe`e[\g\e[\ek
eXk`fe%I\dfm\fe\c\kk\i
]ifdk_\ZflekipeXd\
Xe[XeX^iXdk_\
i\dX`e[\ikfi\m\Xck_\
gcliXck\id]fi`kj
Zlii\eZp%
8e\`^_Yfi`e^Zflekip
lj\jXZlii\eZpf]k_\
jXd\eXd\%N_XkËjk_\
jlieXd\f]`kjZlii\ek
gi`d\d`e`jk\i6
8[[knfc\kk\ijkf
k_\gi`d\d`e`jk\iËj
jlieXd\Xe[XeX^iXd
`kkf]`e[fe\f]k_Xk
ZflekipËjjgXZ\gif^iXdj%
K_\knf\okiXc\kk\ijZXe
Y\i\XiiXe^\[`ekfk_\
gfjkXcXYYi\m`Xk`fe
f]n_`Z_L%J%jkXk\6
8[[knfc\kk\ijkf
k_\jkXk\ËjeXd\kf^\k
X[`]]\i\ekL%J%jkXk\#
k_\Y`ik_gcXZ\f]XL%J%
gi\j`[\ek%@en_Xkkfne
nXj_\Yfie6
I\dfm\fe\c\kk\i
]ifdk_\kfneeXd\
Xe[XeX^iXd`kkf
dXb\k_\eXd\f]
Xeff[c\jflg%
Fen_XkZfek`e\ek
[`[`kfi`^`eXk\6
K_\Zfek`e\ekeXd\nXj
lj\[Ypk_\IfdXejkf
i\]\ikffe\f]k_\`i
gifm`eZ\j#cfZXk\[fe
k\ii`kfipefnY\cfe^`e^
kfknfdf[\ieeXk`fej%
Fecpfe\_Xj\m\i
_fjk\[XeFcpdg`Zj%
N_Xk`j`kjZXg`kXc6
8jdXccjflk_\ieL%J%Z`kp
f]k_\jXd\eXd\`j_fd\kf
XgfglcXiYXe[n_fj\
]`ijkj`e^c\`e(0/(nXjeXd\[
]fiXe`ek\ieXk`feXc
YifX[ZXjk`e^jpjk\d]fle[\[
[li`e^k_\:fc[NXi%
N_XkËj`kZXcc\[6
@eAXelXip)'('#
[\jg`k\`kjeXd\#
k_Xke\knfibY\^Xe
GXj_kf$cXe^lX^\
YifX[ZXjkj`en_Xk
[\ej\cpgfglcXk\[
Zflekip6
K_\dfjkgfglcXi
jgfik`ek_XkZflekiplj\j
k_\jXd\nfi[kfi\]\i
kfk_\Z\ek\if]k_\]`\c[#
XgXike\ij_`g#^\kk`e^
XdXeflk#fiXj\kf]
jkldgj%N_Xknfi[6
8jflk_\ie8]i`ZXe
ZflekipgcXp\[k_Xk
^Xd\Xk`kj_`^_\jk
Èk\jkÉ c\m\c]ifd(00)
lek`cgfc`k`ZXclg_\XmXcj
\e[\[k_\`iZXgXZ`kpkf
]`\c[XZfdg\k`k`m\j`[\%
N_Xk`j`kjZXg`kXc6
K_\Z`kpËjZfcfe`XceXd\
Y\^`ejk_\knf$nfi[eXd\
f]X[`j_f]d`eZ\[Y\\]j\im\[
`eYifnejXlZ\%8eX^iXdk_\
j\Zfe[nfi[kf]`e[k_\
jlieXd\f]Xe<e^c`j_gf\k%
N_Xkb`e[f]gf\d[`[_\ni`k\
XYflkD\cXeZ_fcp6
K_Xkgf\k[`\[`e
XD\[`k\iiXe\XeZflekip
n_`Z_^`m\j`kjeXd\
kfXjkpc\f]ZXcc`^iXg_p
Xe[Xb`e[f]kpg\YXj\[
fek_\ZXcc`^iXg_p%
N_XkËjk_\jkpc\ZXcc\[6
K_\jkpc\eXd\ZfekX`ej
k_\jlieXd\f]XYfo\i
n_f]fl^_kXY`qXii\(0.-
dXkZ_n`k_ni\jkc\i
BXea`@efb`k_XkXdflek\[
kfc`kkc\dfi\k_Xe@efb`
b`Zb`e^_`d`ek_\c\^j]fi
Xe_fli%@en_XkZ`kp
nXjk_\]`^_k6
8[[fe\c\kk\ikfk_\
Z_XiXZk\ieXd\Xe[
XeX^iXd`kkf^\kk_\
jlieXd\f]XeXZZlj\[L%J%
gi\j`[\ek`XcXjjXjj`en_f
c`m\[]fiXcdfjkknfp\Xij`e
k_\Jfm`\kLe`fe%
@en_XkÈN_`k\Iljj`XeÉ
Z`kp[`[_\c`m\6
K_\ZXg`kXcZ`kp
Y\cfe^jkfXe`jcXe[
eXk`fen_\i\X]Xdflj
_Xi[$kf$]`e[Z_`c[i\eËj
Z_XiXZk\i`jZXcc\[
ÈNf_$i`%ÉN_Xk`j_\
ZXcc\[`e8d\i`ZX6
.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

168 Make: Volume 24
Ever thought about trying to make something to 
last? It’s a hard problem: moths, rust, fire, thieves, 
and time versus the works of the mighty.
 Take a walk through an old cemetery. The Mount 
Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Mass., is one of my 
favorites. Acid rain is dissolving some of the marble 
and limestone headstones so that you can’t even 
read them. 
 By contrast, bronze ornaments and plaques hun-
dreds of years old look brand new. Unfortunately 
some of them are missing; they’ve been pried off
by scavengers to sell for scrap. That’s not a new 
problem — perhaps some of the bronze in those 
items came from da Vinci sculptures melted for 
cannon in Renaissance wars — hence old stone 
sculptures are more abundant than metal ones.
 But even stone isn’t safe. The looted pyramids, 
stripped of their limestone sheathing. The Sphinx’s 
nose. The Venus de Milo’s arms. Unfortunately, 
stone breaks rather than bending when accident or 
malice befalls it. 
 Marble statues in Greece were even crushed 
and fired down in limekilns to make mortar. Aztec 
temples in Mexico were broken up to build cobble-
stone streets and walls of churches. In my own 
hometown, a beautiful domed library was torn 
down to make room for a motel, the granite slabs 
and stones shipped off to build walls elsewhere. 
Only the granite columns remain, moved to a park.
 So what lasts without being buried? Wherever
I go in the world I see really ancient stone bowls and 
other funny little sculptures made from hard stone. 
They aren’t big or square enough to split down and 
build a wall out of. They’re somewhat useful and 
people keep them around. They can be made much 
thicker than ceramic items and are less likely to break. 
 For example, here’s the worst-maintained museum 
in the world, in Fujian Province, China (Figure A).
It’s basically a vacant lot with a lot of artifacts piled 
in it. A collection of things that have withstood the 
Make a gift to eternity in about two hours.
Carve a Stone Bowl
HEIRLOOM TECHNOLOGY
By Tim Anderson
»
Photography by Tim Anderson
ravages of war, monsoons, and cultural revolution. 
Objects that won’t rot, burn, melt, break, or be cut 
up to make something else of value. Notice the 
preponderance of stone bowls.
 Now it’s our turn. Let’s also make something 
that will truly last. Fortunately, tools with diamond-
studded cutters have become cheap and abundant. 
They make stone carving amazingly fast and easy. 
The same techniques seen here can of course be 
used to make any sort of stone objects you desire.
 My bowl is heavy and shallow because I plan to 
use it for a mortar to make nut butter. And I want it 
to last forever.
A
Angle grinder
Diamond abrasive disk
Marking pen and 
tin cans
Dust mask
Safety goggles
Hammer
Chisels
Clamp
Metal wedge I used 
an aluminum wedge 
from the scrap bin.
Big hard rock
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
 First, a few notes regarding materials. You can buy 
an imported angle grinder for a few dollars almost 
anywhere. When I travel in remote areas of the 
world, if there’s electricity, there’s an angle grinder. 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

169
Make:
An angle grinder that costs $10 new is worth exactly 
that. You’ll keep buying better ones until you get one 
that lasts.
!
WARNING: The angle grinder is an 
incredibly dangerous and useful tool. Wear 
safety goggles, or better yet a full face shield 
and leather protective gear. An image search for 
“angle grinder injury” will scare the hell out of 
you. You’ll want a guard on yours. 
 (Unfortunately mine is missing its guard because 
I found it that way in the trash. The former owner 
threw it out when the switch burned out. The re-
placement switch cost a few dollars online.)
 The diamond abrasive disk is a “dry cut segment-
ed” masonry blade. Imported ones are available 
online for a few dollars, or wherever cheap tools are 
sold. Mine was $7. Goes through granite like you 
wouldn’t believe. Opens up whole new worlds of 
recreational stone carving. Don’t accidentally open 
your veins with it, OK?
Carve the Bottom
Let’s get started. Does the stone “ring true”? Hang 
it from a cord and tap it all over (Figure B). The ear 
reveals a few spots where cracks and flaws deaden 
the sound. Nothing serious. 
 Mark a cutting line for a flat bottom of the bowl. 
A tin can or plastic tub flexes to make an approxi-
mately planar line around the stone (Figure C).
 Clamp the stone securely, then cut around the 
line with your diamond wheel (Figure D). Don’t cut 
yourself. I did, fortunately not badly.
 Chisel off the end of the stone, then grind the end 
of the stone flat.
Carve the Lip
Mark a cutting line for the lip of the bowl. I used this 
high-precision height gauge (Figure E). Clamp the 
stone, then cut all around the line as deep as you can.
 Split the end off the stone with a wedge (Figures F 
and G). You just made a lid for your bowl!
Hollow the Bowl
Mark the inner edge of the lip of your bowl. Cut 
slots into the bowl (Figure H), and then break out 
the standing stubs of waste with a chisel or wedge. 
Repeat to achieve your desired depth. 
 
Grind the Inside Smooth
Grind the inside of the bowl smooth with the edge of 
the grinding wheel (Figure I). You’ve made a bowl! 
 This article shows the first bowl I ever made. It 
took two hours according to the time stamps on my 
photos, and most of that was taking pictures and 
various distractions. Who knew stone carving could 
be so easy! Diamonds really are a girl’s best friend 
after all, and the rest of us, too.
 Enjoy your bowl, eternity! Hmm. How’d that be for 
the inscription? 
Tim Anderson (mit.edu/robot) is the co-founder of Z Corp.
See a hundred more of his projects at instructables.com.
B
E
H
C
F
G
I
D
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

170 Make: Volume 24
Before Alessandro Volta invented the battery, 
the only way to produce electricity on demand was 
to use a friction machine and a Leyden jar — and 
except for parlor tricks, there wasn’t much use for 
this form of electricity.
 The problem was that the electricity generated in 
this fashion produced a single, big, instantaneous 
spark that, while entertaining (see “Remaking 
History” in MAKE Volume 21), wasn’t usable in 
any practical way. 
 In 1799, Professor Volta was hard at work in 
his laboratory at the University of Pavia in Italy, 
investigating his idea that under certain conditions, 
dissimilar metals placed next to each other could 
generate an electrical current.
 If this was so, he reckoned, then scientists could 
produce constant, even flows of electricity. Volta 
stacked alternating metal plates of zinc and copper. 
Between each group of plates he inserted disks of 
cardboard moistened with a weak saline solution.
 This assembly became known as the voltaic pile 
— the first device that produced a steady source of 
electrical current. (An alternate configuration was 
his couronne de tasses, a “crown of cups” of saline 
solution linked by copper and zinc strips.)
 When Volta published his findings in March 1800, 
the excitement in the scientific community was 
palpable. Sir Humphry Davy called the voltaic
battery “an alarm-bell to experimenters in every 
part of Europe.”
 Soon, scientists were applying constant-current 
electricity to just about everything they could, 
eagerly studying and documenting the effects. 
Ultimately the scientific unit of electromotive force, 
the volt, would be named for Volta. 
 Less than six weeks after Volta wrote to the
president of London’s Royal Society with his find-
ings, two British chemists, William Nicholson and 
Anthony Carlisle, were able to decompose water 
into its two component gases by electrolysis,
applying electricity from a battery based on
Volta’s design. 
Alessandro Volta and Electrodeposition
REMAKING HISTORY
By William Gurstelle
»
Before the chemists of the
19th century understood
electrochemistry, most metal 
items were made from one
solid hunk of metal; the same
on the inside, outside, and
everywhere in between.
 This discovery was soon followed by Davy’s
production of electric light from a continuous
spark in the gap between electrodes (see “Remaking
History,” MAKE Volume 20), and by perhaps the 
most commercially important of all early electro-
chemical applications: the electrodeposition of 
metals. 
 Before the chemists of the 19th century under-
stood electrochemistry, most metal items were 
made from one solid hunk of metal; the same on 
the inside, outside, and everywhere in between. 
Most silver forks and knives, for example, were solid 
sterling silver, making them very expensive. 
 Using Volta’s battery, with small amounts of metal 
salts and the right catalysts, it was possible to elec-
troplate inexpensive metals with a thin, hard, and 
economical coating of pure nickel, copper, silver, 
or gold. 
 The Italian chemist Luigi Brugnatelli, a friend and 
colleague of Volta, invented electroplating in 1805, 
successfully plating silver medals in gold. The English 
caught on a few decades later, and by mid-century 
factories were mass-producing immense quantities 
of silver-plated teapots, silverware, hairbrushes, snuff 
boxes, and more, making life a little more refined, 
even luxurious, for the working classes.  
 In this issue’s project, we’ll use Volta’s invention to 
do our own copper electroplating, using materials 
found in most hardware stores.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

171
Make:
Photography by Ed Troxell
A
MATERIALS
Copper sulfate (pentahydrate), about 175g sold
as root killer in the drain cleaner section of hard-
ware stores (brands include Rooto 1185 or Roebic 
K-77), or in 25g bottles from the Maker Shed 
(makershed.com), item #ZUNCC19
Sulfuric acid, about 125ml from the hardware 
store shelf next to the copper sulfate, or in 25ml 
bottles from Maker Shed #ZUNCS10A
Dishwashing liquid
Copper sheet, 1"×3" from the hardware store.
Brass sheet, 1"×3" from the hardware store. Get 
extra if you want to make more (or bigger) signs.
Glass loaf baking pan, 1½qt 
Copper wire, 16 gauge, 2' length 
Wood block, approx. 2"×6"×1" 
D cell battery (1.5V) and battery holder or low-volt-
age DC power supply 
Test/jumper leads with alligator clips (2) such as 
Maker Shed #MKEL16
Wax candle
TOOLS
Tinsnips or heavy scissors
Drill with 6" bit
Graduated cylinder, 50ml or 100ml Maker Shed 
#YLBGB24 or #YLBGB26
Beaker, 400ml
Scale grams or ounces
Bucket, large bowl, or 4-cup measuring cup
Glass stirring rod
Rubber gloves 
Splash-proof goggles Maker Shed #YLBCA28
Make a Copper-Plated Sign
1. Cut 1×3 strips of copper and brass, then drill a 
6" hole in each as shown in Figures A and B. 
2. Prepare the wood block by drilling holes as shown 
in Figures A and C, so that the electrodes will be 
suspended on opposite sides of the loaf pan. Next, 
cut and bend two 12" copper wires as in Figure A.   
3. Measure 6oz (170g) of copper sulfate (Figure D)
and mix it into 24oz (700ml) of water in a clean 
bucket, bowl, or large measuring cup. Stir until
dissolved, but don’t worry if a small amount
doesn’t dissolve. 
!
CAUTION: Put on your rubber gloves and 
splash-proof eye protection for the next 2 steps 
and all steps thereafter that require you to 
handle the acid solutions.
4. Slowly add 3oz (89ml) of concentrated sulfuric 
acid to the copper sulfate solution (Figure E). Be 
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

172
Make: Volume 24
William Gurstelle is a contributing editor of MAKE.
M
K
I
J
careful with this stuff — it is corrosive and highly 
toxic. Set aside. 
5. Pour 350ml of water into the beaker. Slowly and 
carefully add 35ml of sulfuric acid to the beaker 
(Figure F, previous page). Stir with the glass 
stirring rod.
6. Thoroughly clean the brass and copper strips 
with dishwashing detergent and water. Rinse well 
and dry thoroughly. Use the wax candle to draw
a design on the brass strip (Figures G and H). You 
can also try stenciling a design in wax.
7. Immerse the brass strip in the beaker of diluted 
sulfuric acid (Figure I). Remove it after 2 minutes. 
The acid prepares the metal for plating by removing 
oxides and other impurities. Electroplating profes-
sionals refer to this operation as “pickling.”
8. Insert the wire hooks into the holes in the wood 
block and bend the wire so it lays flat on the block, 
taping the wire to the block if necessary. Then
hang the brass and copper strips from the hooks 
(Figure J). The side of the brass strip with the wax 
design must face the copper strip. 
 
9. Pour the copper sulfate solution into the glass 
baking pan. Don’t overfill. Then place the wood 
block across the glass pan. Make certain the copper 
and brass strips are fully immersed in the copper 
sulfate solution (Figure K). 
10.  Use the alligator clip leads to connect the cop-
per plate to the positive battery terminal and the 
brass plate to the negative battery terminal. You’re 
electroplating! Let the electricity flow for approxi-
mately 2 minutes (Figure L).
 
11. Remove and rinse with lots of water, then rub 
with a soft cloth to polish off any wax traces. Your 
electroplated sign is complete (Figure M).
12. To dispose of the solutions, don’t pour them 
directly down a storm sewer.  Run cold water in your 
sink or bathtub and pour the solutions in, flushing 
them down with plenty of running water. Clean all 
the glassware with running water.
L
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

D8B<1Dfe\p
DXb\DX^Xq`e\
nXekjkf_\cgjlggfik
pflifi^Xe`qXk`feK_\
gif^iXd`jj`dgc\1
■Pflj\ccD8B<jlYjZi`gk`fej]fi
*+%0,]fife\p\Xi+`jjl\j %
■Pflik\Xd\Xiej,'fi(.%,'
]fi\m\ipjlYjZi`gk`fepflj\cc
■>fkfdXb\q`e\%Zfd&dXb\dfe\p
gif^iXdkfj`^elg%
dXb\q`e\%Zfd&dXb\dfe\pgif^iXd
Pflik\Xd\Xiej,'f]
\m\ipjlYjZi`gk`fejfc[
8e\ngif^iXd]fijZ_ffcj#ZclYj#
Xe[XdY`k`fljdXb\i^iflgj%
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Make: Marketplace
www.iFixit.com • 1.866.613.4948
You fix it.  
We make it easy.
Parts & Upgrades for  
iPhone, iPod, and Mac.
We save you money by helping you  
repair your Mac or iPod yourself.
Installing  
iPod Nano  
2nd Generation  
Display
HOT 
iPhone Part
iPhone 3G 
Replacement Battery 
$14.95 (was $19.95)
Repair your iPhone 3G for a fraction of Apple’s 
service price with this REPLACEMENT BATTERY.
Shown here with 
optional stand
Table size 26” x 8”

O
10000 RPM computer-  

O
    controlled Spindle
Stiff cast iron frame

O
Space-saving footprint

O
Requires basic 115VAC 

O
   household electrical service
Designed for disassembly  

O
   for moving
Optional accessories:  

O
   4th Axis, Digitzing Probe, 
   Reverse Engineering  
   CNC Scanner
Real CNC for Makers 
Product Information and 
online ordering at
www.tormach.com
$6200
(plus shipping)
3-Axis Mill
Introducing the PCNC 770:  The ﬁrst real machine 
tool designed for your basement shop or other 
small space.  At over 650lbs, this isn’t your 
typical small desktop mill.  Tormach PCNCs 
are the ultimate maker machines – 
don’t let your tools hold back your 
creativity.   Whether you’re a 
jeweler, artist, prototyper, 
builder, engineer, or hobbyist, a 
Tormach PCNC will expand 
your possibilities and 
enable your ideas.
The PCNC 770 
Features:
We have  
what you  
need for your  
next project. 
LEDS  .  CONNECTORS 
RELAYS  .  SOLENOIDS  .  FANS 
ENCLOSURES  .  MOTORS 
WHEELS  .  MAGNETS 
POWER  SUPPLIES  .  PC  BOARDS 
SWITCHES  .  LIGHTS  .  BATTERIES  
and many more items....       
Discount Prices   .   Fast Shipping 
   
www.allelectronics.com 
Thousands of Electronic Parts  
Available Today! 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Make: Marketplace
www.frontpanelexpress.com
(206) 768 - 0602
•
Cost-effective prototypes 
 
and production runs
•
 
Wide range of materials or 
 
customization of provided material
•
 
Automatic price calculation
•
 
Fabrication in 1, 3 or 5 days
FRONT PANELS 
& ENCLOSURES
Customized front panels can be easily 
designed with our free software 
Front Panel Designer
Visit  us  at  Electronica  2010,  along  with
Schaeffer AG,  in  Hall  B5,  Booth  519
WITH MOTION IN MIND
the new equation in jewelry
+
=
www.kinektdesign.com
watch our video
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

176 Make: Volume 24
Matthew Wirtz of Eagle, Colo., is soon to be co-owner of 
Bonfire Brewing Company.
■ My first brewing experience came via a
Mr. Beer kit. The result, something akin to brownish 
vinegar, left much to be desired. I knew I needed 
better equipment, so I started with a few plastic 
buckets and a turkey fryer. My results improved, and 
I was hooked, but not satisfied. I wanted a system 
that allowed me to make beer from scratch — no 
more extracts, no more Mr. Beer.
 I spent a few weeks formulating ideas and sketch-
ing out the mad science it would take to give life to 
my newfound passion. I developed a parts list as
I went along, and scoured thrift stores and badgered 
friends for the necessary components: essentially, 
two pots or kettles to brew the beer in; a frame or 
stand to hold the kettles; a way to heat the beer; 
and a pump to circulate the contents through the 
system. An old steel table became the base for the 
stand, and abandoned kegs from a local liquor store 
served as my kettles. The table formerly had a glass 
top, so I had to fill in the gaps with scrap metal and 
use more scraps to complete the basic framework. 
With some amateur welding and a fresh coat of 
paint, I soon had the infrastructure in place.
 Next, I needed some heat. With my old system, I’d 
used propane to boil the wort (unfermented beer). 
I wanted my “FrankenBrewery” to run on electricity, 
not only for consistency in temperature but also 
in case I ever found a way to power it with the sun. 
My solution divided the system into two parts: 
high-voltage and low. The front control panel was 
designed to run on 12V DC, and a sealed NEMA box 
housed the 240V AC power for the heating ele-
ments. For temperature control, I adapted a PWM 
circuit to vary the power to the elements.
 Next, I developed a way to move my brew from 
kettle to kettle. The use of an electric ball valve 
allowed me to remotely control flow from the pump. 
Using a mix of copper and PEX tubing for the main 
routes, I incorporated a quick-change panel on 
the front to help move fluid around using only one 
pump. I was ready for a test run.
 On a frigid Colorado afternoon, I hooked up the 
power and started flipping switches. Lo and behold, 
rather than the lights flickering and the machine 
rising up and smashing through the door, it worked 
like a charm. Since the inaugural run, several 
delicious batches of beer have flowed through my 
creation, with the process becoming more familiar 
and more fulfilling each time.
Photograph by Matthew Wirtz
My Own FrankenBrewery
By Matthew Wirtz
HOMEBREW
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Welcome to our Holiday Gift Guide! 
Discover magical DIY projects, components, 
tools, and books handpicked by the editors 
and staff of MAKE magazine and available 
for purchase at makershed.com.
4
5
1
3
2
1. Mechamo Crab Kit
Product Code MKGK2
2. Pocket-Sized Digital 
Storage Oscilloscope
Product Code 
MKSEEED11
3. Mini-Theremin
Product Code MKGK10
4. Mini-Trebuchet
Product Code MKRTL1
5. OLLO Action Kit
Product Code MKOL1
More Great Gifts Inside!
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Share It Online
And don’t forget to share your experience. 
Whether you just soldered your first merit badge 
with your kid or took on an entire drip irrigation 
system with an Arduino, share it with others. 
Take some pics or video. Post it to Make: Projects 
(makeprojects.com). Tweet it. Or just email us. 
Even in-progress reports are welcome and inspira-
tional to other makers. 
 As John Park said to me the other night, 
“Resolve to do new stuff and tell people about it 
on a blog, Flickr, forums — but somehow put it to 
the community.” 
 I’ll toast to that. Happy New Year, Makers!
W
e tried out a cool new idea at Bay Area 
Maker Faire 2010: we hosted a Learn 
to Solder tent where people of all ages 
could sit down and learn to solder for the very 
first time. Under the supportive tutelage of Mitch 
Altman, Jimmie P. Rodgers, and a band of vol-
unteers, thousands of attendees donned safety 
goggles, picked up a soldering iron, and emerged 
minutes later proudly wearing the product of their 
new skill — a blinking LED merit badge (brilliantly 
designed by our own Marc de Vinck). 
 For two days, thousands of people sporting their 
freshly minted, flashing badges of accomplishment 
— transformed by this simple gateway project and 
flushed with confidence — were suddenly looking 
for their next project. 
 We repeated this Learn to Solder activity with 
the same success at Maker Faire Detroit and 
World Maker Faire in New York. Each time, it’s 
a refreshing and very personal reminder of the 
transformative effect that learning a new skill
has on people, and by extension on the DIY com-
munity. It’s been wonderfully rejuvenating to the 
entire MAKE team. So as 2011 approaches, we 
thought, “What a perfect New Year’s resolution
for makers of all ages.” 
Learn (and Teach) a New Skill
In this year’s Holiday Gift Guide and Maker Shed 
store (makershed.com), you’ll find hundreds of 
kits, books, and tools designed to help you develop 
and build upon a new skill. Learn to solder; design 
a circuit; program an Arduino; build a simple com-
pressed air rocket (yes, they really do go up to 300 
feet high); make a cracker box amplifier; learn to 
sew with one of our sock monkey kits. 
 Learn a new tool, skill, or technique, but then 
pass it along. You wouldn’t believe how many moms 
I saw in the Learn to Solder workshops teach their 
kids how to solder just 10 minutes after they’d 
picked up an iron for the first time. Yes, you can!
MAKER’S CORNER
BY DAN WOODS
Dan Woods is associate publisher of MAKE and general manager of the Maker Shed.
New Resolutions 
Photograph by Goli Mohammadi
Mitch Altman (left) guides a gentleman at 
Maker Faire Detroit through soldering his 
very first circuit.
Learn a new skill, teach a new skill.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

MAKE: Electronics Book
Product Code 9780596153748
Our hands-on electronics book makes 
learning easy, entertaining, and fun. 
Pick up basic electronics tips and 
techniques with step-by-step instruc-
tions, circuit diagrams, full-color
photos, and engaging explanations
of the principles behind each project. 
Make: Electronics 
Components Pack 1 
Product Code MECP1
The first companion pack to
Make: Electronics covers all of the 
experiments from the first two
sections of the book.  
Make: Electronics Toolkit,
Basic & Deluxe
Product Codes MKEE1, MKEE2
Everything you need to get started with
electronics and soldering in a fun and
experimental way! 
Make: Electronics 
Components Pack 2 
Product Code MECP2
This pack continues where 
Components Pack 1 left off and 
delves into integrated circuits, digi-
tal electronics, and soldering skills. 
:_Xic\jGcXkk
DXb\1
<c\Zkife`Zj
C\XieYp
;`jZfm\ip
9liek_`e^jflk#d\jjk_`e^jlgÇk_XkËj_fnpflc\Xie%
070=3B>=
?A8<4A5>A
C74=4F
4;42CA>=82B
4=C7DB80BC
Intro Electronics
AND TO HELP YOU OUT
We’ve sourced the components
you’ll need:
Learn to 
Solder Kit 
Product Code MKEL4
Includes everything 
you need to solder 
together a simple but 
satisfying project — 
even a soldering iron.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

DISCOVER DIY KITS, TOOLS, BOOKS, AND MORE AT makershed.com.
Papertronics Lunar Modules
Product Code MKSL2
DIY fun with paper and electronics. Comes in packs
of three — Alien Girl, Spaceboy, and Tabula Rasa.
Staff Picks
LED Art Kit
Product Code MKKM2
Create your own unique piece of LED 
Light Art, which displays an eerie, 
shifting pattern of abstract colored 
light on a framed, translucent screen. 
Netduino
Product Code MKND01
Software meet hardware. An open 
source electronics platform using 
the .NET Micro Framework. A perfect 
solution for engineers and hobbyists 
alike. 
Soft Circuit Elephant
Product Code CSCO2
Say hello to Salt n’ Peanut! They’re 
created using a simple LED soft
circuit. Salt acts as the power
source to illuminate Peanut’s LED
by touching trunks. 
Drawdio Kit
Product Code MKAD12
Drawdio is an electronic pencil that 
lets you make music while you draw! 
A great project for beginners, it’s an 
easy kit with instant gratification!
Simon Kit
Product Code MKSF7
Build a memory game that 
blinks and buzzes. Great for 
beginner soldering, plus it’s 
easy to reprogram. 
Brain Machine Kit
Product Code MSBM
Hack your brain with this
awesome DIY sound and light 
machine. Turn on and trip out.
Compressed Air Rocket Kit
Product Code MKRS1
Hundreds of makers have built this 
launcher. Get ready to blast paper 
rockets hundreds of feet in the air! 
Includes a copy of MAKE Volume 15.
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Arduino Projects
Pack Kit
Product Code MSAPK
Kit includes over 100 parts to help 
you get started with Arduino. 
Electronic Brick Starter Kit 
Product Code MKSP8
Easily connect to digital, analog, and 
I2C/UART interfaces with these plug-
and-play modules. Arduino compatible.
Getting Started
with Arduino Kit
Product Code MSGSA
Learn how to make electronics that 
interact with the physical world.
Voice Shield Kit
for Arduino
Product Code MKSKL3
An analog audio shield that allows
you to play sound bytes.
Arduino
Kids Corner
Arduino Projects
Getting Started
Voice Shield Kit
These simple, little electro-mechanical insects 
respond to movement, wind, and vibrations by 
blinking their LED eyes. Great fun for all ages,
and addicting, too.  
Blinkybug Kit
Product Code 
MKKM1
BrushBots
Product Code MSBB
Inspired by the original BristleBot from our friends
at Evil Mad Scientist Laboratories. Build your own 
scuttling vibrobot (or four) with a BrushBot kit; they’re 
easy to make, fun to build, and easy to personalize. 
Piperoids
Product Codes MKMGPC1, MKMGPC2
Assemble these paper-pipe robots following
the pre-drilled holes and marks to cut, fold, and 
connect the pipes without any glue or tape.
Most components can be moved or swapped
with other Piperoid body parts. Expand your
imagination and make your own original Piperoid! 
LoL Shield for Arduino
Product Code MKJR3
A charlieplexed LED matrix of individually 
addressable LEDs that lets you display scroll-
ing text, games, images, or anything else. 
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

TV-B-Gone!
Product Code MKCE1
Turn any TV on or 
off with the click
of a button. Peace 
on Earth is at your 
fingertips. 
   BACK ISSUES MAKE GREAT GIFTS!
Stocking Stuffers
Leathermans
Product Codes MKLTM1, MKLTM2, 
MKLTM3
Available in Circuit Breaker, Bomb 
Defuser, or Warranty Voider styles.
MintyBoost Bundle
Product Code MSBUNMB
Make this handy kit to charge 
your devices on the go. Bundle 
includes kit, tin, and batteries.
54-Piece Bit Driver Kit
Product Code MKIF2
Includes a magnetized driver, a 
60mm extension, a 130mm flexible 
extension, and 54 bits. 
LED Mini Menorah Kits
Product Code MKEMS4
Perfect for Hanukkah, this mini 
menorah displays one more light 
each time it’s switched off and on.
Mintronics Kit
Product Code MSTIN2
A survival pack in your pocket, 
including 60+ components for
prototyping on the go.
3D Christmas Tree Kit
Product Code MKVN2
Eight simple steps give you a 
cool flashing multicolored LED 
Christmas tree. 
SALE!
Sock Monkey
Product Code CMSM1
Make an adorable sock monkey 
faster than you can say “eek eek.”
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

Let your geek shine.
g
Meet Jen Lewin, creator of The Pool. Commissioned 
for the Burning Man Project, Jen’s creation features 
a combination of XBees, Arduinos, and LEDs ﬁtted 
in custom enclosures. When the pads sense weight, 
they respond with a beautiful display of light and 
color that mimics rippling water. 
Whether you’re searching for a new microcontroller, 
or building a room-sized interactive environment, 
the tools are out there. Create a work of art, and 
let your geek shine too.
©2010 SparkFun Electronics, Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademarks 
contained herein are the property of their respective owners. Read more 
about Jen Lewin’s Pool at http://tinyurl.com/232m54u or check out 
Burning Man at www.burningman.com. Have fun out in the desert, Jen! 
Sharing Ingenuity
W W W. S P A R K F U N . C O M
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

y(7IB4E9*NSMSOL( +,!=![!;!; 
ISBN: 978-1-449-38284-1
US $14.99 
 CAN $18.99
HANDS-FREE CALLING
    JUST ONE OF THE MANY AMAZING FEATURES FROM SYNC,
® 
       THE VOICE-ACTIVATED IN-CAR TECHNOLOGY AVAILABLE 
            EXCLUSIVELY ON FORD, LINCOLN AND MERCURY VEHICLES.*  
                         SYNC. Say the word.
Its your personal operator. Your voice calls the shots. 
hands-free calling•music search•vehicle health report
turn-by-turn directions•business search•trafÚ c alerts
911 Assist™•audible text messages•personalized daily information 
Learn more about all SYNC features at syncmyride.com
 *Driving while distracted can result in loss of vehicle control. Only use mobile phones and other devices, even with voice commands, when it is safe to do so. 
**Standard text messaging and data rates apply. Not compatible with all phones.
YOUR OWN PERSONAL TOUR  This “tag” allows you to view 
product demos right on your mobile phone. Download the Scan app on 
your phone at gettag.mobi and follow the directions. Or, text SYNC to 4FORD.**
Scan: worldmags®
Scan: worldmags®

