• 
O'REILLY 
Retro 
Balsa Model 
Airplane 
page 108 » 
makezine.com 


4th Annual 
Maker Faireo 
The World's Largest DIY Festival 
=~ 
MakerFaire.com 
FEATURING: Rockets, Robots, Art Cars, 
Eepy Bird Diet Coke & Mentos Fountain 
Show, ExploratOrium, Cyclecide. Life-
Sized Mouse Trap, Swap-O-Rama-Rama, 
Bazaar Bizarre Craft Fair, Food Makers, 
Make Play Day and more! 

Make ~ 
technology on your 
SPECIAL SECTION 
52: The Power of Steam 
A steam-powered sawmill survives. By Dale Dou~erty 
56: William Blake: Patron Saint of Makers 
The mad EngliShrr\lV1 wason a mission that makefS can 
relate to_ By Gareth Branwyn 
62: Teaching Time 
The US:s premoer watchmaker's col~e_ By Erin Kelly-Park 
63: Florence Siphon Coffee Extractor 
A mad-scientist brewing apparatus. By J. Edgar Park II 
68: The Teacup Stirling Engine 
Turn the heat from tea into piston power. By Jim Shealy 
76: The "Discreet Companion" ladies' Raygun 
Pocket raygun for steampunkycosplay. By Molly Friedrich 
80: The Lost Knowledge Catalog 
Techno-artifacts ur.earthed. By Gareth Branwyn 
83: Steampunk Family Album 
An alt.Victorian photo gallery. By Gareth Branwyn 
Columns 
12: Welcome: lost Knowledge 
Learning from makers of klng i!@:o.ByGarethBranwyn 
14: Make Free: Work Like Artisans 
Love the machine. hate the factory. By Cory Doctorow 
16: Reader Input 
Wind tunnels. rocket cams. arid the great Judy Phone debate. 
17: Makers Corner: let's Talk Kits 
Got an idea for agreat kit?Let us Mem. By Dan Woods 
26: Making Trouble: The Year of Peak Waste 
Recessions reduce our carbon footprint. By Saul Griffith 
28: Hands On: Kosmos in a Box 
Meetan alphamal<er from 85 B.C. By BruceSterling 
46: Art Work: Putting On a Show 
There's a real world out there. Use it. By Douglas Repetto 
48: The Country Scientist 
Howto photograph the sola" aureole. By Forrest M. M,ms III 

Making Your Way in an Uncertain Economy 
the current recession. 
Glen Kadelbach, GR Kreations 
Glen Kadelbach's life as a Maker began at seven years of age - long before he was a 
ShopBotter - when his grandfather gave him a hammer and a hand saw. Life on a farm 
offered many opportunities to fix and make things - like barns and gates - and as he grew, 
so did his interest in making. He began to make props when recruited by his photographer 
sister to help with her sets, and in 2002 he incorporated his first business, GR Kreations, 
Inc. Glen purchased his ShapBo! in 2007 and added Vectric's Aspire 3D software to his 
Maker arsenal in 2008. He still makes photo props, but now his work also includes 
anything he and his customers can dream up. Today, Glen 
runs four businesses and uses his Shop Bot to make things 
from whatever materials he can get his hands on - wood, 
plastic, foam, even cardboard_ Glen's love for making 
continues to grow along with his businesses. 
~ I feel really good about my shop and the technology that I 
have. Owning a ShopBot along with Vectric's Aspire has 
opened up so many doors and has shown me so much 
opportunity. I would not want to be without either. Business 
for me is great. We have chosen not to participate in the 
current recession.
n 
Call or visit us online to learn how 
a ShopBot can help you make 
the things you want to make. 
.shopB.QL. 
., 
What will you make today? 
ShopBot Buddy 
888·680·4466 
www.shopbottoo/s.com 

Make: Projects 
\ 
4 
_
_ 
11 
Wunderkammer! 
How to create your own museum 
of the bizarre and the beautiful. 
By Heather McDougal 
130 

THIS CHILLER HELPED SAVE 
FOUR MILLION DOLLARS. You GO, CHILLER. 
And a prestigious hospital in Toronto is fore~er gratefu l. Johnson Controls helped save the 
hospital S4 million over three years with an ingenious and energy-efficient cooling system that 
uses YORK- (hillel;, It's ingenuity at work, and good for everyone's bottom line. Just another 
way we're making this world a more comfortable, safe, and sustainable place. Want to make 
your world better? We'll help you figure it out at ingenuityWelcome.com 
OJooOSON COO" ... , 1009 
Johnson 
Controls 
INGENUITY WELCOME 

ake: 
technology on your time 
Maker 
18; Made on Earth 
Sr1apshotslrom the world of backyard technology. 
30: Trouve Magic 
Gustlll'l! TrollY' was like Thomas Edoson. Aleulnder Grall." 
Bel, and lsor SiIIorsky rolled into one. By KII~n K. Harosen 
37: Crib Notes 
"baIy (nb modded lor disabled parenl$. By Mochael H. Kelsey 
38: Flight of Fancy 
Kazuh:.to Hachrya mines cartoons for his rea!-' • .orl(l 
inYentJOns. By li5a Katayama 
40 : Thin(k) Ice 
AChlily reception for M,noesola"sArt Shanty Proj&cts. 
By Mike Haeg 
43: Giants of the Micros 
The two uwentors who fueled the rise 01 the liY'''i room 
helicopter. By Nlam Salter 
84: Upload: DIgital Arts and Crafts 
K~ . co~er art beautoful brushes, and mo<e. 
92: 1+2+3: Wind-Triggered Lantern 
By Morten Skogty 
136: 1+2+3: Mechanical Image Duplicator 
ByCyTyrnony 
168: Toolbox 
The best tools. SOftware. publications. and we!1s,U,S. 
176: Howtoons: Compressed Air Power 
By Saul Grdfith and Nf(k Dragotta 
6 
_
:.......,.11 
147' Workshop 
~t and PHlt removal, 
~purposed project 00>2$, 
eleclronoc roacI<iL 
159: Circuits 
n"sh memory hard disk. 
bonau..,1 mic. USBkey mod. 
usa control knob 
178: Heirloom Technology 
Island tricks from Maui. By Tim Anderson 
180: Maker's Calendar 
Events from around the 'fIOrll;L By Wiliam G ... stele 
181: Make Money: Coin Chess Set 
By Tom Parker 
182: Retrospect 
Theory of self·reprool.lCirl8 automata. By George Dyson 
184: MakeShift: Mountain Bike Rescue 
By LeeD. Zlotoff 
191: Aha! Puzzle This 
ElIlst~·s sturnpel". By Michael H. Pryor 
192: Homebrew 
My own ArdlWlO espresso machllle. By Timothy H~I 

e: 
technology on your time 
Subscribe by June 30th 
and receive a free issue!* 
» Go to: makezine.com/subscribe 
Enter promotion code: SMAKE17 
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
* You'll get a total of 5 issues for $34.95 
(Price includes US, shipping_ For Canada please add $5. 
Add $15 for all other coontries.) 

"It II.,. bun tt.. rlok-t ake<s. 
1M doe,s. t il. mailers 01 
IlImp - some """b,,,tO<l, 
bwl mo .. often .... n_nd 
_ .... n obscure in thel. 
1.1>0< - .... 0 II ..... carried 
us up th" lonl. ",aaed 
!>lIlt towards prosperity 
andfrHdom." 
-~_nt ..... o_ 
.... -.-~ 
Make: 
technolou on your Ii""; 
EDITOR ·IN·CHIEr 
Mark Frauenfelder 
...... "'~-""" 
I.IANAGING EDITOR 
Shawn Connally 
~-.... -""" 
ASSOC .... TE IdANAGING W llOR 
Goll Mohammadl 
SENIOR EDITOR 
Phillip Torrone 
pt........" .... .mm 
EDITOR AND PUBLISHER 
Dale Dougherty 
_"Iy«m 
CREATIVE DIRECTOR 
Daniel Carter 
<IC>ot .......... .eom 
DESIGNERS 
Katie Wilson 
Alison Kendall 
PROOVCT ION DESIGNER 
Gerry Arrington 
PffOro EDITOR 
Sam Murphy 
...... ~;Iy-""'" 
PROJECTS EDITOR 
ONLINE IdANIo.GER 
Paul Splnrad 
Tatla Wleland-(lar<:ia 
__ 
''''-<»m 
COPVCHIEr 
Keith Hammolld 
saH EDITOR 
Arwen O'Rellly Griffith 
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT 
laura Cochrane 
EDI TOR AT LARGE 
David Pesccwltz 
SPECIAL SECTION EDITOR 
Gareth Sranwyn 
ASSOCIATE PUBLISHER 
Dan Woods 
_ 
... .eom 
CIRCUlAT10H DIRECTOR 
Heather Hannon 
... ... RKETING & EVENTS "'''''''''ER 
Rob Bullington 
ACCOUNT ...... NAGER 
Katie Dougherty 
SALES" .. "RK[TING COORDI NATOR 
Sheena Stevens 
"'AK E T EC tiN iC.O.L AOVISORY BO~R 0 
IIlpp Bradford, Evil Mad Scientist laboratories,lImor Fried, Joe Grand. Saul Griffith. 
William Gurstelle. Bu..,ie Huang. Tom 19ot!, Mister Jalopy. Ste...e Lodefink. Erica Sadun 
PUI!LISHED BY O'RE ILLY MEDIA. IfIC _ 
Tim O·Reilly. CEO 
laura Baldwin. COO 
Visit uS oillille at makezlne.eom 
Comments may be sent to editor@makezl roe.eom 
For advertising inQUiries, contact: 
Katie Dougherty. 707·8Z1·nn. katli!4torellly.eom 
For event InQUiries. contact: 
She<ry Hus5. 707·827·7074. sherry@orei1ly.com 
Customer Service c~readerservtces .makez i roe.com 
Manage your account online. including change of address at: 
makezlne.com/account 
86&289·8847 tolHI"H In US. and Canada 
818·487·2037.5 a.m.-5 p.m .. PST 
EVEN GREENER 
MAKE is printed on rlCyded. process·cNorIno·lree. 
a<:id-free paper w~h 30% pO$t-<::onsurner .... ste. 
"'"rtilled by lho Fotest Stowardsl>lp c....ncll and lIIe 
6,=. Sustainable fotesllnitiatlw, with SOY·based Inic. 
1Ii:ill__ OOntaoinini 22'1\0-~ '110 .-e.-able rliN< rnaterlals. 
P\.(AS[ NOTE: ~""08'f. tho IowJ. an<! Irntalions irJll<)Sed by 
monoJ.c'urel"$ lind conte nt OW'*S a.-e cons' '''''1)' ehanQ:ing. 
n... .. some of tho projo"'< """',itled may not work, may be 0neM' 
slste<lt W'IIh current ...... 01' user OlIreerrents. or m"ldamoge or 
~ 
.lIeet $Omoe<loip"'<nt_ 
\\xl, $llfolty is your <)Wn respon,,"'toty. inekJdif"ll: prOf* UW 
of"",,,ment ..-.:I safetygear. anddetermining _her yoo have 
adequate . ~ III and e'perience. PoNe, toots. electricity. ard 
othe, resoun:es u.ed for the SO pftl)ects a '" dangerous. uries. 
used I)<Operly .... with adequate Pfecau~o ..... i,""lu,"~"'fe\y 
gear. Some ilus" all"" pohOiOs rIO r>:>t depict ... foIty Pf""""t "ns or 
eqUpmen~ In order to show the project steps m<:<ec .... ~y . These 
p-oje<:lS a", r>:>t intended for use bychild' .... . 
v.e 01 the in.iru<t"n< an<! ."_tlo .... in MAKE .. ot your 
<)Wn ri. ~ . O-Rwlily Me<lia. Inc. <liS<:lOim. all responSlt>oity for any 
teSuitll1j; damage, ln,ury, or expense. H I. )'O<Ir teSponSrlOl1Iy to 
............ e that )Our act ... i!ieS comply with IP!lI",able l<>wS, Includ· 
irIjj C<>P')'nihl. 
8 
..... 
: ~ v 
Contributl"i Edilors: Garelt1 Branwyn, William Gurslelle. 
Mister Jalopy, Brian Jepson, Charles Platt 
Contributing Artists: Matt Blum. Elena Dorfman. 
Nick Oragotta, SuzarVIe Forbes. Ryan Hefiernan, 
Julian Honor~ . JoiYl Keatley. Tim lillis. Branca Nitzscl'I(!. 
N ik Schulz, Camien Scogin. Jen ~ska 
Conttibutlllg Writers: Tim AI1derson, Thomas J. Arey. 
Peter BerVIett. Arltlle Buckley. Bill Byrne. Cory DOC10r0w. 
George Dyson. Molly Friedrich. BobGoidstein. Saul Grilfith. 
Ryan Grosswller. Mike Haeg. Karen K. Hansen. GeorgeW. Hart. 
Timothy Hirzel. Jeremy Jackson, Lisa Katayama, Len Keeler. 
Erin Kelly·Park. Michael H. Kelsey, laura Kiniry. Tim Ullis, 
Heather MeDougal. Forrest M. Mims III. Brian Nadel. 
Tim O'Reilly, Tom Owad, J. Edgar Park II, Tom Parke!", 
Joseph Pasquini. Linda Permann. Robbie PItts. 
MIChael H. Pryor. Douglas Repetto, Adam Salter. Jim Shealy. 
D .... e Sims, Morten Skogly. Jake von Slatt, Bruce Sterling, 
Bru¢!! Stewart. Donna TauscI'I(!r. John Todd. Cy Tymony. 
Daniel Walker, Kevin Weekly. Marc de Vinck. Lee D. Zlotolf 
Sloggers: Jonah Brucker-Cohen. Collin Cunningham, 
Mike Dixon. Luke Iseman. Kip Kedersha. Pat~ Schiendelman. 
Becky Stern, Marede Vinck 
fnterns: EricChu (qr.). StevenLemos(engr.). 
Kris Magri (engr.), MearaO'Reilly(projects), 
Ed Troxell (photo) 
Copyr\lht Cl 2009 O'Reily Media.lnc. 
All rights reserved. Reproduction Without permission is prol-l;IIte<l. 
Printed in the USA by Sctluma nn Pr.,ter .. Inc. 

• • 
transforming traditional crafts 
Subscribe by June 30th 
and receive a free issue!* 
:.:. Go to: craftzine.com/subscribe 
Enter promotion code: SCRFT17 
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
* You'll get a total of 5 issues for $34.95 
(Price includes U.S. shipping. For Canada please add $5. 
Add $15 for all other coontries.) 
If you can imagine it. you can CRAFT it. 
;.:. craftzine.com 

Contributors 
Gareth Branwyn (Special Section editor) has a confession. He's more of a ruffled-sleeved 
romantic than a pocket-protected geek, moll! artIst than engineer. So rt's no wonder that 
he's enamored with steampunk. the maker subculture (celebrated in this volume) lor 
amateur technologists who are hopeless romantics at heart. When not hanging out under 
top hat and gaslight, he's a contributing editor to MAKE. adailycontribulor lothe MAKE 
blogat makezine.com, and an editor at Make: Books. 
Ryan Heffernan (TeachIng Time photography) is a location-based editorial and corporate 
photographer wondng out of Santa Fe. N,M, The goal of his photographic work is to tell 
stories by capturing genuine moments of humanity. He 1000es the challenge of distilling an 
everyday scene into a single. pra<ocat,w frame that captures the essence of that moment 
and invites the viewer to share ,n the story. Current proj(!cts include photographing Kenyan 
marathon runners living and trainong in New Mexico, He also spends a goodbitol time 
skiing. fly-fishing. and taking photos of his bulldogs 
~ebecomlng a writer, Usa Katayama (Kazuhlko Hactuya prOfile) worked at a company 
in New York City that sold military eQUipment to the Japan Defense Agency. She is now a 
San Francisco·based Ireelance journalist who's currently working on a story for Tile New 
'lbrk Times Magazine about men in !aYe with anime characters A knitter, she likes making 
sweaters lor her two min~ture pinschers, Ruby and Malcolm, -e-.en thoughthey don't 
like to wear t hem." Her favorite tool is a ceramic kitchen knife she bought In Tokyo and her 
lal'Ol"ite food ;s "the surprise dish that comes in flal'Ol"s I newr e-.en knew existed: 
Frank Ford (Tips) has always bef!n a maker. Before he could walk or talk, he was on the 
floor rummaging through Mom's kitchen cabinets and reassembling cookware: as a result. 
his first Christmas present was a drip coffee maker (really - he loved itl), Frank made his 
w<1f through Tinkertoys. Erector Sets. models, and countless experiments. and was the 
only one in his college dorm with a vise mounted on his desk and a drawer full Of tools. 
Things hawn·t changed mlJ(:h since. He's walked for the last 40 ~rs making and restor· 
ing stringed instruments (frets.com).andfive years ago, at the ripe age of 60. he started 
seriously on the path to bea machinist and toolmaker (homeshoptoch.com). 
A traditIonal portrait artist spedalizing in alternative lifestyles, SUUlnne Forbes (Lost 
Knowledge CataJog illustrator) can also be thought of as "an exira' freaky illustrator: In 
her work, she sees things "that shock mee-.en now, and I wouJdnl have it any otherw<1f, 
San FrancISCo is full of creatIve performers, wildly stylish divas, mad geniUS inventors. and 
artists whose lives are their work. And I get to draw these amazing people, and record them 
for posterity. It's a privilege: The Berkeley, Calif .. resident liws WIth her "large, manatee·like 
cat." and is currently workIng on aseries of corset-themed paintings. 
Jake von Slat! (Wimshurst Inliuence Machine) is the deYOted t..Jsband of avery tolerant 
Lady von Slatt and the father of two whip-smart girls. He spends the majority of his work· 
ing hours as Linux sysadmin at a small rese .... ch firm ;n the Boston area but has re<:ently 
reduced his hours to co·wrlte a book on steampunk subculture with award·winning science 
fiction author JelfVanderMeer. When Jake was 14 and his b~ le frame broke. he saw it as 
an opportUnity not to ask his parents for a new bike. but to ask them for a welding torch. 
He continues to view e-.ery challenge or adversity in hie as an opportunity to acquire srnny 
flew tools! 
10 ...... 
: ~v 

• 
vvv .• ff .orll/i 
© 
ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION 

r--------------------"---------------------, 
i 
I BY GRRETH BRRNWYN 
i 
L ___________________ ~ 
_____________________ " 
Romancing the Steam 
"S 
teampunk!?That's so last year!" 
It's so last century and a hall. actually, 
but who's counting? Apparently, a few 
people are counting. as someone always chimes in 
with this sentiment whenever we ~st anything to 
the MAKE blog from the alternative-Victorian sub-
culture known as steam punk. But while some are 
sounding the death knell of steampunk (we hope 
it's a brass bell they're clanging), we suspect many 
readers may not even know what it is yet. 
Steampunk traces its literary roots to the dime 
novels of Jules Verne and H.G. Wells, and the 
invention-adventure tales of the lale 1800s eventu-
ally dubbed Edisonades. In the 19805. sci-Ii and 
fantasy writers like K.w. Jeter. James P Blaylock. and 
Tim Powers began placing their "gonzo-historical" 
fantasies in an alternative 19th century, where high 
tech mixed with gaslight, brass, and steam. 
Bruce Sterling and William Gibson's 1990 novel. 
The Difference Engine, fully crystallized the genre, 
positing a central question: what would have hap' 
pened to the future if Charles Babbage's design for 
his "difference engine," a proposed Victorian-era 
mechanical computer, had act ually been built and 
the digital revolution had begun a century earlier? 
From this fertile question, a thousand speculative 
fictions bloomed, 
Then something interesting happened a few 
years ago. Unlike other designer subgenres of sci-fi, 
steam punk's consumers didn't just want to read it 
anymore, they wanted to build physical expressions 
of it. They wanted to be steampunk: to dress the 
part, make the fantastic gadgets, and !)jog about it 
on brass-and-wood-modded computers. Think of 
it as Steampunk 2,0, a participatory genre that's 
leaked off the page and into the real world, smudg-
ing the margins between fantasy and reality, the 
last two centuries, and technologies of the past. 
present, and future. 
While there's plenty of debate as to why steam-
punk fans insist on taking it so far, its actual 
practitioners tend not to overthink it. We like our 
cover spokesgentleman Jake von Slatt's approach, 
In episode 3 of Make: television (makezlI1e.tv), 
he says: "What makes steampunk important is the 
12 ..... 
: ~ v 
community it's created -
an incredibly diverse 
community of people: 65-year-old steam hobbyists 
in the U,K .. fans of goth-industrial music in Seattle, 
people interested in making steampunk clothes, 
fashion, jewelry, and so on. My greatest hope for 
steampunk is that it will continue to attract people 
into this really wonderful community," 
Von Slatt calls himself a "maker who happens to 
work in a steampunk style," He sees steampunk as 
a kind of carrier wave for holding people's interest in 
the art of making things. At Maker Faire, you'll find 
many other enclaves of people riding on different 
maker carrier waves: art car builder.;, mutant bicycle 
makers, robot combatants, fire artists, circuit bender.;, 
and many more, They're all makers: they're just 
working in whatever aesthetic appeals most to them, 
For those who love the intersection of romance 
and technology, and fancy reviving the cooler 
aspects of the Victorian era, steampunk has otNious 
appeaL If it's not your cup of tea, there are plenty of 
other maker communities that'll gladly welcome you 
into their garages, too. 
We're calling the theme for this issue Lost 
Knowledge, because we want to cast our net wider 
than steampunk -to explore any type of forgotten 
technology, from ancient Greek computers to analog 
copying machines to apocalyptic zine printing of 
the 18th century -
and because we're suckers for 
a little techno-romance ourselves, But obviously, 
it's not lost or it wouldn't be in these pages, 
In fact, technology may be difficult to 10se,In 
a recent interview, technology scholar and Wired 
co-founder Kevin Kelly observed that. unlike bio-
logical species, technologies are actually hard to 
drive into extinction, For example, there are now 
more people flint-knapping (making stone arrow-
heads) than during its prehistoric heyday, Why? 
Because people enjoy keeping old skills alive, And 
it's fun! 
It's also proof that, along with steampunk, there 
are countless technological carrier waves from the 
past. So find one that appeals to you, climb aboard, 
and start making! Dressing the part is up to you, 
G(W"eth Brdnwyn is a contributIng editor for MAKE. 

Maker S 1-11: I) 
DIY KITS + TOOLS + BOOKS + FUN 
SAVE 10% THROUGH JUNE 30. 2009 
WITH COUPON CODE MAKE91 
.. Smart 
Matenals KIt 
- -
SMART MATERIALS KIT 
Create your own DIY smart 
crafting project s using shape 
memory wire, polymorph 
plastic, and more. Includes the 
Fashioning Technology book. 
DIET COKE & MENTOS 
Each kit contains a variety of 
nozzle cuts to give you the 
coolest, highest-shooting gey-
sers. We'll even throw in a pack 
of Mentos to get you started 
(Diet Coke not included). 
BARRAGE GARAGE 
Best·selling author William 
Gurstelle blends science. 
humor and the Barrage Garage 
Gals into an explosive new 
instructional DVD. It's Myth· 
Busters meets Baywatch. 
EX·IS0 KIT 
This cool retro kit puts more 
than 150 experiments at your 
fingertips, safely with no 
soldering required. A great 
starter for kids interested in 
electronics. 
makershed.com 
LILY PAD PRO 
Customize your clothing 
with this programmable 
board. Creat e light and 
sound displays that respond 
to their environment. 
- ~ --------------------------------
DIY ELECTRONICS KIT 
Harness the power of the 
electron with this compenent-
loaded kit. Everything you 
need is in the box: you'll 
master the basics in no time. 
DISCOVER DIY KITS. TOOLS. BOOKS. AND MORE AT » makershed.com 

r--------------------T---------------------, 
I 
I BY CDlW DOCTO!lOW 
I 
L ____________________ ~ _____________________ J 
Love the Machine, 
Hate the Factory 
W
e've heard a lot about how scary the indus-
trial revolution was - the dislocations it 
wrought on the agrarian population of the 
early 19th century were wrenching and terrible, and 
the revolution was a bloody one. From that time, we 
have the word Luddite. referring to uprisings against 
the machines that were undoing ancient ways of 
living and working. 
But the troubles of the 1810s were only the begin-
ning. By the end of the century. the workplace was 
changing again. Workers who'd adapted over three 
generations to working in factories at machines. 
rather than tilling the land and working in small 
cottage workshops. once again found their lives 
being dramatically remade by the forces of capital, 
through a process called "scientific management." 
Scientific management (which was also called 
Taylorism. for its most prominent ad~ate. Frederick 
Winslow Taylor) was built around the idea of reduci~ 
a manufacturing process to a series of optimized 
simple steps, creating an assembly line where work-
ers were just part of the machine, Each worker's 
movements were as scripted as those of a cog or 
piston, defined by outside observers who sought to 
make the workgo as smoothly as possible, with as 
few interruptions as possible. 
Taylor, Henry Ford, and Frank and lillian Gilbreth 
used time-motion studies, written logbooks, high-
speed photography, and other empirical techniques 
to find wasted motions, wasted time, and potential 
logjams in manufacturing processes. Practically 
every industry saw massive increases in productivity 
thanks to their work. The Gilbreths' research gave 
us modern surgical procedures. touch-typing. and 
a host of other advances to human endeavour. 
But all this gain was not without cost. The 
"unscientific" worker personally worked on several 
tricky stages of manufacture, often seeing a project 
through from raw materials to finished product. He 
or she could choose how to sit. which tool to use 
when, and in what order to complete the steps. If 
it was a sunny day with a fine autumn breeze. the 
worker could choose to plane the joints and keep 
14 ..... 
: ~v 
the smell of the leaves in the air. saving the lacquer 
forthe next day. Workers who were having a bad day 
could take it easy without holding up a production 
line. On good days. the work could fly past without 
creating traffic jams farther down the line. 
Forevery gain in efficiency. scientific management 
exacted a cost in self-determination, personal 
dignity. and a worker's connection with what he 
or she produced. 
The biggest appeal of 
steampunk is that it exalts 
the mach ine and disparages 
the mechanization of 
human creativity. 
For me, the biggest appeal of steampunk is that it 
exalts the machine and disparages the mechaniza' 
tion of human creativity (the motto of the excellent 
and free SteamPunk Magazine is "Love the Machine, 
Hate the Factory"). It celebrates the elaborate 
inventions of the scientifically managed enterprise. 
but imagines those machines coming from individu-
als who are their own masters. Steampunk doesn't 
rail against efficiency -
but it never puts efficiency 
ahead of self-determination. If you're going to raise 
your workbench to spare your back. thaI's your 
decision. not something imposed on you from the 
top down. 
Here in the 21st century, this kind of manufacture 
finally seems in reach: a world of desktop fabbers. 
low-cost workshops. and communi ties of helpful. 
like-minded makers puts utopia in our grasp. Finally. 
we'll be able to work like artisans and produce like 
an assembly line. 
COl)' Doctorow lives in London. writes science ftction nO'lieis. 
co-edits 80Ing 801118. and fights for digital freedom 

Tinker. Learn. Play. 
Repeat as needed. Preferably often. 
-
Google SketchUp Cookbook 
by Bonnie Roskes 
$49.99U$ 
Creating in 3D has never been easier-
or more fun. Go beyond the basics and 
explore the complex features and tools 
that design professionals use to take 
Google Sketchup to the next level. 
YouTube: An Insider's Guide to 
Climbing the Charts 
by Alan Lastufka & Michael W. Dean 
$29.99US 
Learn what it takes to make a splash from 
two YouTube veterans who know how to 
make quaJity art-and have the subscribers 
and millions of views to prove it. 
Order now on oreilly.com 
O'REILLY 
_~_"""~""'''''"9''''''''~_oIO"'''''_",," 
M __ 
... "",p<q>«tyof __ 
-.. .. Ill 

r--------------------, 
I 
I 
I 
: 
L ____________________ " 
Tales of inspiration in school and 
debates on artistic expression. 
II I really enjoy your magazine and read it cover to 
cover. One thing I like is the small gadgets and proj-
ecls in the magazine. It's so interesting I can't stop 
reading itl I am 12 years old and we get it at school. 
My whole family loves it too. 
~Michael Jon Nisly. Hutchinson. Kan. 
II I'm no Judy Garland fan (nor do I dislike her. for 
that matter), and I'm rarely the first person to push 
for political correctness. But I have to say that in the 
Ghost Phone article [Volume 16. "The Disembodied 
Voice of Judy Garland Speaksl. the suggestion of 
pills and liquor on the night table is in really poor 
taste. Given that Garland died of a drug overdose. 
I would think that her family and friends would find 
the article ugly. 
MAKE. to me, is a classy publication that rates 
.. things which create wonder" high in priority, and 
rates the salacious and snarky very low in priority, 
This feels more like Perez Hilton. This piece was 
below you. and I felt very put off by it. Not the best 
editorial call, MAKE. 
-John Cornwell, San Francisco. Calif. 
Author Greg Maclaurin responds: My focus 
for the article was to share the Ghost Phone idea 
with everyone. The idea of bringing old telephones 
alive by hiding an MP3 player inside is Simple and 
wonderful. and I want other people to create their 
own art with it. One person told me that she has 
some cassette tapes of her long-lost mother on an 
answering machine, and now she wants to create 
her own Ghost Phone with that. Irs perfect! And 
since the Judy Phone was my first Ghost Phone. it 
made sense to use it as an example. But the article 
is about process, and not the Judy Phone. 
Some people don't like the Judy Phone. But when 
people see it in person, they sit on the bench, pick 
up the phone. look at the pills and booze, and listen 
to Judy talking about her own life. They begin to 
think a bi t about who she was. This is art that has 
layers. Sure, it seems strange and Silly on the sur-
face. but that wasn't my intention. and fortunately 
it's not the impression that people get when they 
16 ...... :II<WmoV 
experience it. 
I've been surrounded by lots of death and tragedy. 
and my art reflects this. It's not unfeeling. It's 
deeper and truer. Uke the Judy Phone . 
II , just received the latest MAKE, and was quite 
pleased to see one of the leiters from readers was 
a positive note from a 5th grader on his wind tunnel 
build based on my article [Volume 15. "Model Wind 
Tunner]. This brought an ear-to-ear smile to my face. 
A Side note: This week I was asked to give a talk at 
my son's elementary school about aerospace engi-
neering. Besides the wind tunnel, I brought a rocket 
cam from MAKE [Volume OZ "Rocket-Launched 
camcorder"] that was a huge hit -
especially when 
I played the video. There were tons of energized kids 
wanting to go off and build things afterward. 
My next project is mounting a CVS camcorder on 
a Pinewood Derby car to film a race as it happens, 
then next building a 5-launch-rod digital model 
rocket cont roller for the Cub Scout rocket derby. 
Fun stu"! What a great magazinel 
-Doug Desrochers, Burke, Va. 
ri!------------ ~ 
L~ ___________________ ~ 
,--------------------, 
I The name of photographer Pat Molnar was misspelled 
I in MAKE, Volume 16. We regret the error. 
l in St eps 2 and 3 of " Hacking the Glade Wisp" in 
Volume 16, references to ~ 150MHz signal $hould haV<) 
I been to a 150kHz signal. 
I 
On page 155 of "Chatter Telephone" In Volume 16. the 
Hang-Up Hinge Instructions ask you to drill ''four 'A" 
I holes through the sides of the phone," but they $hould 
In fact be four 'II- holes, 
l in "OIY' bmry" In Volume 16. seYeral errors eluded fact-
che<::k: Rick and Megan Prelinger shared an intere5t in 
I the American landscape (not landscaping), and Rick 
I considered restarting Landscape (not Landscaping) 
""'gazlne. AlSo. the Prelinger Library and the Internet 
I Archive challenged a 1992 copyright law that aut o-
"",tically extends copyrights up t o 15 years (not 50). 
I Thanks f or the corrections. Rick , and we're sorry f or 
I the mix-up! 
'--------------------" 

r--------------------c---------------------, 
i 
I BY DAN WDDDS 
i 
L ____________________ ~ 
____________________ J 
Penny for Your 
Thoughts 
O
ne of the reasons this is the coolest team 
I could ever hope to work with is that we 
all get to wear different hats. But it's no 
secret around the MAKE office that my favorite hat 
of all is general manager of the Maker Shed store. 
What's not to like? I get to exchange ideas with 
everyone about new kit ideas, tools, toys, micro-
controllers. books, games. and yes. projects that 
we think ought to be kits but aren't yet. 
Over the past two years. our store has grown 
considerably in terms ofthe number of people we 
reach. number and variety of products we carry, 
number of indie makers supplying products, and 
even the size and spectacle of our physical pop-up 
stores at Maker Faire (about 10.000 square feet 
and growing). Maker Shed is the fastest-growing 
piece of our business right now. In fact, during two 
of the gloomiest months for retail in the pasl40 
years, Maker Shed 2008 holiday sales were up 
79% over prior-year holiday sales. 
We're apparently doing something right here. 
But we can't take all the credit Our formula is 
pretty simple, really. We have a team of smart 
people who take the time to visit schools, clubs, 
and community events: ask a lot of questions: 
and listen to what you have to say. 
However. we're not resting on our laurels. I want 
to hear from even more of you. On your terms. 
We're putting up a simple survey at makershed. 
com/survey. I invite you to take it and share your 
Maker SHI:I) 
thoughts. However. if you'd prefer to simply jot down 
your thoughts in an email. I'd be delighted to read it. 
I'm dan@oreilly.com.Want toseemoreproductsof 
a particular type? More science proiects? A certain 
kind of tool? Kits for a certain age group or maybe 
classrooms? Maybe you'd like to see our store 
arranged differently, or perhaps get club or group 
discounts. Whatever comes to mind. I'd love to hear 
about it. 
Most importantly, if there's one project kit you've 
always thought would be cool. or a maker toy you 
remember from years ago but haven't been able 
to find, drop me a line. Maybe we can find it or we 
know of a maker supplier who'd be interested in 
making it for us. 
If you've shopped at the Maker Shed. thank you. 
If you haven'!. I invite you to peruse the store at 
makershed.com and then take our surveyor send 
me an email and tell me: What can we do to make 
the place even more interesting or useful for you? 
Dan Woods is associate publisher of MAKE and CRAFT. 
r----- -------------------------------------, 
11 ______________________ LDDKFORTHES~~MDREDNLlNE __ I 
I~AKE Presents; 
Make Presents; The LEO 
How-To Tuesdays 
Maire; television Videos -1 
The R.,.;istor 
LEOs are in technology 
Each week we build some· 
and Weekend Projects I 
I Simple, commonplace. 
all around us, familiar and 
thing from the pages of 
Check out the latest 
II and absolutely vital toour 
helpful. But have)'lu eYer 
MAKE, the Maker Shed, or 
episode from our public 
II 
electronic world. Take a 
wondered wtlo invented 
just something the makers 
television sh<::w. Make .. 
close!" look at the curreot· 
them? Or if it's possible 
out there seod us. Check 
or watch our online se!"ies. 
I 
fight,ng backbone of 
to make your own LED?! 
the site each week on 
Weekend Projects. SubjedS 
circuitry, the resistor! 
Learn the answers to these 
TlJI!sday and also take a 
incllJde pole cameras, 
I makezine.o::omlgol 
baffling questions;ond mort' 
look atour past builds' 
trebucl1ets. workbenches. 
I 
thereslstor 
in this popular video. 
maknine.com/gol 
microcontrollers. and 
m.keune.com/gol 
tuesday 
screen'print'ngT'shirts! 
I 
theled 
makezine.com/lo/vldeo I 
L __________________________________________ J 
...... , 
17 

MADE 
EARTH 
Report from the world of backyard technology 
-

f 
Going Buggy 
Although many (or all) of us try to keep our 
encounters with bugs short and infrequent. glass 
artist Wesley Fleming likes to spend all day with 
them. With an entomologist's passion and meticulous 
attention to detail, he recreates them in the form 
of tiny glass sculptures. 
"There's nothing more weird or crazy than bugs," 
says Fleming. who lives in Bozeman. Mont. And he's 
always been interested in odd creatures: as a kid 
he loved the characters from Star Wars and comic 
books: at the toy store. he picked the strangest-
looking action fjgures. Fleming remembers that he 
was especially fond of characters that combined 
human and insect features. 
Fleming first had the inkling to work with glass 
~ afler purchasing a single lampworked bead in 1999. 
3; 
Intrigued by the colors and shapes on the bead's 
}; surface, he began taking classes and ultimately, 
£' 
quit his full-time job to pursue glass sculpture. 
!::! 
Alter happening upon an insect collection at 
J an art show. he knew that he wanted to focus 
0. 
his work on the intricate surface textures. shapes, 
and colors of bugs. 
Fleming forges the fine details of each "specimen" 
by controlling the heat on his torch. First. he heats 
the glass to a honey-like consistency. and then he 
plays with gravity, surface tension, and layering to 
create each miniature. 
The bugs are rendered in painstaking detail. 
especially considering their finished size: on aver· 
age, 2 to 3 inches. 
How realistic are the glass bugs? While traveling 
in Turkey, Fleming showed one of his beetle sculp-
tures to a shop worker, who jokingly placed it on a 
friend's knee. Startled. the second friend jumped up 
and brushed away the "bug," shattering it. Although 
it was frustrating to lose the piece, Fleming consid· 
ers it the highest compliment to his work. 
-Linda Permann 
» Fleming's Sculpt ure Gallery: westey1teming.com 
...... : 19 

Super Green Greenhouse 
Jasmine Zimmerman, like many of us. was 
t hinking that there must be something cool and 
useful she could do with all those used plastic bot· 
ties. So when she was commissioned by Solar One 
in New York City to create an environmental instal· 
lation for the 2007 Citysol festival, she decided to 
act on her thoughts. Zimmerman used hundreds of 
plastic bottles to create a functional greenhouse. 
The Bottle House ties in nicely to the green 
themes now popular at art festivals. So far. the 
multidisciplinary artist has created two Bottle 
Houses, one for the Citysol fest and the other for 
the 2008 Bumbershoot festival in Seattle. Both 
were well received. "It's an excellent example of 
repurposing a harmful and overlooked material into 
one that will grow vegetation." points out Inhabitat 
blogger Alexandra Kain. 
The most difficult aspect of creating the green-
houses was maintaining the structural integrity. The 
bottles are held together with permanent silicone. 
and Zimmerman found that she has to build the 
houses at a specific pace so that the silicone sets 
20 ...... :1I<Wmo1l 
up correctly as she creates the inclines of the walls. 
Both beautiful and practical. the Bottle Houses are 
intended to raise awareness around bottled water 
consumption. "I wanted to use everyday, discarded 
materials to transform our waste into the birth of 
new life," she says, pointing out that Americans 
consume more than 90 million bottles of water 
every day, and only one in live bottles is recycled. 
You may be familiar with some of Zimmerman's 
other work: her rubber band installations around 
Manhattan have been featured on Boing Boing, and 
she was recently awarded an artist residency at the 
Museum of Glass in Tacoma, Wash. 
Zimmerman plans to e)(hibit the Bottle Houses in 
empty lots, rooftops, parks. and vacant buildings to 
help spread the word. She hopes her work will have 
an effect on the choices people make in everyday life. 
And maybe others will be inspired to make some-
thirg cool and useful out of all those plastic bottles. 
-Bruce Stewart 
» Zimmerman's Projects: jasminezimmerman.com 

Hennepin Crawler 
If a camel is a horse designed by committee. then 
what is the Hennepin Crawler? 
It looks like a jalopy. but it's really a big bike. 
designed by Krank-Boom-Clank. four Santa Rosa. 
Calif .. artists who wanted to build something that 
moves as gracefully along railroad tracks as it 
maneuvers around the playa at Burning Man. 
Two of the members. Clifford Hill and Skye 
Barnett, had built an art car for Burning Man in 
2007. For the Crawler. they drew in fellow welders 
David Farish and Dan Kirby. 
.ott was a very organic process,n says Barnett. 
"The only thing we had set was that it would be 
pedal-powered and that it had lour seats -
since 
there are four of us," 
They also got involved in planring a local e...ent. the 
Great West End & Railroad Square Handcar Regatta, 
which aimed to raise awareness for transportation 
beyond the car, including bikes and commuter rail. 
So they designed the Crawler (Farish was fond of 
the antique-sounding Tom Waits song "9th and 
Hennepin") to ride the rails, too, 
Found materials helped dictate the design: 
Barnett returned from one dump run with a $15 
metal hammock holder. It eventually became the 
centerpiece of the Crawler's curvy chassis. 
"I refer to it as improv, because we were using 
metal like Play-Doh: says Hill. "We would try some-
thing, break it if it didn't work, try something else," 
They got together once a week -
"Our Thursday 
night TV watching got all screwed up." says Kirby-
and cranked into the night to get it finished, 
Now they pedal it out to community events, 
where it draws a lot of interest, "People ask who 
designed it." says Hill. "Everybody pulled their 
weight. People can't handle that." 
Hill says their goal is to "plug this notion of art and 
celebration in a public context. inspiring more people 
to do creative things with bikes, especially kids," 
"Kids see it. they find out there's bike parts in it. 
and then they realize they can make something like 
that," says Farish. 
-Dave Sims 
» Hem-.epin Crawler: krankboomclank,com 
...... : 21 

Power to the People 
What do you get by combining a spinning wheel 
with electricity? An energy and economic resource 
poised to transform rural India, of course. 
Bangalore-based engineer R.S. Hlremath's 
"e-charkha" starts wit h the charkha. a hand-
cranked tabletop wheel that spins yarn from raw 
cotton and other fibers. and was promoted by 
Mahatma Gandhi as a symbol for Indian indepen-
dence. He then updates it and equips its base with 
a generator that stores spinning energy in a lead-
acid battery. which can then power an LED light or 
small transistor radio. Two hours of spinning creates 
enough energy to provide at least 7.5 hours of elec-
tricity, a boon for rural India's developing villages, 
Hiremath's idea for the invention came as a child, 
while playing with both his grandfather's charkha 
and a bicycle equipped with a hub-dynamo, or an 
electrical generator that powers an attached light. 
"This interested me to see how the charkha and 
dynamo could be joined together to produce elec-
tricity: he says. "It took almost 35 years for me to 
figure out all the parts to suit rural India." 
22 
Mo"" : ~11 
With a patent that includes magnets, winding 
wire, driver circuits, gears, and mechanical 
components. the e-charkha brings new possibilities 
to India's masses. Spinners can now work longer 
hours generating a commodity -
yarn -
while 
keeping current on agricultural news and weather, 
or listening to music, They can also read books 
without resorting to toxic kerosene lanterns, 
Growing up in India's small towns and villages, 
Hiremath learned what it's like to live in pitch dark-
ness. After completing a mechanical engineering 
degree in Karnataka, India, he started MIS flexitron, 
an organization focused on developing low-cost 
appropriate technologies for rural India, The 
e-charkha is one of more than 270 such products. 
Since late 2007. thousands of e-charkhas have 
been distributed forfree in rural India's most remote 
areas through a government-sponsored program, 
with a target goal of 300,000 to 1,2 million over the 
next three to five years. 
-Laura Kiniry 
» Flexitron Company: lIexitron,fuzinil,com 

Paper Hardware 
Los Angeles-based Christopher Tallon. a graduate 
of the UCLA School 01 the Arts and Architecture, 
engages the histories of both fields in his playful 
reiterations of hand tools, free weights. and other 
decidedly un-fragile objects. 
Reminiscent of Baroque trompe-/,Ioeil murals, 
Tallon's true-Io-life sculptures are inspired by the 
most prosaic. even macho. objects, remade with 
the simplest of raw materials: paper. 
But what is a new hammer or a pristine set of 
wrenches when the first tap or twist will ruin it? 
Upon reflection. Tallon's works address utility and 
its absence. More directly. they're just plain fun. 
Tallon's paper barbells. saws. and vises have 
been exhibited in galleries in L.A. and San Francisco 
and. in late 2008, in a juried exhibition at the Los 
Angeles Municipal Art Gallery In a city crawling with 
artists -
at least 600 entered the competition-
Tallon's surprisingly fresh-looking tool bench was a 
highlight (it took second place), and his meticulous 
craftsmanship is the key. 
It would be easy to mistake Tallon's replicas for 
the real thing, but the hitch is that none of the 
objects he duplicates are intended to be as clean 
as the resulting facsimiles. Even a tool bench in a 
store display would likely bear some mark of its 
use; after all. tools are supposed to be dirty. 
At a time when U.S. manufacturing -
and school 
courses in woodworking and machine shop -
are 
threatened with extinction, Tallon's unused and 
unusable tools take on new meaning. 
The recent economic downturn might indeed 
have Americans rethinking their disregard for the 
value of making. But if the age-old dyad of "man 
and his tools" does come to its rest. Tallon will 
ensure that it has a cheerful coffin. 
-Annie Buckley 
» More 01 Tallon's Tools: 13tchgallery.com/tallon 
.. .... : 23 

In the Round 
From a small town in the Black Hills of South 
Dakota. Dick Termes turns his artist's eye to the 
globe. Literally. No flat surfaces for this painter: 
rather. his Termespheres invite the observer into 
another dimension that allows us to perceive the 
world as if in real time. 
Imagine you're in a beautiful building and you 
rotate slowly around to see every surface -
the 
walls, the ceiling. the floor. Now you're Termes. so 
you use six-point perspective to paint this total view 
on the outside of a sphere. Six-point allows you to 
draw the lolal- up, down. and all around -
scene. 
Over the past 32 years. Termes has painted 
rooms. buildings, towns. nature. and a myriad of 
subjects from this unique perspective. "In art the 
most important thing to find is an original thing to 
do," he says. "The sphere adds a whole new set of 
geometries that fits with the real world better than 
a flat surface." 
Termes starts with plastic spheres he buys from 
light fixture factories. or for the larger globes. direct 
from Union Oil Company. He then sandpapers. 
gessoes. and paints with acrylics. 
In addition to his artwork, Termes holds work-
shops to share his methods and enthusiasms with 
a far·ranging group of students, including Lakota 
Sioux children in South Dakota. mathematicians. 
Jungian society members interested in dream 
worlds. and art lovers worldwide. 
His passion for art. science. and philosophy 
are evident. but as he says. 'Total visual space. of 
course, has been my main interest:· 
The sphere seems to reflect the balance and 
harmony in Termes'life, He and his wife live in four 
domes with his ongoing creations of global beauty. 
"I am happy with my life. I think I have a good bal-
ance. maybe because I work with the sphere and 
the sphere is so perfect: it relates to the globe-
Earth -
with its geometries and design problems" 
-Donna Tauscher 
» Termes' Worlds: termes'*'eres.com 
.
Termes,*,eres in Motion: makezine.com/goltermes 

Transatlantic Tunnel 
In May 2008. a group of us ventured out to the 
Fulton Ferry Landing in Brooklyn. N.Y .• to explore the 
mysterious Telectroscope by Paul St George. \Ne'd 
read about this strange and beautiful Victorian-era 
apparatus.. but none of us had experienced it up close. 
As the story goes, 51 George is the great-grandson 
of Alexander Stanhope 51 George, who. in the mid-
l890s. came close to completir'€ one of the greatest 
engineering feats of all time - a transatlantic tunnel 
connecting New- York and london via a curious con-
traption dubbed the Telectroscope. 
The Telectroscope is a powerful telescope. but 
instead of peering into the heavens. it sees through 
the Earth. connecting New York to London. 3.500 
miles on the other side. Both the tunnel system and 
this optical device were marvels of Victorian engi-
neering, and the project has ended up taking more 
than a century to complete. 
There is an alternative, equally interesting theory 
on how the Telectroscope is connected. This story 
doesn't start in the late 1800s, but rather, the early 
2000s. The project was brought to life by the artist 
St George and produced by Artichoke, a london-
based creative organization known for its 
extraordinary public shows. They worked with 
Tiscali. a telecommunications firm, and Twofour 
Digital, a media company. to create an ultra high-
quality video conferendng system. 
Each Telectroscope houses a Sony EXI camera, 
a Breeze Technologies Ice Blue encoder/decoder. 
and a Sanyo XP-IOO projector. The camera captures 
the video and the encoder/decoder corrverts it to 
an MPEG-2 format. The video is streamed over a 
Tiscali VPN fiber network. then data is decoded and 
projected onto the internal screen. The result is an 
amazingly realistic real-time image 6 feet in diam-
eter. housed within the Telectroscope itself. 
In the end. the story of St George's great-grand-
father may have some truth to it The Telectroscope 
is a transatlantic tunnel between New York and 
london, only it's digital. not analog. 
-Marc de Vinck 
» The Amazing Telectroscope: telectroscope.net 
Mo ... : 25 

r--------------------T---------------------, 
I 
I BY SAUL GHII'I'ITH 
I 
L ____________________ ~ ____________________ ~ 
The Year of Peak Waste 
Y
es. we are all depressed. It appears to me that 
everyone I know is working harder than ever 
before. scrambling in this strange new world 
that was thrust upon us while the Global Economic 
Crisis took hold of our little monkey brains and 
made our primate instincts do the worst : panic, 
But maybe, just maybe, it's the best news ever. 
Perhaps it's actually fantastic. Let's look at some 
data: in terms 01 energy use and. consequently, 
carbon output. the only proven technology human-
ity has for reducing CO2 output at the global scale is 
economic crisiS (see graph). The data is not yet in for 
2008, though given that OPEC slashed production 
multiple times in the latter half of 2008. it looks as 
if. once again. recession has provably reduced our 
"reliance" on carbon-based fuels_ 
So while you sit there contemplating employment 
uncertainty, take solace in the fact that the dolphins 
are probably doing backflips of joy, and polar bears 
are likely hibernating in a slightly more secure 
Arctic, dreaming of a few extra years of viable eco-
system ahead. The reality is that all of our economic 
activity, whether it be buying gas to fill our cars, 
or buying stuff to fill our houses, or even food to 
feed our stomachs, uses energy from one source or 
another. This is why, knowing how much money you 
spend, you can estimate with reasonable accuracy 
how much energy you use, and how much CO2 you 
are responsible for putting into the atmosphere. 
This equation is why there is a conversation in the 
circles of people who think about climate change 
and energy about "decoupling" the economy from 
C02' Simplistically. there are two ways this decou-
piing can be achieved. The first is by swapping clean 
energy sources for dirty ones. Electric cars run on 
solar-power electrons instead of oil. Wind power 
instead of coal. Geothermal instead of natural gas. 
The second decoupling happens when we achieve 
the same quality of life and service. at much lower 
energy or carbon output How can this be realized? 
In the last decade or so, efficiency gains in the 
steel industry mean that we can now produce 
steel with 10%-20% less energy than previously re-
quired. Better refrigerators use less energy per unit 
of food kept cool and fresh. This side of the energy 
equation is often called efficiency, Efficiency can 
get us a long way, but for many things that we do, or 
find "necessary" in modern society, we already do 
them surprisingly efficiently. 
Globally, the best models suggest we need to reduce 
the amount of carbon going into the atmosphere by 
80%-90% by 2OSO,That 'sa lot. It looks incredibly 
unlikely that we'll figure out how to make steel with 
80%-90% less energy or CO2 produced, That's also 
true for aluminum. plastics, paper. and most modern 
materials, What does this mean? It means we need to 
use less of all of those materials, which means making 
products that last longer, It means repairing those 
products, It means maintenance, 
By being more careful and 
thoughtfu I about what we 
waste. we could have quality 
consumption, 
Let's try and imagine the beautiful version, Children 
will play with beautifully engineered wooden toys 
without toxic additives in small plastic parts. The 
wooden toys will be repaired as necessary between 
generations_ You will have handsome shoes, repaired 
by a cobbler, Instead of dealing with a website or 
superstore, you'll interact with someone who is inter-
ested in the weather that you share, how your shoes 
are performing, and whether you are using beeswax 
treatment often enough to keep the shoes soft and 
waterproof. Rather than unflattering Ikea generics, 
you'll own beautiful furniture, handmade and well 
oiled and polished, 
Why would I bring this up now? Isn't this the 
steampunk issue? Let me give you a glimpse into 
my thoughts right now. I'm writing in December of 
2008. We are in the midst of the economic stupidity 
Twice this week there were blackouts on my street. 
They hit me with an overbearing relevance: I was 
reduced to candles, there was no wireless interne\. 
and my house was quiet Peaceful. actually. I made 
soup on my gas stove and used two tea candles 

RECESSION POWER: HIstorical datil Implies that we reduce energy-consumption during economic downturns.. Thl! 
qI.I€!'Stlon of our times Is how we reduce energy consumptIon whIle retaInIng II VIbrant .nd interestIng economy. 
each night to light my endeavors. I actually had time 
to sit and think. Just a notebook. a pen. and some 
candlelight. all sprinkled with calm quiel- real 
thinking l ime. 
I had just been in London with a friend. Matt Webb. 
We discussed consumerism. and the economy. and 
the environment in combination. He posited that 
2008 would become known as the year of "peak 
consumption:' I liked the term and the concept. but 
IIhink that "peak consumption" implies a diminished 
quality of life. This made me think about peak waste, 
which is essentially the same, but with an important 
nuanced difference. We all, it seems, want to know 
how to live better. and how to live in a way thaI's less 
damaging to the environment. Peak waste seemed to 
encompass Ihis idea better, the idea that we should 
strive for a higher quality consumption through 
lower waste. 
All these things seemed to tell a larger story to me. 
When I think of steampunk.1 think of a movement 
thai glorifies the period of the new industrial revolu-
tion, that first moment when people really started 
to enjoy fossil fuels. At the same time. steampunk 
is also nostalgic for the craftsmanship and brass-
and-walnut engineering that was typical of that 
period, "Lost knowledge" seems to typify what we 
lost after that early mix of craftsmanship and the 
new industrial revolution, I'm sure I'mglorifying the 
moment. and historians will prove me wrong, but 
I see an opportunity in the concept of steampunk. 
It appears we can worship the new and embrace 
it. but by reducing our consumption of the old, being 
more careful and thoughtful about what we waste, 
we could have quality consumption. A consumption 
that considers the human element. and doesn't 
outsource it A consumption where you know the 
person who made your bicycle or your mUSiC player. 
Not a consumption where all you know is that your 
shiny iPod was made in foreign lands and magically 
teleported to you in a pristine and hygienic retail 
store using unknown amounts of CO2-producing 
energy. The economics of this clearly need some 
ironing out. but we've managed to create an incred-
ibly complicated credit system for buying a lot of 
poorly made things. so it should be possible to use 
it to instead buy a few well-made things. 
So, as we sit. unemployed and fearful of the 
unknown future, perhaps there is something beauti-
ful to occupy makers. We can do the Fahrenheit 451 
of making, each of us picking up a legacy trade or 
skill and learning it to a degree that it can be taught 
and passed on. and introduce a more human face 
to the technology we take for granted. We can even 
make that technology "green." Let's make SlXe 2008 
was the year of peak waste. 
Saul GrifMh isa co-author of How!oons and a MacArthur 
fellow. saulsnlfitt1.com 
...... , 27 

r--------------------T---------------------, 
I 
! BY BlllJCE STEHLING 
I 
L ____________________ -L ____________________ ~ 
The Kosmos in a Box 
W
e call it the Antikythera Device. or some-
times "the world's oldest computer." 
That's nolwhal the machine's maker 
called his box. He would never have wanted it lost in 
a Roman shipwreck, near the obscure. rocky island 
of Antikythera. 
If that maker saw hs high-tech gizmo now. boy, 
what a comedown. It sank to the bottom of the 
Mediterranean under a tonnage of pottery, statues, 
and furniture. It was smashed to pieces. Its stout 
wooden frame flaked away like wet paper. It was 
also severely corroded. Fossil dinosaurs have been 
found in better shape. 
Once. there was room to claim that modern ideas 
about this machine's complex functions might be 
far-fetched. However. in 2005 the machine's frag-
ments were digitally CAT-scanned. revealing that 
the Greek maker carved specific instructions inside. 
Those scales and labels eliminate any doubt: we've 
got a crank-driven, precisely geared bronze orrery, 
The Antikythera Device predicts the position of 
the sun and the phases of the moon, and it prob-
ably tracks all five visible planets. It also predicts 
eclipses, and, as a final throw-in bloatware feature, 
it will tell you whenever the Greek Olympic games 
occur. All this in a single mechanism from 85 B.C .. 
or very near it. 
To understand the huge extent of the lost knowl-
edge here, we need to grasp what this lost object 
once meant ~ not to us who found it. because for 
us it's mind-blowing ~ but within the context of its 
own time and place. 
All we've gol is a few hints. We'lI have 10 blue-sky 
it a little. 
Let's consider the maker. For him, that machine 
was surely no marvel. He had 10 laboriously hand-
cut dozens of meticulous gear teeth into more than 
30 hard bronze wheels. Then he mounted all those 
gears in working order, complete wilh frame, dials, 
pointers. and a crank. A long. hard, exacting job. 
This machine is not a royal gift. all gussied up as a 
fancy collectible. It's also not commercial, because 
it's much too complex for untrained users. This 
cosmic box is Ihe work of an academy. Irs a pocket 
universe from a university. It was built by a graduate 
28 ...... 
: ~v 
The Antikythera Device predicts 
the position of the sun and the 
phases of the moon, and it 
probably tracks all five visible 
planets. It also predicts eclipses, 
and, as a final bloatware feature, 
it will tell you whenever the 
Greek Olympic games occur. 
All this from 85 B.C .. or very 
near it. 
student. Somebody young, smart. and determined, 
stuck in front of a professor. 
I'm inclined to suspect that this machine actually 
was our friend's academic education, that the box 
was his working diploma, a physical proof of the 
ordeal he had been through. Because it's portable' 
irs the Size of a laptop. Irs a bit heavy -
you sure 
wouldn't want to swim with it, if your galley was 
sinking off Antikythera ~ but you could lug it with 
you around the known world. 
You could take it home. Back tothe family estate, 
with the vineyards and the olives and the goats. 
There you could crank it up and show your Dad 
where the moon would rise on his next birthday. 
Your Dad's a tough army veteran: he scourged the 
Earth with the heirs of Alexander's generals (that's 
where he got the huge estate and all the slaves), but 
you're a fine gentleman from the Rhodes Academy. 
It took you four long years to build your kosmos 
in a box -
you, and maybe 20 other elite students. 
Most freshmen couldn't cut the metal there. They 
just couldn't hack it. They flunked out. You gradu-
ated: you successfully built a model cosmos. Now 
you fully get it about astral epicycles. You can crank 
history forward and backward: yes. you can even 
predict eclipses. ·Well. son:' says soldier Dad, beam-
ing approval, "maybe I grumbled about the cost of 
your college education. But no wonder we run the 

D£CONSTRUCTING THE ANTIKYTHERA DEVICE: (clockwise f rom t op left) 
FRONT: The gears and pointers at the front of the mechanl"",. There Is a zodiac 
scale. which displays the positions of the s..., and moon: a calendar seale. 
which shows the dat e in t he Egyptian calendar: and I moon phase display. 
BACK: Elements colored in bronte are tllose for which there is direct evidence; 
elements In copper are t hose that have been conjectured to complete the model. 
BACK DIALS: The main upper dial Is a 19..year. 235·monlh Met onic calendar: Its 
two subsidiary dials Ire Olympiad and C.llippic calendars. FRAGM ENT: The f ront 
of the m ain surviving fragment of the mechani"",. It conblins 27 gears. The large 
gear with four spokes at t he front Is called the Mean Sun Wheel. 
known world! By Zeus. we Greeks are civilized!" 
It is absolute. metal proof that you are not just 
empty talk like those so·called ··cosmopolitan·· phi-
losophers. YOu can tell horoscopes with your device. 
even get a decent job teaching. It also proves that 
you matriculated from Rhodes. where the Rhodians 
build giant war machines ~ where they built the 
Colossus of Rhodes out of somebody else·s war 
machines. The Colossus is truly one of the Seven 
Wonders of the World! 
Wondrous things happen in Rhodes. and even 
weirder ones in its close ally Alexandria. the boom-
town 01 the Hellenistic world. In Alexandria they 
build wild gizmos like jet-propelled aeolipiles. You 
grease up one of those babies. fire up its steam 
cauldron. and it swiftly becomes the fastest-moving 
object known to man. 
Of course. you have to explain a lot to get skepti-
cal Greeks to support advanced aeolipile makers. 
You have to explicate to doubtful people that the air. 
the pneuma. is not ··nothing:· but possesses mate· 
rial substance. unlike the element fire. which has 
immaterial substance. Physics canget complicated. It 
can get huge/ycomplicated. really Greek and subtle. 
Unlike the unsubtle Romans. who also have strong 
ideas about a universal cosmic order. Except. unlike 
your nifty little gearbox. their orderly ideas involve 
huge aqueducts and roads. SOlid. world-gripping 
stone roads. with Roman armies marching on them. 
So the problem here isn·t too few kosmos boxes. 
The problem is too many ancient computers. Once the 
sense of cosmic wonder fades. the boxes are arcane. 
they"re fussy. they·re mystically detached and geeky. 
No bUSiness model there. Too many features. Not 
enough apps to errpower the everyday user. 
And all that fancy bronze gearing ... hey. bronze. 
thal"s valuable stuff. The kids can repurpose 
grandpa·s fusty old gearbox and make some new 
objects of solid. practical value. like coins. Coins 
and swords. Bronze coins and swords ... who can·' 
love those? Coins and swords are universal! 
Bruce Sterling (tlruces@weH.com)istheauthorol several 
scoence fOctIOll n<;NelS arid nonfiction bookS. 
.. .... , 29 

30 ...... 
: ~Il 

GUSTAVE TROUVE 
,"01., Ie 1"' jall"iol' 1839 a L:I lIayc-DClIClU·les(ln<.!l"c.cl-J.oirc) 
O"aprcs Ie portrait exeCute par M. f'crnllnd ue Launay. 
Atlmis au :lalon Jes lIea u.x-Arts de Paris en l~ 

Maker 
With the magic of our MAKE Wayback Machine. 
we were able to interview the man whose contri-
butions to society were rivaled only by those of 
Edison. You may come away thinking Trouve 
deserves a brighter place in the spotlight of history. 
Monsieur Trouve, were you always a maker? 
Evidemment! I could happily spend from morn-
ing to evening tinkering and constructing lit tle 
carriages, telegraphs, mills, rabbits, automated 
birds inflated by air. Although I didn't partake 
much in the children's games of my age, I loved 
to amaze friends with the toys I made for them. 
When I was 6, I made a wind-powered 
marionette mill 01 wood. lead. and pewter. The 
connecting rods and cogwheels made the litlte 
figures move like people cavorting in the woods. 
At 7, I constructed a steam engine using a gun-
powder box and some hairpins. Then. in a sardine 
tin. I made a tiny fire engine with an air and water 
pump that apparently was new at the time. 
After studying mathematical sciences and 
mechanical arts. I was fortunate to work in Paris 
in a premier clockmaker"s shop. My patrons and 
colleagues seemed impressed with my manual 
skills. and I learned much from them. 
During my leisure time. I studied architecture. 
mathematics. chemistry. and physics. But wi th 
electricity it was like love at first light 
In 18661 established my workshop in Paris. My 
flattering biographer. Monsieur Georges Barral. 
claimed I possessed a gift for turning concepts 
into action. Perhaps that is why inventors and 
customers flocked to the workshop. 
The electric rifle I invented employed two 
small batteries. Capable of firing 18 to 20 shots 
per minute. it eliminated deviations in accuracy 
caused by the shock of a hammer. It was an 
object of public curiosity at the international 
Exposition Universelle in 1867. where it was 
presented to Emperor Napoleon III. An expert 
in weapons development. /"empereur admired 
its simplicity. 
If your early inventions attracted such atten-
t ion. why do so f ew people in North America 
know about you? 
Je ne sais pas! Perhaps they need to study 
French! Or maybe it is the nature of invention 
that the name of the first -
or the most famous 
CHARGE ME UP: (thiS page) The very economical 
Trouve-Callaud battery. with constant and continu-
ous current optimal for medical use: (facing page) 
Trou"" s molst-cell copper-zinc battery In a glass vase 
with paper disk$: his univefYl automatic battery. 
shown In use and In repose: a cutaway illustration of 
Trou""s batlery-ope<ated electric rifle. 
-
inventor lives on. while those who contribute 
modifications go unheralded. 
For example. I made valuable improvements 
to the telephone. boosting sound volume and 
improving the magnets. Forgotten! 
However. when lied the way with inventions. 
the acclaim was international and gratifying. 
A scientific journal of London wrote. "If England 
has Swan. America Edison. France has Trouve:' 
Why spend so much time on batteries? 
That 's hardly a route to f ame and fortune. 
Alors. electricity was beginning to transform 
society. yet batteries were fraught with limita-
tions. For me. they were fundamental building 
blocks that needed to be improved in order to be 
truly useful in multiple applications. I developed 
many types: weI-ceil. dry-cell. moist·cell. sealed. 
portable. pocket. automatic. reversible. and more. 
I was one of the first who combated the opin-
ion that wet·cell potassium bichromate batteries 
would be very inconstant and inapplicable to 

..... -, 
experiences lasting more than a few minutes. In 
a note to the Academy of Sciences. I established 
that constancy and duration could be achieved 
when carbon surfaces were of sufficient size. 
solutions were properly prepared, and zincs 
perfectly amalgamated. 
Some of your batteries were open-topped and 
others were in glass jars. How did they work? 
My mOist-ceil battery worked in a glass vase with 
two Iial disks: one zinc and one copper. Between 
these disks were blotting-paper washers. The 
lower washers were impregnated with a satu-
rated solution of copper sulfate. while the upper 
washers contained a solution of zinc sulfate. 
A copper rod insulated in ebonite plastic held 
everything in place. Wetting the disks put the 
element into action. Being very regular. this bat-
tery was especially advantageous for telegraphy 
and medical instruments. As you can imagine, 
constant and continuous current was critical 
during surgery, and my batteries achieved that. 
One of the most practical. simple, and well 
known was the Trouve-Callaud battery made of 
copper, zinc, and a copper sulfate solution. It 
was designed for medical uses. Constructed at 
a more reasonable cost than other batteries and 
generating about 1 volt. it also could be employed 
in alarms, telegraphs, and telephones. 
Arthroscopes, laparoscopes, and ultrasound 
are today's high-tech medical tools_ Are such 
devices really new? 
Mais nonll invented polyscopes (illuminated 
endoscopes) and photophores (medical 
headlamps) beginning in 1869. Polyscopes let 
physicians explore inaccessible parts of the 
human body. and photophores illuminated and 
reflected more easily accessible cavities. I was 
the first to light the cavities of the human body 
by means of platinum wire heated to an incan-
descent state by an electric current. This made 
diagnosis more accurate. 
Although I developed ooth petrol- and electric-
powered devices. the electric ones came into 
widespread use during surgery and in physiology 
laboratories and dentists' and gynecologists' 
offices. Societies and exhibitions around the 
world honored me with medals and diplomas. 
I also created instruments for removing tumors 
and extracting projectiles, as well as for cauter-
izing.1 do not wish to describe too graphically 
the instruments I customized 10 each organ. (For 
those interested, I suggest my illustrated Manuel 
d'tlectrologie Medicale.) 
For my batteries and medical instruments 
I made cabinets, portable cases. and even 
a tapestry cover that made a pedal-operated 
electro-cautery device look like an ottoman. 
_ 
33 

Maker 
No sense in frightening the patient - or the 
neighbors - with the sight of a strange new 
medical apparatusl 
Wasn't there a dispute about who was first ? 
My polyscope caused a revolution in medicine 
when it appeared at the World Exposition of 1873 
in Vienna. I was awarded the Medal of Progress. 
Malheureusement. two foreigners - a physician 
and a manufacturer - claimed as new inventions 
things that were merely modifications of my ideas. 
I told my wife with a smile, "My dear love. 
I am redeemed: my invention is good, I have 
a counterfejter!'~ 
Luckily, I encountered eloquent defenders, and 
in spite of the two German counterfeiters. the 
use of my electric polyscopes entered medical 
practice definitively. 
In the 21st century, we're getting serious 
about electric vehicles. You pioneered two? 
Using electromagnets. I made dynamo-electric 
motors. I patented a 5-kilogram motor and 
envisaged two such motors. each directly driving 
LIGHT WHERE YOU NEED IT; Un<k!rwater lighting 
with an electric lamp by Trouw.; interior view of his 
fire-safe universal eledrlc safety lamp. 
a paddle wheel on either side of a boat's hull. 
Then I progressed to a multi-bladed propeller. 
In July l S80, I submitted to the Academy 
of Sciences a new motor based on the eccen-
trization of the Siemens coil In l SSl.1 reported 
that through numerous modifications I had 
reduced the weight of all the components and 
thus obtained remarkable output. The motor 
was removable and easily lifted off the boat. 
On the 26th of May lSSl. my outboard motor, 
with two potassium-bichromate batteries and a 
three-bladed propeller. powered an lS-foot-long 
boat down the Seine and back from Pont Royal. 
Soon after. I repeated this experiment on the 
calm upper lake of the Bois de Boulogne. with a 
four-bladed propeller and a battery charged with 
one part hydrochloric acid. one part nitric acid. 
and two parts water so as to lessen the emission 
of nitrous fumes. 
Without noise or smoke. my boat beat all others 

and reached an unofficial record speed of 10.8 
kilometers per hour. Quelleacclamation! 
As all inventors did, I greatly admired Mr. 
Alexander Graham BelLI had named my fast, 
electric-powered boat Telephone in his honor, 
It seems the admiration was rTlltual, for when he 
visited me in Paris. he said. "I want to import to 
America a complete collection of all your inven-
tions. because they constitute for me the higtlest 
expression of the perfection and the ingenuity of 
French electrical science," He also expressed great 
SlXprise that I wasn't a millionaire many times 
over like all hs colleagues in the United States! 
In April 1881, I mounted two battery-powered 
electric motors on an English-made Coventry 
Rotary Tricycle, Traveling on the Rue de Valois in 
Paris at 20 or 25 kilometers per hour (depending 
upon whom you ask), this velocipede was the 
first lightweight electric vehicle. It wasn't much. 
but it was a start. 
While my boats became popular among 
wealthy patrons for pleasurable outings, they 
were practical as well. 
To control opium trade along China's coast, the 
authorities required stealthy surveillance boats. 
Thougtl electric motors were two or three times 
more expensive to operate than steam engines, 
they were silent and always ready. My small. 
efficient, 30-horsepower dynamo·electric motor 
launch provided a solution. This boat made 
possible the interdiction of many millions of francs 
worth of contraband. 
While you were making waves with the out-
board motor, you were also experimenting 
with aviation. What were you up t o? 
Since I drew birds and made bird toys from an early 
age. it is perhaps not surprising that my flying 
machines were based on birds. In December 1870. 
I presented two new models to the Academy. 
In my first omithopter. steam or compressed air 
activated the wings. The second derived its power 
from gunpowder charges fired into a tube, Finale-
ment. even though mine flew 70 meters, mechani-
cal birds did not figure in the future of aviation. 
What prompted you to invent military devices? 
The terrible days of bloodshed in the 1870 War 
directed my attention away from pleasant 
science. My first work forthe military involved 
"During my leisure time. 
I studied architecture. 
mathematics. chemistry. 
and physics. But with 
electricity it was like love 
at first light." 
locating bullets in wounded soldiers. Later, the 
Geneva Conference recommended to all European 
govemments that my lighting system for locating 
wounded soldiers on the battlefield be adopted as 
standard ambulance equipment. 
In the portable telegraph system I devised. 
the sealed battery withstood all sorts of moving 
aoout, It became the most-used portable military 
telegraph at the time. The Scientific American 
Supplement in 1882 called the system "perfect." 
Others called it "ingenious." That mattered less 
than the fact that the combination of snap hooks 
and cables on spools allowed soldiers to estab· 
lish lines as long as three kilometers over land 
and streams in just half an hour. 
My shipboard light projector for detecting 
torpedo boats was presented to the Academy of 
Sciences in 1885. That same year. my underwater 
lamps were used in the Suez Canal- and drew 
international press attention -
when they helped 
divers dynamite a sunken dredger that had inter-
rupted navigation. 
Electricity was transfonnative, and you lit the 
way in many ways. Tell us about that. 
My battery designs made possible portable 
lamps that were small, maneuverable. and light. 
For vehicles. I developed an extremely simple 
lantern that functioned instantly and provided illu-
mination five to six times superior to oil or candle 
lanterns. Doctors and others lit their vehicles 
inSide. to do their work. deliver mail, take notes. 
read. and dispel boredom! Some people. wanting 
to light their routes or being in need of publicity. 
used the lamps on the exteriors of their vehicles, 
The public named them lampes d'Aladin Trouve. 
They burned for about three hours and gave 
illumination equivalent to four or five candles. 
One of my designs enclosed an electric lamp in 
a double envelope of thick crystal inside a metal 
...... , 35 

Maker 
lantern. Even if the lamp broke in a flammable 
atmosphere. no accident would result. It was 
used for firefighting in Paris and New York. in 
mining. and for finding gas leaks. 
Did you ever invent just for fun? 
Of all things, I became an international sensation 
as a jewelry maker and theatrical designer. 
I started making electro-mobile jewelry in 
1865 - rabbits drumming, birds and butterflies 
flapping, decapitated heads talking, a grenadier 
playing a drum. Everyone wanted them l Mounted 
on gold or on tiepins, the minuscule creatures 
were animated with the aid of an invisible wire 
attached to a cigar-sized, sealed battery hidden 
in a waistcoat pocket. Tres amusant! 
After the military events of 1870,1 made 
electrically illuminated cryst al jewelry in myriad 
colors and shapes. It. too. was all the rage. but 
nothing compared to the audience and media 
acclaim when I incorporated lighted crystals in 
dance. theater. and opera costumes and props. 
Neither language nor images can sufficiently 
convey the effect on the major stages of Paris. 
London. Berlin. and beyond. For the time. it was 
36 Mo ... : V<Wmo V 
STAGECRAFT TO AIRCRAFT: A IIYlng chandelier of 
dancers adorned in Trouv ~'s electrically lighted 
;e_lry for Tile CII/den Tllat laid the Golden Eggs. 
performed In Paris and Berlin; electro-mobilejewelry 
by Trouvo! Included a drumming rabbit. flapping bird. 
and chattering skull; Trouvo!'s second ~mechanlcal 
bird" omithopter, driven by gunpowder. 
the most considerable application of electrical 
illumination directly from batteries. Imagine a 
ballet of illuminated amazons. a bejeweled chan-
delier of sparkling dancers. Neptune's chariot 
aglow. and the duel in Faust with lighted swords 
flashing on a darkened stage. Quel plaisir! 
Given the many inventions I exhibited at major 
expositions. it seems fitting that my last spectacle 
on the international stage appeared in 1889 at 
the Exposition Universelle in Paris. My enormous 
lighted fOlXltain. which I would patent in 1893. was a 
sensation at the end of a transformational century. 
With hope that in some small way I lit their 
paths or electrified their imaginations. I salute 
all inventors and makers who succeeded me. 
Au revoir et bonne chance! 
Karen Hansen makes classical mUSiC. stories. and 
photographs in Minneapolis and on her travels Itlrough· 
out Europe.ASia. and America. She Inte ..... iews artists. 
entrerx-eoeurs.gardeners. judges. rx-ofessors. and makers. 

Modding a baby crib 
for disabled parents. 
By Michael H. Kelsey 
I 
.... arents with disabilities face numerous chal-
." lenges when caring for a newborn. Besides 
the usual sleep deprivation and anxiety 
about such a small and dependent life. the equip-
ment made for infants and children can present 
substantial barriers. 
Changing tables are built for standing. bathtubs 
can take two (or more!) hands. and cribs require 
parents to have substantial flexibility and lifting 
strength, 
My wife, Liz. is a little person: when she's out of 
the house, she uses crutches and a lower-body 
brace that doesn't bend. Around the house. we 
keep most of our storage low to the ground. and our 
activities are on the floor. (Dinners on a patterned 
rug with Japanese lacquere(Hable place settings 
are a great way to relax alter work!) 
By the time we brought our daughter. Madeleine, 
home from the hospital. we'd been thinking about 
the many adaptations needed to care for her. We 
consulted several times with Judi Rogers at Through 
the Looking Glass in Berkeley, Calif.. a terrific organi· 
zation with resources, advice, designs, and uniquely 
engineered equipment for parents with disabilities. 
Some things were easy: a mover's dolly to move 
stuff around, a padded changing pad on the floor, 
trays of supplies stored in our coffee table, 
But Madeleine's crib posed a challenge: cribs are 
built to strict regulations, and the railings are all 
21J2 to 3 feet above the floor. far too high for Liz to 
use. One of Rogers' designs inspired me to modify 
a crib to be easy for Liz to use both in and out of 
her brace (and easier for my back, as well!), while 
being safe for Madeleine to sleep in unattended, 
I started with an inexpensive "Leksvik" crib from 
Ikea, built of solid wood and easy to alter. It converts 
to a toddler bed, so the mattress is lower; with the 
legs cut off. the top of the mattress is just 8 inches 
off the floor. 
I cut one side panel in haH, and attached drawer 
glides at the top and bottom to rejoin the two 
halves, With a strip of molding on the end panel 
as a stop, and the fixed part of the railing screwed 
to the mattress frame, the panel opens arK! closes 
like a patio door and stays solidly in place. I used 
another strip of molding and a block of foam 
padding to close the gap between the rail and the 
mattress. I added a clevis pin underneath to lock 
the door. and covered the railing posts with a 
Hexible crib bumper. 
Now when we open the crib, the mattress is 
right there. just inches off the floor. Liz and I can 
both get Madeleine into and out of the crib, day 
or night. with no extra effort. 
D Detailed assembly instructions and safety notes 
are available at makezine.com/go/cribmod. 
Michael Kelsey IS an e.xperimental particle physicist and 
occasional tinkerer. irwestigating rare B meson decays 
at Stanford 
...... : 37 

I=light of I=ancy 
Kazuhiko Hachiya mines cartoons for his real-world 
inventions. By lisa Katayama 
I < 
azuhiko Hachiya is famous in Japan for his 
quirky, entertaining creations. He is also 
about to become the first person to fly in an 
anime-inspired jet. 
The 42-year-old Tokyo-based artist is in the final 
stages of making the jet-engine version of OpenSky, 
a one-person glider with a 32·1001 wingspan based 
on a popular Japanese film. "My biggest goal is to 
create something that moves or bemuses people: 
he says. "If that meant I only made one big thing. 
that would be OK," 
It took Hachiya three years and a whole lot of 
spruce wood and fiberglass composite to make the 
first version of OpenSky, inspired by the fictional 
plane from Hayao Miyazaki's Nausica~ of the Valley 
of the Wind. "It's a hybrid between a vintage wooden 
glider from the 19305 and today's airplane," he says_ 
HiS first test flight, which lasted several seconds, 
took place in the spring of 2006 with the help of a 
bungee cord and a nearby university soccer field. 
To understand factors like weight. wingspan. and 
control. Hachiya practiced riding hang gliders and 
trikes, then launched a half-sized remote control 
verSion before takeoff. The full-sized OpenSky only 
carries a pilot weighing less than 130 pounds, but 
this isn't a problem for Hachiya. "I weigh 115:· he 
says. "And I only plan on letting myself and female 
pilots take the flight." 
Hachiya worked full time at a design consulting 
firm until 1995, when he won a $100,000 fine arts 
award and decided to go independent. Since then, 
silliness has become an unofficial requirement in 
all of his works. "People always ask me if I'm an 
inventor, but I'm not. Inventions have a practical 

component to them: none of my pieces have that" 
In 1993, Hachiya made the Inter DisCommunication 
Machine, a simulation game in which two people 
interact with images of themselves as seen by the 
other, using two head-mounted video cameras and 
winged backpacks geared with transmitters, 
"You switch perspectives with your partner," 
Hachiya explains, "Sometimes I tell players to kiss 
or shake hands: they freak out because they feel 
like they're kissing themselves." 
But it was A:lstPet. a simple desktop application 
that combines an endearing virtual pet with a 
person's email inbox, that put him on the map 
in the growing niche of Japanese media artists, 
PastPet was commercialized in 1997 and has sold 
more than 1 million copies to date, 
Some also know Hachiya for the Thanks Tail, a 
joystick-controlled robotic dog tail that attaches 
,-
IJ' 
to the rear of any car and wags at other drivers. 
In Japan, a quick wink of the hazard lights means 
thank you, and flashing hazards indicate traffic 
ahead. The tail serves a similar function. 
Open Sky isn't the only Hachiya project that looks 
like it's straight out of a fictional world. PastPefs 
cute, 3D characters were inspired in part by a 
manga called JoJo's Bizarre Adventure, and the 
AirBoard - a jet-powered skateboard that hovers a 
few centimeters above the ground -
is a lot like the 
Hoverboard from Back to the Future II. "I really get a 
kick out of turning fantasy into reality," Hachiya says. 
» Kazuhiko Hachiya: www.petworl\s.co.jp/- hachiya 
LIsa Katayama is a Tokyo-bornjournalist living Irl San Fran-
cisco. She is the authorol Urawaza: Secret Everyday Tips and 
Tricks fromJapanand has guest bIogged tor 80mg 8OIng . 
...... : 39 

i<. 
Thin(l<) IC(~ 
A chilly reception for Minnesota's Art Shanty Projects. 
By Mike Haeg 
~ 
lopsided tin shed creeps along the surface 
I' of the frozen lake. Inside. a handful of rosy-
~ cheeked passengers are pedaling their 
hearts out. The shanty's sl<ipper keeps the little 
icehouse on its snowplowed track by manipulating 
a rudder-like steering apparatus. His first mate is 
feeding small pieces of cedar shake into the minis-
cule wood·burning stove that warms the shanty's 
passengers and brings a snow-packed teakettle 
to whistle. 
The Mobile Home Shanty circumnavigates the 
2008 Art Shanty Projects. a curated community of 
20 artist shacks humbly populating a small section 
of Medicine Lake, just outside Minneapolis. Along 
its route. the mobile shanty passes a monolithic 
shanty comprised of inward-facing refrigerator 
doors. a shanty with clear plastic walls insulated 
with castoff stuffed animals. a menacing 20-foot 
robot shanty. an ice museum. a radio station. and 
a camera obscura. 
At the heart of tns makeshift community is a 
small. piecemeal shack sporting a bold. red letter 
A and a sign proudly exclaiming Auto Ethnographic 
Guide Service HQ. 
Inside is Peter Haakon Thompson. who started the 
Art Shanty Projects together with fellow artists David 
Pitman. Kari Reardon. and Ale)( DeArmond with a 
single shanty back in 2004. The idea: to transform 
the traditional ice-fishing shack into a public art 
space. That year. the team had about 30 visitors. 
mostly friends and other artists. 
The following year, the team was awarded an art 
show through the Soap Factory gallery. involving 
ten projects created by 20 different artists on the 

lake during the winter. The team put out a small 
press release. and much to their surprise. 300 
people showed up the first day - one of the coldest 
days in 70 years, around -36°F. 
For the 20 teams selected each year to partici-
pate. the only limitations are the temporary nature 
of the exhibit, extreme conditions, respect for the 
lake, small grants, and state and county regula-
tions for fish houses (they must have at least three 
walls, a door that opens from the outside, and at 
least two square inches of reflective material on 
each side). The rest is up to their imaginations and 
resourcefulness. 
'"It's like forts for adults:' says Thompson. 
Thompson believes that the real magic of the 
project comes in pushing not only the artists but 
also their art out of their studios, galleries, and 
disciplines, and challenging them to be more inspi-
rational and engaging to the bundled-up families, 
ice fishermen. and occasional game warden who 
come to visi\. 
Near what looks to be a crashed plane, the 
residents of S.U.R.V.IVAL. Shanty (Serious 
Undertakings Regarding Visionary Investigations into 
the Vital Attributes of longevity) are improvising a 
workshop on the aesthetics of improvised shellers. 
Nearby. a shanty built out of green chalkboard 
quakes in response to the Drawing While Dancing 
workshop that's taking place within. A stunningly 
handcrafted wooden fish breaks through the ice 
just feet away from the line of people waiting for 
the Norae Karaoke Shanty. And the Mobile Home 
Shanty picks up a new group of inhabitants, and 
lazily (as seen from the outside, at least) takes 
another lap. 
Find the annual Art Shanty Projects on Medicine 
Lake from mid-January through mid-February. 
Come on the weekend . Plan on spending the after-
noon. Dress warmly. 
» For a list of the 2009 shanties and more informa-
tion, visit artshantyproJects.org. 
» Turn the page for more Art Shanty photos. 
Mike Haeg Os the proud mayorof Mt. Holly. MII .. 1. (pop. 4). He 
inVItes all disbelievers to swing by for an ice·coId beer and 
some /ree pinball. 
.. .... : 41 

Maker 
• • \-
, 
42 ...... :VoIUmoV 

(;iants of th(~ Nlicl"os 
The two inventors who fueled the rise of the living room 
helicopter. ByAdamSalter 
\. 'I iero-sized indoor RIC helicopters that 
~V launch from your palm and hover in midair 
• 
never fail to make the uninitiated gawk 
like cats tracking a moth. Toy stores are filled with 
these inexpensive miniature marvels. and it got me 
wondering: how did they come into being? I learned 
that the story of their development includes years 
of hard work. hobbyist passion. and an undeniable 
streak of brilliance. 
The giants of the micro RIC scene are Alexander 
Van de Rostyne of Antwerp. Belgium. and Petter 
Muren of Nesbru, Norway. These two have made 
possible the affordable. ready-la-fly indoor RIC 
helicopters. Van de Rostyne's models from Silverlit 
Toys and Muren's from Interactive Toy Concepts 
(ITC) are the market leaders and the original prod-
ucts that started the current micro RIC heli craze. 
Van de Rostyne is an electromechanical and 
computer science engineer who has worked in 
marketing and management at Motorola and Apple 
Computer. where he says he "got the bug for simple 
and user-friendly high-tech products," He's currently 
CEO of a 50-person web agency and partner in a 
software company. 
Muren is an R&D engineer who studied hydro- and 
aerodynamics and has experience in mechanical 
engineeriJll, electronics, and software development. 
He manages a team of 20 engineers developing 
videoconferencing systems at Tandberg ASA, does 
constJtant work for the UAV industry, and also runs 
his own company, Proxflyer, 
Of course the two men's "hobby" is their true 
obsession. and has become a profession in itself. 
Van de Rostyne explains, "I have been a passionate - ., 

Maker 
modeler for more than 40 years now, There is no 
single topic in my life that I've spent more lime 
on. For me it was always much more than just 
spending my free time. It became a way of life. 
When I got bored in a business meeting, I started 
making sketches of all sorts:' 
Muren says that his hobby know-how blends 
naturally with his career skills when he's designing 
his inventions. "Most of the development work is 
done in my private workshop as a modeler/hobby-
ist - but then again, I have experience as a modeler 
that probably could be classified as professional: 
Tim IIH:I'(<![libh~ 5111'il1l<il19 H(~li 
In the late 19905. RIC helicopters were out of reach 
for casual buyers. You had to build, tune. and learn 
to fly a mOdel that was large, heavy. dangerous. 
expensive, and just plain "fiddly," Van de Rostyne 
explains, "You have to imagine that in those days 
a typical helicopter weighed 8 pounds or so, and 
there were no indoor helis at aiL" 
In OI"der to bring the joy of helicopters to a larger 
demographic, some major problems had to be 
solved: miniaturization, stabitity, steepness of learn-
ing curve, and price, The first step took place when, 
despite the warnings of friends who thought it 
couldn't be done, Van de Rostyne set to work on 
his Pixel series of miniaturized electric helicopters. 
In 1997 the Pixel 1 took flight. weighing 125 grams. 
He explains why this was such a feat at the time 
(before the advent of ultra-light Li-Po batteries): 
"The biggest challenge was (and remains to some 
extent) energy density. meaning how much energy 
can I get in what weight of batteries." 
As Van de Rostyne continued his series of incred-
ible shrinking prototypes. his work led to the first 
retail indoor heli in 1999: the Ikarus Piccolo, weighing 
280 grams and measuring 20 inches in length. 
Despite a relatively high cost and sensitive controls, 
the Piccolo allowed enthusiasts to spend hours 
perfecting their flight skills in their living rooms. It 
also had full4-channel control, a gyro for stability. 
and the durability to survive the learning process. 
Stallilitv 13[~(-!al<thl~()lIgh 
While the Piccolo was amazing heli freaks every-
where, Muren was solving the second daunting 
problem: the quest for passive stability. The main 
challenge was bucking conventional wisdom: '"All 
the textbooks I had stated that helicopters by 
nature are inherently unstable. After years of failure, 
hundreds of models, and thousands of test flights 
(most of them ending in spectacular crashes) it was 
sometimes hard to push on." 
However. by combining his theoretical and mod-
eling skills, Muren was able to slowly make progress 
until, in 2002, he achieved perfectly stable flight. 
"I still remember that feeling," he recalls. "I am 
pretty sure it is close to the feeling a sportsman 
has after winning an Olympic medal." 
In hiS Proxflyer concept. Muren employed two 
counter-rotating rotors that tilted freely in response 
to horizontal movement. keeping the craft in the 
same position relative to its surroundings without 
the need for gyros or other electronic aids. The 
result is an almost magically stable, light, simple 
flying machine. 
In videos on his website, a prototype hangs 
elegantly in space. silently compensating for destabi-
lizing forces, even when Muren tugs the booy of the 
cralt with his fingers. This new kind of helicopter also 
used greatly simplified controls. more akin to an RIC 
car with an up/down stick added on. 
It was only a matter of time until this technol-
ogy would be brought to the mass market. Muren 
recounts: ""I instanlly knew that this could be the 
start of something very big:' 
I~ac(~ to HHtail 
The process 01 going from prototypes to a retail 
product was a new challenge for Muren. He says his 
years as a development engineer were instrumental 
in overcoming the obstacles: "Maybe most impor-
tant of all was that I had learned to never give up-
even at times when 20 engineers and 200 workers 
in a factory in the middle of Asia just sat there and 
looked at you, waiting for you to tell them how to 
solve the problems and get this thing to work:' 
The 50-gram 81aderunner was released in 2004. 
offering an ultra"light aesthetic and a flying experi' 
ence more reminiscent of rubber band-powered. 
balsa-and·tissue planes than of copters that used 
high-rpm rotors to lift their weighty power source. 
Subsequent versions of the Bladerunner offered 
new options and improved performance. culminating 
in a new model called the Micro Mosquito. This latest 
incarnation has a 6·inch rotor and weighs only 20 
grams. It also offers a sleeker, uncovered design 
similar to Muren's prototypes, and green LED "eyes" 
that accentuate its insectoid appearance. 

LITTLE WING: Interactlye Toy Concepts' 2Q-gram Micro Mosquit o (aboYe) and IFly series 13 gram vamp (right) 
Van de Rostyne was not far behind in the race 
to retail. with another groundbreaking helicopter 
called the PicooZ, the tiniest yet at 10 grams and 
6 inches long. Costing around $30. it has a tougtl 
foam body. auto-stability. and a simple 2-channel 
control scheme. 
iVlI-!lding ()f thH Minds 
Muren and Van de Rostyne met in 2003 and had 
a ball flying their models in Van de Rostyne's living 
room. The fruit of this meeting was a friendly 
competition between the two, producing succes-
sive pairs of impossibly tiny helicopters. Since then. 
more models have been produced, some less than 
2 inches long and weigtling as little as 1 gram. 
The two designers are constantly releasing new 
retail versions of their models. Among Van de 
Rostyne's copters is one notable for its aesthetic 
appeal. The PicooZ Pluto is a 3-channel. minutely 
detailed model with a classic bubble canopy and 
open tail-boom structure. The design is reminiscent 
of the iconic Bell 4701. famously suspended from 
the ceiling of New York's Museum of Modern Art. 
One of Muren's latest the Micro Mosquito 4~4. 
has mechanical and control innovations that set it 
apart from previous models. It incorporates four 
motors and 4-channel control. which now allow the 
helicopter to "slide" side-to-side while the body 
remains facing forward. This is accomplished via 
two separate tails with independent rotors that 
extend at oblique angles from the body of the craft. 
Beyond staying in touch with each other. the 
two designers communicate with their peers. their 
fans. and the larger hobbyist community througtl 
discussion forums such as rcgroups.com. They also 
interact with their customers there, offering tips 
and encouragement to those of us who love tearing 
into the retail products. modding them to improve 
their function or appearance. 
Their kinship with other enthusiasts is unsurpris· 
ing, since Muren and Van de Rostyne insist what 
they value most is bringing joy to users of their 
technology. Van de Rostyne sums it up: " When 
designing products is driven by a dream, then that 
dream will become tangible in the experience of 
the final product." 
Adam Salter ( adamulu~(!lgma~.oom) is a burnt-out ~Iock 
trader and fortnef Angeleno. He currently lives in Rome where 
he writes jreelarlC(' and enjoys the ir.comparable vi<:tuals . 
...... , 4S 

r--------------------T---------------------, 
I 
I BY DOUGLAS 11101'1011"0 
I 
L ____________________ -L ____________________ ~ 
Putting On a Show 
I 
think you should put on a show. It's great that 
you're a gastra-innovating. neuro-hacking. 
nano-fabricating bio-tinkerer.lt's wonderful 
that you've posted pies to your website. made an 
Instructable. been featured on the MAKE blog, and 
Twittered every stripped-out screw and hot-glue 
mishap. But I think you should put on a show. an 
in-person. be there or be square. get 'em while 
they're hot, olde-timey, humans-sharing-a-point-
on-the-space-time-continuum show. 
It doesn't matter if you live in a big city. a tiny 
hamlet. or a strip-mall dead zone. There are other 
humans around. and it's time to meet them face to 
face. Tough love, I know. but it's got to be done. 
Great ! So now that you're putting on a show. all 
you need are some projects/artworks/ideas you 
want to share. an enthusiastic crew. maybe a little 
cash. and a venue. How about a kite phot ography 
e)(hibition in the public library or a handmade 
instrument concert at a local park? 
We put on the first ArtBots robot art show for 
$200, but we probably could have done it for $20 
if we had really worked at it. And dorkbot-nyc. a 
regular show'and-tell of creative electricity projects. 
has been running for eight years now on an annual 
budget of zero dollars. but with a tremendous 
amount of support from the community and 
Location One. our host. 
Find venues by riding your bike around the neigh-
borhood looking for empty spaces. sending emails 
out to local mailing lists. and pestering friends of 
friends of friends who work at likely spots. Coffee 
shops and bookstores are common venues. but try 
local colleges. abandoned storefronts. the court· 
house steps. out-ol-season campgrounds. etc. A lot 
of fun can be had showing your work in unexpected 
places. 
Both ArtBots and dorkbot started tiny and have 
grown large. mostly by accident. Starting tiny is 
good -
if you're going to grow. you get to grow 
organically. and if you don't want to grow. then you 
don·t have to worry about it ! 
I've taken the liberty of asking an assortment 
of veteran DIY. low-budget (or no budget) show 
makers for show-making advice. 
46 ...... :Vdumoll 
There are other humans 
around. and it's time to meet 
them face to face. 
III First off. me! Here's my number-one most 
important. from·the-heart advice: strive for diversity. 
both in people and in ideas. Be open to. and even 
pursue. people and ideas that don't Quite fit your 
original conception of the event. The ArtBots call 
for works states: "If you think it's a robot and you 
think it's art. send it in!" And dorkbot-nyc is an open 
forum -
we have a vague mollo. "People doing 
strange things with electridty:· but beyond that it's 
anything goes. That means that we've had some 
really terrible presentat ions. but we've also had 
incredible. une)(pected wonders. Of course there 
are often good reasons to make careful selections. 
but stretch out a little. reach out to someone 
une)(pect ed . Err on the side of diversity. 
III Artist Tali Hinkis organizes La Superette. an 
annual holiday art show that focuses on functional. 
affordable art in multiples. Her advice: learn to 
delegate. 
"Allow people to cont ribute: give them responsi-
bility so they feel like real collaborators and want to 
invest time in helping and promot ing." Hinkis says. 
"Pwple are the best resources: they have friends. 
family. and skills. They have jobs with high-end color 
printers. a boyfriend with an empty office space. 
a journalist Sister. or some mad archiving skills!" 
She also recommends an "in progress" attitude : 
"Sometimes the hardest thing is just to put some-
thing 'out there' in the world. It doesn·t have to be 
a masterpiece. or a revolutionary curatorial project. 
We learn from doing:' 
III Wendy Jehanara Tremayne has organized all 
sorts of DIY events. from collaborative plays to 
political protests. She's the force behind the giant 
Swap·O-Rama-Rama events at recent Maker Faires. 
She recommends projects with a clear structure. a 

focus on a particular problem or idea, and space for 
the participants to contribute meaningfully. 
"If you feel strongly that a project is relevant." 
Tremayne says, "you must suppose that some num-
ber of others will too, and act on this assumption, 
~ Projects that invite others to express themselves 
E invite authentic contributions that are heartfelt and 
that ultimately resonate through the project when 
• 
, , 
~ 
it is produced. Nothing but genuine self-expression 
can have this same impact. Money, as an obstacle, 
is an illusion." 
" 
i III Marie Evelyn is executive director of the art 
~ organization Analogous Projects, and produces 
ScrapCycle, a series of homemade-instrument! 
j 
noise shows with a novel admission fee - audience 
members are asked to bring a piece of scrap or 
found material for barter al l he show. Analogous 
Projects focuses on interaction art and emergenl 
behaviors. interests reflected in her advice. 
~ 
"Enter into the endeavor with acceptance." coun-
~ sels Evelyn. "Accept that you can't directly control 
£' 
any aspect of a social gathering. You can set up the 
~ 
inil ial condil ions and you can guide things. bul a 
J social gathering is a living organism: to try to con-
n. 
trol it (even in the most caring and well-intentioned 
way) is to snuff out the life and joy and humanity 
of coming together .... And accept the fact that you 
have absolutely no idea what will happen! People 
will surprise you in beautiful ways." 
II And some wise parting words from Saul Albert, 
U.K.low·budget rapscallion who co-produces The 
People Speak events and helped start dorkbot-
london: "There is no such thing as a low-budget 
event! If you've got no cash, you just use different 
rurrencies to get the job done. Sweat. flattery, pas-
sion, and flirtation are all good ones, and can 
improve the atmosphere more than the most 
expensive canapes. The real key to your cheapo 
event's success is making sure it hits an unfulfilled 
need for different groups of people:' 
What could be simpler? Embrace the chaos, be 
prepared to improvise. con your friends into 
helping. find your niche, and keep an open mind. 
You made it. now show it 
Douglas Repetto is an artist and teacher inl'Oived in a number 
01 arVcommunity groups including dorkbot. ArtBots, organism. 
and music-dsp. He lives in New 'lbrk City with Amy. Fbkey, 
Sneezy.and many plants 

r--------------------T---------------------, 
I 
! BY I'Dll11EST M. MIMS III 
I 
L ____________________ -L ____________________ ~ 
How to Photograph 
the Solar Aureole 
T
he purpose of the Country Scientist column is to provide projects that will encourage readers to 
do science. Whether you're a sludenllooking for a good science fair project. or an adult wanting to 
begin a personal science study. I hope that you'll find this or a future project worthy of pursuing. 
The Solar Aureole 
Dust and other kinds of particulate matter cause 
the sun to be surrounded by a bright glow in the 
sky known as the solar aureole. The aureole is often 
faint or even nonexistent when the sun is viewed 
from a mountaintop. But it's almost always present 
at lower elevations. especially during spring. sum· 
mer. and fa ll. 
The diameter and brightness of the aureole is 
related to the scattering of sunlight caused by par-
ticulate matter. This means a record of solar aureole 
photographs can provide a good indication of the 
transmission of sunlight through the atmosphere. 
The color of the sky beyond the aureole also pro-
vides ctues about stuff in the air. 
Since 1990 I've made almost daily measurements 
of the ozone layer. solar ultraviolet radiation. haze. 
total water vapor, and other sun and sky measure-
ments from a field adjacent to the small farmhouse 
that serves as my South Texas office. In 1998. 
I bought my first digital camera. a 1.5-megapixel 
Fuji MX-700. To date this camera has prOVided 4,465 
images (1.280xl,024 pixels) of the solar aureole and 
the sky over the north horizon. White the resolution 
is low by teday's standards, it's more than adequate 
for a record of sky images. 
These solar aureole images provide important 
information about my electronic sun and sky 
measurements. lor they quickly reveal the presence 
01 thin clouds or haze that might have affected 
the measurements. They also provide a visually 
convenient way to compare the clarity of the sky 
across the seasons and years. 
Photographing the Aureole 
Solar aureole photos can be made with virtually 
any kind of digital camera. For serious studies, 
you'lI want to use a camera that allows you to set 
48 ..... 
: ~Il 
the same exposure duration and I-stop for all your 
aureole photos. This will provide a record of the sky 
without unwanted automatic adjustments by the 
camera that alter or even remove the changes in sky 
brightness and color caused by dust. smoke. and 
other forms of air pollution. 
The aureole is washed out if the sun is photo· 
graphed directly. Worse. your eyes and a digital 
camera's image sensor can be permanently dam-
aged by the focused image of the sun. Therefore. it's 
necessary to design an occulting device that blocks 
the direct sun when making solar aureole photos. 
To protect your eyes, it's also necessary to use a 
method that does not require you to look anywhere 
near the sun. 
I've developed various methods for photograph-
ing the solar aureole in which you need only look at 
your camera. My favorite occluder rig is a simple 
camera platform that keeps the sun and occluder in 
the same position for each photograph. This greatly 
simplifies the comparison of photos 
You can design your own platform or you can try 
my simple version. the Solar Photography Occluder 
Rig, explained in the DIY on the following page. 
Making a solar aureole photo with the occluder in 
place is simple. If the sky is not overcast. put on sun-
glasses and a hat and go outdoors with your camera 
mounted on the occluder. If it's awkward to sit in a 
chair or on the ground. brace theoccluder rig against 
a stable object such as a fence or wall. 
Switch on the camera, point it toward the sky 
away from the sun. and adjust its position so that 
the occluder is centered in the display. Then look 
at the front of the camera - not at the sun -
while 
pointing the camera toward the sun. When the 
shadow of the occluder baliialis directly over the 
lens, press the shutter button and quickly move 
the camera away from the sun. 

r----,--------------------------, 
i 
i SOLAil PHOTO(;ll,IPIW OCCLLJIJEll IlI(; 
i 
MATERIALS 
L ____ 
_ _______________________ ~ »H'."x5" steel 
mending plates (3) 
or C<luivalent 
II Join 2 of the mending plates end'lo-end with 
three 6·32 screws and nuts. as shown in the photo 
above. (You may need to slightly enlarge the holes 
in the mending plates.) Drill out the center hole near 
the end of the third plate to IA" diameter. to accept 
the L,4·20 bolt that will secure the camera. Bend the 
third plate twice as shown above and fasten it to the 
center of one of the 2 base plates with 3 more 6 ·32 
screws and nuts. 
Next. determine how high the wood bat! needs to 
be so that irs in line with the camera lens. Mount 
your camera atop the bent plate with the If.·20 bolt 
Hand·tighten the bolt to a'Alid damaging thecamera: 
» 36-32 S(:rews (6) 
» .6-32 nuts (8) 
» '1.-20 bolt 
» '/." threaded rod 
» Wood bait slightly 
f;lrger than the diam-
eter of the camera's 
lens Found al crall or 
hobby stores, wood 
balls may colTlC with 
or wilhnut II hole 
bored Pi'rtway or 
entirely through. 
» Black Ink Or paint 
A black marker pen 
works fine. 
» Drill and drill bits 
if irs loose. insert a few washers to take up the Slack. 
Now measure the distance from the base plates to 
the center of the lens. Add 10 this distance 14" plus 
half the diameter of the wood ball . Use a hacksaw 10 
cut the threaded rod to this length. 
Twist the cut end of the rod into the wood batt. 
Turn a 6·32 nut onto the uncut end of the rod until 
irs about 14" from the end. Remove the camera and 
set il aside. Insert the end of the rod through the 
center hole in Ihe end of the base plate opposite the 
camera mount and secure it with another 6·32 nut . 
Complete the occluder by coating the ball and the 
threaded rod with black paint or ink. 
29 Jun 2008. African dust . Sunlight 
transmission at 525 nm (green): 60.1% 
08 Oct 2008. Clear sky. Sunlight 
transmission at 525 nm (green): 94.3% 
.. , ..•.... y.~ 
...... , 49 

r--------------------, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
L ___________________ = 
e-:; 
". 
. 
. 
r 
SOLAR JOURNAL: A rocent series of solar ""reoll! Images ITIIIde with the author's s un occlude •. 
A CAUTION! Always wear sunglasses and 
never look at the sun while making aureole 
photographs. To a\/'Oid sunlight damage to your 
camera's image sensor, you must work fast. 
You may void the camera's warranty if you 
damage it by pointing it at the sun. 
Doing Science with Your Images 
For serious scientific purposes, it's best to make 
solar aureole photos at the same manual settings 
(I use 1/1.600 at 14) and at the same time each day 
the sun is visible. 
Since 1990, I've made 2.392 aureole photos at 
or near local solar noon. Solar noon varies during 
the year, in accordance with the equation of time. 
You can lind solar noon calculators and tables for 
your location online. Just search Google under 
··solar noon:· Some sundial sites also have solar 
noon tables. 
An even better choice would be to photograph the 
50 ...... 
: ~Il 
aureole when the sun is at the same angle in the sky. 
Again. the web has various sites that provide solar 
angle calculators. A good choice would be to select 
the sun angle at noon on the winter solstice when 
the sun reaches its lowest point in the sky. 
Going Further 
Next time. we·1I use a free image processing 
program to analyze your solar aureole images and 
other kinds of photographs. 
Forrest M. Mims III (Iorrestmims.org). an amateur scientist 
and RoIexAwardw'nner. was named one of the-SO Best 
Brains in Science" by Discovermagazine_ His books have sold 
more than 7 million copies. He also edits The Citizen Scientist 
(sas.org/tcs)_ 

T
echnologies from the dusty attic of the past can have as much mystery, 
excitement, and allure as those we imagine are just over the horizon. 
Ta day's amateur techno-historians don't just want to read about the gadgets 
of yesteryear, they want to build them, to interact with their constituent parts, 
right down to the rivet heads and hand-blown triodes. 
Perhaps because modem technology seems so gray-box drab and utilitarian by comparison, 
retro makers like to bring the hand-built sensibilities of the past into their technosphere, 
re-casing their gadgets in highly ornamemed forms of wood , brass, leather, and copper. 
There's no end !O how we can revive, recast, and refashion the machinery of the paSt, and meld 
it with the technology ofthe present. In this issue, we explore ~ste am p un k~ and the revival 
o f steam power, relief-etched illuminated printing, the an of mechanical time-keeping, 
and brilliant makers o f centuries past. We'll demonstrate how to build a parlor-proven 
electrostatic general'Or, a vacuum siphon coffee brewer, an engine with a teacup power 
source, and much morc .... 

THE Power of Steam 
A 
sawmill survives. "lOY DALE DOUGHERTY" 
P 
lume~ of Steam rise from 3 rusted tin roof and from side vents underneath (he wooden building. They floal 
among the redwoods that line the canyon and merge into a low, morning fog that has rolled in (rom the coast. 
A portal to the past has opened to reveal Sturgeon's J\l ilL 
I
t's a world of steam whistles and forged iron, rombling wooden floorboards and rhythmically pulsing, gleaming 
machH>cr)' filled with moist air and piles of wet sawduK At its ceoler is a beast of a circular blade, with huge 
teeth, ripping through a giant log. Evcrywhcrc, men arc working, unable to speak to each other above the noise, 
each one tasked wid, keeping the newly restored California sawmill alive. 

lilt' 
... "', S3 


.. 
A
bOUt a dozen workers arc neooed [0 operate the 
$.awmill, each onc with a very specific nmction. 
"It is vcrydcar when yOU look at this old mill tbat it was 
very labor intcnsive,~ says Harvey Henningsen, ",ito is 
leading efforts to restore the milL ~That "''as the cc~ 
nomic downfaU of the mill as the 1<)50S slipped into tbe 
~ 60$ and 70S and modern equipment replaced workers." 
I 
He belj,:,ves tbe mill is worth maintaining so that future 
generations can sec "howwalcr was converted to STeam, 
how it powered an engine that convened reciprocal 
motion into rotating power, and then how this rotating 
power was transferred throughout the mill by the use 
ofbclts and jack shafts." 
Sturgeon's Mill (m"geonsmilLcom) is located ncar 
Sebastopol, Calif. (about foor miles from MAKE's 
offices). I-!cnningse" 's father, James, and Ralph S. 
Sturg~'On bought the mill in [943- It opcrat<:d in various 
locations from the larc ,8805 until '964. 
...... , 55 

William Blake: 
Patron Saint of Makers 
The mad 
was on a ffilSSlOn 
can 
to. ;BY GARETH BRANWYNt 
I 
I'IN Ifdl"r"'Kt uf If,,,, tn ""d lit/I (( "P' [, 1 S,-). on ~'rh eJeampl,· of Blob" In, ""t.d IN Itn1quo <or ,IIUnufU' • .t 
pn"''''g ami ,,,mc,h,nl\ of a P""" line." "It ,hff.r'C"t " ntmg ", 1c" '"'' e,. ",,"urn, "m". and 'ph"",m, 

F
or the past 25 years, nearly every day, I've interacted with "the mad English poet" 
William Blake in some fashion. T poke my nose into one of the dozens of books 
I've lovingly collected, or T whisper (or shout to the rafters) a poem, or T chew on 
some gristly hunk of his ridiculously complex poetic psycho-mythology. 
For someone with the attention span of a 4-year-old. 
having anything captivate me to such an extent is 
downright alarming. Equally strange is the fact that 
I rarely explain my obsession with Blake to anyone. 
Why am I so fascinated by this apocalyptic. 
outSider artist (in his day) whose work still defies 
comprehension? What keeps me coming back? 
In this article, I'll explain a little of Blake's invented 
printing method. and make my case for him as 
patron saini of makers. 
William Blake, 18th-Century 
Zinc Publisher 
I was introduced to William Blake in British Lit 
class in high school. but ironically. it was during 
the desktop publishing revolution of the mid-1980s 
that I started to understand what he was really all 
about. 
I came to the real Blake by way of the cyberneti-
cist Gregory Bateson. Bateson was fascinated by 
how Blake famously ··mixed up·· modes of percep· 
tion in his work: Blake claimed he had something 
called ··fourfold vision" and that he could see things 
on different levels of awareness simultaneously. 
Bateson had studied schizophrenia for the 
Veterans Administration and discovered thaI. 
similarly. schizophrenics confuse and conflate. 
for instance. the literal and the metaphorical: they 
don·t organize thoughts. communication. and 
perceptions into logical categories the same way 
that non·schizophrenics do. 
Blake also seemed to leak at the margins 
separating these logical types. Of course. one can 
argue that all artists do this. but irs the extremes of 
the leakage in Blake·s work. the sheer quantity. and 
its complexity (and its surprising coherence. if you 
stick around long enough to sort il out) that makes 
Blake so compelling. Bateson was also intrigued by 
how functional Blake was while living in his world of 
perceptual and categorical mashups. 
As I began 10 delve deeper into Blake. one day 
I had something of an epiphany. I"d gotten a lovely 
two-volume set of his most popular works: Songs 
of Innocence and Songs of Experience. two of hiS 
masterpieces of "illuminated printing:· a technique 
of free-form engraving. painting. and printing he·d 
invented. 
Up until his discovery. illustration engraving and 
book printing were two separat e disciplines. with 
the engravings etched. printed. and later. tipped into 
the books as plates. By combining these two arts 
on the page. Blake·s technique freed him to write 
text. compose pages. design typography. and paint 
illustrations. right on the copper printing plates. 
I was reading about all of this while working on a 
zine publishing project. using an Apple Mac SE run-
ning PageMaker layout software. I was doing a lot of 
the writing. designing. even some of the illustrations. 
right in PageMaker. and printing out my zines on the 
Canon copier sitting next to my Mac. I realized that 
Blake had experienced the power of a different. but 
surprisingly analogous. set of media tools and felt 
a similar sense of creative freedom. more than 200 
years earlier. William Blake was a zine publisher! Wil-
liam Blake was a multimedia artist!' 
"On England's Pleasant Pastures Seen" 
William Blake was born on Nov. 28. 1757. in Soho. 
london. in a modest apartment above his father"s 
hosiery shop. His parents were devoutly religious. 
but they were Dissenters. nonconformists who 
opposed the established Church of England and 
its hierarchy. From an early age. Blake proclaimed 
religious visions. thai he could see angels and other 
nonphysical entities. His father tried to beat such 
nonsense out of him. 
Aside from punishment for seeing apparitions. 
Blake·s early childhood was rather peaceful. even 
I. Some scholars have even argued that Blake was a 
hypermedia artIst Songs of Innocence and SongS of Experj· 
ence are not only two poetic cycles connected to each 
other. WIth a poem relating to yooth and innocence. and a 
complementary one to age and experience. but they also 
contain additional images and textual passages that thread 
together in ways similar to hnked content in a modem 
hypermedia document. 
.. .... , 57 

bucolic, as he wandered 
through fields on the outskirts 
of London, swam in farm 
ponds, haunted printmakers' 
shops, read the classics and 
the Bible, and studied as much 
art as he could find, 
The rest of his life found 
him living through some of the 
most tumultuous times imagin-
able, including the American 
and French revolutions, great 
scientific and naturalistic 
discoveries, the dawning of 
the Industrial Revolution, and 
all the intellectual ferment 
and cultural activity excited by 
these seismic shifts, 
It's nowonder that Blake's 
subject matter was so epic, so apocalyptic -
all 
fire, upheaval. and psychic magma on one hand, 
and Eden-like dreamscape on the other. He saw 
tremendous potential in humanity and in the power 
of big ideas -
and he dreamed of all of it coming to 
flower in his beloved Albion,l But he also saw the 
horrors of war, of poverty and class division, of state 
and religious intolerance, and of the shortcomings 
of science and reason when dillOrced from imagina-
tion and wonder, 
Blake showed artistic promise at a very young age 
and was enrolled in drawing school at age 10. At 14, 
his father, ever the pragmatic tradesman, wanted 
his son to know a durable trade, so he signed him up 
as an engraver's apprentice, where he labored for 
seven long years, It was as an engraver that Blake 
developed a lifelong love for Gothic art and archi-
tecture and for the nobility of the engraver's and 
identified solely in that trade), 
In 1779, at 21. Blake was accepted into the 
recently formed Royal Academy of Arts, He quickly 
found himself at odds with the teachings of the 
school and its first president. Sir Joshua Reynolds, 
Reynolds would become a lifelong artistic foil for 
Blake, a two-dimensional symool of everything he 
found wrong aoout establishment art and art that 
generalizes, abstracts, and handily categorizes: art 
that no longer "rouses the faculties to act: 
58 ""1oo:VdumoI7 
Blake Dreams a New 
Method of Printing 
In 1788, Blake claimed he'd 
been visited in a dream by his 
dead brother Robert (who'd 
recently died of consumption) 
and shown a revolutionary new 
printing technique. 
Unlike traditional engrav-
ing, where the image outline is 
scratched into a plate prepared 
with an acid-resistant waxy 
"ground" and then the lines 
are exposed to acid, Blake's 
technique worked in reverse. 
The area to be printed was 
painted over with the acid-re-
sist ground and then the plate 
I::: exposed to acid, eating away everything that 
not the image. 
After etching, he would touch up the image and 
1
1.1~:~~th~':~~OO~P::"'~:';:Pf:"~t;;'~':~~~t:h his engraver's tools 
on a rolling press and then 
II 
i 
i 
pages with watercolors. 
For Blake. "illuminated printing" was the artistic 
I
~h~:'~:~;~:~~,~ft: lifetime, "a method of combining 
the Poet" 
Anyone who's looked closely at traditional 
techniques can appreciate 
laoor-intensive, and constraining 
is (a square inch of engraving can take 
a method of engraving that 
artwork, where creation happens 
on the plate, using pens and brushes, traditional 
i 
tools, 
Imagine how excited Blake must have been by 
which 
largely a copyist medium, a means 
printing was a means of original 
could compose your ideas, 
right on the printing plate. 
the ancient name for Bntain, In Blake's mylhol-
il also represented the 'cosmic man,- the MinS who 
space-lime, falls fromsrace, and yearns 
unity In a new Jerusalem. 

T
o give you a beller idea of how illuminated print-
ing worked, here are a series of photos laken 
by Todd Weinstein in 1979 in the New York studio 
of 81akean scholar Joseph Viscomi. They were part 
of Viscomi's attempt at preparing, executing, and 
printing a relief-etched facsimile of plate 10 from 
The Marriage of Heaven and Hell (1790). Blake wrote 
lillie about his technique, so his process is not 
exactly known . Few of his plates survive. Tragically, 
they were mainly sold for scrap metal after his 
death. Scholars such as Viscomi have managed to 
reverse-engineer the process and they think it went 
something like this. 
From the I-leart of Los' Forge: 
Preparing the M et al 
In Blake's psycho-mythology, his inner poeV 
creative man was named Los (likely "Sol" spelled 
backward). Los is a blacksmith. and given the 
preparations required to create the plates that 
Blake worked on. it's not hard to see how he would 
have made the connection between this prep work 
and the roots of his creations. both literally and 
figuratively. Copper sheets had to be hammered 
and cut into smaller plates. planed. washed. oiled. 
and polished. 
Raising Up H is Voice: 
Pa int ing t h e Text and Art 
Once the plate was prepared. Blake painted the text 
and artwork onto the copper surface with quills 
and brushes. using an "impervious fluid" that would 
resist the acid to which the plate would then be 
subjected, For this. he used "stop-out," an asphalt· 
based varnish found in traditional engraving. used 
to cover already·etched lines to prevent them 
from being further "bitten" into during successive 
etchant baths, 
Because the designs would be transferred onto 
paper in an engraver's press. the art and tex! all had 
to be painted in reverse. While Blake was already 
used to reverse composition in engraving. he raised 
free·form mirror writing and mirror painting to an 
art form in itself. (For a man who believed it was a 
mission for each of us in life to do everything in our 
power to keep our minds awake, our imaginations 
expansive. and to look at things from multiple points 
Fig. Ie Copper plat es were hammered. chiseled, and split 
to siZll!. then polished with charcoal. pumice. oil. arxl 
water t o creat e a smooth wonclng surface.. Fig. B: Stop· 
out varnish mixed with lampblack made an acid-resist ant 
"Ink" for crNt ln@; theartwork on thecopperplates. 
Fig. C: Blake could compose his work. In mirror Images, 
right onto the copper plat es. Fig. D: Blake would build 
a ...essel of wn around the plat e and constant ly stir the 
acid like a cauldron brew. 
of view. conceiving and visualizing everything back-
ward must have been a great "mind hack" in support 
of this worldview.) 
"Melting the Metals into Living Fluids": 
E tching 
With the image painted onto the copper with imper· 
vious liquid. Blake would then create a dike around 
the outside edges of the plate with walls of soft wax. 
This allowed him to pour a bath of "aqua fortis" 
(nitric acid) onto its surface. As the corrosive acid 
bit into the exposed metal. Blake would hover over 
the plates like some Shakespearean witch. using a 
big bird feather to keep the acid agitated and to stir 
away bubbles that formed. 
The process. with its noxious fumes. was not a 
,. .... , 59 

Fig. E: Ink is <;arefully added to the raised areas of the 
plate uSing an engraver's dabber. Fig. F: Blake would 
add color In the printing process by Inking different 
areas of the plate with different inks before printing. 
Fig. G: An approximation of Plat e 10 from Tile Marriage 
of Heaven and Hell. first copies probably printed in 1190-
FIg. H: Plat e 10 of Tile Marriage of Heaven and He". 
from Copy I, printed in 1827 and completed j ust months 
before Blake died. 
pleasant one (some have suggested that the liver 
failure that finally took Blake's life may have been 
the result of "chronic copper intoxication"), II's no 
wonder that he called this an "infernal process:' and 
that in his satirical masterpiece, The Marriage of 
Heaven and Hell, he located his print shop in hell. 
With his penchant for leaking margins between 
modes of perception, Blake proclaimed that what he 
was really doing in his artistic process was "melting 
apparent surfaces away, and displaying the infinite 
which was hid." 
After the etching was complete, he would remove 
the acid and the wax dike, rinse off the ink with 
turpentine, and polish the plate before inking, 
~ \Vi[hout Contraries Is No Progression": 
Inking 
Ink was applied to the etched copper plate with a 
flat·bottomed linen dabber wetted with engraver's 
ink, The ink was made of a powdered pigment mixed 
with burnt linseed or walnut oil. For multicolored 
prints, Blake would use smaller dabbers or brushes 
to apply spot colors to desired areas on the plates, 
Ul n Which Knowledge Is Transmitted from 
Generation to Generation": 
Printing the Plates 
Blake's wife, Catherine. was his assistant in hell's 
printing house and she was especially adept at 
printing, and in hand-coloring the printed pages. 
They used an engraver's press (with the plate and 
paper on a bed that passes between two heavy 
rollers when the press is cranked), Blake would ink 
and deliver the plates to the bed and Catherine 
would then place the paper, blankets, and backing 
sheets. 
Given the metalwork, caustic chemicals, oily inks. 
and other"infernal" parts of the process handled by 
Blake, and the pristine and expensi~ white paper 
delivered by the 10~ly Catherine, it's no wonder that 
he saw t heir extreme roles as a symbolic expression 
of the dynamic, two-toned life process, his "marriage 
of heaven and hell," 
~ Exuberance Is B eauty~ : 
Hand-Coloring the Prints 
For his illuminated books, Blake and Catherine 
would hand· color the printed pages with water· 
colors to complete an edition. Some editions, and 
individua l copies. were painted very simply, others 
far more elaborately. 
Over the years, Blake also changed, sometimes 
dramatically. the ways he colored the manuscripts. 
This could depend on his mood, or 'Nhether he 
desired to bring out some aspect of the work in 
a specific copy he was creating. This has allowed 
connoisseurs of Blake's work to enjoy. interpret. 
and heatedly debate multiple versions of the same 
work from countless perspectives. something Blake 
surely would have been thrilled by. 

Create! The End Is Near! 
During his lifetime. Blake was uncompromising in 
his work and what he wanted to say with it. His art is 
so dramatic, so muscular and apocalyptic, because 
he felt an overwhelming sense of urgency. One can 
almost picture him as a crazy man on a street cor-
ner. wearing a sandwich board, waving around dirty 
fistfuls of doomsday pamphlets. 
But instead of proclaiming "Repent. sinners! The 
end is near!" Blake's message was more like: "Wake 
up! There's an artist asleep inside of you! Don't let 
the world lull you to sleep. Create!" 
And that message. steadfastly encoded like a 
fractal equation. reiterating at every level of his 
work. is what makes William Blake a worthy saint 
of makers. He called his illuminated prints "win' 
dows into Eden." They were designed to function 
something like stained glass: you can see through 
them, to something on the other side. What he 
hoped you'd catch a glimpse of there was your own 
creativity, your own "poetic genius:' Blake didn't 
want to creat e work for you to passively consume: 
he wanted to create work that would inspire you to 
make something yourself! 
Blake's early biographer Alexander Gilchrist said: 
"Never before surely was a man so literally the 
author of his own book." Blake was self-taught in 
every discipline but engraving: during his lifetime, 
he was a painter. poet. essayist. author, inventor, 
philosopher. engraver. printer, calligrapher. graphic 
designer, bookbinder, singer, songwriter. and 
metalsmith (to name a few). One of Blake's best-
known quot ations is, "I must creat e my own system 
or be enslaved by another man's," There is no more 
ultimate "maker" statement than that. 
SPECIAL THANKS: Information about Blake's print-
ing technique used in thiS article comes from the article 
"Illuminated Printing"by Joseph Viscomi, available at the 
William Blake Archive (blakcal\:hive.org), Many thanks to 
Professor Viscomi for providing these images. 
a s~ larger versions of the illuminated printing process 
photos, and check out ourown experiments in re<;reating 
the technique. at makezHle.oom/l71blake. 
Gareth Branwyn isa contributing editor tor MAKE, an 
editor at Make: Books. and part of the MAKE blogteam. 
Channeling Your Magic Cephalopod 
I
can't think of a better example of a real-life 
Blakl:an character, somC<}1>C who's cuhivued 
a similar self-modeled universe and who sees things 
from many unique angles, than comemp-orary com;c 
artist and memoirist Lynda Barry 
This is impressively evident in Barry's new book, 
Wbdt It L (Drawn And Quarterly, zooS). T his 
densely collaged work is utterly uncategorizable -
so many simultaneous modes of expression: 
a textbooklworkbook on inspiring creative writ ing 
and cult ivating creativity of aU kinds; a memoir-
comic of Barry's personal struggles with Cn'ativity 
and self-expression, especiaUy as a child; a stunning, 
intense, and challenging piece of oollagefaltercd 
book art; and a 
..... ' . 
SOrt of extended 
fever dream On 
the nature o( 
memory, ,magl-
nation, play, and 
cre3livity. 
Like Blake, 
Barry's message 
is also about 
rousing yourself 
from creat;ve 
slumber. Ifun 
extended pep 
talk on finding 
your 5Ourcesof inspiration and using your senses 
and memories of life experiences to express yourself 
m ways that can truly enrich your life. 
When you open up this book and poke your head 
into its dn'am-like sea of memory-ticklers, imagina-
tive ideas, creative inspiration, and surreal imagery, 
it's hard not to want to put it down and go make 
something on your OWn. As if to drive home the 
beastly, manifold nature of primal creativit), Barry 
introduces the Magic Cephalopod (aka squid), 
a SOrt of crC3ture from your id who swims through 
the murky depths of the text, its many appendages 
in constant creative motion, gently guiding you 
to swim off on some grand adventure inside the 
Marianalrcncli of your own creativit), 
This is Blakl:an art, and Blakl:an inspiration, 
(or the lISt century. 
- G.B. 
..."', 61 
lit' 

D See more: makezine.com/17/watch 
Time 
The nation's 
in the heart of Amish 
"lBY E RIN K ELLY- PARKjo 
T
wist the crown of a mechanical watch and 
you're winding a tiny spring, which powers 
a gear that runs until the spring is completely 
unwound, some two days later. Maintaining these 
miniature ecosystems is a skill that takes hours 
to learn - 3,000 hours, if you're as obsessed 
with keeping time as they are at the Utitz Watch 
Technicum or "lWr ( Iititzwatchtechnicum,org), 
Based in the Amish country of Pennsylvania, this 
watchmaker's college accepts just 12 students a 
year.After a two-year program, graduates can repair 
anything that ticks, and even fabricate parts, 
Jordan Ficklin (watchmakingblog,com), a 2006 
graduate of LWT, originally got a degree in computer 
science but now fixes watches. "Watchmaking tools 
haven't changed much in a hundred years," Ficklin 
says, "A few have become motorized, but the twee-
zers,lathes, and files haven 't changed much," 
"Probably the hardest skill to master is manipu-
lating the tiny hairspring that controls the rate of 
the watch:' Ficklin says, "The slightest mistake can 
ruin the work piece," 
The LWT, funded by Ro lex. aims to prevent a 
watch-repair crisis, as watchmakers have declined in 
recent decades, Rolex covers tuition, while students 
are responsib~ for their own tools, which can run up 
to $5,000, 
Ficklin muses about traveling back in time ISO 
years, "Watches from that period would have had 
custom-fit components instead of manufactured 
pieces with the tolerances we have today. With a 
modern watch I can just order a replacement and 
put it in," Still, he notes, "Every day I have to adjust 
parts so that the play between them and the next 
component is within 0.01 or 0.02 millimeters.-
Your grandfather's Oatejust will reap the benefits 
of this new generation of watchsmiths, 
Erin Kelly-Park is WIfe to a maker arid momma to two little 
makers. She lives in Southern California, 

THE Florence Siphon Arabica 
Brewing" Extraction Apparatus 
Make your own mad-scientist coffee machine. "lOYJ. EDGAR PARK lit 
,.."', 63 

A
board the dirigible Aeroship Phaedrus, two men are seated at a table in the 
onboard laboratory: 
"Doctor Liepold. would you kindly prescribe some-
thing to lift my depressed spirits?" 
"Why of course, Captain Heffernan. What is it that 
ails you?" 
"My mind feels sluggish and there is still much 
work to be done before daylight. I am drawing up 
charts tor the expedition." 
"Ah. yes, I have just the thing. Sit a moment while 
I extract the invigorants from these wondrous beans." 
"Very good, thank you, What is that strange device. 
Herr Doktor?" 
"1 call it the Florence Siphon. It is an arabica 
brewing and extraction apparatus. Allow me to 
demonstrate. First. I fill this boiling flask with a 
quantity of pure spring water. It is a vessel of my 
own devising that can withstand great heat and 
pressure. I heat the flask. which causes the water 
to vaporize. passing through this tube here. through 
a filter. and into the beaker to my left. Here, the 
water commingles with precisely roasted and 
ground fruit of Coftea arabiCa.1 give the slurry a rapid 
stirring to fully saturate the grounds. then wait. 
"As my boiling flask cools. a vacuum is created. 
causing the very atmosphere of the Earth to push 
the liquid through the filter. leaving the grounds and 
all unsavory particulate matter behind. Thus the 
liquid. now filled with essences. oils. solubles. 
flavors. and vital invigorants. is returned to the flask. 
Allow me to unstopper it and pour you a dose:' 
"Doctorl You have outdone yourselfll feel revital-
ized by this most miraculous potion:' 
T
he vacuum siphon coffee brewing method dates 
back to the 1840s. It produces some of the 
cleanest. smoothest-tasting coffee of any method. 
Commercial vacuum pots are available. but I wanted 
to heighten the drama of vacuum brewing by taking 
it into the realm of the mad scientist's lab. Thus the 
Florence Siphon was born! 
After studying original patent drawings and exist-
ing devices. I identified these key features: 
»Water is heated in a boiling flask that has a tube 
leading to a second vessel containing ground coffee. 
»The tube must have a filter. to allow the water to 
flow through but not the grounds. 
» The filter must be submerged during brewing. so 
as to maintain a seal with the boiling flask. 
» The second vessel must be accessible for stirring 
the slurry. 
»The boiling flask must be large enough to create 
a sufficient vacuum as it cools to "pull" the coffee 
back through. 
One drawback to early vacuum brewers was the 
constant danger of exploding glass. Today. we have 
plenty of high·quality borosilicate glassware that's 
up to the task -
it just happens to be found in the 
lab. not the kitchen. 
Filtration was another challenge. I tinkered with 
a few options (including an unfortunate foray into 
shower heads) before arriving at an inverted thistle 
tube. This is a type of bulbed funnelthafs easy to 
cover with filter cloth. (Thanks to Dr. Jim Callan from 
Avogadro's Lab Supply for this suggestion.) 
I assembled my funnel. stopper. tubing. filter. and 
a beaker for the grounds. I filled my flask with pre-
heated water (small bumers can take a while to boil 
500ml). poured 38g of medium-ground coffee into 
the beaker. donned my goggles. and lit the burner. 
The water began to bubble quickly. and soon went 
straight up the glass tube and over to the grounds. 
After about a minute. the flask was nearly empty and 
I extinguished the flame. At this point. there was an 
abundance of expanded water vapor (steam) inside 
the flask. which prevented the water from returning. 
I stirred up the slurry with a stick and then waited 
with great excitement. Would the siphon be able to 
draw the coffee back up? At just about the 2-minute 
mark. I saw the gorgeous brown liquid begin its 
ascent. This is due to the vacuum created by the 
cooling and contraction of water vapor in the boil-
ing flask. It was tentative at first. but as the boiling 
flask continued to cool. the coffee started to move 
quickly up the tube. over and then back down to the 
flask below. Within another 20 seconds. the journey 
was complete: 420ml of coffee made it back. leaving 
80ml of water behind with the grounds. 
I removed the stopper and poured myself a cup. 
It was perfect! Smooth. bright. clear. and clean. 
Vacuum coffee is a step above a French press. and 
leagues above drip. Plus. when you brew with the 
Florence Siphon you get to don your lab coat and 
cackle maniacally. What more could you want from 
a cup of coffee? 
Here's how to build your own Florence Siphon . » 

MATERIALS 
I purchased all the lab supplies from Avogadro's 
Lab Supply (avogadroslabsupply.com). 
A 
CAlif ION: Use only brand·new lab equipment. 
Used glass can contain seriously scary things 
that ~n kill you. 
lOOOml Florence flask. Py«ox (II" Kimax br.Inds only 
aka round bottom flask Or boiling flask 
Rubber stopper sl~ed for Florence flask 
MIn<! _s •• s. 
lOOOml Griffin beaker 
4mm 0.0. gLass tubing. 12" length 
Glycerin 
latex connedlon tubing, 2" length 
Thistle tube with 4mm tube 0.0 .. 1V." funnel mouth 
Cloth filter I used. Vama vacuum pot filter from 
sweetlTWlrias.comlpmd.brewel'$.vac ... m.shtml. 
Rod stands (2) 
4-flngered clamp for Florence flask 
Tube clamps {21 
Butane burner 
Stopwatch Or oHler time. 
Crease pencil or crayon 
Optional: Flask tongs, cork flask stan:!. pouring funnel 
TOOLS 
Drill 0. stopper boter to create. 4mm hole 
Thick leathe. gloves for hutlng and bending gins 
Safety goggles 
Build It 
L Wash the glassware with a small amount of dish 
soap and warm water. 
2. Assemble your stands and clamps as shown 
in Figure A on page 63. Put the burner. Florence 
flask. and Griffin beaker in place. To connect the 
2 vessels. you'lI need to put two 90· bends in the 
glass tubing. Measure the height of your Florence 
flask, then add 3". This is the length from one end 
of your glass tubing to the first bend . Place a mark 
there with a grease pencil or crayon. Measure the 
distance between your tubing clamps. This will be 
the distance between the lwo 90· bends. Mark this 
distance from the first bend on the tubing. 
3. Turn your butane burner on high heat. don your 
gloves (or optional mad SCientist gauntlets). then 
place the glass rod at the first bend mark. Roll the 
tube in the flame. putting gentle pressure on il so 
you can l ell when it begins to soflen. When it's soft 
enough. gently bend it to 90· . I'd never done this 
before this project. and it sure is funl 
A 
CAUTION: Wear thick leather glOYes and long 
sleeves when bending or Inserting glass tubing. 
"' .... , 6S 

4. Using the same method. bend the glass tubing 
at the second mark. It's important that the bends 
are aligned on the same plane. so you may need to 
reheat and adjust. 
5. You should also heat the ends of the tube and 
rol1 them in the flame to round off the sharp tube 
edges. Don't overheat them and close off the ends! 
6. Using either a dril1 bit or a stopper boring tool. 
make a 4mm hole through the center of the rubber 
stopper, Lubricate the hole with glycerin and very 
careful1y pUSh the long end of the glass tube into 
the top of the stopper hole. This can be dangerous 
if done too quickly. so take your time. think happy 
thoughts, and wear gloves and long sleeves. The 
stopper should hold the glass tube about lh" off the 
bottom of the Florence flask when properly seated. 
7. Cut a 2" length of latex tubing, and use it to couple 
the glass tubing and the thistle tube, 
8. Place the cloth filter over the end of the thistle 
tube's funnel mouth. then pul1 the drawstring tight 
and tie it off (Figure B. previous page). (I had also 
inserted a Teflon screen that proved unnecessary.) 
9. Attach the filter/tube assembly to the 2 tube 
clamps. so that they hover above the Florence flask 
and Griffin beaker (Figure C). You should test push· 
ing the assembly down so that the stopper is in 
place and the filter rests about \18" above the beaker 
floor. You can adjust these heights with a greater 
length of latex tubing, or use a stand to prop up the 
beaker. as 1 did, 1 found a disused wine bottle holder 
that did the job nicely, 
Brew It 
1. Preheated water can be a timesaver. Raise the 
filter/tube assembly. then pour 500ml of hot water 
into the Florence flask. 
2. Grind fresh coffee beans on a medium·fine sel· 
ling, somewhere between a drip and an espresso. 
YOU'll fine·tune this over time. Pour the grounds into 
the Griffin beaker. 
3, Lower the filter/tube assembly until the rubber 
stopper is firmly in place. The stopper must have a 
good seal all the way around. The filter end wil1 be 
dug down into the grounds at this point. 
4. Don your safety goggles, then ignite the burner 
(Figure D). It should take a few minutes for a butane 
burner to bring the water up to temperature. Watch 

for the water to rise up the tube, defying gravity. 
It's a very exciting moment! 
5. Once nearly all of the water is in the Griffin 
beaker, start your timer. Lower the heat enough to 
maintain a low. bubbling roil in the small bit of water 
that remains behind in the Florence flask. This will 
keep things from progressing too quickly. 
6. Give the water-saturated grounds a few stirs with 
a spoon or rod (Figure E). If your coffee is fresh 
you'll see it "bloom" as gases are released . 
7. After l'li minutes have passed (you'll learn to 
adjust this timing, so keep notes). turn off the 
burner and remove it. As the flask cools, steam will 
contract and draw the coffee out of Ihe grounds 
and back to the flask (Figure F). 
8. When the coHee has slopped flowing, carefully 
unstopper the flask and raise the filler assembly 
tube (Figure G). Remove the flask of coffee. Pour 
yourself a cup of the most delicate. nuanced coffee 
you've ever brewed. Orink and enjoy madly. 
J. Edgar Park II is a digital automata builder for cinema 
theatricals. and the host of the Maker Worl<shop on 
Make: televISIon. 
The Method Behind the Madness 
W
hy is siphon coffee so good?l;'1) reasons: 
Ideal water temperature and optimal coma<:t 
between the grounds and the water. \Vater turn~ to 
vaporprior t'O bQiling. and then heads QUI 'Of the 
boiling flask and in(Q the ground coffee. This means 
your water is right around loo'F when the brewing 
begins. Electric drip brewers arc notorious for their 
wildly inaceUJ:l(e brew temperatures (and the >O\Ir 
brews they can produce as a result). (' ___ ....... 
All 'Of the water in a siphQn 
brewer is in eQntact with all of 
B 
the grounds during the entire 
C=~:::: ...... 
~=, 
brewing process. This givcs the 
water the greatest chance to extract the things we 
"'ant out 'Of the c'Offee grounds. In aU but the best 
drip brewers, a tiny stream 'Of water flows quickly 
through the center of the grounds, leaving behind 
much of the flavor. 
Once you get the hang 'Of y'Our siph'On brewer, you 
can brew f'Or a veryprecise amQunt of time. When 
the vocuum pressure is great enough, it will pull (he 
coffee back into the flask rapidly. YQU can instigate 
this by cooling the flask with cold water, or even 
a wet cloth, although I"d be careful not t'O shock the 
glass tOO much with an ice bath. 
.. .... , 67 

THE Teacup Stirling Engine 
Turn the heat from 
or candles into 

_
To see a video of a Teacup Stirling Engine being built arm run. check out: maknlne.com/ 17/stirling 
T
here's energy all around us, juSt waiting to be tapped. W hether it's a hot cup of 
coffee on a cold day, light from the sun, scented candles, orwaste heat wafting 
from electronics, it's all potential power waiting to be harnessed! T his is the world 
of the Stirling engine. 
Have you ever tried this fun experiment? Put a 
tightly filled balloon in the freezer. When you return. 
you'll find it shrunken. Bring it out into the warm 
room again and it will expand! 
What if we could use these expanding and 
contracting states to move a piston? This is the 
principle behind the Stirling engine. invented and 
patented by the Reverend Doctor Robert Stirling. 
in 1816. It's a simple idea. for a very simple engine. 
Let's build one! 
Jim Shealy;s a 17'year'oId who enjoys !)(.lIlding engines. 
He's built everything from pulse jets to turbines. and is 
currently enrolled at Georgia Ted. 
MATERIALS 
CD or large plastic Jar lid such as a peanut butter lid 
10".5" piece of aluminum or steel plate. at least ",." 
thick lWo 5",,5" pieCH are fine. 
Plastic CD spindle case from a stade of blank CDs 
Wire rod, 'Il>" steel or 'I,," stainless steel Welding rod 
Is preferred. and stainless steel Is i>Ht; It must be 
smooth and straight! 
¥." PVC pipe. 7" length 
10".5" piece 01 foam board or two 5" " 5" pieces 
¥." copper pipe 
r length of any type 01 pipe. C-stock. or L-angle stock 
EpoJIIes: j·8 Weld or J·8 Kwik. and cheap S· or J.S. 
minute epoxy If It says "no .... shrink.· don·t get It! 
f.Iot glue gun and glue (optional) 
Fan weights or pennies (optional) 
Double-sided tape (optional) 
TOOLS 
Hacksaw 
utility knife 
Drawing compass 
Ruler 
Mari<er 
Electrical tape or glue 
Drill and drill bits: '10." Or 'Ii", 'VJ2", 'I!"-%" 
Needlenose pliers (2 pairs) 
Wire cutten 
Hair dryer 
Plastic cling wrap 
Window cleaner 
Cooking spray 
COMPLEXITY, DIFFICULT 
Before starting, read the tips on p~ge 7S so you 
know whal you're getting inlo. 
1. Cut the dis placer ring. 
Mark a CD spind le case 1" below the top. all the way 
around. You can fill it with CDs up to your mark and 
use them as a guide. Remove the CDs and cut the 
case in two. along your mark. I used a drill press and 
cutoff wheel and made a level cut by spinning the 
case (Figure A. following page). A hacksaw works. 
too. Next. cut the top off the case. leaving a ring. 
2. Make the displacer. 
USing the cut top of the CD case as a guide. span 
your compass from the center of the case to 1/4" 
from the edge -
2J,4" in my case. 
Draw 2 circles with this radius on your foam board 
(make sure to mark the center points!). Cut them 
out roughly. then use a jigsaw. foam cutter. or utility 
knife to finish the cuts (Figure B). 
Stack the 2 circles. then tape or glue them 
together around their circumference. I used white 
electrical tape (Figure C). 
" 'M' 69 
I/Ii' 

3. Cut the alwninum hot 
and cold plates. 
Draw two 5" circles on your aluminum slock. 
These are the top and bottom plates (cold and hot 
respectively) that power your engine. Use a hacksaw 
or band saw. take it slow. and cut out the circles 
(Fjgures 0 and E), They don't have to be perlect: just 
make sure they cover the displacer ring completely. 
4. Drill the top plate 
to fit the rod. 
Here's where problems can arise -
not critical ones, 
but extremely annoying ones. Using your small drill 
bit (the one that matches the diameter rod you're 
using, in my case ¥:i6"). drill through the exact center 
of 1 plate (Figure F). This will be your top/cold plate. 
TesHit the rod in the hole and make sure it's a 
smooth lit. In order to maintain thermal efficiency. 
we need this passage to be as airtight as possible. 
but still allow the rod to run smoothly in and oul of 
the plate_ If you wiggle the wire around, you may 
notice that it tends to stick at any angle. Keep it 
perpendicular to the plates. 
If the rod isn't running smoothly, try this: Run the 
bit through the hole again to make sure it's clear. 
File or sand down the edge of the wire rod to make 
sure it's not causing any binding. If it still doesn't fit, 
try wiggling the plate around a bit to widen the hole. 
5. Build the top plate standoff. 
Once the rod runs smoothly, cut a l ' piece of pipe. 
C-stock, or angle stock (I've used both angle stock 
and pipe for this), and cut a small square (or circle, 
if you're using pipe) of metal from the scraps you 
cut while making your plates_ Drill a hole in the exact 
center of t he small square (or circle). This will act as 
a standoff to keep the displacer rod perpendicular 
10 the plates. 
Center the piece of a!l;lle stock (or pipe) eNer the 
hole and glue il down to the top plate with epc»:y 
(Figure G). Poke the wire roc! through the holes in the 
plate and the standoff, making sure it slides smoothly, 
and glue the standoff to the angle piece. As the epoxy 
cures. check periodically that the rod still moves freely 
in the hole, and adjust if necessary. If the rod "freezes:' 
redrill the top hole with the next-larger bit . 
Finally, near the edge of the top plate drill a 
Ih"-JA" hole (Figure H). Bigger is better, but just 
make sure the pipe you're using for the piston 
cylinder is slightly bigger than this hole (the pipe 
should not fit inside this hole). 
E 

6. Cast the piston. 
I've tried using nearly everything under the sun as 
a piston. Nothing worked. Without machining one. 
you're left with few options. So. we'll cast a piston. 
6a. Cut 3" of copper pipe: this will be your cylinder. 
Deburr the inside edge with a utility knife. Don't use 
sandpaper: you're smoothing the pipe so you can 
push out the cast piston. Clean the inside until it's 
nice and shiny. Window cleaner helps. 
6b. Wrap the base of the pipe with plastic wrap and 
secure with a rubber band. Then oil the inside of the 
pipe (Figure I. next page). Cooking spray works fine. 
6c. Pre-warm your IS-minute epoxy components 
using a hair dryer. You want it nice and runny. Mix 
enough epoxy to filllh" of the pipe or so. Fill the 
pipe. Once the epoxy is fully cured, remove the 
plastic wrap. Your cast piston Should push right out 
(Figure J). Before you push it all the way out. ma~ 
the piston and cylinder so you can match them 
e)(actly later (see tip on page 72). 
6d. Cut 1" 01 wire and bend the end into a hook. Drill 
a hole in the center of the piston and glue the hook 
in place (Figure K). 
While you·re wait ing for the piston to cure. use J-B 
Weld or J-B Kwik to glue your plastic displacer ring 
to the bottom metal plate (Figure L). 
ilL 
NOTE: For the best piston-<;asting reSIJlts. don't mix the 
epoxy in the cylinder. The oil seems t o contaminat e it 
and keeps it from hardening. Mix on wax paper or plastic 
wnp. Don't use l ·minute epoxy: it can shr ink too much 
or get too hot. Al so. don·t use u tra-tlme epoxy: it 
probably won'l shrink enough. 
7. Make the displacer rod 
and 2 lever arms. 
Here·s a critical step: correctly bending the wire 
rods. Take some more wire and bend a hook in 1 end. 
Cut the other end at about 5". This is your displacer 
rod (Figure M). Sand the end and make sure it fits 
through the hole in the aluminum top plate. Fill the 
hook with epo)(y (Figure N). Go ahead and fill the 
piston hook. too. 
To cut the displacer rod t o length. first lay the top 
plate on top of the bottom dis placer assembly that 
you glued. so that its small center hole hangs over 
one edge. Put the 5" displacer rod through the holes 
until its hook is resting on the standoff. Mark where 
the rod meets the edge of t he bottom plate. Remove 
the rod and cut it where you marked. 
Now create the 2 lever arm rods. Bend a hook 
onto a length of wire. mark the wire 2" from the base 
of the hook. then cut it 21f2" from the base of the 
hook (In" from your mark). 
... .... , 71 

II 
At your mark, bend a 90· angle. then bend a bit 
of the end as well (to keep the piston and displacer 
rod hooks from sliding off). Make another rod in the 
same fashion (Figure 0). 
Fill the hooks on the lever rods with epoxy as you 
did on the previous 2 hooks. 
8. Mount the piston cylinder. 
Again. clean the inside of your copper cylinder very 
well. Center it over the large hole you drilled on the 
top plate and epoxy it in place (Figure Pl. 
Once cured. wipe the inside of the pipe with an 
oiled towel. Test the piston in it. Align the marks on 
the piston and cylinder. then move the piston up 
and down until it travels freely in the cylinder. 
TIP: The inside of a copper pipe is extruded. mu nlng It 
has small ridges that run Its length. These need to be 
matched with your piston. which was cast with these 
ridges as well. Just maYe the piston up and down, slowly 
twi$ting until It mOV1!'$ freely. 
• 
11 __ ---' 
9. Bend the crankshaft. 
The crankshaft is probably the most critical part of 
your engine. It must be as straight as possible. and 
its 2 cams must not be too deep. Its piston cam 
must be 0.15"-0.20" deep. and its displacer cam 
must be a little less than 0.25" deep. 
Also. the cams need to be 90
0 out of phase from 
each other: if one is lying flat on the workbench. the 
other should be standing straight up. You probably 
won"! get it right the first time, so don't sweat it. 
Measure the distance between the piston rod and 
displacer rod (Figure Q) and mark their locations on 
a sheet of paper: these indicate where the cams will 
go (Figure R). 
Cut an 8" length of rod. Bend the first cam. using 
both sets of pliers to hold and shape the wire. Bend 
the second cam offset 90° from the first. Make sure 
the wire still lies flat and the cams are where you 
want them after bending. Roll the wire to make 
sure irs still straight. and straighten it if necessary. 
NOTE: The cams can be bent in t ... pezoldal shap"" 
rather than rect ang les. 
E 

• 
• .f ' 
10. Glue up the displacer 
and the crankshaft. 
Drill a lf32" hole (or one size bigger than your wire) 
in the center of each epoxied rod hook. Put the 
displacer rod through the standoff and center hole 
again. Drill (or poke) the rod into the exact center 
of the foam board displacer disks and epoxy it in 
place (Figure S). Make sure irs attached really well. 
It's a royal pain jf it falls off after you've glued the 
displacer assembly together. Now glue the top plate 
onto the dis placer ring. I suggest using hot glue. 
(Don't use hot glue on the bottom plate, as it will 
melt during operation of the engine.) 
Cut a 5" length 01 PVC pipe, then cut it in half 
lengthwise (Figure T). These pieces become our 
crankshaft stands to hold the crankshaft and fly-
wheel in place. Measure how high the shaft will need 
to be -
$0 that when the displacer rod is raised 
halfway, the lever rod hole is level with the shaft 
- and drill a hole in each stand at that height. I'd 
suggest drilling holes just above and below this one, 
just in case the height of the crankshaft needs to be 
adjusted during engine tuning 
Finally, epoxy one crankshaft stand right behind 
the piston cylinder, lined up with the piston and 
displacer rods, Don't glue the opposite crankshaft 
stand in place yet! 
iii 
11. Final assembly and testing. 
Attach the piston to its lever arm, and slide the lever 
ann into position on the crankshaft.lt'li take some 
wiggling. Slide the crankshaft through the middle hole 
on the crankshaft stand you glued down. Next. slide 
the lever arm for the displacer roo onto the crankshaft, 
and attach it to the displacer rod (you may need to 
bend the bottom hook), Slide the second crankshaft 
stand onto the shaft and line itup. We still don't want 
to glue it in place untd we're done tuning the engine. 
Turn the crankshaft Does anything hang up? 
If the piston isn't pumping properly, is it lined up 
where you marked it? If no\. remove it and twist the 
lever arm until it lines up, 
When turning the rod, can you complete a full 
rotation? If not. check the displacer disk, Does it 
move all the way up and down? If it's trying to go 
too high, move the crankshaft down 1 hole on the 
stand, If too low, raise it I hole. If it doesn't make a 
complete turn because it's trying to go too high and 
too low, bend shallower cams on the crankshaft, 
Bend deeper cams if there 's too much of a gap. 
If it turns over nicely, drill a hole the same size 
as your rod in the center of your peanut butter lid, 
This is your flywheel. Push it onto the end of the 
crankshaft closest to the piston cylinder. It should 
be a snug fil. Don't glue it yet. 
...... , 73 

NOTE: You can al50 use a CO for a flywheel. Just mold an 
epoxy disk In lhe center. and drill out an attachment hole. 
Now. the moment of truth. Apply heat to the 
bottom of the displacer assembly. Does it work? 
Try different heat sources: hot tea. coffee. votive 
candles. a tin filled with alcohol. Obviously, don·t 
melt the plastic displacer ring with too much heat. 
Turn the shaft and see what happens. One direction 
should be significantly easier than the other: this is 
the way your engine runs. After the metal heats for 
a bit. your engine will either not run at all. or it will 
kind of move but the piston won't move as high 
and low as it could. Or if II run perfectly. 
If performance is sluggish. make sure all your glue 
joints are airtight. Also. make sure nothing is snag· 
ging or hanging up. Add oillo Ihe moving parts and 
try again. And finally. try making the piston·s cam 
shallower. You can also put ice cubes on the cold 
plate to increase Ihe temperature differential. 
Tune It 
II works! Basically. you·re done. but let"s tune things 
up a bit. Check for these problems: friction. hang-
ups. overstressed parts (trying to make them do 
more than they want to do). and leaks. 
Add oil where needed (not much). adjust any 
parts causing problems. and keep e~rything sealed 
I!I 
tight.Also. you need to counterbalance the displacer. 
First. glue the second crankshaft stand down. and 
glue Ihe flywheel to the crankshaft. Get your fan 
weights (or pennies) and stick them to various 
spots on the wheel (use double'stick tape) until you 
find the right spots that offer the best performance 
(Figure U). 
You're done! Steampunks. start your engines! 
How It Works 
Start off by pushing the air into the hot side of YOIf 
engine. by spiming the flywheel to raise the displace!"". 
1. The air is heated and expands. raising the 
pressure inside the engine and forcing the piston 
upward (a stroke). 
2. The displacer falls. movirqs the air to the cold side. 
3. The air is cooled and contracts. lowering the 
pressure in the engine and sucking the piston back 
downward (a stroke). 
4. The displacer rises. moving the air back 10 Ihe 
hoi side again. 
And the cycle repeats. The displacer isn·t really 
doing any work. it"s just taking up space to move 
the air 10 one side or the other. so that the heating 
and cooling can do the work. 
E 

PARTSQF 
THE TEACUP 
STIRLING 
ENGINE, 
o Crankshaft 
o Crankshaft stand 
o Displacer lever rod, 
and beneath it the 
asplacer rod 
o Piston lE!Vf!r rod 
o Displacer rod standoff 
o Piston cylinder (with 
piston inside) 
o Flywheel 
o Top displacer plate 
(cold side) 
o Displacer ring (with 
foam displacer disk inside) 
e Bottom dis placer plate 
(hoi side) 
Building and Operating Tips 
Building a Stirling engine can be a real challenge. 
II you undertake this project. lake your time. Be 
patient. Go over all instructions carefully. walch the 
video. and read the discussion of the Inslruclables 
version (makezine,com/go/stirling) before you start 
work. Here are some tips to increase your chance of 
success: 
» The piston can be difficult to cast. Don't try mixing 
the epoxy in the cylinder. Mix it outside, then pour it 
in. It may take several attempts. 
.. Grease the cylinder before casting. 
.. The piston should fit snugly in the cylinder but not 
too tightly. and should not slide loosely. Remember. 
the copper pipe has casting grooves in it that the 
cast piston must travel in. 
.. leaks are your enemy. Make sure every thing-
the displacer chamber. the piston cylinder -
is as 
airtight as possible . 
.. Friction is your other enemy. Makesure the 
crankshaft and lever rods travel as smoothly and 
frictionlessly as possible. 
» You want the 2 displacer plates to have the 
greatest possible temperature differential (around 
200°F). Try putting ice on the cold plate. 
NOTE: The photos on pages 68 and 69 are fot illustra-
tion purposf$ only. to show how you can decorate yo"t 
engine to make It look more oId·schooL The brass rods 
connecting the top and bottom displa.::er plates ate 
probably not a good idea. unless they're completely 
Insulated to pre"'l'nt heat transfer. 
A version of this project was originally posted on 
instructables.com . 
"'M' 75 

The "Discreet Companion" 
Ladies' Raygun 
A pocket butane raygun for steam punky cosplay. 'fBY MOLLY FRI EDRICH }' 
F
irst invented in 1885 for use by the 
daring ladies of the Cloud Frontier, 
the Discreet Companion has been a staple 
of purses andgartcr belts ever since. 
Torch lighters are handy, cheap, and easy to find. 
They come in a wide variety of shapes and styles, so 
there's room for customizing to your personal taste. 
I normally modify mine with antique parts, but 
here I chose parts that you can get in most hard-
ware and home stores. The finished raygun works 
well as a prop: simply pull the "trigger: and an inch 
or so of fire shoots out the barrel! 
This project uses a $10 Dodo brand lighter. If you 
use a different lighter, you may need to change the 
size of the pattern to accommodate it. You need to 
use a lighter that. when installed into the barrel of 
the raygun, will shoot forward. 
Some point in other directions -
obviously, avoid 
16 
""1oo:VdumoI7 
these. unless you specifically want a booby-
trapped gun! 
You might try a different ornate coat hook for a 
different-looking handle. The handle can also be 
mounted forward or backward. 
The lamp parts are easy to customize - you 
can change the look just by using different finials 
and other decorative elements -
and the design 
on the front of the barrel can be almost any shape 
you want. 
This project is fairly easy to do. takes a few 
hours, and costs about $30-$40 in parts (less if 
you have some stuff alreadyon hand). 
Inthis dimension, Molly-PQrkshanks- Friedrich is a 
freelance costume, prop, and jewelry designer. She's also <Y1 
Inlamous pan· dimenSIonal smuggler and freelarw::e artist 

Torch'style cigar lighter 
Ornate stamped bl1lss lamp check rings. 
I'h" diameter (2) 
Brass lamp washers with fhrture seat 
and Va" openl .. (2) 
Steel 1"14" washers (2) 
I" lamp knob finial 
Brass "4" knurled locknuts (2) 
Brass ." .. " bracket caps (2) 
Nlckel·finlsh 1"14" washer 
Brass 'M hex locknuts (2) 
Brass 'Va" to '/alPS reducer 
'/alPS lamp ni pples (2): I" long and 2" long 
4-4Ox'Va" slotted round machine bolts (2) 
4-40 nuts (4) 
Tiny 2-part decorating rivets (S) 
Hall tree hook B&M Hardware part "B&M1901 
Brass sheet 0.010""4" "10" 
Patterns (2) Download at makezlne.coml17/noYX .... 
Scissors 
Marke. 
Small flathead screwdriver 
Needlenose pliers 
Metal snips 
Hole punch 
Hammer 
Saapwood 
Metal rod or pole less than "4" diameter 
Rivet setting tool 
• 
• 
, 
J 
, 
a 
1. Build the body. 
la. Print the 2 patterns. cut them out. and trace 
them onto the brass sheet with a marker. Be sure 
to mark carefully the dashed lines (where the metal 
folds) and all holes (Figure A). 
lb. Use a pair of metal snips to cut out the shapes. 
Take your time. Don't worry if the edges bend a 
little: this is normal. When you're done cutting. use 
your pliers to flatten the edges out again (Figure B). 
CAUTION: Be careful not to cut yourself when cuttina: 
A 
and bendina sheet metal. I never use alaves. and 
.... my poor fingers hate me for it. Don't be 
like me! 
le. Set the metal shapes on a scrap of wood and 
use a hammer and hole punch to punch holes 
where mar!.<;ed. For larger holes. do a few punches 
and then cut the hole with snips. If the metal 
deforms as you cuI. use your pliers to flatten it out 
afterward (Figure C). 
lei. Bend ooth pieces on the dashed lines. Bend the 
rounded tabs away from the marks on the barrel 
piece (Figure 0). and bend the long sides and the 
back in toward the mar!.<;s on the body piece. 
le. Bend ooth parts over to round them into tubular 
III .... ' n 

II 
shapes as shown (Figure E). Insert the rivets into 
the holes of the matched-up ends of the barrel 
piece. Don't forget the single rivet that goes through 
3 holes on the backside of the body piece. 
To pound the rivets into the barrel piece. you'll 
need a metal rod. Slip the piece over the rod and 
hammer the rivets. Use the rivet setting tool to reach 
the inside of the single rivet 00 the body piece. 
lf. Slide the open end of the body piece over the 
end of the barrel at the rounded labs. The holes 
from the folded sides of the body should line up 
with the holes in the rounded tabs on the barrel. 
From the inside. insert a 4"40x%" slotted round 
machine bolt through each set of lined-up holes 
(Figure F). 
II 
2. Add the back. 
2a. Put the hex nuts on one end 01 the 1" lamp 
nipple, tightening them against each other so they 
don't slide around (Figure G), 
2b. Slide the other end of the nipple through the 
large hole on the back of the body (Figure H), Add 
the %" to 14IPS reducer, the nickel-finish washer, 
and the 1" lamp knob finial (Figure I), The center of 
my washer was too small for the nipple, so I used 
the meta l snips to cut the hole a little larger. 
3. Attach the handle. 
la. This is the trickiest part and takes patience. 

m 
Pressil15 in on the sides of the gun body at the bolts 
(friction will help keep them in place), navigate the 
bolts into the holes on the base of the B&M hall tree 
hook. aka raygun hardle (Figure J). If you have a hard 
time getting the bolt 10 go through the holes, use a 
small screwdriver to push it down ard guide it in. 
3b. Once you have enough of the bolt showing 
through, slide a nut on and tighten it down with 
pliers (Figure K), Do this for both sides, then add a 
second nut to each bolt to lock everything down, 
4. Add finishing touches. 
4a. Slide the 2" larrp nipple through the side holes so 
that equal amounts stick out on each side (Figure L). 
Add to each side, in order, 1 brass lamp washer with 
fixture seat and ¥So openi~. l steel}'!." washer. 
1 brass lamp Ilk" check ring,t brass 3,4" krurled 
locknut. and I brass %6" bracket cap (Figure M). 
4b. Slide the ligl1ter into place. '1\)u may have to press 
in the sides of the gun barrel slightly to fit. Friction 
should hold it: in fact.I usually have a hard time pulling 
the lighter out to refill it. If it gets stuck. use a screw-
driver to push on it from the back, where the gun 
barrel drops down near the handle base (Figure N). 
5. Fire away. 
Don't smoke, kids! Use your raygun to light devotional 
incense, airship lanterns, or cartoon dynamite only! 
III .... ' 19 

THE Lost 
unearthed for 
of their most 
Monstrous Machittes that Eat Wood! 
¥r OLD WOODWORKING MACHINES 
OWWM is a labyrilllhian onlin<: library of photo-
graphs, histories, operating instructions, and 
restoration tips C(>vcring vintage woodwQrking 
equipment. The site has hundreds of PDF sCans of 
old catalog5, manuals, parts lists. adverts, and his-
torical documents from dozens of manufauurers. 
If you're an enthusiast of "old iron.~ youll go giddy 
clicking the corridors of this imprcssive C(>lIection. 
................................................................. owwm.com 
& amusement, in the interest 
"lBY GARETH BRANWYNt 
~I 
I 
I 
Strange Codes Revealed! 
~ HOBOCODE 
To help fellow train hoppers and vagabonds, hobos 
dcyclopcd a secret language of symbols to communi-
Cate dangers. available food and work, safe places to 
s!e~'P, and townspeople's susceptibility to grift. While 
some hobo signs arc simple (a smiley (ace indicates 
friendlics or a safe place to sleep) orhen arc compli-
cated and csO(eric (t\O.'O interlocking rectangles, one 
with a squiggly bottom, means: Cowards! They' ] give 
you food/money just 10 get rid of you). 
................................................. t inyurl.com/ mk77 
Make a Forceful Impression 
17 U ."TTERJ'RESS 
Fueled by bouti'lue-
1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-~---1 press publishing, the 
Coin Carvingfor Fun and 
17 H080COINS 
"Hobo nickels~ are 
wins whose faces 
have been carved 10 
create new imagery. 
Because it's inexpen-
sive and portable, 
the hobby became 
popular with hobos; nickels arc the faVQred denom;" 
nation because of their si:u:, thickness, and relative 
softness. While coin carving is still practiced today. 
fans in the Original I lobo Nickel Society are primar-
ily imerest ... 1 in coins made in the era of the Indian 
Head ("Buffalo") nickel ('9'3- '940), the mOSt popular 
win to Carve. ................................ hobonickels .org 
80 ...... :-.....17 
new craft movement. 
and high-profile 
endorsements in 
places like Marthil 
Sirwart ¥(~ddi"gl, 
letterpress printing 
is enjoying a revival. 
Suddenly. antique 
letterpress machines, casting eype, type drawers, and 
anything else todowith letterprcss primingare if' 
great demand. There is som~"thing undeniably awe-
some about typography and artwork visibly pressed 
intoa gorgeous piece of high_quality paper stock. 
Grcoen Dolphin Press is the keeper of the venerable 
Letterpress FAQ (greendolphinpress.com). 
Also, check OUI Ihe Briar Press Lellcrpress Museum 
(brlarpress .org) ......... aapainfo.org/ lpress.html 
f 
0 < • 
0 < 
< , 
, • E 
.~ , • , 
--

Amaze Your Friends with 
Manual Labqr! 
~ CLASSICTYPEWRITERS 
As computers, phones. and other modern digital 
machines do more, some people desire less -
3 mach ine that onlydoe5 one thing: dutifully 
h3mme~ out the written word. Typo:writcr repair 
shops arc experiencing 3 small upsurge in business 
and inquiries about purchasing manual type"Titers. 
The ClassicTypcwriter page will take you back in 
time and bnngyou up to speed ... er ... so you ean 
slow down again. with a fine analog word pro<:essor 
of )"!5ter)"!ar ............................. tinyutl.com/55dhl 
Don't Get Angry, Get Steamed 
~ YANKEE STEAM- UP 
I~ ____________________ --I Everyyear. the New England WIreless and Steam 
Museum in East Greenwich. R.I., hosts the Yankee 
Steam-Up. 3 daylong fall gathering where IOOdcI makc~, 
machinists, enginrers, and historians interested in steam 
power g~>! together and shQw off their latest proje<;ts. 
The~ are industrious makers ... howere hacking steam 
long before it b«ame fashionable and who will likely 
be pressurizing their boilers long after the poseurs 
have hung up their brass goggles. 
Magical Electric 
Amplification 
Device.' 
~ TRIODES 
There are makers. and 
then there's Claude 
l'aillard,3 French ham 
radio enthusiast who 
makes his OWn vacuum 
tubes -
from scratch! 
Watching his video of the 
process is like watching 
a great stage magician at 
work. But instead of pull-
ing a rabbit out of a hal 
or reconstitut ing a sawn-in-hal f lovely assistant, with 
a gracefull10urish of work_worn hands Paillard wilds 
a working triode. And as impressive as his triodes 
al1l. the fact that he huilds many of the machines 
and jig5 that he U$CS is e<]ually awe-inspiring . 
.................... ......................... paillard.claude.freeJr 
................................................................... newsm.org 
, 
'-
.... M : 
81 

Engineering Marvels on a Dime 
~ CRAFfSMANSJlIP MUSEUM 
T he Craftsmanship Museum in Vista, Calif., offers an 
impressive CQUection of the best model engineering 
in the WQrld. Hundreds of pre<:ision-builr miniatun: 
steam, gas, and Stirling engines; miniature gunsmith-
ing examples; model ships, cars, and planes; hand-
made scientific instruments; even unusual pieces $Uch 
as hand-knapped microscopic arrowheads are on 
dispLa)' Much of the collection is also v;"'w:lble online 
in their ~virrual museum.~ It's hard 10 visit. cit her in 
person or via the aelher .... eb, and not come a .... aywith 
the sense that you can do anything if you'n: dedicated 
enough ...................... crafts mans hipmus eum.com 
RTFM! (READ THE FERROUS METAL!) 
BY DALE DOUGHERTY 
~ SORGIIUM PRESS 
I
n planting an experimenlal 
~encrgy garden" in north-
ern California,Julian Darley 
and wifc Ccline Rich thought 
they'd try gro .... ing sorghum as 
potential biofueL Sorghum is 
normaUy grown in the South 
as a source of sugar. Growing 
thc sorghum .... as casy; finding a .... orklOgsorghum 
press was harder. The pn:ss they found is more than 
100 years old. They weren't sure how it worked, but 
fonunatcly. it came with instructions -
forged into 
it, describing how to use and how to maintain it. One 
sidc n:ads: "Always keep bottom boxcs filled with oil." 
Below that is a tcrse operat ing manual: "Feed cane 
large end foremost." 
Time-Traveling llow-Tos 
~ 
LINDSAY'S TECHNICAL BOOKS 
If therc's onc catalog that'll 
allow you to travel back to 
thc time of steam cngincs 
and blacksmiths, mountain-
side moonshiners and 
pedal-pO\\'Crcd wood shops. 
it's Lindsay's 'Iechnical 
Books. Thcycarry hundreds 
of ho .... - to books for all 
sorts oflargcly forgotten, 
obscure. fringe, or replaced 
technologies. A gold mine 
for retro-tct:hnicians ......... .. 
lindsaybks.com 
THE Wonders OF Mechanical Linkage 
BY CHARLES PLATT 
I
n the early days 
of the Industrial 
Rcvolmion.lack of 
I 
I 
lubricants 
it impossible 10 
a lubricated guide 
lincar 
ofarodmand 
Ii 
engine. A lot of hcad-scralChing occurn:d as 
tried to figure out how to build a linkage that 
control lincar mot ion.James"Watt could only 
l
:l::~,:,:.::pp;;ro:X:imate aRS"·~". Solving this problem 
100 )'Cars. 
The solution is known as l'eaucellier's Inversor. 
Irs said that when Lord Kelvin wirness<-"l a model 
I
~;i:~:~f:~:~jj~;il~;~~' that it was the most 
cver seen. The ~mclTy is 
to understand. A proof can be found at 
Linkages that control motion in clcverw~ ,!re 
these days, but still turn up in odd places such 
the trunk lid of your car. The Brock Institute for 
Studies has a collection of linkages in very 
animations at brockeng.com / mechanis m. 
~ 
TIIA."'IKSTO: Saul Griffith. Mister Jalop); Marc de Vinck, Paul Spinrad, Charles Plan, 
Patti Schienddman, Keith Hammond,John Edgar Park, Bill Gurstdlc & BrianJepson ( 
• 

D See more at makezlne.com/lUalbum 
Steampunk Family Album 
A
t last ycar's f>1aker Fairc Bay Area, in the liteml shado,,'S of the Nc\'cr""as Haul (the Victorian house on 
wheds), and amongst the tinkering of the ContrapwTS' Lounge, the eerie whining of Electric Western's 
tubc-driven theremin, and the lightning-fast pen and ink portraiture of Suzanne Forbes (also featured in this 
issue), photographer Elena Dor fman set up an OI.Itdoor studio. There, she captured some of the more oolor-
ful, creative expressions of ah.Victorian finery as it paraded thwugh the crowd. 
-Gareth Bnmwy'l 
,. .... , 83 

............. (t) 
UPLOAD 
............. 
Kit.tY
H 
! @ G) e 
K I . d 
~ Make magnificent mandalas 
P : 
from kittehs and other 
a e lOS C 0 e: 
kritters. By Erico Nari!a 
......... ...... ...... . ... .. . ...... ............................... . ............................................................. . 
A typical kaleidoscope contains 2 
mirrors angled at 60", which reflect a 
pattern to create a symmetrical effect 
that we can emulate in software such 
as Photoshop. Here's how I did it. 
Choose a photograph that has a wide range 01 
shading from light 10 dark. and some features thai 
will be recognizable after they've been chopped. 
rotated, and reflected (eyes always work well). For 
my first effort. I made an LOL'cat Here are the 
steps in Photoshop 6 or later. 
1. CHOOSE THE POLYGON TOOL 
Choose the Polygon tool. which looks like a hexagon 
and is hidden in the toolbar. You may have to read 
Help to find it. After you select it, use Window => 
Options to show the tool Options bar. and click the 
button "Create new work path" or just "Paths" (the 
wording varies in different Photoshop versions). 
Also in the tool options. specify 3 sides. 
2. FIND AN INTERESTING PART 
Drag to create an equilateral triangle over your 
photograph. then go to Edit => Transform Path => 
Rotate. or Edit => Transform Path => Scale (while 
scaling. hold down Shift so that your triangle 
remains symmetrical). to modify the size and posi-
tion of your triangle. until it contains an interesting 
area of your photograph. While scaling or rotating 
your triangle. you can also drag it around . When you 
have what you want. press Enter to confirm. 
3. COPY PATH TO A NEW LAYER 
If your Paths palette is not open. open it from 
Window => Show Paths. Photoshop will have put 

your triangle path in the palette. Ctrl·click (Windows) 
or Command-click (Mac) the name of the path to 
turn it into a selection. Copy. then paste. to duplicate 
the selected area in a new layer. 
In the Layers palette. click the eyeball beside the 
Background layer to hide it. In the toolbar. select the 
Rectangular Marquee tool. 
4. MAKE A COPY OF THE PART 
In your new layer. move the mouse pointer to the 
triangle. hold down Ctrl and Alt keys (Command 
and Option on the Mac). and drag the triangle to 
make a copy of it. which will pop up in another 
new layer. 
5. MAKE A MIRROR IMAGE 
Use Edit :=> Transform = Flip Horizontal to make a 
mirror image. Now use Edit = Transform :=> Rotate 
to turn and move the second triangle so that it goes 
edge-to-edge with the first. Press Enter when you 
have it exactly right. then Ctrl-E (Command-E on 
a Mac) to merge the 2 layers. 
6. MAKE A HEXAGON 
Drag off a copy of the diamond shape that you·ve 
created. select Edit = Transform :=> Rotate. and 
type a value of 120 degrees in the Tool Options 
palette. Drag the selection into place. press Enter. 
then repeat to make one more rotated diamond 
shape to complete a hexagon. 
7. CROP INTO A CIRCLE 
Go to layer = Flatten Image (discard the hidden 
background layer containing your original photo-
graph). Select the Elliptical Marquee tool. hold down 
Shift. and make a circular selection that extends to 
the edges of your image. Go to Select = Inverse and 
then delete. to remove pixels outside of the circle. 
You now have your kaleidoscopic image -
or in my 
case. a fine LOl·cat! (I also repeated the triangle 
many more times in another document to make the 
design shown in Figure 0.) 
Figures C. E. and F were repeated 6. 12. and 8 
times. Can you use other numbers of repetitions? 
Of coursel Divide the number of repetitions that 
you want into 360°. Then make a selection with the 
Rectangular Marquee tool. go to Edit = Transform 
Path = Skew. and in the tool Options bar. enter the 
number of degrees for the horizontal skew angle. 
Convert it to a selection as in Step 3 and use the 
Rectangular Marquee tool to chop the left or right 
part. to leave you with a triangle that you can reflect 
and rotate as before. I used palm trees. reflected 
them. then rotated 10 copies of the pair. 
Repeated angular patterns have been used in 
mandalas to form a focus for meditation. There·s 
something about this kind of pattern that fasci· 
nates the eye. Applying this process to everyday 
photographs may not help you reach an altered 
state of consciousness. but it can be fun. 
Erico N~rit~ IS ~ graphic deSigner in New York City . 
...... : 85 

· ............ (!) 
UPLOAD 
............. 
Make 
.............................................................................. 
Use simple commands to 
build organic patterns with 
Context Free software. 
Scalable Art 
By John Edgar Park 
Context Free (CF) is a free program for creating images of incredible beauty 
and complexity. Instead of a complicated user interface cluttered with tools, it 
uses a very simple set of commands called the Context Free Design Grammar. 
Here's how you can dive in and use it to create an organic. recursive tree 
graphic suitable for printing on canvas. silk-screening on a T-shirt. or even 
laser etching onto your iPhone (that's what I plan to do). Even jf you've never 
programmed a line of code before. don't panic! Anyone who can type can 
write instructions to create wonderful art like you see in these images. 
First download the appropriate version of CF for 
your operating system from contextfreeart.org. 
Install the software and then launch it. 
NOTE: Windows and OS X versions have a graphical user 
Interfac:e: the lInux vet"Slon Is command·llne only. 
1. CREATE A NEW DOCUMENT 
Select File = New from the menu. You don·t need 
to specify an image size, because the designs you 
create with CF can be rendered at any resolution 
you need. 
2. PLAN YOUR DESIGN 
There are only 3 possible building blocks of a CF 
program: square, circle, and rectangle. These are 
usually stamped down and transformed in a repeti· 
tion to create an image. For example, stamp down a 
circle, then scale and rotate a second circle; repeat 
until the stamps are 100 small to see and you can 
create a perfect. smooth spiral. Introduce some 
randomness to the angles and scales of your recur-
sive circle and you can create fantastic tendrils. 
We'll use this principle to make our design. 
3. DESCRIBE THE MAIN SHAPE 
There are a few rules in CF. First. there is always 
a main shape described at the beginning of a file. 
Click in the text entry window on the left-hand side 
of the interface, and type the following, pressing 
Enter at the end of each line. 
start shape TENDRILS 
NOTE: While this mlY look like other programminr: 
languages, such as C, It's not quit e t he same, Type t he 
lines exactly as they're listed here t o see how they work. 
4. DEFINE THE TENDRILS RULE 
The next rule is that all shapes must be defined. 
Let's define the TENDRILS rule. We'll start simple, and 
add to it as we go. New lines of code are highlighted 
in blue text. 
slartshape TENDRILS 
rule TENDRILS ( 
ARM (I 
I 
This tells CF Ihat when il tries to draw a TENDRILS 
rule it will do so by drawing an ARM shape. What's 
an ARM shape? Well. we have to go define that as 
a new rule. 
5. DEFINE THE ARM RULE 
The ARM rule will be made from a recursion of the 
circle shape. First type: 

startsltape TENDRILS 
rute TENDRILS I 
ARM II 
I 
rule ARM { 
CIRCLE {) 
I 
You can test this out now by clicking the Render 
button at the top of the CF intefface. This draws a 
circle (Figure A). Not too exciting, but it's a start. 
Let's now modify the ARM rule to add a recursion. 
We'll do this by having the ARM rule reference itself. 
This causes a loop, which would go on infinitely, but 
for the fact that we'll have it scale the circle a little 
smaller on each iteration of the loop. CF will end the 
loop as soon as a shape becomes too sma ll to draw. 
Here's the modified rule: 
startsltape TENDRILS 
rute TENDRILS I 
ARM {I 
I 
rule ARM { 
CIRCLE {) 
ARM I Y 0.2 size 0.909 rotate 3) 
I 
Render this and you'll get a nice arm spiral (FiglJ""e 8). 
The adjustment in the ARM shape call moves it up on 
the y-axis by 0.2 "units:' sizes it down to 99% of its 
original size, and rotates it 3' . 
6. MAKE OUTLINED CIRCLES 
Instead of solid circles, I want outlined circles. We'll 
add a line to the ARM rule that makes a second, 
slightly smaller white circle. This is done through 
adjustments to the circle shape: size 0.9 scales the 
size down and brightness 1 makes il white. 
CF draws shapes in the order that they're encoun-
tered in a rule, so we'll now have the black circle, 
then a smaller white circle on top of it (Figure C). 
startshape TENDRILS 
rule TENDRILS { 
ARM {) 
I 
rule ARM { 
CIRCLE {) 
CIRCLE {size 0,9 brightness 1) 
ARM {y 0.2 size 0.99 rotate 3) 
I 
7. ADD RANDOMNESS 
Randomness is at the heart of any organic design. 
This is the part that's difficult 10 create in a drawing 
program like Photoshop. but simple in CF. We can 
... 100: 87 

--
.................................................................................................................................. 
define a rule more than once. with different adjust· 
ments to the rule. and CF will randomly choose 
which version of the rule to draw each time it 
encounters it. 
We'll add a second definition of the ARM rule that 
is the same as the first. but has a 90· flip in it. We'll 
give this a very low probability of being chosen by 
adding a small "weight" value after the rule name: 
98% of the time the large arm will be drawn. and 
2% of the time it will branch to the smaller arm' 
startshape TENDRILS 
rule TENDRILS { 
ARM 0 
I 
rule ARM 98 { 
CIRCLE (J 
CIRCLE (si~e 0.9 brightness I) 
ARM (y 0.2 size 0.99 rotale 3) 
I 
rule ARM 2 [ 
CIRCLE (J 
CIRCLE (size 0.9 brightn@$sl) 
ARM I y 0.2 siu 0.99 fli p 90 I 
I 
Render this and you·1I see that the ARM is no 
longer a perfect spiral. but is an organic vine 
shape (Figure D. previous page). Each time you 
render it. the shape will vary. 
8. DEFINE FADING BRANCHES 
In order to make fading branches fork off the main 
arm. we·1I modify this low·probability version of the 
ARM rule to create a second recursion thafs sized 
down to 0.6. light gray. and nearly half of the current 
circle size: 
start shape TENDRILS 
rule TENDRILS ( 
ARM I) 
I 
rule ARM 98 ( 
CIRCLE I) 
CIRCLE I size 0.9 brightness I) 
ARM I y 0.2 size 0.99 rotate lJ 
I 
rule ARM 2 ( 
CIRCLE I) 
CIRCLE I size 0.9 brightness I) 
ARM I y 0.2 size 0.99 flip 90 I 
ARM I y 0.2 sizt 0.6 brightness 0.2 ) 
I 
Render this and you·1I see a wondertul. complex 
shape emerge (Figure E). 

· ............................................. ' ..... ' ..... ' .. 
9. ADD TRUNKS TO THE SHAPE 
To create two main trunks 01 the shape. modify the 
TENDRILS rule to add a second. Ilipped ARM (Figure F): 
startshape TENDRILS 
rule TENDRILS I 
ARM II 
ARM 1 flip 90) 
I 
rule ARM 981 
CIRCLE I) 
CIRCLE I size 0.9 brightness I ) 
ARM 1 y 0.2 size 0.99 rotate l) 
I 
rule ARM 2 ( 
CIRCLE () 
CIRCLE (sile 0.9 brightness 1) 
ARM (y 0.2 size 0.99 flip 90) 
ARM (y 0.2 size 0.6 brightness 0.2) 
I 
10. REN DER A HIGH·RES COPY 
Fe)( a high·resolution version 01 your image. select 
Render ::> Render to Size. choose your dimen-
sions. then select Render = $ave Image. You can 
reproduce an exact variation by making note 01 
the variation code that appears in the top of the 
window (usually 3 letters. such as EAW) and uSing 
that to render the script (highlighted in yellow in 
Figures G and H). 
II you want to get perfect alpha·channel trans-
parency around the image so you can layer it easily 
in Photoshop or other compositing programs. just 
add this line to the top alter the initial stirtshipt line 
(Figure I): 
stilftshipe TENDRILS 
backgrQund (, -I ) 
rule TENDRILS ( 
ARM () 
ARM (flip 90) 
I 
rule ARM 98 ( 
CIRCLE () 
CIRCLE (size 0.9 brlghtntu 1 ) 
ARM I Y 0.2 size 0.9'1 rotate 3) 
I 
rule ARM 21 
CIRCLE {I 
CIRCLE {size 0.9 brightnm 1\ 
ARM {y 0.2 size 0.99 flip 90 \ 
ARM I y 0.2 size 0.6 brightness 0.2 I 
I 
11. GOING FURTHER 
You can even output your work as an animation. by 
choosing Render = Save Movie and then adjusting 
the output settings. It's quite trance-induCing to 
watch your shape bUIld itself ovef time. 
This is just a tiny fraction of what you can do 
with this powerful design tool. Other techniques 
include tiling. color. complex transformation order-
ing. shearing, expressions. and pat h operations. 
Check out the gallery and forums on the Context 
Free website to see fantastic examples and to learn 
~. 
D Check out some CF art by other users at 
oontextfreeart.orglgallery. 
John Edgar Park (IP 
J~](Lnet ) is a character mechanic at 
Walt Disney Animation StudIOS and the host 01 the Maker 
Won..shop on Make: teleVision. 
.. ... ' 89 

Beautiful 
.............................................................................. 
Brushes 
Simplify applying images 
with the Paintbrush too!. 
By Charles Platt 
Brushes are a lesser-used feature of Photoshop that designer Silvia Bukovac 
Gasevi has exploited to extreme effect. The concept is simple: Create an image, 
define it as a brush, and apply it with the Paintbrush tool. 
As an example. she suggests. "Let's say I wish to 
add a snowing effect to a graphic. Instead of placing 
snowflakes one by one to the image. I just select a 
snowflake brush:' 
Ga~vi's website at graphics·llIustratlons.com 
contains a huge variety of brush patterns. ranging 
from alphabets to leaves to lipstick impressions. 
Some designs are for sale. while others are free. 
The site also offers tutorials. beginning with 
basics and progressing to esoteric topics such as 
"How to create grungy vector brushes:' 
Ga~evi creates many of her brushes in Adobe 
Illustrator or Corel Draw before importing them 
10 Pholoshop. but a few have a more organic gen -
esis. ""My Coffee Stains brushes:' she says, "are real 
stains that are scanned and imported directly into 
Photoshop:' 
There's only one snag if you want to brush up on 
your brushes: you'lI need Photoshop 7 or later to 
make full use of this feature. 

New Video 
eo 
.............................................................................. 
O . 
: 
An increasing range of 
P t I 0 n S 
~ possibilities for hassle-free 
: video. By Charles Platt 
. ...... .... . ................................................................................................................... . 
A year ago I recommended Sanyo Xacti solid-state camcorders for creating 
video clips that can be uploaded simply by plugging in a USB cable. Sanyo's 
decision to use flash memory for storage, instead of tape or discs. eliminated 
unreliable moving parts and enabled a palm-sized camera. This was relatively 
unusual at the time. Good news: many similar competitors are now available. 
, ................................................................................................................................ . 
Go to the Camcorder section of Amazon and search 
for "MPEG·4" (the compression format commonly 
used with flash memory) and you'lI see what I mean. 
Of course. more options create more shopping 
dilemmas. First you have to decide whether you 
want the traditional 4:3 picture shape. or a wider 
HD picture. HD does entail some compromises. 
because it requires more pixel data. Personally 
I still prefer the quality of a 4:3 picture on current 
consumer equipment. 
You also need to decide whether your main pur-
pose is to save videos onto a hard drive to watch on 
a monitor. or bum DVDs to watch on TV. Computer 
monitors have square pixels and will display now 
interlaced pictures. A format of 640x480 pixels 
looks good. TraditionallY pictures (and many HD 
formats) are interlaced, and a typical 4:3 digital 
video picture uses 720x480 rectangular pixels. 
Conversion between formats is automatic in 
most software, but you lose quality as resampling 
occurs. Several of the Sanyo Xacti models are 
clearly intended for use with computers. since their 
pictures have square pixels and are non-interlaced. 
If you want to email video clips to your friends or 
upload them to websites, this is the way to go. 
Lastly I suggest you look for a camcorder that 
has the H.264 version of MPEG·4 compression. 
since this produces fewer visible artifacts than 
earlier schemes. 
For viewing your videos on a computer. try 
VideoLAN's VLC Media Player version 0.9. This 
latest edition is a free download, available for Mac 
or Windows. and has already won a Community 
Choice Award from Source Forge. I consider it far 
superior to Windows Media Player or the Mac 
equivalent. It has a particularly elegant screen-
capture feature. and a very good set of help files. 
Check it out at videolan.org. 
I'm still looking for really versatile free video edit-
ing applications, but the ones bundled with OS X or 
Windows are adequate for simple projects. Add it all 
up. and there has been significant progress in the 
last year if you want to make your own video and 
copy it. upload it. and share it as simply and cheaply 
as possible. 
Charles Platt is the Se<::tlon edItor of Upload. 
.. .... : 9 1 

AI + 2 +~.) Wind-Triggered Lantern 
rten Sko 
... 
.. 
~~,~ 
__ 
A_n_l_E_D_,_a_fe_a_t_h_e_"_a_n_d_a_s_p_r_in_g_,_, ________________ ~ 
Create a little magic in your yard with this flickering 
garden lantern triggered by the wind, made with spare 
parts you probably have lying around your house. 
1. Attach the LED to the battery. 
Solder one of the LED's leads to the battery holder 
(Figure 1). I got the battery holder for the flal 3V 
button cell battery from an old PC that I've been 
scavenging parts from. (It's the battery that powers 
the internal clock. and I guess every PC has one.) 
You don" need a battery holder at all- you could 
just tape one of the LED's leel to the battery -
but 
a battery holder makes things easier. 
NOTE: Remember to test the LED first. so you 
know you're attaching the correct lead to the 
correct side of the battery. 
2. Make the flickering mechanism. 
Solder a flexible piece of metal to the other side of 
the battery holder. I happened to have a long. thin 
spring from the CD·ROM drive of an IBM ThinkPad 
I took apart a while back: it works great. Another 
option could be a copper thread or wire. as thin as 
~ssible. or a piece of guitar string. Then bend the 
unsoldered lead of the LED so it curves around the 
spring without touching it (Figure 2). 
Attach a feather to the spring with a piece of 
thread. When the feather moves in the wind. it pulls 
on the spring. which touches the foot of the LED 
and closes the circuit -
which equals blinkingl 
3. Hang it in the garden. 
For weatherproofing. cut a slit in the lid of a jar and 
put the feather through it (Figure 3). Fiddle with it 
until the mechanism moves freely. Use lyd or so 
of strong wire to wrap around the jar. to make a 
"harness" and a handle. Then go out and hang it in 
the garden (or run around with it. giggling. like I did). 
Possible improvements: Add a solar cell and 
battery. Create a prettier casing. perhaps using 
beeswax? Or maybe even add soundl 
protectlon 
i 
Morten Skogly is a cheerful man. e\'en in the dark. He makes Itlings to impress his wife and kids. See more of his DIYstuff 
at pap~as k"'-no _ 
92 ...... 
: ~v 

a e: Projects 
...... : 93 


" 
~ 
! 
SPARKS IN YOUR PARLOR 
When assembling a proper laboratory, 
the gentleman or lady experimenter 
should be sure to include a Wimshurst 
electrostatic generating machine. This 
device will serve tirelessly in investiga-
tions into the field of natu ral philosophy, 
and provide interesting parlor games 
such as the "electric kiss." Herein we will 
demonstrate the const ruction of such a 
spectacular device, with materials easily 
acquired from your local home center 
and hardware store. 
Electrostatic machines create high -voltage charges without 
the familiar coils of copper wire. permanent magnets, and 
commutators found in conventional generators. They're 
made of brass, glass. and wood. and they look more 
mechanical than electrical. 
The coolest thing about them is that you can feel them 
working. As you begin to crank a Wimshurst machine, you 
can hear it crackle and hiss with energy, you can smell the 
sharp tang of ozone. and you can feel the hair on your arms 
stand up as the Leyden Jars begin to charge. 
! Set up: p.97 
Make it: p.98 
Use it: p.l07 
.. 
I 
Jake von Slatt IS a 1,Ieloo8 tInkerer and maker currently res1dlngoutsode BostO<1 He wo<ks as a l lnu> sysadmin 
for a small aerospace research form. but hIS true pasSIOn .s t he construct lOll 01 anachromstoc contrapt>OflS In hIS 
Steampunk Workshop(-.,\<.',""::" ".,," ",In, "', p ) 
...... , 95 

PROJECTS: WIMSHURST MACHINE 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF ELECTROSTATIC GENERATORS 
The earliest eie.:::lrostalic generators. from lhe 17th 
century. rubbed amber. sulfur.O( glassagalost a cloth 
or brush to induce a charge. Around 1865. the German 
physICists Wilhelm Holtz and August Toepler indepen· 
dently deIIeloped -,nfluence- machllles that created 
a charge by induction. without dl""ct friction between 
ele.:::tron·donor and acceptor materials, 
In 1880.James Wimshurst. an Englishengineer and 
imento(, refined the design of the influeoce mactune by 
using two counter'rotatlng disks rather than one. He never 
apphed for patents. but he so imprCNed the functionol 
these machines that they became known by his name. 
Wimshurst machines SOOll found practical application 
in exciting the X-ray tubes used in early medical im~lng. 

a 
MATERIALS 
The one item I couIdnl lind 
in a home and hardware 
510re was the Poll' 01 0"'-'5. 
The total cost of materials 
was abool SlOO. blJt most 
are COl '.'100 items. so a ~ttle 
SCfO\Jl1(ling and perhaps 
s.ome duJTpSte. diving should 
net )OU sCrmcant sMvs. 
(AJ Fluorescent lamp 
protedo' 11_ 
for the 
leyden jars 
[BJ Slllireese balustefs (2) 
fot supports for the rotat. 
Ing disks 
[el IN bronze bruing rod 
from 11 hardware store Or 
_klina supply shop 
(OJ Fiberalas$ dtl_y 
malicer rod, Va .. diameter 
[E] 'VI. 00 thin _lIlnIn 
tublfw, 3' u ction 
[F] Knlck-knM:k shell •• t. 
appn>llinultely 24".6" for 
the base. You can use any 
~ " board, but this she" 
has. nice rail tiI.t; adds 
to the _ •• 1 look. 
[O] lntine skllte ..,pla~ 
men! wheels (2) 
[H] L ... brass lamp chain 
pull balls (2) for the leyden 
jar shunts 
[I] •• or .6 . .... - flathead 
(countef'MInk) wood screws 
(4) to mo ... t dlsb to skill. 
wlleels 
(J) 'VI" Krylic; gblzin. 
ak. plexltlass. Of' poly. 
c.rbonllte aka Leun 
en~h to cut two 14" 
circles. PolycarbDnate Is 
enle. to _rio; with but 
costs twke as much. 
[K] Clothesline pulleys 
must be plastic 
[ll Rubber feet (6) 
[M] 1" copper pi"" hang<!111 
(2) F ... nd In the plumbln, 
S.,tlon, ttley're copper· 
p'ated 5te.l. 
[NJ 1.8mp .. rts Pk:tured 
here are various pllil (:halns. 
brass flnbols..nd bal. ralts. 
[OJ Small brass bal. up 
nllb (2) for ttle e .... b odes. 
FOllrld In the elO!(:trlc.l 
s_tlon. they're commonly 
lIsed to secure the t"" 
of brass ... tdoor Ilghtln, 
fl.tu~ 
[PJ 2" drywlll sc:rllWS (2) 
wlttl borge washers 
[QJ Casement window 
(:rank 
[RJ .... • threaded lamp 
finials (2) for ttle charge 
~ollec:tors 
[NOTSHOWNJ 
BrlSS lamp linlals (2) for 
ttl. brllSh S41pportS. These 
h_ a .... • thr ... ded hole In 
one end and a small hole 
In the other. I think they're 
made for ~!lin, fbtures 
that h"" ... a (:enter pull 
strln,. 
Flat rubber washers (2) 
W
OO thin _II brass 
tubing. 6· lengths (2) 
""'. ttI~aded collats (2) 
\'eO lamp nipples, I" long (2) 
Lamp washer nuts. 
ttlreaded (2) 
""'. brass washers (2) 
Brass lamp finials with 
...... ball end (2) lor the 
electrodes 
'to. Iqllilre dowel. 
12"' length Or equivalent 
scrap. Pin. _ ... s. but 
h.d_od Is preferable. 
SIq>enny IIIIlIs (2) 
PIa"k: milk ju, 
Pushpins 
:vw," bolt with large (fender) 
washers 
Scrap of fOllmboard. 
about 15" square 
AlumlnOOl tape wlttl peel' 
off paper b.a.lng folM"ld 
wtth the dud tape and 
HVAC supplies 
Ailiptor dips (4) and 
copper braid or solder wick 
for the neutralilln, brushes. 
Try RadioShack. 
3'- 4' of bare (:opper wire 
Plastic: (:'oset po'e 
mounting sockets (2) 
¥w." selscr_ collars with 
setso;rews (4) for the a.lesl 
shafts 
ftj·32 setscrN"S (2) for the 
neutrallll,.. brush SllPports 
Rubber O·rlng belts (2) 
MCMaster·Carr part 
M941l5K259 (mcmnt« . 
com). SI5 for 8 
14 AWG solid copper wire. 
about 12· IeI18lh 
Small bran 
wood sc:rews (2) 
TOOLS 
Pow« drill and bits: 
'h R . ...... . , collrlterslnk. 
and multl'step bit 
Hacksaw with fine tooth 
blade, copln, saw. and 
mltert>oo: 
Hobby knife. scissors 
Metal Illes: Fine metalwork. 
ing. round (rllt·tall), and 
flat crosscut intermediate 
(lNIstard) 
4()O.grit sandp;oper. 
jJ()() steel wool 
ftj·32 screw tap 
and handle 
Small solderl,.. torch . ndl 
Or large soId,,'ng Iron I lise 
alenk LSP-18O torch. It's 
a marvebus tool. 
Miscellaneous SC:.--driwn; 
and small pliers 
rape measure. ruler 
Epoq, C<!lIophane tape. 
rosln-c_ solder 
Drawing comp. ss 
Small c.rpenter·s 5qLllre 

PROJECTS: WIMSHURST MACHINE 
BUILD YOUR 
ASTOUNDING 
WIMSHURST 
GENERATOR 
This is a moderately difficult project. No single operation is particularly difficult. but a variety of techniques 
are involved. You'lIlikely find the soldering to be the most challenging. but don·t fear. irs easier than it looks. 
Practice on some scraps before each operation. and you should be fine. A dimension diagram of the main 
parts is online at makezine.com/17/W1mshurst. 
1. MAKE A CIRCLE-CUTTING TOOL 
To cut the two 14" acrylic circles. we first need to make a tool. 
1a. Cut a 12" length of lAo square wood dowel. Drill a pilot hole near 
1 end and press or drive a sixpenny nail through the stick so the point 
sticks out about 1,4". Drill a second hole exactly 7" from the first and 
insert another sixpenny nail. 
1b. Use a fine metalworking file to shape the second nail as shown. You 
want to make a chisel point with a slight undercut on the leading face. 
2. CUT 2 ACRYLIC DISKS 
2a. Layout your circles with a compass to be sure they"1I both fit on your 
acrylic (or polycarbonate) sheet. Drill a lJs" hole in the center of your 
circle. Be gentle when drilling acrylic. as it cracks easily. Polycarbonate 
is much tougher. 
2b. Working on a carpeted floor. insert the unmodified nail into the 
center hole and begin scoring your circle with the cutting nail. Cut 
around the circumference. about V. of the way around with each stroke. 
If the cutter sticks. lift it out and move to a different spot. When you've 
cut about halfway through. flip the sheet over and cut from the other 
side. Repeat as necessary. When the circle pops free. clean up the edge 
with some 400·grit sandpaper. and set aside. 
98 
"',," : ~Il 

3. CUT BELT GROOVES INTO THE SKATE WHEELS 
341. Gently clamp or strap your drill to a workbench as pictured. 
Assemble a mandrel from a !¥!6' bolt and some large (fender) 
washers. to grip the skate wheel. When assembled. the entire 
wheel must spin. not just the bearings. 
3b. Chuck the assembly into the drill. The wheel should tum toward 
you and the speed should be fairly fast With a crosscut bastard file, 
make a lA'·wide flat on the wheel. Then switch to a rat-tail file to 
cut the groove. Apply light and even pressure to the file. 
4. ATTACH THE SKATE WHEELS TO THE DISKS 
4a. Use a step drill bit to widen the hole in the acrylic disk to 0/16". 
Be gentle. and go slowly, because acrylic is easily cracked. 
4b. Remove the washers from the wheel and use the !Jti6' bolt to 
center the wheel against the disk. Drill lour Vs' holes through the 
disk but not into the wheel. Then switch to a 3f32" bit and drill part-
way into the wheel in 4 places. Finish the holes with a countersink. 
4<:. Remove the !¥i6" bolt and drill the center hole out to lh" or %" 
using a step bit. You want the edges of the hole completely clear 
of the rotating parts of the wheel bearing. Install 4 small counter-
sunk screws. Tighten these so they just touch the disk. The disk 
must remain as flat as possible. 
5. CUT THE SECTORS 
Decide how many sectors you're willing to cut. I'm rather lazy and opted for fewer. 16 per disk. If you make 
24 or 32. you'll have to make them smaller but you·1I be rewarded wit h longer sparks. 
Following the diagram at makezlne.coml171wImshurst. make 
a template from a plastic milk jug. then trace each sector onto 
aluminum tape. Irs a good idea to make some extra sectors to 
practice with. Cut them individually: don·t be tempted to stack 
multiple layers or your cuts will end up ragged and bleed charge 
away into the air. 
TIP: I found it easiest t o use an X·Ado knife and straightedge t o cut 
the long sides, and then switch to scissors for the curved ends. 
. I '.,,-
~ ~\ 
;=:1· ' , \\'\ ' , 
. ,' 
' 
" 
-
' , 
lb.: 99 

PROJECTS: WIMSHURST MACHINE 
6. ATTACH THE SECTORS 
6a. Draw a 14" circle on foamboard. and draw radial lines to cor-
respond with your number of sectors. Place your sector templat e 
centered at 6 o'clock and trace it. The large end should face out 
and be about V4" from the edge of the circle. 
6b. Center t he acrylic disk on the foamboard and insert pushpins 
around the circumference so it turns in place. 
6c. After practicing with some spare sectors. carefutty peel 
and stick the first one in place. A length of fiberglass rod makes 
an exceUent burnishing toot. Turn the disk 1 line to the left and 
repeat. Always index the line to the first sector you stuck down; 
this witt help make the spacing as even as possible. 
7. PREPARE THE DRIVE PULLEYS AND CRANK 
7a. Remove the putteys from their cages by dritting out the rivets. 
NOTE: It·s Important to use the step bit 
then use the step bit to enlarge the holes to 0/16". Orin from one side. 
here be<::ause it is self·centering. 
then the other. to enlarge the full depth of the hole in the putley. 
7b. Cut two 7" lengths from t he fiberglass rod. and slight ly bevel 
the ends with a file to prevent chip-out. These are the dis!<; axle and 
drive shafl. Be careful of the glass fibers -
they can be irritating! 
7c. Drill the splines out of the window crank's bore wit h a regular 
!¥:is" drill bit Clamp the crank in a vise and drill slowly. making 
sure the bit is in line with the axiS. 
8. CUT AND DRILL THE DISK SUPPORTS 
Sa. Cut a 12" length off each staircase baluster. Choose the end 
that you think looks best. 
8b. Clamp the 2 supports together as shown and dritt !¥:is" holes 
at 3LJ4" and again at 11" inches from the bottom (square end). 
Sc. The lower hole needs to be reamed out so that the fiberglass 
axle turns freely in it. Use a slightly larger dritt or rat·tail file. 
You can also dritt it larger and insert plastic bushings or skate 
bearings for smoother operation. 
100 ...... : \/<Uno 11 

9. BUILD THE BASE 
9a. Draw a line lengthwise on the knick-knack shelf, parallel to the back, 21h" in. Then draw a centerline 
perpendicular to the fjrst. 
9b. Cut a IIf4" gap in the rail on the centerline, as pictured. 
9 (:. Drill two ¥s" holes in the base on the centerline, %" from the 
front and back edges. Use 2" drywall screws and large washers 
to attach the disll supports to the base. The oversized holes and 
washers will allow you to adjust and align the position of the 
rotating disks precisely. 
9d. Drill two ~. holes on the lengthwise line. 7~" from the 
centerline on each Side. These need to be perfectly vertical. so 
use a small carpenter's square to line up the drill. 
10. MAKE THE CHARGE COLLECTOR COMBS 
lOa. Cut each pipe hanger to 5" with a hacksaw, removing the 
nail ends. Save the scraps. Place the small brass ball nuts on the 
ends, heat them with a small torch, and apply just enough solder 
to fill the joint. 
NOTE: The pipe hanger Is copper' plated steel: be carefu l not to 
ovem eat it or the 50Ider may not adhere. 
lOb. You need to make 8 to 12 pointy prongs down each side of 
the collector combs. Wrap copper wire around each pipe hanger 
(I made 11 turns). then cut away the center portion on I side only 
and bend the cut ends around the pipe hangers. Spread these 
wires out e\'enly along the portion of the charge collector that will 
face the sector. 
lOco Solder the prong wires. Crimp the ends tightly around the 
pipe hanger and use a large soldering iron to solder each joint. 
Apply sufficient solder so that it flows down to fill the gap at the 
end of each length of wire. We want to avoid any points other 
than the prongs themselves. 
Once you've soldered all the joints, cut down the center of the 
wires. but don't trim the prongs to length until it's time to install 
the combs. 
... ... : 101 

PROJECTS: WIMSHURST MACHINE 
11. PREPARE THE CHARGE COLLECTOR MOUNTS 
lb. Using the step bit. bore out half of the threaded collar. Screw 
the nipple halfway into the cOllar. Insert the brass tubing into the 
other end and solder it in place. 
llb. Drill a hole straight down into the top of the ¥s" threaded 
finial and thread it with a #6-32 tap. Use the drill size written 
on the tap. Then drill a Va" hole through the body of the finial as 
shown: this is for the discharge electrode. 
llc. Cut a lh" length from the scraps you trimmed off the pipe hanger. and solder it to the brass washer. 
This will allow the assembly to clamp and hold the charge COllector perpendicular to the support. Test· 
assemble the mount. and then disassemble and set it aside. Make another the same way. 
12. MAKE THE DISCHARGE ELECTRODES 
lb. Cut two 15" lengths of brazing rod and bend them as shown. 
I bent mine by hand but you could bend a 30" length around a 
Sgal pail and then cut it in the center for a neater appearance. 
12b. With a hacksaw. cut Ih" balls oN 2 
brass lamp finials. Solder 1 ball to each 
electrode: fill the hole with solder so it 
makes a smooth transition to the rod. 
NOTE: Do not solder the small ball nuts In 
place! You'll use them after you aH ach the 
electrodes t o the charae collector mount. 
13. FABRICATE 2 NEUTRALIZING BRUSH SUPPORTS 
13a. Cut two 14" lengths of brazing 
rod and make two 90
0 bends in each 
as shown. 2" from either end. These 
are the brush supports. 
L 
• • 

13b. Solder the brush supports to the brush bosses (hubs). First 
drill a sideways hole for a setscrew in the base of the finial. and 
tap it with the #6-32 tap. File a groove in the top of the finial, then 
center the brush support bar on the finial, prop it parallel to the 
workbench top, and solder it in place. 
13c. Crimp the alligator clips onto the ends of the brush support 
bars, and solder. 
14. FABRICATE THE LEYDEN JARS AND SHUNT 
1401. Make the Leyden jar shunt Cut a 22" length of brazing rod 
and make a 900 bend 311/;" in from each end. Solder 2 large brass 
lamp chain pull balls to the ends. (Smaller finial balls or cabinet 
knobs would work, too. If you use knobs, be sure to remove any 
lacquer finish.) 
14b. Cut the Leyden jar bodies. Using the miter box and fine 
tooth hacksaw, cut two 7'h' lengths from the fluorescent lamp 
protector sleeve. 
-
.. 
1 
_
103 

PROJECTS: WIMSHURST MACHINE 
14<:. Affix the inner and outer plates. Cut four 5' ~6" sheets of 
heavy-duty aluminum foil. Form 2 sheets ~ wrapping them 
around the tubes along their 6" axis. so each foil cylinder is 5" 
high. Insert 1 cylinder into each tube so that irs}" from 1 end. 
then use a couple of rolled-up sheets of paper to hold the foil 
firmly against the inSide of the tube while you tape it in place. 
the tighter the better. 
Wrap 1 piece of foil around the outside of each tube. and tape it 
in place. Again. the tighter the better. but don't wrinkle the foil. 
l4c:I. Snap the tube end caps onto the opening that is}" from 
the foil. Make the Leyden jar bases from a pair of plastic closet 
~Ie mounts: I had to trim off some reinforcing ribs with an 
X·Acto knife to make them slide into the tubes. Drill out the 
center hole to %G". 
15. MOUNT THE DISKS AND DRIVE LINE 
15a. Slide the disk axle through the top holes in the supports. adding a %G" setscrew collar. an G' ring belt. 
the 2 disks. the other belt. and another collar. as shown. 
15b. Attach the casement window crank to the drive shaft. Insert the bushings in the sup~rts if yoU're 
using them. slide the shaft through the pulleys. and put a setscrew collar on either end. The pulleys should 
be tight: you'lI have to twist the shaft back and forth to get it through. 
15c. Stretch the belts around the pulleys: don·t forget to twist one. so that the 
disks rotate in op~site directions. (In this photo. the belt with the twist is hid-
den behind the disk. What you are seeing is a reflection of the untwisted belt.) 
NOTE: You might need a spacer between the disks. My machine be<:ame difficult to 
tum once It WItS fully charged, due to the electrostatic attraction of the disk$.. I cut 
a 2'''" washer ftom a plastiC milk Jug and placed It on the shaft between the disks 
to remedy this problem. 
l04 _ : ~ v 

16. ALIGN THE DISK AND COLLECTOR SUPPORTS 
Cut two 11' lengths of fiberglass rod and press them into the holes 
in the base. Loosen the screws that hold the 2 dis!<; supports and 
adjust them so the disks are perfectly in line with these charge-
collector supports. Retighten the supports. 
-
17. INSTALL LEYDEN JARS AND CHARGE COLLECTORS 
17a. Slide the leyden jar bases, then the charge collector assemblies. over the fiberglass charge 
collector supports. 
17b. Use about 6" of 14 AWG solid copper wire to form each inner 
plate contact Wrap it once around the brass tube and form 
2 loops in the ends. 
Using a scrap of the plastic tube as a guide, adjust the inner 
plate contacts so they apply even. gentle pressure. You want 
good contact with the foil but you don't want to rip it when you 
install the Leyden jars_ 
17c. Apply epoxy to the end of the fiberglass support rod. slide 
the brass charge collector assembly down onto it. and set it aside 
while the epoxy cures. 
17d. Slide the Leyden jars onto their bases. being careful not 
to tear the foil as you make contact. 
17e. Line up the charge collector 
combs. test·spin the disks to see if 
there's any wobble. then trim the 
prongs to come as close as possible 
to the disks without touching. Tighten 
the charge collector assemblies to 
hold the combs in place. 
-
_
lOS 

PROJECTS: WIMSHURST MACHINE 
18 
INSTALL DISCHARGE ELECTRODES 
• AND NEUTRALIZING BRUSHES 
1&. Insert the discharge electrode into the finial on the charge collector and tighten the screw to hold it 
in place. (The finial should be tight enough to hold the collector comb but still allow the electrode to move. 
If it's too tight. or not tight enough. the support rod can be twisted in the base to accommodate.) 
18b. Wrap a bit of tape around the bare 
end of the electrode and screw on one 
of the small ball nuts; this will prevent 
charge from bleeding off the sharp 
end. Repeat with the second electrode. 
18c. Slide the neutralizing bars onto the upper shaft and align 
them roughly 45' from the COllector combs. A sector should pass 
through a charge collector. encounter a neutralizing bar after about 
1/6 of a rotation. and then encounter the other charge collector 
after a further IIJ of a rotation. Tighten the setscrew to secure. 
1Sd. Add the neutralizing brushes. Clip llh" lengths of solder 
wick or copper braid to the ends of the neutralizing rods so 
they make good contact with the disk. 
19 
MOUNT THE LEYDEN JAR SHUNT 
• AND ADD FINISHING TOUCHES 
19a. Cut the 2 acrylic brackets as shown in the parts diagram. then use small brass wood screws to attach 
them to the front disk support. leaving them a little loose at first Place the Leyden jar shunt in the brackets 
and line them up so the bailS on the shunt lean comfortably against the leyden jars. Tighten the brackets. 
19b. Attach the 6 rubber feet to the base. 
19c. The tops of the 2 disk supports looked a little bare to me. so 
I raided my junk box for more lamp parts and came up with these 
decorative finials. The wealth of finial and cabinet knobs at the 
typical home center means that there are infinite opportunities 
for creativity here! That's it. Your Wimshurst machine is done! 
A 
CAlJTION: HIGH VOLTAGE! This machine, or mOre specifically Ihe leyden Jars lhal are a part of It. are 
.... capable of delivering shocks in excess of SO.OOO IIOlts. While the current is quite low and therefore unlikely 
to harm a healthy person. a serious Joll might knock you off your feel -
and who knows whal your head will hil 
on the way down. Please be careful and lreat all sourt:es of high IIOltage electtlclty wilh the utmost respect. 
NOW GO USE IT » 
l06 ...... : ~ v 

LETTHE SPARKS FLY 
OPERATION 
There are 3 variables you can play with: size 01 
the spark gap, angle of the neutralizing bars. and 
switching 01 the Leyden jars in and out of circuit. 
Start with the spark gap set to about 1". the 
neutralizers at 45" to the collector combs (90" to 
each other), and the Leyden jars disconnected. 
Turn the crank smoothly at a moderate speed. The 
electrodes should produce a thin blue spark. Look 
closely and you'll nol ice that one end is brighter; 
this is your positive electrode. 
Stop cranking and engage the Leyden jars. These 
can hold a charge for days. From this point on. 
consider the machine "hot" until you shorl the elec-
trodes by simultaneously touching both with the tip 
of a screwdriver. Also be warned that Leyden jars 
can acquire charge just sitting there. so you need 
to discharge them this way each and every time 
before you touch the electrodes. 
Turn the crank again. After several revolutions 
you'lI hear the neutralizing brushes crackle, you'lI 
smell the fresh scent of ozone. and - CRACKI-
a strong blue spark will jump the gap. 
ADJUSTMENTS 
Short the electrodes and reposition them a little 
farther apart. Crank some more and you'll see a 
bigger spark. Repeat this procedure until you see 
multiple small sparks jump from one of the collec-
tors. across several sectors. to a neutralizing brush. 
You've reached your maximum spark length. 
After you find the maximum gap, you can adjust 
the neutralizing bars. Narrowing their angle from 
90· to about 60· will increase the maximum voltage 
at the expense of a small decrease in current. 
MAINTENANCE 
Your machine should require little maintenance. but 
may require periodic replacement of the betts and 
cleaning of the disks. Use only water to clean them. 
or rubbing alcohol if you suspect there is oil on them. 
THE ELECTRIC KISS (AND OTHER 
ENTERTAINMENTS) 
Wimshurst machines had a place in Victorian enter-
tainment. After a fine meal. guests might adjourn 
to the parlor for games. discussion. and scientific 
demonstrations. One can imagine the visceral 
impact of the Wimshurst machine, with its spinning 
glass disks. electrical discharges. and the loud report 
of 6" sparks. 
For the adventurous. in the right company. there 
was a demonstration known as the electric kiss. 
Two volunteers would stand on insulating surfaces. 
Each would touch one of the 2 charge collectors 
and then they'd slowly. without any other part of 
their bodies touching. bring their lips together for 
the inevitable "tingle" of electricity. 
A 
CAUTION: Demonstrate the electric kiss only 
.... WIth the Leyden Jars taken out of the COn::Ult. 
to avoid a paInful Jolt. 
• 
To demonstrate the Wimshurst machine with 
Franklin's Bells. see makezine.com/17Iwmshurst. 
For further reading. I suggest: 
Ford. RA. Homemade Lightning: Creative 
Experiments in Electricity. 2001 
Francis. G.w.. Electrostatic Experiments: An 
Encyclopedia of Early Electrostatic Experiments. 
Demonstrations. Devices. and Apparatus. 2005 
• 
See the Wimshurst machine in action at 
makezll1e.com/17/wimshurst and on Make: television, 
Episode 103, at makezine.tv/episodes. 
.. .... , 107 


BALSA FLIES BETTER 
Build a majestic, 5-foot-wingspan model 
airplane inspired by stick-and-tissue 
designs of the 1930s, then fly it free or 
radio-control led and watch it outclass 
all the toy-store plastic. 
The summer before ninth grade. in 1985. I was stuck at 
home while my usual friends were away. I started talking with 
Eddie, t he World War II vet who lived across the street, and 
during those 3 months he taught me the fundamentals of 
model airplane building. His lifelong hobby, which he had 
learned during the Great Depression, became my own. and it 
inspired my career as a flight instructor and developer of 
UAVs for the U.S. Air Force. 
I designed the Medicine Man to reintroduce this largely lost 
art , drawing on my own experience and discussions wit h 
fellow modelers. I made it a glider because gliders are the 
purest form of f lying machine, they're cheaper to build, and 
t hey develop piloting skills without the distraction of engine 
management. It's RIC compatible so you can fly it in city and 
suburban parks. or you can make a free-flight version for 
larger expanses. Its 5-foot wingspan makes it stable enough 
~ for beg dinners (Iardger Plallnf es are morlle stab I I he), yet with t he 
I 
~ wings ismounte it wi 
it in a sma car. 
ope you enjoy it. 
o 
~ " 
" , 
~ 
.. Set up: p.lll Make it: p.112 
Use it: p.ll9 
I 
Ryan Gtosswller '5 a USAF Civilian test polot and an ,ncorrtg1ble model airplane geek 
... "': 109 

PROJECTS: MODEL AIRPLANE 
FLIGHT FUNDAMENTALS 
With its "bu~d~ structure and light-but-strong design_ 
the Me<licine Man isjustthe plane to cure the 
modeling work! ot its instant-gratification doldrums. 
Traditional model airplanes are constructed in much 
the same way that airplanes once were. by building and 
covering a strong. lightweight wooden frame. Model and 
full-sized air1rames share the same basic parts. 
TAIL 
o Tail lin 
o Ruddl,'r 
G Ventral lin 
FUSELAGE 
'" 
General Building Advice 
," 
Before touching knile to wood. study the plan and 
conduct an "imaginary build" 01 the model's entire 
skeleton, visualj~ing each step. Taking the time to do 
this first w~1 make the build much easier. 
For each section 01 the plan. you'U follow the same 
general procedure: pin lIle plan onto the building 
board under a shHt of waxed paper. Fit. glue, and pin 
U O ... "' : ~v 
Modelers cut pieces following 1:1 scale patterns on 
a pLan. then glue them together on top of the pLan. The 
larger. curved pieces that dictate lIle model's OYerali 
aerodynamic shape are typically cut out of a fLat balsa 
sheet bf!fore any assembly. Smaller pieces arecut from 
standard-sized sticks caned stock. with curves in their 
edges cut later. after some assembly. so lIlat they blend 
together smoothly. 
WINGS 
o Trailing edge 
O Spar 
o Leading edge 
o Wing ribs 
WING MOUNT 
ID wing mounting pins 
e Rubber bands 
FUSELAGE 
I9 longerorrs 
a Risers 
cD Diagonals 
fD Stations (between risers) 
down the pieces. starting with the perimeter pi('(:es 
and then filling in, sanding as necessary for a precise 
fit_ Glue pieces only after they're snug: glue should 
work as a bonding agent, not as fiYer. Wipe _ay 
excess glue with a scrap 01 balsa - this is easier than 
sanding it away later. Finally, spray down the assem-
bly with warm water to relax tensions in the wood. 

SET UP. 
MATERIALS 
(A] Firm sandin, block 
with 8O-grit sandpaper 
for shaping 
Soft SIIndin, bloek with 
15O-Iril $andp.llper 
10f" smoothirc 
[BJ Ball-point ~n 
{el Rille!' 
(0] Sp"ing d~mps 
(2 or more) 
[E] Triangle 
[F] Modelina board 
that you un stkk pins 
Into. You can buy from 
,reJItplanes.com. bill I 
good wo",ing rel'tlonshlp 
with your local hobby shop 
is. powerful tool! I us. 
24".48" fibtor !;;elling 
panels.. which build.,,&" 
supply retailers Mil In 
, ...... 
[OJ Wued paper 
(H) 2'_6' roll of Iron-on 
pl,lIStie coverinr l used 
Top Flite MonoKote 
Transparent(and don't 
recommend the opaqlOt). 
Hangar 9 UIt,.Cote is 
also good. The tradltlonJlI 
(and d asslest) cover',. 
Is Sil kspan,,, heavy-grade 
tissue paper 1M! you apply 
with glue and dope, but II's 
fragile and Impradlul for 
landire In dry ,.ass. 
[IJ Wood You CIIn bllYon. 
of ITI)I kits. wtlk:h 'ncludes 
" lithe wood you "H<!. 
p .... printed with patterns. 
at realklts.com. Otherwise. 
you'll need the follOwing. 
avallable.t Hobby Lobby 
(hobby-Iobby.com) and 
other ho~ stoops. Wood 
qllillity Vittles ,nllIlIy. 10 
first·time buildffs should 
seek experienc:ed nsls· 
lance. 
Medi.." bil15OI. all 36" lona: 
'/H.".4" sheet 
"'",· .4· sheet 
.".. •• .,,"' •• tleks (8) 
"""."". stlek. (2) 
Medi.." bal50I blol;k, 
1""·.2".2""· Or you can 
laminate. blol;k from 6-7 
I"yen of .".. •• heet 
Trlan,ular t;l'oss'sectlon 
"trallln, ed,." bal5Ol. 
1·.IA". 36" (2) 
Hard bal5Ol, IA". IA ".36· (2) 
Spruce, Y.· • ."..".36· (2) 
Spruce dowel. rn.,· .S· 
[J] .11 hobby knit. and 
spare b~ 
Your best 
friend tlwo,.hout con· 
structlon. Change blades lit 
the end of eacll phase. 
[K] .".." drill bit You don't 
need a drill. 
[L] Pack of T·pln. or 
modelln& pin. $6 for SO 
from Hobby lobby 
[M] RalOf NlW to cut 
hardwood s lock 
[N] WDod alu. (aliphatic 
nisin) Cyanoacrylale 
"super" ,lues are finicky 
and brltllfl. and the bottle 
frequently clop. Then. 
when you un<:lo, II, It 
shoots a stream of glu. on 
a ne"rby appendagt! and 
nearly burn. It as It cures. 
[0] Mukln,hpe 
[NOT SHOWN] 
Small weli:hb I just use 
le"d tire _I&hls I find In 
,utlen. 
Wood ICnlWS. '1I·.r (3) 
willi threads thlt stop a l 
least Y.I' from the head 
BraSSSlrlp, ""·0'114".7" 
2--channel (or 4--cluonnel) 
RIC al'l' ..... radio with 
mini ~ 
and a 250-270 
mmlllmp blttery pKk 
All musl filln Ihe fuselage. 
SO bJln, the plan 10 the 
hobby shop; I used In old 
rutaba Conquesl radio 
willi Hltac HS·81 servos.. 
Control horn. (l pack) 
I used Ou·Bro 1I2A nylon 
control horns.llem .107. 
Model hlnps (l pKk) 
I used Oreal Pllroes Ultra 
Orlp CA Hln .. s. .".' .}", 
Item MOPMQJ950. 
RIC control pusllrods 
(l pack) I used 36· SullI'o',," 
Flexible GoId· N·Rods. 
Item MS503. 
.64 rubber bands (4) 
Or 6 If you 11'1' a HI,Slart 
bun,ee launcller 
Carbon piper (optionll) 
If you don't use tile kit, 
you'll need this to transfl!r 
tile Plttems from the plan 
toW<>Od. 
Plan. Induded wltll my kit. 
or you ean download and 
print Ihem from m. k""ln .. 
com/17/modeLalrplane. 
Bar $ander such as 
the Oreat Planes n · 
Easy·Touch. for sandi.., 
In notches and mHing 
adjustments 
Old mlp.rJnes 10 cut on 
Spray botti, 
,~, 
GuidoInce from an 
elq)eflencl'd model builder 
(opllo ... l) Highly recom· 
mended; on, mistake on 
• model Cln mean the 
dillenlne. belween flying 
and crllshl,.. 
_
: W 

PROJECTS: MODEL AIRPLANE 
BUILD YOUR 
MODEL AIRPLANE 
1. CUT THE SHEET PARTS 
This is the tedious part. Do not attempt it while feeling impatient or agitated. 
lao If you're building from plain wood rather than the kit. download and print the plans from makezine.com 
117/model_alrplane. Trace the patterns onto the sheet using carbon paper. making sure the wood's grain 
runs in the piece's dominant direction. Mark some pieces multiple times. following the plan. I offer the kit 
because patterns can be frustrating to a beginning builder. 
lb. Cut out each piece using the knife. Cut them slightly oversize. particularly on mating portions. so 
you can sand them down to a firm fit later. Don·t cut through the piece all at once: allow about 9 passes 
(3 per Vt6" of thickness). Where parts are mirrored right and left. cut one and then flip it over to use as 
a pattern for the other. Old magazines are good for cutting on top of. 
Ie. After cutting out each part. number it with a pen. Then trim the parts down and refine their shapes 
using sandpaper. Save leftover wood. 
2. BUILD THE TAIL 
2a. Start with the tail. which is the 
simplest part. Follow the general 
building advice on page 110 to trim, 
fit. glue. and pin down all the pieces. 
The wax paper will ensure easy 
removal. Spray with warm water 
to relax the wood. 
2b. Let the tail assembly dry over-
night and remove it from the plan. 
TIP: Add 25% rubbing alcohol to the 
_ter to rela~ the wood even more. 
112 "'100: \/<Uno V 
r 
- r 

2e. To cut the tail's curved tips. hold the plan up to a light and pin it aligned 
over the assembly. Lay them down. plan on top. and punch through the paper 
with a pen at about Va" intervals. following the curve to make a dotted line. 
Remove the plan and make a connecHhe'dots cut. following the line. Finish by 
holding the elevator piece against the fin and blending their combined outline 
into a smooth curve. 
2d. Draw and cut hinge slots for the rudder and elevator. centered as shown on the plan. Use sandpaper 
to bevel the leading edges of the rudder and elevator along their hinge lines. so they'lI rotate freely. 
2e. Sand all surfaces to the rounded cross-section shown on the plan. 
3. BUILD THE FUSELAGE 
You'lI build the 2 mirror-image fuselage sides one at a time. 
3a. For the longerons. soak 2 of the 
~"square sticks in hot water for 10 
minutes to make them more flexible. 
3b. Assemble a fuselage side on top 
of the plan, as you built the tail above. 
Place perimeter pieces first, then the 
risers. and finally the diagonals. work-
ing in from each end. This sequence 
gives glue joints a few minutes to set 
undisturbed. 
3e. Fit ~eces Fl F2. and F3 to each 
side. spray down the assembly with 
warm water. and allow to dry overnight. 
3d. Remove the assembly from the plan and repeat Steps 3a-3c to build the second fuselage side. 
3e. Pin the 2 sides together and sand 
their perimeters down so they match. 
3f. Drill a ¥i6" hole in each F2 piece 
as shown on the plan for the wing 
mount pegs. You can twist the drill bit 
through the balsa with your fingers. 
3g. Separate the sides and sand the bevel shown in the fuselage top view into the tail. This makes the 
2 sides handed. mirror·images rather than identical. 
...... , U3 

PROJECTS: MODEL AI RPLANE 
3h. Following the fuselage top view. 
cut the cross-members for stations 1 
through 7. Note that stations 3 and 5 
use spruce. and at station 4 the top 
cross-member sits about %" below 
the top in order to clear the wing. Pin 
the bottom cross· members in place 
on the fuselage top view. 
3i. Glue the far fuselage side to the 
cross-members at stations 4 and 5. 
Pin it in place through the bottom 
longeron and make it exactly vertical 
using the T square. 
3j. Glue the other fuselage side 
vertical to cross·members 3 and 4. 
Add the top cross· members at 
stations 3 and 5 and re·true both 
sides. if needed. by adding or sub· 
tracting pins. Let dry 1 hour. 
3k. Glue the rear fuselage together in 
a similar manner. clamping the back 
(station 9). 
, 
• 
• 
31. Readjust for trueness along both sides. Pinch. glue. and pin the cross-
members at the front (station 1). Check that the nose is square. and if it isn·t. 
"persuade" it into IX>sition with a heavy, upright object such as a brick or a full 
oottle. Daub a second coat of glue onto these front cross·members (they're 
under quite a bit of stress). and allow to dry 1 hour. Spray down the entire 
fuselage and let it dry overnight. to further safeguard against the dreaded 
"banana" fuselage. 
3m. Glue :fuM sheeting above and below the nose. This will be the equipment 
bay hatch. so just tack-glue this section. Add top and bottom "slivers" between 
stations 8 and 9. as shown in the fuselage top view. Sand the front of station 1 
flat. and glue on the nose block. Laminate and glue in the tow hook mounting 
block on the fuselage centerline aft of station 3. Let dry overnight. 
3n. Shape and sand the completed fuselage. You can use the pen trick in 
Step 2c to shape the nose block. Lightly round the edges of the fuselage. 
except where the wing and tail will join. 
U4 Mo"' : ~ V 
TIP: Spruce crosS'members 
can be pinned into their end 
grain. and you can daub 
glue Into hard·to-reach 
locations using a pointy 
S/: .... p of b3lsa. 

4. BUILD THE WINGS 
You can build both wings at the same time if you have room on your building board. Be certain to build 
a right wing and a left wing. not two of the same! 
4a. Pin the l" xIA" triangular trailing edge sections onto the plan. cutting and fitting the supporting pieces 
that curve forward at each end. Carefully mark and cut the l/i6" XVs" notches where wil"€ ribs R3-R15 fit into 
the trailing edge. A knife or razor saw will work, but a loose hacksaw blade is better. 
4b. Re·pin the trailing edges to the 
plan in place. Fit. glue, and pin down 
the supports, WI and W2. and the 
spruce spar. sanding to match the 
plan if necessary. 
4<:. Add (cuI. fil. glue. and pin) the 
bottom center sheet piece that lies 
aft of the spar and spans ribs Rl and 
R2 underneath. Add wing ribs R2 
through R15. Let the glue set for 30 
minutes, then fit and glue the hard 
balsa lAo square leading edge into 
the ribs' triangular front notches 
Pin and let dry overnight 
4<1, Cut the wings' curved tips using 
the Step 2c method, transferring the 
curve to the flat undersides. Sand the 
tips smooth and round. 
4e. Sand spanwise the leading edge 
to a uniform semicircular cross· 
section, as shown on the plan. 
• 
TIP: The ribs' notches 
may need some sanding, 
l>ut nl!V<!r force them 
Into place! 
NOTE: A lot of aero· 
dynami c activity 
ox:curs at the wingtips, 
so pay attention and 
do clean work, 
41. Using the sanding block, sand an approximat ely 3° bevel into the wing roots where they will mate. 
Be very hygienic with making clean joints here: the wing center section absorbs more flight stresses t han 
any other part of the aircraft! 
4g. Pin one wing back to the plan 
and join it to the other wing tJy gluing 
together the inside edges of the center 
sheet pieces. Use a hardcover book or 
something similar to prop the opposite 
wing tip 6lh" above the building board. 
...100: us 

PROJECTS: MODEL AIRPLANE 
4h. Spread glue generously over one 
side of the dihedral brace and clamp 
it into place. binding the 2 spars 
together. Add the Rl ribs. ensuring 
they assume an angle symmetrically 
between the ribs on either side. Let 
dry overnight. I accidentally cut the 
inside ends of the leading edges too 
short. so I filled the gap in between 
with a bit of balsa. 
41. Use lh6" balsa to sheet the topside 
of the wings' center sections, then 
turn the wings over and add the 
bottom center sheet piece forward 
of the spar. Allow to dry. 
5. TEST ASSEMBLY 
Sa. Use a foam-block. sander t o gently remove burrs and hard edges on all external surfaces. except for 
the hard corners where the wings and tail will mate to the fuselage. 
5b. Cut two l"-long pegs out of the 
spruce dowel and round the ends. 
Insert the pegs into their holes in 
the fuselage. Mount the wings to the 
fuselage with rubber bands. using 
the pegs as end posts. Check. for 
straightness both from the top and 
(especially) from plumb center rear. 
sanding where the wings meet the 
fuselage if there's a discrepancy. 
Sc. Pin the tail components temporarily 
into place to check. the fit. mak.il'€ small 
adjustments where necessay 
5d. Step back. and admire your work.. 
Hey. I built that! Have a beer and just 
check. it out. This is a moment to be 
savored: allow yourself to do so. 
U6 ..... :~v 

6. EQUIP IT FOR RIC (OPTIONAL) 
6a. Drill holes in the fuselage rear for 
the 2 pushrods to exit. 
6b. Mount 2 servos approximately 
where shown on the plan, using 
¥i6"X%" spruce to conjure up a 
support framework for your system. 
Mount the pushrods to run to the 
servo heads unobstructed. 
7. COVER IT 
Follow the instructions that come with your covering material. A single 72" roll will cover the entire model 
if you plan ahead. Here's the usual procedure for iron-on plast ic. 
Cut out and lay a piece of covering 
over a sect ion 01 the airframe. Smooth 
out the covering. Use a 350°F iron 
to first tack dovm the corners. then 
seal down the perimeter. Shrink and 
smooth the entire section lYj wOOl" 
ins the iron gently over the surface. 
Repeat for all model surfaces. 
TIP: Cut a fringe Into any 
Cllrved edges to seal them 
d_n without wrinkles. 
,. ... : U7 

PROJECTS: MODEL AIRPLANE 
8. FINAL ASSEMBLY 
Sa. If you're using RIC. mo,.mt the control horns and hinges on the rudder and elevator. Locate the hinge 
slots you cut in Step 2d and re-cut them through the covering. Wood glue won't stick to plastic. so you need 
to remove the covering anywhere you're bonding to. for a model this size, I cut the hinges in half lengthwise. 
8b, Glue the wing-mount pegs in place in the fuselage. Attach the wings with rubber bands. 
Sc. Glue the elevator to the tail fin. and glue this assembly in 
its mount between stations 8 and 9. Attach it to the fuselage 
with 1 pin centered in its leading edge. While the glue is still wet. 
center it so each tip measures the same distance to a common 
midpoint centered on top, and then pin down the trailing end. 
&:I. With the glue still wet. adjust and pin the rear stabilizer so 
that it lines up symmetrically below the wings. Let it dry 1 hour. 
Glue and pin the vertical fin centered in place, and use a T square 
to ensure that it's perfectly perpendicular. Let it dry 1 hour. 
Be. Trim some hinge material. then glue it to attach the rudder to the vertical fin . Glue the ventral fin to the 
fuselage and use more hinge material to connect it to the bottom of the rudder. Run a bead of glue around 
all fixed joints on the model. Check for square along all aspects. and let dry undisturbed overnight. 
8f. IMPORTANT! To adjust the wing "washout" for flight at low glider speeds. the trailing edges of the wing 
tips need to be twisted upward. Prop up the wing trailing edges with scraps of balsa. and then tape or clip 
small weights to the other 3 corners of each wing. Iron out the resulting wrinkles in the covering. and allow 
to cool to "lock" the new angle in place. 
8g. for RIC, install the radio receiver and battery in the nose. following the instructions. for gliders. I skip 
the switch and plug the battery straight into the receiver before flying. I had to take my older receiver out 
of its case and wrap it in plastic to get it to fit. but a modern mini receiver should fit with no problem. 
Sh, for RIC, connect pushrods to the servo arms. center the 
trim switches on the transmitter, and turn on the radio. The 
servos will come alive and center themselves. Install the included 
hardware to hold the pushrods, then follow them back to place 
and attach control horns to the elevator and rudder. Connect the 
rods to the horns. Move the radio's stick to make sure nothing 
hits anything else. 
81. For the tow hook, drive a}" screw into fuselage, following the plan. For the landing skid, use 2 more 
screws to attach the brass strip under the fuselage. then sandwich rolls of masking tape above the middle to 
make the strip spring. Ensure that the radio is fully charged, and mount the wings to the fuselage. ThaI's it! 
NOW GO USE IT » 

I'M MEDICINE MAN, 
FLY ME. 
On a day with no wind, find an open area at least 500' square. ideally with tall grass. Established RIC flying 
sites are good - you're more likely to find help and probably won', run mto frequency problems. Finding 
an experienced flier to help you start Qui greatly increases your chances of success. But be prepared for 
stares and incredulous remarks al your hand·bulit airplane. 
PREFLIGHT CHECKLIST 
1. Check flight controls. MO .... lng the control stick 
forward and back should make the elevator move 
down and up. The rudder should match left and 
right stick movements. 
2. Check center of gravity. Balance the airplane 
on both Index fingers at the wing root where 
indicated on the plan. The model should hang 
balanced. With the fuselage level. For your first 
flight. you'lI probably need to add about loz mto 
the nose compartment. I cut lead tire weights 
down to the right weight using pliers. Do not 
fly the airplane until it balances level or slightly 
nose·down. 
3. Inspect the structure by gently tugging at 
different parts. ThiS is why I prefer transparent 
coverings: they make structural problems much 
easier to spot. 
4. Give the glider a gentle. level toss. It should 
fly straight and land level about 50'-75' ahead. 
If it turns left, detach the rudder clevis and adjust 
the rudder right a bit. and vice versa. If it tends 
to pitch down. nose to the ground. adjust the 
elevator upward. 
FLIGHT 
Spend a few minutes imagining the flight and your 
control inputs. For a glider. think of the e~vator as 
a speed control: back means slow down. forward 
means speed up. Lett and right are the same as you'd 
e~pect. except when the model is flying toward you! 
You can launch your glider with kite string and 
some spirited sprinting. or less foolishly with a 
Hi·Start elastic towline. which catapults your plane 
into the sky. 
Thmk of flymg a glider less as controlling It and 
more as making suggestions. If you run mto trouble. 
let go of the controls. Medicine Man is inherently 
stable. and Will nght Itself If disturbed, With enough 
altitude. 
At first. restrict your control inputs to Simply 
keepmg the glider Within about 250' of you. Set the 
input on the stick, wait for the glider to respond, 
and then let go. When the plane gets wlthm 20' of 
the ground. just make sure its path 500' ahead is 
clear. and let It land itself. 
Ne~1. practice makmg figure eights from both 
directions, Notice that you need to hold up a bit 
of elevator With each turn, and that this amount 
increases as you use more rudder. ThiS is called 
control coordmatlon. Strive to use it to keep your 
turns as level as poSSible. 
Thermalling: Gliders can stay aloft indefinitely in 
thermals, rising columns of warm air that you find 
over parking lots and plowed fields. Their diameter 
and strength varies. but you'lI know you've hit one 
when your model starts climbing without a change 
in attitude. Circle to stay in it. 
Sloping: You can sustain a glider aloft in the 
updraft where wind flows over a slope by flying 
back and forth parallel to the slope. always turning 
into the wind. This is a more advanced technique. 
Further Reading 
Model Glider Design by Frank Zaic (1944) is a 
classic book. available at hrunway,com. 
a Download the plans for MediCine Man and read 
more about model aviation at makezine.com/171 
model_airplane. 
..-. 119 


• 
~ 
STEEL PULSE 
The BeatBearing is an exciting and 
intuitive way to make music. Move the 
balls on a grid, and you change the beat. 
Music sequencing couldn't be simpler. 
Like countless other musicians, I use a computer to create 
beats and sequence t hem into mixes. Pointing and clicking 
with a mouse is fine for a studio, but what about when you 
want to sequence rhythms in live performance? Or collabo-
rate with others on a shared rhythm? These questions led 
me to develop the BeatBearing sequencer. 
So what is t he Beat Bearing? Simply put, it's a computer 
interface that takes the pattern of ball bearings placed on 
a grid and t ranslates it into a rhythm. The fun part is that t he 
whole interface is transparent and sits on top of a computer 
screen, allowing graphics to be shown from directly under-
neath. The screen highlights which beats are switched on. 
and what sounds they're playing, as a red line sweeps across 
the screen to show the current time position. The system is 
controlled by an Arduino microcontroller, and the screen 
is an old computer monitor cradled in a milk crate . 
~ Set up: p.123 Make it: p.124 Use it: p.129 
.. 
I 
Peter Bennett (pdf dpetec~be com) IS a Ph D student In the Somc Arts Research Centre at Quee<1"s Unlwrs,ty Belfast 
In Northern Ireland. where he's researching the desogn of dog' tal mu, '~al Instruments. He has previously studied cyber· 
net,cs, dlglta l-meOla art anc!des,gn. while maintaining a constant Interest In mUSical performance andcompos,t.oo 
...... , 121 

PROJECTS: BEATBEARING 
MAKING BEATS WITH BALLS 
The BeatBearing plays rhythms based on ball bearing placement. 
o A4~8 grid of transparent plastic acts as a control sur/ace. Tile hori-
zontal positions define a repeating musical measure with 8 beats. 
wtlile thevenical positions carry4 different preprogrammed 
drum sounds that you can trigger at each beat. 
a The visuaijzer on the ftat,screen CRT monitor shows 
wtllch bearings are active and where the current 
beat is in the 8·beat sequence. 
o Acaclle in tile plastic base grid holds 
unused ball bearings. 
o A plastic crate acls as a handy 
cradle for the monitor. 
o An Arduino mlcrocontrol;;;,,:,CO::::::2"O'!!'f 
colle.:ts the ball/no ball states of each of 
the 32 washers and continuously sends this information 
to a laptop computer via USB cable. 
G Two ITllIltiplexer chips let the Arduiflo read values from all 
32 washer switclles. receiving tllem in sequence through 
2 analog input pins. 
122 ..... 
: ~v 
o A steel ball bearing in any grid position 
closes the electrical connection between 
tile 2 halves of a split metal washer 
underneath. 
o A laptop computer takes tile 
rhythm feed from the Arduino 
and translates it simultane· 
ously into both MIDI sound 
data and visuals for display 
on the screen underneath 
the grid. The laptop also runs 
standard software to conven 
the MIDI into sound. 

SET UP. 
--11:1 
MATERIALS 
[I] Soklerie$s breadboard 
Solder tabs (64) One end 
[NOT SffOWNJ 
Is. flat bib f or 50ldering 
(AJ 20-wi .. ribbon cable 
[J] a -sub (25-pin) con· 
onto: the other has. hole 
Band_ 
about 2 melers long. or 
necton, malching .... Iel 
that should fit the SCrews. 
two 4o-wlre IDE c .. bln . 
flHTlara parrs (2) Make $Ure 
"M 
one with. comedOI' In 
they fit topther. that one 
Sc~ corrupted unl-
the center. 
1'1115 soldenble pins, and 
bo.d around lOcm_25cm 
Drill press .... dnl bit 
that the other can crimp 
to match the screw size. 
(8] Insulated soUd...:ore 
I ribbon cable. If YOII',,, 
Duct tlPfI 
In my case 2mm 
hool<up wi .. In 3 c:olors to 
IIslng IDE <;lObin, you'll 
her, diff.....,"tlllte around, 
need three 2 .. 20 rna" 
Plastic milk crab! or 
!.Ietlll file 
power, and sl(n;llllnes 
headers to fit. 
so .... other way to hold 
the monitor horizontal. 
Router 
[e] Ball bearinp (32) Mine 
[NOT SHOWN] 
Improvise. Or construct" 
_ .... 2Omm. Use <;hrome-
simple frame from wood. 
Milling m;llehh ... (optional) 
plated. Or they will rust. 
Laptop I;OfIlputer The 
replaces ~ 
5 tools pre-
PI'~ software Is written 
Bladll poster board <;ut 10 
cedln,lf you h .... lICCess 
[0) USB cabl. 
both In Proces.slng and on 
the dlmeno.ions of the CRT 
to I frierxlly engineering 
lhe Aldulno. SO II's cross· 
monitor screen 
deplrtment 
[E] Arduino Oledmilil 
platfonn. 
mlctOC:ontrol~ boIIrd 
TOOLS 
Ru~ Ind stnlJhteclgl! 
Ws lVilllable from 
FIllI-setMn CAT monitor 
mlkeJ$hed.com. The 
You can get one chelp Or 
Clear glue Ind Smm trans-
nlw OuemlllnOVI bolrd 
lven ftN these dll'fs. Make 
[K] Soldering Iron 
parent plastic (optlonll) 
should also won.. 
sure the screen isn't curved! 
Ind solder 
Instead of the ruifl Ind 
s trllshtedge. Same type 
[F] Washers (32) to com· 
Solid s heet of transplrent 
[t] Wirfl 51rlppet 
of plastic IS thl15mm 
fortlbly seat ~I I belrin,s; 
Icrylk (plulglns) Dr 
sheet lbove. 
mini were 30mm outer 
polycarbon." cut to the 
[M] Muilimeter for 
diameter (00). I?mm 
dimensJons of the CAT 
checking cOlW1ecllons 
Inner diameter (10). 
monitOf" SCfftn. I used 
lSmm thick. 
[N] Screwdriver 
[G] Multiplexer chips. NXP 
Screws and metchin, nuh 
[0] Needlenose plleJ$ 
(Philips) HEF4067B (2) 
(54) Si~e the screws so 
[H] lOkD reslsto .. (32) 
they,.,t throlCh smell 
[p] WI .. wlters 
holes ,*llIed In the _she .. 
Ind pass through the clear 
plastic sheet; I used M2 
(2rnm diameter). 

PROJECTS: BEATBEARING 
BUILD YOUR OWN 
BEATBEARING 
TANGIBLE SEQUENCER 
1. SPLIT THE WASHERS 
I had these washers split and drilled by a milling machine at Queens University Belfast's friendly engineering 
department. but you can achieve similar results uSing a band saw and a driH press as follows. Alternatively, 
you can bypass the washers altogether and make ball-bearing contact switches more easily out of bent wire. 
or with screws or metal pins arranged in a triangle or square. See makezine.oom/17/beatbeanng for sketches. 
1a. Clamp and drill the washers in a drill press. centering the 2 small 
holes on opposite sides of each . 
1b. Use a band saw to cut each washer in half. perpendicular to the axis 
formed by the 2 holes. It's easier if you clamp or screw the washer to a 
jig of scrap metal or wood. 
1e. File off any sharp edges. The washers will be exposed to fingers 
when installed on the instrument. 
2. CONSTRUCT THE TRANSPARENT BASE 
Like the washers. the base can be CNC-milled or made by hand. Mine was milled: I sent a CAD file to the 
QUB engineering department to manufacture (see the plan at makezine.com/17/bealbearing). You can 
also drill and roullhe base as described here, or else bypass the machining entirely by gluing thin horizon-
tal strips of plastic to elevate the washers and make channels for the wires and spare bearings. 
2a. Cut the transparent acrylic sheet to just cover your CRT screen. 
2b. For each washer, following a regular 4><8 grid. drill a hole through the 
plastic sheet to match the washers' inside diameter. 
2c. Countersink another straight·sided hole for each washer that fits 
its outer diameter and thickness. 50 the washers will sit flush with the 
surface of the plastic. 
2d. Drill 2 more holes through the plastic for each washer. positioned to 
align with its screw holes. 

2e. On the underside of the base. cut straight channels about 
5mm deep running horizontally through each row 01 holes 
lor the wires. II you're drilling by hand. use a router along a 
straightedge fence. 
2f. Cut 2 more horizontal channels on the topside 01 the base. 
along the top and bottom. These channels will house balls that 
aren't currently in use. 
2g. Attach the washer halves to the transparent base using screws. holding 1 solder tab above each nut on 
the underside. 
3. WIRE THE BASE 
3a. Cut the ribbon cable in 2. With each ha1f. carefully peel the 
red wire along one side away from the rest of the cable. separat· 
ing it down to a length matching the grid's width. These will be 
the ground wires. With 40'wire IDE cable. iust use 1 cable. 
3b. One side of each washer connects to ground. so run the 
ground wires from the ribbons down 2 of the rows. soldering 
each wire to the tabs on all washer halves facing the same way. 
For the other 2 rows. cut some spare wire and solder it to the 
remaining ground tabs and to the ground wire. 
3e. For each row, peel away and solder 8 more ribbon wires to 
the other washer halves. trimming them progressively shorter. 
Each ribbon will have 3 wire connections unused. 
3d. Crimp a D-sub connector onto the other ends of each ribbon, lining them up so that the teeth 
engage properly with the wires inside. These connectors let you disconnect the grid base from the rest 
of the electronics. 
... ... , 125 

PROJECTS: BEATBEARING 
4. BUILD THE ELECTRONICS 
NOTE: For all wiring. follow the schemati<: at rnal<~ l ne.<:om/l1/beatbearlng . 
4a. Solder wires about IOcm long to 
the 2 solderable D-sub connectors. 
Use a contrasting color for the ground 
wires. and don't bother with the 4 
unused pins. 
4b. Connect the 4 ground wires from 
the D'sub connectors to 1 edge of the 
solderless breadboard. establishing 
a ground rail. Use another wire to con-
nect this rail to the Arduino's ground 
terminal. To hold the breadboard next 
to the Arduino.1 taped both to a piece 
of cardboard. 
NOTE: With IDE cables. you 
don"t need to solder. Plug 
the 3--connector <:able's 
<;enter oonne<;tor and 0 ... 
en:! conne<;tor on opposite 
sides of the breadboard 
trench. of bet by 1 hole 
(see diagram online). 
4<:. Connect the 5V line of the Arduino to the breadboard along the opposite side from the ground. creating 
a 5V rail. 
4<1. Plug the 2 mu~iplexer chips across 
the breadboard's central trench and 
connect them up to the switch wires 
from the D'sub connectors. With 
HEF40678 chips. the 16 independent 
inputs YO-Yl5 run from pin 2 to pin 9 
on one side and from pin 16 to pin 23 
on the other. Don"! worry about the 
order; comments in the software 
explain how to sequence the washer 
inputs there. which is easier than 
untangling and continuity-testing all 
the wires. 
126 ...... 
: ~Il 

4e. Connect each multiplexer's 4 address pins (pins 10, 11, 13, and 14) to 4 of the Arduino's digital input! 
output pins. These let the Arduino select which multiplexer input to receive as analog input. Here again. 
you can designate the sequence later in the software. 
41. Wire each multiplexer's common 
inpuVoutput Z (pin 1) to one of the 
analog inputs on the Arduino. AO-Al. 
Using the analog inputs lets you select 
the threshold voltage at which the 
switch is triggered in the firmware. You 
could use the digital inputs instead 
for greater speed. but you'd lose the 
ability to change the threshold. 
4g . Connect a 10kQ pull·up resistor from each multiplexer input up to the 5V rail. This ties all the inputs 
to the 5V line and prevents them from having a floating signal. When a ball bearing is placed on a washer. 
the circuit is closed and the input voltage is pulled down to ground. 
5. ASSEMBLE THE HARDWARE 
5a. lay the monitor on its back in the 
milk crate. or anything else that will 
cradle it and keep it stable. 
5b. Place the transparent base on 
top of the screen. and attach the elec-
tronics using the D-sub connectors. 
I taped the electronics to the side of 
the crate to keep them off the floor. 
5c. Size and cut a frame of black 
poster board to disguise the CRT 
screen and hide the ribbon cables. 
(An ideal solution would be to build 
the screen into a table or cabinet.) 
5d. Connect you:- laptop to the monitor. 
and to the Arduino via USB cable. 
... ... , 127 

PROJECTS: BEATBEARING 
6. INSTALL THE SOFTWARE 
Ga. Download and install the Arduino programming environment from arduino.cc and the BeatBearing 
project bundle from makezine.com/17/beatbearing. Launch the programming environment. 
6b. Copy and paste the BeatBearing Arduino code into a new Arduino document. then save. 
6<:. Select Arduino Oiecimilia from the Tools ~ Board menu. then click File ~ Upload to 110 Board A 
message should appear in the comments pane at the bottom confirming that the boar<! was successfully 
programmed. 
6d. Download and install Processing from processng.org. The BeatBearing software was created in version 
135: it should work fine with the latest version. but if you have problems. switch to version 135. 
6e. Download and install the ProMIDllibrary for Processing from texone.orgJpromidi and the trial verSion 
of Ableton Live or Uve LE from ableton.com. 
6f. From Processing. open Ihe BeatBearing Processing program. included in Ihe project bundle. This 
application reads the position of the bells. then creates the MIDI messages and visuals. 
6g. Launch Ableton Live (or another MIDI program or soft-synth) to generate the sound output. The free trial 
version of Live won·t let you save settings. but you don"! need Ihis to run Beat Bearing. On a Mac. configure 
the program to receive MIDI from Processing via the buill-in lAC bus (inter-application communication). Wil h 
Windows you should be able to route the MIDI using Virtual Audio Cable (ntonyx.comlvac.htm). although 
I haven·t tried this. 
6h. From your laptop·s display configuration pane. change the second screen's resolution to 640>< 480. 
and position it to the left of the primary screen and lined up at the top. 
6i. Run the Processing program. No 
error messages should appear. and 
the monitor should turn black with an 
array of gray dots and a sweeping red 
line. If the monitor turns gray. then 
Processing might not be connecting to 
the board. In this case. check that all 
other Processing applications (shown 
as applets in the dock) are closed 
and then re-plug the board in and 
try again! 
6]. The Beatbearing Processing code may need some tweaking to get things right. such as lining 
up the virtual grid with the real grid The code has been commented to make modifications as easy as 
possible -
the only limit is your imagination! 
NOW GO USE IT » 
128 ...... 
: ~11 

DROP SOME BEATS 
The BeatBearing is 
simple to use. Simply 
place a ball in a hole 
to start triggering a 
sound at that position. 
Remove it to switch 
the sound out. 
TANGIBLE USER INTERFACES 
I first encountered tangible user interfaces (lUis) 
at the Ars Electronica exhibition in 2003. where 
I saw James Patten's Audiopad project and Sony 
CSL's Block Jam. These lUis, along with others 
I have since found, inspired me to pursue a Ph.D. to 
study and develop new musical instruments. and 
influenced my design for the 8eatBearing. 
The main idea behind lUI design is that the user 
Should be given a physical handle on the digital 
data. Importantly, this handle should allow the user 
not only to feel and see the data. but also to grasp 
and manipulate it. In the case of the BeatBearing. 
you "read" and manipulate the sequencer through 
the arrangement of the balls. 
One design challenge rve found with TUls is how 
to include a visual display. Typical computer game 
interfaces (and others) have you look at the screen 
while manipulating a controller elsewhere. Many 
TUI researchers create more direct connections 
by projecting an image onto a control surface from 
above or below. rve tried top·projection with instru· 
ments rve designed. but found it cumbersome. 
especially if you want a portable instrument for 
playing live. My solution for the BeatBearing was to 
ditch the expensive digital projector and show the 
visuals from below using a cheaper CRT. 
I deliberately designed this project to be a base 
upon which further tangible interfaces could be 
developed. I believe it has the potential to do much 
more than this original version . 
MODIFICATIONS 
Each part of the BeatBearing is simple enough to 
allow for easy modification. Here are some ideas: 
» Tweak the Processing code to change the graphics. 
How about showing the name of each sample? 
» Add a tempo control in the software. or add a 
dedicated potentiometer to the hardware. 
» Build the SeatSearing into a coffee table, wooden 
cabinet. or my favorite. an old leather briefcase. 
» Add extra "sample select"' holes to one side of 
the grid. allowing you to switch between sample 
banks directly from the board. 
)) Expand the grid. A 16><4 grid would be large 
enough to create more serious rhythms. 
)) Use a flat LCD monitor instead of the bulky CRT 
-
a bit more expensive. but much more portable 
») Write new software. You can use the program 
provided. but if you want to develop your own 
firmware. the pseudo·code is: 
a.Set address lines on the multiplexers. 
b. Read analog pins. 
c. Repeat Steps a and b to read all the positions 
on the grid (cycling from 0000 to 1111). 
d. Send out the values of all grid positions over 
serial. 
Different software applications are possible: for 
example. rather than a sequencer. how about a 
real·time performance instrument? 
Resources 
Peter Bennett·s home page with SeatBearing news: 
www.sarc.qub.ac.uk/~ pbennett 
• 
BeatBearing demo video on YouTube: 
makezine.com/go/beatbearing 
CI Visit makezme.com/17/beatbeanng for 
BeatBearing code. diagrams, sketches. and links to 
other resources and inspirations. 
.. .... : 129 

BUILD 
NOTES \ 
How to create your own museum 
of the bizarre and the beautiful. 
Your Own Wunderkammer 
BY HEATHER McDOUGAL 
• THE WUNDERKAMMER (CHAMBER OF 
wonders), in its original 16th- and 17th-century 
incarnation. was a way of housing and displaying 
collections 01 natural oddities or curios in a room 
-
usually in the home 01 someone with wealth 
or influence. or that 01 a scholar. The chamber 
was arranged according to similarities or other 
groupings, on the whim of the collector. 
Collectors then, just like today, were competitive, 
and tried to gather the strangest. rarest specimens 
for their displays: the largest bezoar (gastrointes-
tinal mass) found in the stomach of a camel. the 
most bizarre two-headed animal fetus preserved in 
fluid, the most unusual fossil or fish skeleton. and 
fascinating objects from faraway lands. All of these 
were common wunderkammer content. 
Interest in Wunderkammern spread throughout 
Europe into the 18th century. spawning not only 
rooms. but boxes. cabinets, and other furniture full 
of curiosities. These collections became something 
of a requirement for the well-rounded gentleman. 
As collections evolved. and European thinking 
shifted from the theological to the more analytical. 
the need for a more thorough. universal way of 
organizing objects emerged. Arguments about the 
taxonomy of spiritual matters became arguments 
about the scientific taxonomy of birds and beasts. 
and the old collections. with their more personal 
approach. fell out of favor. Great houses went into 
debt. revolutions rose up and faltered. and the 
collections were sold off or acquired by government 
or academic institutions and eventually made public. 
And so, the modern museum came into being. 
Some of the great collections have survived. 
leaving weird remnants of a different way of thinking. 
of a time when all things on Earth existed solely for 
conquest. acquisition. and trophy-like display. The 
frontispiece of Ole Worm's Museum Wormianum, 
for example, shows the voracious clutter of an early 
wunderkammer. Peter the Great's famous Kunst· 
kammer (art chamber), which included much of 
130 ....... , II<Uno 11 
Frederik Ruysch's collection of preserved anatomical 
specimens. seems to us today to be gruesome and 
horriilic. but strangely beautiful at the same time. 
My introduction to wunderkammern came in 
1996. with a brief glimpse of Rosamond Purcell's 
photographs of Peter the Great's collection in 
Finders. Keepers. I couldn't get the images out of 
my head. How could somebody treat other peoples' 
teeth as something to be beautifully housed and 
classified? Why would someone trouble to dress 
a disembodied arm in a frilly sleeve, edged in lace, 
before pickling it in a jar? It bent my mind . I thought 
about it for years. 
What it came down to was presentation -
treating 
your collection as if it were treasure, to be housed 
and counted and lovingly arranged. The Renaissance 
scholars who began these collections came from 
the world of the church. of splendid reliquaries, 
saints' bones and holy fragments. and their arrange' 
ments are clearly influenced by church culture. 
Unlike modern galleries, they don·t isolate objects 
with space but stun you with numbers. with the 
sheer overwhelming experience of entering a room 
whose every surface is filled with gloriously strange 
objects. Only very big or very unusual things get 
focal treatment. Later collectors. living in the splen-
dor of the Enlightenment. went on to stun instead 
wilh Iheir art of presentation. building cabinets and 
displays of great elegance and artistry. 
So what does the wunderkammer mean to us 
today? Purcell. who's worked with some of the 
greatest wunderkammern in the world. feels that 
the term gel s thrown around far too often. It's easy 
to use it to mean any collection, real or conceptual. 
which startles and fascinates. However. the term 
has evolved into something more metaphorical: an 
idea. reclaiming something that's been losl to the 
strictures of modern science and commodification. 
To build your own contemporary wunderkammer 
is to actively imagine authenticity. putling some 
wonder and mystery back in your life. 

Curiouser and Curiouser 
The following pages offer suggestions to keep in mind for your own cabinet of curiosities. in the 
hope that they may help your collection become more unique and satisfying in its presentation. 
Fig. A:. The author's cabinet shows how 
dividing shelves Into cubbies can add 
definition. Fig. S: A Kun$f*ammer painted 
by Frans Francken the Younger. 1636. 
Fig. c: Peter the Great, emperor of Russia 
and self-proclaimed dentist, kept a col-
lection of teeth he pulled from friends, 
assistants. and passersby, Fig. D: Part of 
Joseph Bonnier de la Mosson's famous 
cabinet In the National MllsetJm of 
Natural History In Paris. Fig. E: Ole Worm's 
cabinet of curiosities. 1655. See Rosamond 
Purcell's re-creation on page 135. 
...... : 131 

BUILD 
NOTES \ 
Your Own Wunderkammer 
TIPS FOR AN INSPIRED COLLECTION 
The Contents 
Display items that are truly special. either singularly 
or in groups (e.g .. your collection of sand from 
beaches of the world. organized in little glass vials). 
The contents of the cabinet should inspire aesthetic 
fascination. 
Group things according to your own personal 
system of organization. Take time to work this out 
before arranging your pieces. Do rocks go together. 
or things with holes? AlIOid dull classifications. like 
the dale you acquired things, and instead strive for 
the esoteric. 
Collection Dos and Don'ts 
) Do collect based on personal whimsy. For example, 
butterfly wings thai look like they have eyes. 
» Don't collect based on monetary or perceived 
value. For example. those mint Cabbage Patch 
Kids, still in the box. 
II Don't put disparate elements together. For 
example, that plastic shrunken head Irom the 
movie set doesn't work il the rest 01 the collection 
is old bottles and shells. 
II Do have many small collections with idiosyncratic 
organization . 
II Don't cram everything together on a shell and 
say you're done. 
The Cabinet for Your Wonders 
Almost anything will do to house your collection 
However, once again materials are paramount-
real wood, metal, and glass are always better than 
materials that speak 01 cheap modern manulacture. 
House your treasures in a vessel worthy 01 them. 
Compartmentalization is always good. II your 
cabinet has drawers. take time to modily them into 
compartments by inserting dividers, so that you 
can nestle your finds into custom spaces lined with 
beautiful tissue paper or silk-wool. 
The key is to keep a sense of design and concept 
in how you display things. How does the whole of 
a category look together? Making a mosaic of your 
objects in radiating patterns or neatly arranged 
clusters can fill spaces nicely. Putting things up in 
rows looks more scientific. so think carefully about 
the effect if you choose this route. 
Don't worry about crowding -
it encourages 
132 ..... :VdumoI1 
curiosity and the excitement of the old cluttered 
and mazelike Smithsonian before it was reorga-
nized. that feeling of delving and discovery. of 
seeing something new each time. 
Labeling 
There are several points of view on labeling. 
Some people prefer not to. Others like the cre-
ative aspect. even painting their paper with milk 
and baking it. or soaking it in tea, to "age" it. 
Some collectors like to get fanciful. making up 
names for specimens or creating labels that are 
mysteriously blurred or indecipherable. Others 
prefer precision and clarity, placing neatly let-
tered labels, sometimes with patterned or gold 
edges, next to each exhibit. 
More Research 
Some examples of different kinds of wun-
derkammern, met aphorical and otherwise: 
II The Unknown Museum: makezine.com/gol 
unknownmuseum 
I) Joseph Bonnier de la Mosson's extraordinary 
Cabinet. a piece of which survives at the 
Museum Nationale d'Histoire Naturelle, in the 
Jardin des Plantes, in PariS: makezine.coml 
go/delamosson 
I) Peter the Great's Kunsfkamera: kunstkamera. 
ru/en (and particularly. makezme.com/gol 
peterthegreat) 
» Shelley Jackson's internet-based My Body: 
A Wunderkammer: altx.com/thebody 
II The Museum of Jurassic Technology: mjt.org 
)) The mind-bogglingly fascinating Cryptozoo-
logical Scientific Art of Alex CF: alexcl.com 
Selected Readings 
)) Finders, Keepers by Rosamond Purcell 
and Stephen Jay Gould 
II Owl's Head by Rosamond Purcell 
II Cabinets of Curiosities by Patrick Mauries 
» Mr. Wilson's Cabinet Of Wonder: Pronged Ants, 
Horned Humans, Mice on Toast. and Other 
Marvels of Jurassic Technology by Lawrence 
Weschler 

" • 
E 
0 " • -" 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
! • 
• $ 
• > .. 
" , , 
E 
~ 
]; 
> .. 
i , 
• 
THArs WUNOEFITAINMENT! Fig. F: layout your 
objects and start grouping tto ..... Into CIItegories. 
Fig. G: Try to arrange )'Our objects effectively. 
rlJl:. H: Whlms.lcal elements. like the ball of string am 
bird matches. add humorto the mb. FIg. I: A glass 
case lends museum quality to your arrangement. 
Fig. J: You can 1"8 )'Ou, finds to give them the feel 
of something categorized and left In a drawer. 
tog. K: This ~dusty museum
w label slands upright. 
It's aged by painting It with milk and heating 11 In a 
toaster 0Yl'fI. 
_
133 

BUILD 
NOTES \ 
Your Own Wunderkammer 
I found this cabinet at a junk shop. It was 
wondertully battered and just the right size. 
I had to replace one of the shelves. 
134 ...... 
: ~ Il 
THOUGHTS. COMPARTMENTAliZED: 
Fig. L: This shelf is full of nat ... 1 oddities found 
on land, Since I was laying the objects horiwntaUy 
on shelves. I put larger objects at the back. nother 
than arranging them In patterns. Fig. M: This shelf 
contains man-made oddities, such as fetiShes 
and Prince Rupert's drops. Fig. N: Natural oddities 
from the sea. Fig. (); Remnants of a lost civilization? 
Fig. P: The finished ablnet with all objects In place. 
I had to paint the bottom shelt to match (and bash 
it up a bit) before I adorned any of the shelves. 
An author and bIogger (cabonet·of-WOI'>ders,l!Ioispclcom). 
Heather McDougal attended 0<1e of the first sunmer craft 
~s 
in the United States. She has an MFAin sculpture, 
writes clockpunk lictoon. and likes mechanICal chiekens 

Museum photographer and alllhor 
Rosamond PureeH (rosamondpurcell 
.com) speai<s abolll re·creating Ole 
Worm's famous cabinet of curiosi· 
ties for her exhibition Two Rooms. 
She worked from t he engraving 
Musei Wormlanl His/Dria. which is 
the frontispiece of the Museum 
Io\brmjanum. a catalog 01 the items 
in Worm'scollection pub ~she<l in 
1655, after his death. 
Heather McOougal: Who was Ole 
Worm and why did yoo recreate his 
wunderkammer? 
Rosamond Purcell: Ole Worm was a 
natural philosopher and teacher, and 
he wanted to show his students what 
nature really looked like. fie wanted 
them to handle the tNngs. to make 
the" own deOJctions about what 
they were actually seeing, 
Thereason I did the Olaus Worm 
room Is because the room is very, 
very specifICally described by the 
artist. On fNery shelf yoo can see 
what is there: boxes that are labeled 
"fossils," "earths," "salts: "roots: tor 
example, and in the engraving)Ou 
can even see that those things are 
in those boxes 
You can see all sorts of animals 
on the shelves: the w~tha t th i ngs 
are arrooged across the ceiling: ood 
how. on one sideof the room. there 
are horns and tusks and teeth. 
You can see how th'ng5 were 
beingclass,tied by this teacher. in his 
rather pared·down, simple museum 
- wh,cI1 yoo could call a cabinet 
of curiosities, but wh,ch was also a 
teacl1ing collectIOn 
Thereason you coold call it a 
cabinet of curiosities is because he 
,ncluded iconic specimens in h,S 
room thatarealsofound in many 
01 the other c~ lections of the same 
period - thecrocodiie, the big 
snakeskin. thenarwhat tusk, whicl1 
was a real prize. 
A friend of his foond the tusk 
embedded in theSkuli - So that 
when Worm collected it from the 
man's basement. he gOt the skull 
and tusk intact. Which meant he 
coold sat,"Yoo see -
rt isn't a horse. 
it's a North AtlantIC seagoing crea· 
ture, and this is his tUSk." 
HM: So normally, il yoo'd gOtten a 
narwhal tusk. woold you have gotten 
it!rom a trader? 
RP: They were slipped throogh 
Europe from the North A~antic by 
merchants. and sold to rich people. 
HM: Was rt d'fficult to lind the items 
tor ,.:our Ole Worm room? I mean, 
not everybodycangethoid of a 
polar bear. 
RP: Yes! It was ,ncredibly diflicu~. 
Natural history museums are not 
crazy about lend'ng thing5. And 
curators have an unbelievable lack 01 
under5t .... dingaboot why yoo woold 
want to do this, 
They think, "ThiS is not science. 
Why woold you want to hang a 
seagull next to a murre next to a 
pigeon next to a parrot. beside an 
alligator?" They didr)"t really neces' 
sarily appreciate the notion that yoo 
couid lookat adrawing andthen 
bring rt tolile aga,n. 
And then every t,me the exhibotion 
moved, thecuratOr5 would reclaim 
the;' collections. And yoo couldn't 
send anything to Denmark, because 
that's crossing invisible lines. 
We had to rent a polar bear-
which tUfned oot not to really be a 
polar bear -
from a prop shop in 
Burbank for the entire NorthAmeri-
can tour of the room. He cost $90 
a month. but he looked absotutely 
great when slung !rom a harness 
from the rafter in this room. Sowe 
INTERVIEW WITH 
ROSAMOND PURCELL 
kept him, He wasn't even a polar 
bear. he was somek,nd Of other bear 
-
we took asampieol his !ur, which 
wasn't hollow· shafted, hke a polar 
bear's,And he didnl have those 
great big snowshoe foot pads, e'ther, 
HM: Yoo know.l·m looking at the 
picture here. and the polar bear is SO 
~ny! That has got to be the smallest 
polar bear I have ever seen, 
RP: wal it is - it's a baby bear! When 
we were in Oenmark. we got th,s 
baby bear [from a gir~' schoot] and 
we put h,m up,and he'shkea dog, 
he's not big enough, It shows that the 
ceiling has been reatly stretched. 
I think I want to optically revisit 
th,s thing someday when we atl have 
lots 01 t,me I mean. yoo do<ft know 
what the guy who drew it was actuatly 
doong, We don't knON from what point 
of v,ew the room was actually drawn. 
We knew that ,t was probabty drawn 
with a wide-angled viewing device, 
and that rt was probably drawn from 
a higher angle than aper5011 wouid 
actuatly be stand,ng .... 
OeM'S [Rosamond's husband] 
made a little shad"'" box, and he opti. 
cally stretched the walls, and then 
we made that into a box so that the 
walls didn't look stretched anymore. 
But even so, we always argued about 
point of view. 
o Toreadthe interview in ,ts 
entirety, go to makezine,com/171 
wunderkammer. 
1010100: 135 

Mechanical Image 
Before Chesler Carlson invented photocopying. 
inventors engineered various mechanical devices to 
replicate images_ With a few everyday items found 
in the home. you can make a pantograph. an image 
duplicator that allows you to use one pencil to trace 
an image while another pencil follows its path in 
parallel to produce a near-identical copy. 
1. Cut out and position cardboard strips. 
YOU'll need 4 cardboa rd strips. Cut 2 st rips 
measuring 2" ~ 4 " and another pair 2" ><8 ", as 
shown in Figure 1. Place the 2 pairs of strips at 
right angles to each other. with the smaller pair 
lying on top of the larger pair. 
2. Link cardboard strips with paper clips. 
Cut 4 holes in the strips and slip 3 paper clips into 
them. as shown in Figure 2. Bend up the end of 
another paper clip. as shown. and tape it to the 
top of a paper clip box. 
3. Add pencils and secure to table. 
Cut 2 holes in the image duplicator strips large 
enough for 2 pencils to fit snugly and stand erect. 
as sl"own in Figure 3. Turn the cardboard strips over 
and slip the hole at the end of the left-hand strip 
over the paper clip that's taped to t he top of the 
paper clip box. 
Place a second paper clip box under the image 
duplicator where the 2 large strips meet. to keep 
it level. To ensure that the drawing pencil (6) 
presses against the paper properly. you can add 
weight to the cardboard strip by taping a AA 
battery underneath it. 
Use It. 
Place the original image under pencil A and a 
blank sheet of paper under pencil B. Trace the 
original design with pencil A. Pencil 6 will follow 
along. drawing the image on the paper. 
Experiment with different lengths of strips to 
make larger and smaller copies of the original 
design. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Sl 
I 
Sl 
o 
o 
CyTymony IS the authof Of the Sneaky Uses for Everyday Things book series. He lives in Los Angeles. sneakyuSe5.com 
136 ...... 
: ~ v 

ELASTIC STRING BASS 
~ 
Optica lly amplified rubber band twang. 
By Len Keeler 
I'm always inventing new demonstrations for school, 
To show how inductive pickups WOOl,I once built 
a comically large guitar that I strung with steel 
cable. Later I decided that optical sensing is more 
versatile. since it works with strings made from any 
material. and it's also actually easier. 
So I came up with this rubber-band bass. Plug it 
into a standard guitar or bass amplifjer. and you can 
play amazingly low frequencies and cool sounds. 
Each rubber band sits between a paired infrared LED 
and receiver, and as it vibrates. it varies the amount 
of light detected. Each siring's signal is then amp~­
lied and mixed with the signals from other str ... gs_ 
Rubber bands sound very different from steel or 
nylon strings. Their tone is rich in harmonics, and 
the high frequencies damp out fast. Rubber's high 
elasticity also means you can generate unusually 
low notes out of short lengths of band. 
Because the amplifier requires both positive and 
negative voltages, I power the guitar using two 9V 
batteries, which are switched with a single dual-pole 
toggle, A red LED indicates when power is on . 
My original version had 4 elastic bands, one much 
longer than the rest. Forsimplicity, this article shows 
how to build a single'string version, which you can 
easily extend to accommodate multiple strings. 
1. Plan the overall layout. 
Figure out howyou'U fit the circuit board, components, 
and batteries into your guitar body (Figure A, page 
139). My sandwich maker's interior measlXed 4"x4"x 
1V.", so I had to trim the board a bit (FiglXe B).I used a 
saw, but you can also score a line with a file or Dremel 
and snap the board along the line. If you're building 
your own guitar body, leave extra room for wires and 
components; it's easy to underestimate. 
110100: 137 

RadoShad< .276-143 and _276-145. 
Or Jarneco.106526 and ln12169. 'lbu ean als o buy 
a ...... ched pair, Rad105hac __ 276·142. 
RadloShack .276·150 
RadloShack .276-1995 
ptefenobly 1M. 
to allow wider output range adjustment 
one about IA" 
and the other I" 
I used a s hort length of the ele .... tubl", that 
ICs lire shipped In. 
preferably the black. fabric-covered 
bands from office foiOeB. but plain rubb« bands 
will work In a pinch 
I used a Coleman 
Camp Cooker sandwich pntSs, .... k:h Is a good 
size and has a nice metal container with easy 
access to the Inside. 'lbu could use a toy guitar. a 
fryl", pan. anythl", that will hide the electronics 
and utend out to stretch the strings. For my 
origl ... 1 multl·string bliss. I machined the body 
out of aluminum stock. Shape. size. and st ........ U. 
don·t matter moch beeause strl", tension Is low 
- a toy plastic ukulele will zener-ate notes more 
t)1lleal of an upright bass! 
.. 
2. Build the circuitry. 
The instrument's mixing electronics are based on 
a classic op'amp summing amplifier circuit. An 
input capacitor for each string blocks DC voltages 
to make sure you're amplifying only the vibrations 
(AC). Then potentiometers adjust each string's 
output signal to less than about O.5V. for unifor-
mity. The adjusted outputs are added via a shared 
connection and then fed into an integrated circuit 
amplifier. a 741 op·amp. which boosts the combined 
signal. An output capacitor blocks any DC signals 
from entering your guitar amplifier. 
Power for the op'amp comes from switched 9V 
batteries. The op-amp. capacitors. potentiometers. 
and resistors all connect on the circuit board itself. 
while the batteries. switch. LEOs. detector(s). and 
audio jack are outboard components. 
Use solder and hookup wire to assemble the 
mixer/amplifier components on the circuit board. 
following the schematics at makezine.com/17/ 
diymuslc_elasticbass. (The schematics show the 
single-string instrument in black and optional 
strings in red .) Any layout will work. so long as the 
connections are correct: I centered the op-amp 
and put the capacitor-resistor-potentiometer input 
sequence along the left side of the board. and the 
output capacitor on the right (Figure C). 
The 2 battery snaps connect in series. with each 
end connecting back to the board through one side 
of a double·pole toggle switch and with a ground 
lead at OV between the 2 batteries. 
Recalling that IC pins are numbered counter· 
clockwise from the dot or notch. connect the 
op-amp's pins 4 and 7 to the -9V and +9V sides 
of the power. respectively. Pin 3 connects to the 
negative input (ground) and pin 2 connects to the 
poSitive (signal). The op·amp's output. pin 6. con· 
nects through a capacitor to the tip of the \10" audio 
jack. and the ring of the jack connects to ground. 
Solder more leads from the board to connect out to 
the power indicator LED. the infrared transmitter(s). 
and the phototransistor(s). 
3. Test the circuitry . 
It's prudent to test the circuitry before assembling 
it onto the body. If YOU're building a multi-string 
instrument. test 1 transmitter/receiver pair with a 
rubber band before forging ahead with rest. I spread 
the circuit out on a table and taped the transmit-
ter and receiver down so they sat slightly above 
the surface and pointed directly toward each other 
about 1" apart (Figure D. page 140). 
Plug in the batteries. stretch an elastic band 
between the emitter and receiver. and test for output 
from the jack using a voltmeter on an AC setting or 
an oscilloscope. The output should ju~ a few tenths 
of a volt when you pluck the band. If you see signal. 
you can hear it by plugging into headphones. an amp 

UO transmitter 
MOI/eble "tunl", heed" 
Output jeck 
~$Wltc;h 
Batteries 
(begin with the power turned down). or a cheap set of 
powered computer speakers. 
If you don't hear an amplified tone from the 
string. try turning up your amp. but if you go past 5. 
something else is probably wrong. Check that you 
haven·t inadvertently swapped the transmitter and 
receiver. which look similar. or reversed the polarity 
of either. Test the detector by illuminating it with a 
bright incandescent source. such as a 6o-watt bulb 
or old-fashioned flashlight. instead of the IR trans-
mitter. Direct the light into the receiver. and pluck 
the rubber band close to and in front of the receiver, 
If you still get no signal. test the voltage between 
the phototransistor's emitter and ground, across 
the l kQ reSistor, If the DC voltage there is zero. 
chances are the phototransistor is backward, The 
AC voltage at this point should also increase when 
you pluck the rubber band, If the detector generates 
signal at the IkQ resistor but the amplifier output 
still doesn't work, double-check the connections 
and solder joints on the board. 
4. Assemble the body. 
Once the circuit is working. it's time to mount the 
components onto the body. First comes some dr~ling. 
Conveniently, my Coleman Camp Cookerwas made of 
soft metal and its 2 halves come apart easily. making it 
easy to mrk with. I put holes in the case for the power 
switch. power indicator LED. output jack. and a stand" 
off that hokls the circuit board away from the case. to 
prevent short Circuits (Figure E), 
For the photodetector. 1 drilled another hole 
centered on the body. just below the guitar's neck. 
At one of the neighboring corners I drilled 2 more 
holes for the emitter. one for the I" standoff and the 
other for the wires, Then I cut a short length of IC 
shipping tube to use as an arm that cantilevers the 
emitter over the detector (Figure F). 
I drilled 2 holes in the arm. one to attach to the 
standoff. and the other to mount the transmitter. 
Take care to position the holes such that the trans-
mitter is directly above and aimed at the receiver. All 
of the LED-style components - the indicator light. 
emitter. and receiver -
press-fit eaSily into holes 
drilled with a #9 (0.196") bit. 
5. Add the string, bridge, 
and tuning head. 
I tied one end of the elastic band to the cooker's haf'@-
ing hole. opposite the handles. For the bridge, I used 
a piece of IC tubing with a notch in it to pre~nt the 
elastic from sliding from side to side (Figure G), 
M .... : 139 

· 
To hold the other end of the elastic, I made a 
moyable '"tuning head" out of more tubing. I drilled 
2 holes in the plastic for the cooker's handles to 
pass through, and another hole higher up to tie the 
elastic to. This arrangement lets you easily slide 
the head back and forth to adjust the tension in the 
elastic, while the torque against the handle prevents 
the head from sliding on its own (Figure H). 
The guitar is ready to playl If you have multiple 
strings. the potentiometers let you even out the 
volumes (the signal level increases for very low 
notes), and otherwise protect your amp il the gain 
is high. The other thing to play with is the alignment 
of the emitter and detector. Rotating the emitter's 
mounting arm may increase the signal level. 
6. Play the fantastic elastic. 
Due to the low tension. you can play incredibly low 
notes with just a short length of elastic. It also makes 
this instrument sensitive; depending on how you 
pluck or strike the strings. their tuning might change. 
Rather than play the elastic bass like a guitar. chang-
ing the notes by fretting against the neck. try tugging 
on theelastic at the neck. like with a washtub bass. 
or squeeze down on it behind the bridge. 
You can also control the tone using your fingernail 
140 Mo,,", ~ 
11 
as a sliding fret. lifting the string ;""st enough to give it 
a new vibrating length. Apply just slight pressure. 
Notes also have a different character depending on 
whether you pluck them hard or soft. with the "hard" 
notes containing more high·frequency components. 
It's easy to make a lot of cool soundS with this. but 
challenging to playa song. The best way I found to 
keep a consistent tone was to play the multiple· 
string instrument and gently hammer on its strings 
with chopsticks rather than pluck them. 
Finally. remember these are optical pickups. so 
you can experiment with almost anything! Plucking 
the tines of a plastic comb held between the sensors 
produces a really creepy sound. Even tapping on the 
base of a wineglass can be amplified. For my next 
experimental instrument. I plan on optically amplify· 
ing the motion of glass rod. 
D Schematics plus videos and audio recordings; 
makezine.com/17/diymusic_elasticbass 
len Keeler teaches physics and electrooics at the Uniwrsi!y 
of Minnesota In Morris. He·s an electrooics hacker devoted 
to the idea 01 DIY and makIng things lor less. 
•

RANDOM MUSIC BOX 
r.ml 
tmE 
Microprocessor organ and servo drum 
play an endless song. By Kevin Weekly 
Here's a fairly inexpensive ($30-$40) project that 
uses a microprocessor to generate a constant 
stream of random but pleasant-sounding music. 
A Microchip PIC16F685 generates 5 square waves 
that are amplified and combined to play on a small 
speaker. 
A lookup table in the software stores chord 
progressions common in Western music. As the 
music runs from chord to chord. 3 oscillators play 
the chord itself. 1 plays a tonic-dominant (1-5) bass 
pattern. and 1 plays random notes from the underly-
ing scale as a melody. Potentiometers adjust how 
much of each component (chord. bass. and melody) 
is mixed into the final output. 
To keep the beat. the microconlrolter also gener-
ates output for driving a servomotor to strike a 
drum or equivalent. 
Assemble the Circuit 
Download the project schematic at makezine,coml 
17/diymusicJandom. You can solder it onto proto-
board or put it together temporarily on a solderless 
breadboard , I placed and connected the compo-
nents in this order: sockets. resistors. capacitors. 
power wires. signal wires. potent iometers. and 
finally the off· board connections 10 Ihe speaker and 
servo (Figure A. following page). The web page has 
sketches showing each step. 
Program the Microcontroller 
Download the project code from makezine.com/l71 
diymuslcJandom and use your PIC programmer 
10 burn the firmware onlo Ihe microconlroller. 
You can either program it directly from the hex file 
main. HEX or compile the program from the source 
code main.asm. 
...... , 141 

$3 from DlgH(ey, digikey.com 
$5 from Digl·Key. or use another quad op·amp. 
like the cheaper LM324 
or other value, but all 
3 must be identical 
. . 
I used a 4xAA battery pack with 
a voltage regulator. 
from a h~ 
shop. 
other __ would probably _II. but they must 
""ndle PWM (JxIlse width mocIullotion) Input. 
I tried an HS·325HB an:llt did nothl,. but twitch. 
for one version. 
I used a metal rod and a cardboard boL 
available from mlcrochip.com 
If you're building 
on protoboard 
Verification 
Befofe inserting the ICs into the sockets and power-
ing on. it's important to make some sanity checks. 
to avOid destroying the expensive ICs. First. check 
connections on the circuit with the digital multimeter. 
Next. make sure the power and ground rails aren·t 
shorted out. Then power on the drcuit and make sure 
each dlip'spower pin (Vee) is getting 5V. Finally. plug 
in the ICs.lfyou don't hear musiC output. diScomect 
power immediately to a\.Qid any magiC srroke. 
Add the Drum 
You should now have a noisy circuit happily playing 
chords. To add percussion. the servo output 
alternates between maximum and minimum 
deflection every beat. The music box MAKE built 
uses a metal case as both project box and drum 
(Figure B). For my original version. I soldered the 
circuit onto protOboard and taped everything into 
a cardboard box (Figure C). 
142 Mollo: ~ 
Il 
Forthose with some PIC coding experience. the 
source code for the firmware is mainly driven by 
lookup tables. whidl you can easily mcdify to do other 
musical things such as playing songs. scales, etc. 
a For the schematic. a GIMP fite with wiring. com· 
piled firmware. source code. and an audio sample. 
go to makezine.com/17/diymusic_random. 
Kevin We(!kly studOes electri(:ai engineering and computer 
science at the Univer5ity 01 Texasat Dallas. In his spare time 
he builds cirO.llts. writes programs. and compoSes musIC. 

EGG HEADS 
n 
Construct an interlocking puzzle with 
30 identical pieces. By George W Hart 
As a retirement present for Joe Malkevitch, a geom-
eter friend who likes puzzles, I designed and built 
this I'-diameter Egg Heads puzzle from '/o" walnut. 
Many 01 my sculpture and puzzle designs require 
laser-cutting or other computer-guided fabrication 
technology to accurately produce intncate parts. 
But this design is simple enough that you can make 
the parts yourself with ordinary shop tools such as 
a band saw and belt sander. 
The ease 01 fabricating the p.:lrts doesn't imply 
ease of assembly, however. After cutting out the 
30 parts. you'll find it requires all of your puzzle-
solving skills to interweave and interlock them into 
a symmetric structure. Here are instructions for 
making and assembling your own copy. 
1. Start with a paper template. 
The template can be scaled up to be 11" long using 
a copier. or you can download the full'sized PDF 
version from makezine.com/17/diyhome_eggheads. 
The shape fits diagonally on a standard Slh"xlI" 
sheet of paper. 
I designed a Simple egg-shaped head that's easy 
to saw. but you can personalize the face of yours 
if desired. However. don't modify the neck notch 
or the 90' notch at the back of the head. which are 
carefully positioned for proper assembly. 
2. Transfer the template 
to clear acrylic. 
You could just trace the paper outline. but a more 
accurate technique is to do a hot toner transfer. 
Either print the template with a laser printer or. if you 
use an inkjet printer. photocopy the printed template 
so you have a toner-based copy. Tape it. toner side 
down. to the acrylic and warm it with a heat gun as 

4ft2 of 'I." hardwood Dr plywood 
3" ~12 " scrap of clear Ktyllc plastic 
,1," '''' 
you rub the paper with the back of a spoon (FiglSe A). 
Hot toner will melt and attach to the plastic. 
3. Cut out the acrylic template. 
Cut it with a band saw. just outside the line, and 
then sand it down exactly to the line (Figure B). You 
will trace this 30 times. so be sure it·s accurate. As 
a check, you can trace it onto paper. then rotate it 
180' and trace it again. 
4. Trace the 30 parts. 
With a pencil. lay out and trace 30 copies on V."-thick 
wood. Make a couple of extras. too. One advantage 
of using a clear acrylic template is that you can see 
through it to position it where you want. relative to 
the wood grain. thus avoiding knots. 
TIP: For strength, align the template the long 
way, along (not across) the grain. 
5. Cut the 30 parts. 
Use a band saw to cut the 30 parts just outside 
the pencil lines (Figure C). Then sand to the line 
(Figure D). Any disk or belt sander is line for the 
convex portion at the tops 01 the heads. A thin belt 
sander With no backing is ideal for the concavities. 
6. Drill the 60 eyeholes. 
For drilling the eyeholes, lirst make a simple drilling 
jig that you can clamp to your drill press table. A 
1" square of wood glued to a larger scrap 01 wood 
is sufficient for the jig. You can hold the notch at 
the back of each egg head against this square to 
Templat e (30 pieces plus extras) 
C? 
<J 
Key (1 piece) 
C> 
rJ <J 
position the parts consistently under the drill bit 
(Figure E). 
7. Sand for finish and feel. 
Depending on your woodworking tastes. you may 
round the edges slightly. belt-sand the flat surfaces 
to remove any planer marks. andlor use an orbital 
sander with progressively finer grits, for a sensuous 
feel. Don't alter the geometry of the crucial mating 
points at the backs of the heads and the fronts of 
the necks. 
8. Cut the "key" part in half. 
Use a scroll saw or fine coping saw to cut 1 piece 
along the line indicated in the key template. Be sure 
not to cut the reverse of this curve. with the head 
facing the opposite direction. This is the final piece 
in the assembly (Figure F). 
9. Finish. 
Apply an appropriate wood finish. e.g .. tung oil. and 
allow it to harden (Figure G). 
10. Assemble! 
While the above steps are largely mechanical for 
woodworkers, I guarantee you'lI find the assembly 
step to be a new intellectual challenge. 
It would be easier if you were an octopus. When 
irs done. the parts all interlock without any glue. 
but the whole thing wants to fall apart until the 
final pieces are positioned. So this is the true test 
of dedicated nerdiness. I'm sure you'lI succeed, 
because you have so much time already invested! 

am 
Or perhaps have an Egg Heads party so you have 
fots of hands avaifable to hofd everything in place. 
NOTE: The entire puzzle can be scaled up or 
down, but you must scale f!!IIery dimension, 
including thickness; for example, you might 
tripfe the size to a diameter of 3' using ¥."-thick 
wood. Send me a photo If you do! 
Resources 
The mat hematics underlying this puzzle is described 
in my paper for Joe Malkevilch's Festschrift : 
George W. Hart. "Egg Heads: A Puzzle/Sculpture" 
in Geometry. Games. Graphs, and Education: The 
Joe Malkevitch Festschrift. ed. Sol Garfunkel and 
Rishi Nath. Consortium for Mathematics and Its 
Applications (COMAP). 2008. 
George W. Hart (george@georgehartcom)isa research 
professor at Stony Brook Unrversity and a sculptor. 
Examples 01 his work can be seen at georgehart.com. 
Maximum Puzzle Challenge 
If you'd like to test your puzzle prowess. stop readIng 
and try to assemble your Egg Heads based only on 
the linalassembled image on page 143. H that lao Is, 
follow the step·fly·step assembly instructions and 
photos at makezine.com/17/dlyhome_eggheacls. 
a. First observe how 3 back'oHhe-head notches can 
meet and "mInd meld- hke t he cornt'f 01 a cube, with 
all 3 heads facing eitht'fclockwise or counterclock· 
wise. You can assemble the puzzle in either of 2 
mirl'OO'·image soluhons. but all mind melds must 
be the saone. After finishing.)'Ou can disassemble it 
and try the other handed-less. (For the other set 01 
instructions. just look at these pictures in a m irror.) 
b. Use 5 twist ties to hold together 1 pentagon cycle. 
c. Make another pentagon interlocked w~h the first. 
d. Posrtion the 2 pentagons so that 2 heads ol one do a 
mind meld with 2 heads ol the other. At the opposite 
end 01 the pentagons.)'Ou cando the same thing. A 
rubber band around the mouths can keep the heads 
together. 
e. ContInue addIng parts. oneat atime. making 
t wist·tied neck pentagons and rubber·banded 
mind melds. TheliNll lew parts haw to be carefully 
st~redinto pOSItion. but nofon;e is needed. 
f. Thevery last part goes in as 2halves, one from each 
side. and locks together. 
... ... , 145 

VOLTS HURT, AMPS KILL 
~ 
Excerpts from Rules of Thumb: 
A Life Manual. By Tom Parker 
A rule of thumb is a homespun recipe for making a guess. It's an easy-Ie-remember guide that falls some· 
where between a mathematical formula and a shot in the dark. The following rules of thumb are excerpted 
from MAKE contributor Tom Parker's book Rules of Thumb: A Life Manual (2008, Workman Publishingl . 
» You can determine whether 
a ghost is real by crossing your 
eyes. If the image doubles. the 
ghost is there. If not. it's all in 
yourmind. 
-Scott Parker. data specialist 
}) Volts hurt. amps kill. 
-Waldo ~yeris , engineer 
» You get about half an hour 
of flight in a hoi air balloon per 
20-pound lank of propane fuel. 
-Barbara Frederking. balloonist 
» To roughly convert Celsius to 
Fahrenheit. double the tempera-
ture and add 30. Thus W·C is 
SO"F, and 20·C is 70"F. 
-Stephen J. lambrechts-Forester 
» Snapshots encourage memo-
ries: videos replace them. After 
watching a video of your vacation. 
your memory of the vacation wi!! 
be what you saw on the video. 
-Rulesofthumb.org Review Board 
» You have to wait about 30 min· 
utes after cracking your knuckles 
to crack them again. That"s how 
long it takes for the vaporized 
joint fluid to go back into solut ion. 
-Jim Crissman. 
veterinary pathologist 
» To avoid lunatics on city buses. 
sit in the middle. The friendly 
lunatics sit as close to the driver 
as they can. and the unfriendly 
ones sit as far away as they can. 
-Keith Allan Hunter 
» On a good road bicycle you 
can travel 50 miles per day at a 
leisurely pace. 
-Alwyn T. Perrin. editor of 
Explorers Ltd. Source Book 
» When you are planning a house. 
make the angle of the roof notice-
ably more or noticeably less 
than a right angle: otherwise. the 
appearance lacks charm and is 
curiously depressing. In general. 
the steeper the roof, the more 
charm the house will have. 
-Susan Pitkin, librarian 
» The easiest way to quiet a 
drunk is to whisper to him. 
-Rulesofthumb.ofg Review Board 
» If you think you saw a mouse. 
you did. 
-Rulesofthumb.ofg Review Board 
» If you can control the center of 
a chessboard early. you cont rol 
the game. 
-Rulesofthumb.org Review Board 
» Use ammonia for a bee sting. 
vinegar for a wasp sting. 
-Dr. Bill Grierson, 
professor emeritus 
at the University of Flork1a 
» In most cases, a lithium battery 
will last as long as four alkaline 
batteries, and an alkaline battery 
will last as long as ten carbon·zinc 
batteries. 
-w. Price 
» Time goes by faster from the 
moment one starts paying one's 
own bills. 
-Franklin Crawford, writer 
» If you haven't made an import-
ant discovery in the field of 
mathematics by the time you're 
22, you probably never will. 
-Gerald Gutlipp. mathematician 
» Drivers who customize their 
cars with bumper stickers and 
other adornments are more prone 
to road rage than others. 
-Ru/esofthumb.org Review Board 
» Don't stand within 16 feet of 
the lion tunnel when the lions are 
entering or exiting the ring. They 
will pee on you 
-Todd Strong, 
circus school student 
When Tom Parker (parker@rulesofthumb.Ofg)isn'ttlnkerlngwithjunk.he'sflying a 1956 Cessna 180 bush plane 

HOWTO REMOVE 
ANYTHING FROM METAL 
Glean gleaming treasures from rusty 
trash. By John Todd 
" 
~ 
! 
I love using old machine parts for my projects: often 
their workmanship surpasses that of anything new. 
and you can get them cheap or eyen free. Find a 
junkyard full of ancient, rusty industrial equipment, 
and you can build almost anything -
or at least be 
inspired to, which is half the battle! 
Bul many older machine parts, especially cheap 
ones. have rust. paint. or other coverings that make 
them ugly and difficult to work with. Over the years. 
my salvage habit has turned me into something of 
~ an expert in amateur metal restoration. I am by no 
~ means a metalsmit h, but I have collected a library 
e 
of easy techniques that can enable any moderately 
f equipped hobbyist to turn neglected lumps of metal 
~ into shiny. working components. 
Rust. the oxidation of iron, takes up far more 
volume than the metal it grows from. so the parts 
underneath look surprisingly undamaged after 
treatment. The same goes for old paint , which 
protects the surfaces underneath it. 
There are 3 basic ways to remove oxidation or 
paint from metal in a home shop: mechanical, 
chemical. and electrochemical. (Thermal methods. 
and exotic techniques like dry ice blasting. molten 
salt dips, and bacterial siderophores, require 
specialized equipment.) Here I describe some home 
methods, and how to construct one of the most 
effective rust-removal tools of all: an electrolytic 
conversion tank. 

Mechanical Methods 
These work well for smooth surfaces with paint or 
other coatings. and some ~ght rust. Forsurfaces with 
cracks. pits. orfine texture. the only effective mech-
anical method is abrasive blastirqs (aka sandblasting). 
But to get into the cracks. you can also follow other 
mechanical methods with chemical methods. 
Sandpaper Use on smooth. painted surfaces in 
good condition with no corrosion. Good for preserv-
ing delicate metal. 
»Start with heavy grits (80) and work down to a 
finer grit (200). Always sand wet -
submerged 
or under a constant stream of water -
to prevent 
the paper from clogging. 
Steel wool Removes superficia' "flash" rust. sur-
face imperfections, powder coats, and some thinner 
paint layers. Very fine wool (#000) will also remove 
stains from chrome and even windshield glass with-
out noticeable scratching (but experiment first). 
ScoU'"ing or sanding pads (manual) Remove 
organic residues such as grease or oil buildup on 
engines, or sticker or tape gunk (use with solvent). 
Good for mild to medium surlace rust in some cases. 
113M scouring pads are the only good ones I've 
found. 
ScoU'"ing pad discs (powered) At 13.000rpm. 
these discs are darn near miraculous against paint 
and light rust on any large. smooth surface. 
» Use scouring pads rat her than sanding pads. 
which will sand away the metal itself. A die grinder 
will spin them faster and work better than a drill. 
3M makes effective Roloc brand pads for die 
grinders. You can also try my hack of attaching 
a cutout rectangle of manual scouring pad to 
the bottom of an orbital sander in place of paper. 
which works wet or dry for cleaning boats. awn-
ings. outdoor furniture. etc. 
Angle grinder with wire cup brush A low-cost. 
fast way to clean rust. paint. or other coatings from 
reasonably wide-open surfaces on large parts. 
» Will gouge aluminum and other soft metals and 
leave swirl marks on most steel. Very noisy and 
dusty. and wires can fly off and embed into arms. 
legs. etc. Less effective alternatives: drill with a 
wire brush bit. bench-mount wire brush grinder. 
148 _ : ~1l 
A SAFETY FIRST 
In the shop. I ~mostalways wear leather gloves. 
A minor shp with a 12.00Qrpm WIre brush will lead to 
a discouragll'igly wasted day at the emergency room. 
I wear goggles 100% of the ~me thatI'm WOr1<lng with 
any type of tool or liquid. It's easier to justleaw them 
an rather than trying to remember. do I have them/ 
where are they/do I need them for thIS task? 
Some of the chemicals used here haw nasty fumes. 
sodan't use more than you need. and use chemicals 
outdoors. where there is less risk of fume buildup. 
Keep a f ire extinguisher handy. in case sparks 
or other heat sources cause Mames. A related hint: 
Do not grind surfaces that are still wet with flamrnab4e 
deaning liquid. Learn from my mistakes! 

Angle grinder with flap wheel Reduces thick paint 
buildup or heavy rust over large. flat areas. Best as 
an initial prep step. Remoyes everything rapidly. 
including the metal itself, so be careful I 
Wire brush (manual) Remoyes petrified grease 
from yehicle parts. Helps remove loose or powdered 
oxidation alongside other. more effective methods. 
Needle scalers These earsplitting devices have a 
high-speed wheel of thin. hard rods that succesSiyely 
slam forward a few millimeters with each rotation. 
They're only useful on large rust that comes off in 
scale form. such as on ships and bridges. 
Abrasive blasting Excellent for removing paint. 
rust. or other hard imperfections from any surface. 
though less effective against softer coatings like 
rubberized paints or heavy grease. 
II The downsides are that this method is messy 
and the equipment is expensive. You can use a 
5hp/50gal air compressor ($200 on eBay or 
Craigslist) with a small blasting gun. but more 
power and yolume are better. A $100 bench top 
blasting cabinet will speed the process, keep you 
clean. and save you from haYing to sweep up 
abrasives from your driveway. 
» 00 not use actual sand. eyer. for "sandblasting." 
due to the risk of silicosis. Safe abrasives include 
glass beads ($20 for 25Ibs). aluminum oxide 
(more aggressive: $50 for 25Ibs). and ground 
walnut shells (gentler but slow: $25 for 25Ibs). 
While blasting. keep dust out of your lungs by 
wearing a real respirator with replaceable filters. 
not a disposable mask. 
» Moisture in your compressed air will cause more 
rust later. A good cheap hack is to coil a long 
length of the hose through a trash can full of 
cold water and install a water trap at the down-
stream end. 
» Filter your abrasive medium thoroughly for reuse 
with a good sieve. or a series of 2 with decreasing 
mesh Size. Paint. grease balls. or other impurities 
recycling through yoU" gun win quickly lead to poor 
performance and require gun disasserrtJly. 
Soda blasting This newer variant on abrasive 
blasting uses water-soluble baking soda. Soda is 
amazing for paint removal and for fragile materials 
like brass. copper, aluminum. and glass. but not so 
good with rust. Its solubility lets you blast pieces 
and clean them up easily in place, without haYing to 
remove them from engines or other locations where 
loose grit would cause problems. 
Soda blasting requires specialized equipment. 
but prices (without the compressor) have fallen 
below $300. 
Chemical Methods 
" Homebrew" acids Vinegar. lemon juice. or cola 
can remove light surface rust. 
» These won·t work on heavy rust or paint. Stronger 
acids do the job better. with no sugary mess to 
clean up later. 
Paint remover Removes paint (duh) but not rust 
or corrosion. The best choice for painted. unrusted 
parts. since it won·t allect the underlying metal. 
» Less effective on powder coats: for these. try 
multiple thick applications. 
Alkaline rust removal (aka dip tanks or caustic 
dips) Not recommended. This process inllOlyes 
sodium hydroxide (lye) and chelating agent solutions 
that are heated to near-boiling temperatures. It 
produces nasty toxic vapors and waste. and unless 
you have the right mix of chemicals. temperature. 
and experience. it's not as effective as the electrolytic 
method on the following page. 
Phosphoric acid and naval jelly Works alone to 
remove light surface rust or as a secondary stage 
following mechanical treatments_ 
I) Heavy rust requires high concentrations of acid 
and long immersion. which still might not work 
on rust that has bloomed or turned to scale. With 
lighter rust. spray the acid and let it sit for 30 
minutes. covered with cling wrap to prevent dry-
ing. For faster results. the object should be warm. 
II Phosphoric acid is very effective as a secondary 
prep after mechanical treatment. It gets into 
miniscule cracks (especially on cast iron) and 
cleans out the bits of oxidation that even abrasive 
blasting can miss. 
» Auto parts stores carry phosphoric acid and zinc 
preps for car body painting (e.g .. POR-15 Metal-
Ready). which seal the metal surface with zinc 
phosphate. Naval jelly, which can 't be sprayed, is 
strong phosphoric acid in a thick medium to keep 
it in place. 
"' .... : 149 

-,-
I , 
; 
• 
• 
.-. 
• · 
• ". 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • • 
• 
• • 
~ • 
• 
• • 
• • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • • 
• 
• 
iii II 
-
\ 
Used for fabric dyeing and adjusting pH. It's 
available from craft. aquarium, and home 
ImpnM!!ment stores. I paid $6 for a 21b Jar 
of &I'ance Pak 200 at a pool sl.Ipply shop. 
for the anodes. Carbon rods last 
much longer. Do not use stalnles ... chrome, or pl· 
vanlzed steel. which will leach out tode chromate. 
If your charger's ammeter doesn't go up (W its 
hum doesn't Increase when you dip yo .. part 
Into the bath. you m ay need an older, ~dumber" 
charsH without " 5IIfety Interlock. thllt won't 
test whether In connected to a battery. 
for !IOft·damp anode connection 
150 _
:VoIUmoV 
Electrochemical Method 
Build an Electrolytic 
Conversion Tank 
This is a surprisingly simple way to remove heavy 
rust using DC electricity, a tank of sodium carbonate 
solution. and some sacrificial anode rods. After sev-
eral hours of bubbling. the rust loosens or falls away. 
rye used it on mechanisms so corroded that 
you couldn't even make out their outlines. and 
after treatment the individual parts were easily 
disassembled with hand tools. You can even run 
electrolytic conversion on painted rusty surfaces, 
although it takes longer. (See Resources on page 
152 for an explanation of the chemistry involved.) 
With other home brew electrolytic tanks I've seen. 
the objects just hang from a board in a 5'galion 
bucket. I like my setup better because it uses plastic 
mesh to prevent short circuits between the anodes 
and the object being treated. and it all packs away 
neatly in the bucket 
1. Install the mesh ring. 
Cut the ends off each gutter shield to make 6 pieces 
that just fit inside the bucket (Figure A). Use zip 
ties to connect the pieces together into a ring that 
· 
p 
• 
• 
• 
• • 

\ 
tines the inside of the bucket. with the factory-cui 
ends against the bottom. If your bucket is tapered, 
overlap the pieces to follow the taper. Trim the top 
portion of the mesh if needed to let the lid fit snugly 
(Figure B). 
2. Connect the rods. 
Wind and zip-tie a length of steel wire around the 
top of the mesh ring. connecting it to 4 anodes 
hanging down outside the mesh, one at each com-
pass point (Figure C). I used 4 because the process 
works in a "line of sight" manner between the 
anodes and the object's surface. 
With steel anodes, you can just tightly wrap the 
wire around the rod ends directly. I used carbon 
rods, which can shatter. so I attaChed them to the 
wire with small coils of soft er tin solder. Zip-tie the 
anodes to the mesh (Figure D). 
Finally_ drill a hole in the lip of the bucket for the 
2 ends of the steel conductor wire to pass through. 
3. Modify the lid. 
Drill a hole through the center of the lid and insert 
the threaded rod. Secure it with the washer and nut 
above the lid. and screw on the butt connector and 
ceiling hook at the bottom of the rod (Figure E). 
D 
Drill lots more holes in the lid for ventilation 
(Figure F) -
the flammable oxygen and hydrogen 
byproducts need to escape during cookingl 
4. Put it together. 
Insert the mesh ring in the bucket. The addition of 
the anode rods should make it a snug fit. Pull the 
conductor wires through the hole in the lip of the 
bucket (Figure G). Construction is complete. 
5. Time to zap some rust! 
Sa. Set up an area with good ventilation. Fill the 
bucket with hot water to a level about 2" below the 
conductor wire. Add sodium carbonate.ITbsp per 
gallon of water. Stir. 
5b. Put your rusty object on the hook. and adjust 
the nut so that the object and hook are completely 
submerged when you put on the lid (Figure H). 
5c. Connect the red (+) battery charger connection 
to the anode wires sticking out of the side of the 
bucket. and connect the black (-) cable to the 
threaded rod in the lid (Figure I). After about 20 
seconds. lift the lid a bit and sneak a peek at the 
object. You should see some very small bubbles 

forming on the surface. If not, check your connec-
tions. You may need to scuff the rust where the 
object touches the hook. Depending on the amper-
age of your DC supply, a ful! treatment may take 
up to 1 day or so, but you can't damage an item by 
leaving it in too long, 
5d, Remove the object and dry it. The visible scale 
and surface rust will have been converted to a black 
J)Owder that can be removed with a wire brush, wire 
wheel (Figure J), or light abrasive blasting. This 
oxide dust doesn't cling to the metal like rus!. 
5e. Treat the object with a phosphoric acid and zinc 
prep solution. The acid removes any flash rust left 
by the bath, and the zinc protects against future 
rust and adheres well to primer, Dry, prime, and 
paint or clear-coat the object as soon as possible, 
Sf. Before painting or coating, mask off any gear 
shafts, keyways, or other high-tolerance fittings. 
and swab gear faces and other working surfaces 
with oil so you can wipe the paint off later. A metal 
detailing finish can preserve the metallic look, and 
for antiquing and other effects, miniatures catalogs 
carry a spectrum of paints for die-cast figurines. 
Before applying a clear coat. it's very important 
to remove all oils and other potentially corrosive 
materials. Brass, copper, and smooth cast iron are 
particularly sensitive to the acids in finger oils, 
and you don't want to have a fingerprint showing 
up months later! Wearing plastic gloves in a well-
ventilated area, apply acetone or another thin 
evaJ)Orative mineral spirit. 
You can coat with Rust-Oleum spray, or try 
POR-IS Glisten PC for more durability, For enclosed 
gears and mechanisms where dust isn't a problem, 
you can also coat parts with way oil, a heavyweight 
oil used to grease machine tools. 
OIsc S.d. Cover 
Idon't ofle<l use the disc section cJ my b'8 
belt/disc sander, so I made a simple cover 
so I don't have to worry about things (or me) 
fallingaga,nst the rotating discwhe<l I'm 
COIlCf!ntratll1g on using the Delt. 
-Fr,*,k Ford, fret' 
)m 
)ffiI 
:>pte 
152 ...... : ~Il 
Hints and Notes 
II The electrolytic bath is basic (caustic), like lye, 
so wear goggles and rubber gloves and keep 
a bucket of water or a hose nearby in case you 
spill or splash some on yourself. 
» Alligator Clip cables work well for suspending 
small parts like nuts and bolts from the hook. 
)) Painted rusty objects can take much longer 
because paint impedes electricity, For better 
results, scratch up the paint firs\. or use a paint 
remover before treatment. 
» Ordinarily, you can dispose of the used bath liquid 
down the drain, But if you removed lead paint or 
you suspect that heavy metals (chrome in partic-
ular) have leached from your items. let the water 
evaporate to form a sludge (not a dust!) and bring 
it to a local tOXic materials processor. 
Resources 
I) Metals Handbook, Volume 5: Surface Cleaning. 
Finishing. and Coating, American Society for Metals, 
various editions and years -
an excellent general 
reference 
II Wolfgang Jordan's Small Tool Museum 
explains the chemistry of electrolytic conversion: 
xrLusirustremoval 
» Bill's Antique Gas Engines explains the chemistry 
of electrolytic conversion: antlque-engines.com I 
electrol-deta,ls.asp 
..Io1Yl Todd is a netwo.-king-and-\IoIP Dr. Jekyll during the 
workweek, and a dlesel-and-steam Mr. Hyde on the week-
ends. He's currently building the world's most over-designed 
vegetable-oil-powered home electric plant. and he manages 
the freenum.org alternate telepnony numbering system. 
M.",.tlc Pocket 
Toss one of those strong neodyrmum magnets In your 
pocket. and you can Slick a whole load of screws or 
nails on the outside for easy access when you're doing 
a bit of shopma'ntenance. 
-Frank Ford, fret! 
f 'hI 
!ptE ... 
Find more tools-n-t'ps at rN '." 
Itnt. 

CASE REOPENED 
Repurposed packaging for electronics 
experimenters. ByThomas J.Arey 
Great electronics projects can be found in so 
many places. Magazines new and old, textbooks. 
and websites provide the electronics hobbyist and 
experimenter with literally hundreds of exciting 
possibilities. However. while you may find a great 
schematic for a power amplifier. audio oscillator. 
or other proiecl, finding a suitable case for your 
electronics experiment is another story. 
Commercial project boxes are expensive and 
usually must be ordered trom suppliers. Gone are the 
~ days when everyone had a neighborhood electronics 
! 
"" 
parts outlet wit h a brood supply of experimenters' 
~ resources. BLIt, the maker perspective provides many 
~ possibilities. You need look no further than your recy-
'E. 
cling bin to resolve almost any project case dilemma. 
e 
Why recycle when you can repurpose? 
f 
Audio and radio experimenters have learned to 
tl.. 
love the common mint tin. Several projects have 
appeared in MAKE making excellent use of this 
ubiquitous case. The Altoids tin has become such a 
standard form factor for small electronics projects 
that some designers actually layout their printed 
circuit boards to fit its 3%ft " 2~""3,4" interior. Folks 
have managed to cram quite a lot of electronics 
onto this very small piece of real estate. 
Many other small metal containers found "in the 
wild" can easily be turned into project cases. One 
of the most famous of these was the Tuna Tin 2 
designed by the late Doug DeMaw WIFB in the 
1970s and still built by hobbyists today (see MAKE, 
\t>lume 12, page 167). However. it's by no means the 
earliest example. In the golden age of vacuum tube 
design, it was common for hobbyists to turn pie and 
bread pans into chassis for their projects. 
Once you open your eyes (and your mind) to the 
possibilities. you'll spot small metal containers of 
...... ' 153 

many shapes and sizes. If you can"t find a case to 
fit the original project design. consider breaking 
the circuit down to several smaller boards to fit in 
the case you have on hand. More than once. the 
discovery of a small metal box during one of my 
scrounging sessions has led me to spend many 
enjoyable hours trying to come up with just the 
right circuit to cram in. 
Surface mount technology (SMT) can allow for 
even more complex projects. More and more home 
electronics builders are experimenting with these 
ultra-tiny component packages. The limiting factor 
with SMT case choices is often the size of the 
control components (switches. potentiometers. 
inpuVoutput jacks. etc.) and not the board-level 
parts themselves. 
SMT lets you break free of the mint tin form 
factor to explore other recovered case solutions. 
And if your circuit doesn·t depend on a metal case 
for shielding. a nearly infinite number of recycled 
plastic items become possibilities. 
One of my first efforts at repurposing a found 
container to electronics use goes back to the days 
when fellow MAKE author Nick Archer (see MAKE. 
\.blume 13. page 172) and I were teenagers, riding our 
bikes to local junkyards and trash heaps in search 
II 
of broken electronics. Nick found the idea to use 
discarded gallon milk jugs as speaker enclosures 
in a long-forgotten electronics magazine. I have 
continued to use this idea for nearly 40 yearsl 
The spout of the jug proves to be an excellent 
bass reflex port. and sometimes I even build a 
crossover circuit and add a small tweeter on the 
side of the jug. You can weight the jug's base with 
some plaster of Paris to give it stability. Great sound 
and a great conversation piece. 
One additional note about using found project 
cases: if you make a mistake cutting or shaping the 
case to suit your needs. you're not out anything but 
the time it takes you to return to your recycling bin. 
The money you save by uSing repurposed cases can 
go toward the purchase of the parts you need 
to build the design. 
Don"t let the lack of a case stop you from trying 
out your next electronics experiment. Just open 
your eyes tothe many posSibilities the world around 
you provides. 
T.J. · Skip" Arey has been a freelance writer to the radiol 
electronICs hobby wor1d for more than 25 years and is the 
author of Radio Monjtonng: A How·To Gujde. 

ELECTRONIC ROADK LL 
Scrounging useful components on your 
two-wheeled travels. By Thomas J. Arey 
My articles for this magazine about scrounging and 
repurposing found items are not limited to describ-
ing how to dig through trash bins and dumpsters for 
maker gold. 
I'm an avid bicyclist and. on my training rides,l've 
discovered that all too many people take the notion 
of living in a throwaway society to its worst conclu-
sion. The roadsides are littered with many things. 
I must remain aware of such effluvia as a matter 
..i 
of self-preservation when cycling. While keeping my 
eyes on the road for things that might pierce my 
tires or send me over the handlebars. I am discover-
ing an increasing amount of what I have come to call 
"electronic roadkill." 
~ 
On a recent 3D-mile loop I found no less than 3 
e 
castoff electronic devices that were worth stopping 
f for: a cell phone. a partial electronic ca!culator. and 
~ a s!ighUy damaged portable CO player. 
Let's see what a maker can do with these recov-
ered gadgets. 
Roadkill Cell phone 
The found cellphone was a discount/convenience 
store "pay as you go" model. banged up and inoper-
able. but intact. Apparent!y. when the owner ran out 
of minutes they just pulled the S!M card and tossed 
the unit out the car window. The battery is a nice 
compact 3.7-volt 920mAh lithium-ion unit that can 
be put to work in many electronics projects. 
! also pulled a few other pieces off the phone to 
add to my parts piles. The eccentric motor used to 
vibrate the phone when it rings has potentia!. as 
does the u!tra·mini speaker. 
The majority 01 the phone circuil was proprietary 
surface-mount devices with tittle hope of easy 
recovery but I was happy to come up with the free 

aa 
o 
liB 
battery and a couple of other parts with potential. 
Some folks might also try to make use of the keypad 
and the LCD screen. 
Roadkill Calculator 
The pocket calculator had seen better days. It had 
been run over quite a few times. The LCD display was 
missing and. sadty, the part with the most immediate 
potential, the solar cell, was broken into 3 pieces_ 
So it goes. While I recovered no usable parts other 
than the key tops, I learned a lot about how these 
low-cost calculators are put together. It's not always 
just about recovering parts. Basic knowledge has 
value to any maker as well. 
The PC board was essentially the switch contacts 
all traced back to a "potted" blob in the center of 
the board. No doubt the blob contained one or more 
proprietary ICs thai did all the thinking and power 
management. a very elegant and simple solution. 
Once you look inside. irs easy to see how these 
units can be made for pennies and sold for dollars. 
I was glad to pick the calculator off the road just 
to recover the "button" cell for proper recycling. 
These cells often contain toxic metals that should 
not end up in the environment. No parts. but a warm 
feeling that I helped the planet out a bit. Recovering 
156 _ : ~1l 
and repurposing electronics for environmental (and 
fun) reasons should be added to the Maker"s Bill of 
Rights (downloads.orellly.com/make/MAKERS_ 
RIGHTS.pdf). 
Roadkill CD Player 
While the pICkings were slim on the first 2 found 
devices. I hit the mother lode with the run'over CD 
player. While the case was split open, the circuit 
board. motor, and laser reader appeared intact. If the 
case wasn·t integral to the proper alignment of the 
CD. the unit might have still worked. 
But I was more interested in what components 
couk:l be recovered and replXposed in future projects. 
I found 2 small slide switches, 7 momentary push-
button switches. 10 capacitors. 4 SMT transistors. and 
a small LCD screen. I also recovered a stereo earphone 
jack and external power jack as well as a 2Ji.AA battery 
case. I also kept the motor for future use. 
My bike·riding finds have not been limited toelec-
tronic road kilL Over the miles I've also found hand 
tools. various small hardware. and once even a full 
sleeve of heavy·duty tie wraps. Keeping your eyes 
on the road doesn·t just make for safe riding. it can 
provide a maker with many opportunities to recover. 
reuse, and repurpose what others have left behind. 

AN I MAL DETECTOR 
A webcam captures animals who visit 
whi Ie you sleep. By Bob Goldstein 
My 4-year-old son comes up with some funny 
ideas. A few months ago, he asked for a piece of 
cheese to leave outside for animals. We gave him 
a sliceo! cheddar. The next morning he jumped out 
of bed and hurried to the window. The cheese was 
gone. but who had taken it? He was guessing all day. 
We looked for footprints or tiny hairs, but found 
no clues. 
Then we got more ambitious, I knew that some 
" 
webcam programs can record video only when 
i there's visible motion. That might record visitors in 
'" 
daylight, but not in the dark. So we got an inexpen-
S sive infrared-sensing floodlight - a standard home 
~ security device -
at a hardware store. I fjgured 
~ that in theory, a warm animal moving in front of 
e 
the deVIce should make the light turn on. and then 
f the web cam program would see movement and 
~ start recording. 
That evening we tested it, with the webcam 
pointing out a window and the floodlight just out-
side. The next morning. my son and I raced to the 
laptop. A white cat had visited at 4:30 a.m .• and the 
video caught it flinching as the light came on. look· 
ing quizzically at the contraption, and then starting 
to eat. My son was fascinated. and we were both 
hooked on our new hobby. 
Lights. Webcam. Action! 
Instead of a plug. most motion sensor lights have 
loose wires for connecting to house wiring. We 
wanted to plug ours in outside. so we drilled a hole 
in the plastic casing for a 2 -wire plug cord. twisted 
the corresponding wires in each pair together. and 
insulated the connections with twlst·on connector 
caps. Then we sealed the space between the cord 
and the hole with crazy glue. 
MoIoo; 157 

... , ..... a COoper R ...... 
_ 
built In 
.,. ... 
SUI*" or c:naz, "lie 
CCC, Co old fruit 
er drill and drill bits 
NOTE: I really don't know what I'm doing playing 
with wires and electricity. Please take care to 
protect yourself appropriately. 
The lights and motion sensor are designed to 
work outside, but rain dripping into the sockets can 
be a hazard. So we mounted the device under a pro· 
tective platform buill by simply screwing 4 wooden 
dowels into the corners of a board. We attached 
the motion sensor light underneath. following the 
included instructions. We also bought some PVC 
pipe to fit around the legs, to use as stilts if we ever 
want to raise the platform. 
Motion sensors detect movement over a wide 
angle, so we duct-taped an empty tin can with both 
ends removed Wef the sensor (see Figure A). This 
serves as a blinder so that only animals right at the 
bait will make the light turn on. 
To capture video from inside the house. we used 
a Mac laptop and a webcam runnmg STV Pro. This 
Mac-only software has a motion detection setting. 
plus a nice option to show the time in the corner of 
the video image (Figure B). 
For bai t. we've successfully used inexpensive 
cat food. old fruit. or scraps from dinner. Before we 
retire for the night. we just start up STV Pro and 
158 ""I", ~11 
Infrared motion detector 
security lights 
Tin can with both 
ends removed 
Bait 
I ComP<ller 
with webcam 
put out the bait. Then it·s like the old Easy·Off oven 
cleaner ads: it works while you sleep! 
Results 
Afterour first night's success. I thought we might 
just keep getting the same cat. But the diversity of 
animals we've captured on video has been amazing. 
In our first month. we shot 9 species: raccoons. 
cats.! robin.! wren.! catbird.! sparrow. ! squirrel. 
! rabbit, and ! human -
our neighbor's son passing 
through our yard early one morning. And we've had 
possums come so regularly that we started putting 
out decorative backdrops for a laugh (Figure C). 
The entertainment payback for this easy and 
inexpensive project has been terrific. Set~ takes just 
a few minutes each day. and an animal appears most 
nights. Some animals have given us quite a laugh. like 
a possum that walks slowly in reverse each time the 
light turns on. a young rabbit that appears to panic 
and run toward -
instead of away from -
the house. 
and a squirrel who's learned to evade the motion 
sensor with a commando-style crawl. 
Bob Goldsteon is a dad who enjoys making sluff. HIS son 
wants to bf! an inventor when he grows up. Their videos 
can be seen at animal detect or blogspot com. 

FLASH MEMORY HARD D SK 
This fake hard drive stores more data 
and raises eyebrows. By Brian Nadel 
I love mixing technologies to create an amalgam 
that looks like one thing but is act ually something 
different. A case in point is the old hard drive that 
I stuffed full of flash memory. It looks likean internal 
drive, but it's actually a solid-state memory periph-
eral that plugs in via USB. This makes it an instant 
conversation starter for anyone who ventures into 
my office. 
1. Gut the hard drive. 
l' The original drive stored 10GB. and by filling it with 
:i three 4GB memory sticks. I actually increased its 
E 
capacity. To start the conversion, I attacked the 
~ 31f2". 2-platter hard disk drive. Using a T9 Torx 
-'" 
screwdriver. I unscrewed about a dozen screws 
@" 
from the case. Then I lore out the guts and cleared 
i out space to make room for the flash drives and 
it 
their cables_ 
dOH not need to_ ... 
as mil.., lIS the USB hub 
.11 take; I used 3. 
Get 2-3 short ones, to let the 
memOl)' sticks pack dose together. and another 
one of any length for the external ~I .. 
My drive's screws nn lted a 19. 
for pryina 
_
: 159 

You can use a large screwdriver to PlY loose the 
magnets (Figure A at top left). Any molded nubs 
or mounting studs inside you can break off with 
pliers (Figure B) and grind flat with a Dremel and 
an abrasive wheel. 
2. Mount the USB hub board. 
With the drive's case empty, I lined it all around with 
insulating tape, to prevent shorts. Next. I pried the 
USB hub's case apart (Figure C) and found a way 
to fit its board inside the drive case. I then drilled a 
hole in one end of the case, at the edge next to the 
lid, making it just big enough to tuck the external 
USB cable down into. 
3. Stuff it all in. 
Finally, it was time for the main event. I removed 
the flash drives from their cases, used USB cables 
to connect them to the hub, and packed everything 
into the hard drive case (Figure D). It was a tight 
fit. but there was enough room. 
I then threaded the external cable out through 
its hole, screwed the hard drive's lid back down, and 
plugged the cable into a computer to make sure 
that my handiwork actually worked, 
160 _ : ~1l 
4. Configure 3 drives as 1. 
All 3 drives responded, so there was one more thing 
to do. Rather than having to deal with 3 separate 
drive letters, I navigated Windows to combine them 
into a single letter, To accomplish this, start at the 
Disk Management page, and convert each drive into 
a "Dynamic Disk." This isn't hard, but it's tedious 
and confusing. 
Now the 3 drives act like a single disk that gives 
me a place to stash my most precious digital 
possessions, I took an old disk drive, and in a flash 
I converted it into a solid-state "drive" that holds 
more data and runs faster than the original. You 
can teach an old drive new tricks! 
Bdan Nadel is a New 'IOrk-base<! writer and the former 
editor-in-chlef of Mobile Computing & Communications, 
A 25-l""ar veteran 01 technology journalism, he's worked 
fOf Popular Science, PC MagaZIne, and BUSiness Tokyo. 
1-:':::"<9 Salad Ton. fin, •• S ..... 
A cut-down pair of plastic salad tongs keeps 
me lrom havlIlg cut-down lingers when cuttmg 
small rtems on aband saw, 
- frank Ford, Ire\'! 
r 'hom sh< ptech 
Find more toals-n-tlps at makeZIflE 
'Tl/tnt. 

THE STEALTH MIC 
l-• 
Disguise an inexpensive binaural micro-
phone as ordinary earbuds. By Bill Byrne 
A binaural recording system re-creates the way 
a person actually hears by placing 2 microphones 
at a distance of about 7" (roughly the distance 
between your ears), usually mounted on a dummy 
head or worn on the human recorder's head. When 
played back on headphones. the binaural stereo 
effect is preserved and is often quite remarkable 
in its realiSm. 
With some easy modifications. a pair of head-
phones can be turned into a binaural microphone 
~ with readily available materials and cheap parts. 
:i Better yet. I'll show you how to make your own 
E 
binaural mic. disguised as earbuds. 
SS 
In loday's iPod-saturated urban environment. 
]; 
.<: 
no one ever notices someone wearing headphones. 
~ This makes earbuds an ideal prop lor covering a 
i hidden mic that's plugged into a recording device. 
11: 
for various stealthy endeavors. 
in 2 colors 
1. Wire the binaural mic elements. 
Normally I don't use wrap wire because it's so thin 
it can be frustrating to deal with, but in this case, 
for earbuds, we really need the wires to be thin and 
lightweight. 
Cut two 3' lengths of wrap wire in each of 2 colors. 
Solder these to the first microphone element's 2 
contacts (Figure A. next page). Slide a couple inches 

of heat-shnnk tubing over each connection. and 
heat it with a lighter. This will secure the connec-
tions (Figure 8). We want them to be as stationary 
as possible. as movement of these wires will create 
noise on the line. 
Twist the 2 wires together. but not too tightly. Slip 
on another piece of heat-shrink. this time over both 
wires. Slide it up to about 2" from the mic element. 
then shrink it. 
Repeat the same process with the second mic 
element (Figure C). 
About 10" from the mic elements. slip another 
piece of heat-shrink tube over to combine all 4 
wires. Keep track of which pair goes to which mic. 
2. Wire the stereo plug. 
Open the stereo plug. and slide the cover over the 
4 wires. Here's the trickiest part: in order to have 
the correct stereo image. the wires on 1 of the 2 
mic elements should be reversed . So. for one mic 
element. the red goes to a plug terminal. and the 
blue to the plug's ground: on the other mic element. 
the blue goes to the second plug terminal and the 
red goes to the ground (Figure 0). 
Solder these connections. then screw the cover 
back on the plug. 
3. Disguise the mics as earbuds. 
Fasten the earbud cushions over the mic elements 
so that they're large enough to sit comfortably in 
your ears (Figure E). That"s it. you're done. 
4. Record. 
To hear exactly what"s being recorded. some folks will 
actually use a mannequin's head to hold the binaural 
mic. and will hold the head in their hands while 
wearing a pair of normal headphones to monitor the 
sounds. Worktlg this way creates the amazing effect 
of listeni~ to a binaural recording as it happens. but 
keep in mind that if you walk around holding a dummy 
head out in front of you. you may attract attention 
(in Iact. 1 think you'd get arrested in some places). 
With these stealth binaural mic headphones. as 
long as you're in a situation in which it"s socially 
acceptable to be wearing headphones. you can 
record away. knowing that what you hear will be 
very close to what you play back later. 
a For a schematic diagram and list of recordings. 
go to makezine.com/17/diycircuits_mic. 
Bill Byrne is a multimedIa artist. mobon graphics deSi6"lef. and 
educator. Hewrote about Wii control In MAKE. Volume 14 

USB KEY MAKEOVERS 
These case-modded pocket drives 
move your files with style. By Brian Nadel 
Memory st icks lack character. Even the nicest-
looking ones are more functional than fun. But 
re-skinning a USB flash drive lakes only an hour. 
max. and unlike a PC case mod, you'll carry your 
creation with you. They also make cute gifts 
("Thanks for the memories!"). 
So far, I've done a finger puppet. a ChapStick. 
and 2 wood blocks. but these mini-mods are limit ed 
only by your imagination. Small toys, wine corks, 
or even a rabbit's fool are all lair game. 
~ 
The hardest part is removing the case without 
:i damaging the circuit board. Most USB keys can be 
E 
pried apart. but some require cutting (Figure A. next 
~ page). Then you just need to find the right cover. 
< 
J 
Finger Puppet 
A child·s finger puppet is one of the easiest flash 
drive mods. If the circuit board fits. you just need 
1GB drivH .re as cheep ItS $5 now. 
Shop around and you can find them free Or very 
close to It .. fter a reobate. 
This can be 
anythlllJl: you _nl. I used a plastic finger puppet. 
a ChapStkk container. and small blocks of~. 
, " 
If y01.I make the ~ 
block enclosure. 
I used linseed 011. 
fur the ChapStick enclosure 
fur the ~ 
block enclosure. 
I used a saw. vise. drill press. clamp. belt s ander. 
sandpaper. and lathe. 

to glue it into place. I used a pirate puppet from my 
son's birthday a few years ago. Its plastic is trans-
lucent. so the pirate's head glows eerily when the 
drive's LED indicator shows data moving in and out 
Aftershelling the drive, I covered its circuit board 
in plastic wrap so the glue wouldn't cause problems 
(Figure B).I slipped the board into place. making sure 
the USB oonnectOf had enough clearance: %" is gen-
erally enough. With the board in position, I squirted in 
enough sHicone to seal it in place. An hour later, it was 
ready to save a few naughty sea shanties. 
ChapStick 
Hiding a flash drive in a ChapStick (or other lip balm) 
case takes a little more effort. I started by cutting 
and peeling off the label, to make it a plain white tube. 
You can glue on your own label. but I left it bare. 
Twist the knob to remove all the product and its 
carrier. then yank out the central screw with needle-
nose pliers. Finally, as before. simply cover the board 
with plastic wrap and glue it into place (Figure C). 
Wood Blocks 
Some time ago, my wife bought me a box of hard-
wood samples. most of which I'd never heard of. 
To house a USB key drive, I picked a piece of African 
164 _ : ~ v 
tamboti wood for its dark brown color and even 
grain. A small pine cone or knot would also work. 
First. I cut the block to roughly the right size. To 
drill out room forthe circuit board,lused a small drill 
press with its stop set about Ih" from the bottom 
(Figure D). Then I drilled another hole just big enough 
to fit the activity indicator LED. This doesn't need to 
be precise. because you can bend the LEO's wires 
to the position needed. 
Then I shaped the outersuriace with a belt sander. 
To avoid leaving ugly lines. I used 220-grit sand-
paper and worked with the grain. For the final polish. 
I hand-sanded using 400-grit paper. Then I rough-fit 
the drive board. wrapped it in plastic. and glued it up. 
I also did a memory stick makeover using a cylin-
der of the same wood. which I turned on my wood 
lathe: a pre-made dowel would work just as well. 
After turning the block round and drilling holes for 
the board and a lanyard. I finished both with a light 
coating of linseed oil for a hand-rubbed luster. 
My modded memory sticks move files with style, 
but here's a word of warning: they tend to disappear. 
In fact. 3 of the 41"ve made have since been taken 
by family members. leaving just the pirate for me. In 
other words. as soon as friends and family see your 
homemade memory sticks. they'll want one. 

THE POWERFAKE 
Make an inexpensive desktop scroll wheel 
and volume control. By Daniel Walker 
, • 
" " 
The Griffin PowerMate (gnffintechnology.coml 
prcducts/powermate) is an assignable USB knob 
controller that you can set up for many purposes, 
such as browsing Google Earth. scrolling web pages, 
controlling volume. and so on. 
I took a look at some You Tube videos of it in use 
and thought it was literally a scroll mouse on its side 
with a fancy knob and some software. A few Googles 
later. and I found a post on the bj\-tech.net forums 
about aguywho made his own Irom a VCR spindle 
and an old mouse. I fancied a bit of that. so away 
I went. and this is what I came up with. 
I call it the PowerFake. It's made from an old PS/2 
~ mouse, a project box. and an old RIC car wheel. 
~ The basic idea is to liberate the mouse's scroll 
i 
wheel encoder from its circuit board, reconnect it 
1 
using wires. and set it up to run off of the knob of 
your choice. 
........ 
• nrt.ry encod« for the scroll wheel, not ... IR 
tnonsmltter/dl!tector. A bIIIl mouse Is ....... I"ely 
to Use • robfy encoder thM ... optk3I one. 
orother dn; .... obje<;:t you 
CIm Use for rotating thM fits in your h.nd eMily 
. of s .. table lenath to go thnnch your 
RIC c.r wheel, project 00_ side,.nd the rot~ 
encoder. It could be II thin naU or a piece from 
a large paper clip. 
to II'I01.Int the encoder. I used 
double-sided fOllm bope. 
. .,. 
... ... , 165 

• 
a 
1. Gut the mouse. 
Time to rip apart your beloved mouse (Figure A). 
Usually these just come apart with one screw. but 
maybe your manufacturer has decided to be a bit 
sneaky and put screws under stickers as a way of 
telling ifthe warranty has been voided. 
Here's where you'll find out if you have a rotary 
encoder or an IR transmitter as a scroller. A rotary 
encoder holds the scroll wheel's axle and has 3 
contacts below. whereas with an IR transmitter. the 
input probably comes from some type of sensors 
that the ball feeds. 
If you have a rotary encoder. well done and carry 
on. If you have an IR transmitter (as is the case 
with cheapo mice) then it's no good for this. Try a 
different mouse. 
Pull out the mouse's scroll wheellrom the hole 
that it sits in and throw it away (Figure 8). 
2. Remove and rewire the encoder. 
Flip over the board and find the holes where the 
rotary encoder is soldered in (there should be 3 in 
a row). Note which way the encoder points. or you·1I 
solder it backward and it won·t work properly. Heat 
the solder points with your iron and use either sol-
der wick or a desoldering pump to pull off the solder 
166 _
: V<>Iumo 11 
from the board. releasing the encoder (Figure C). 
Solder wires into the 3 encoder pin holes on the 
circuit board. These will need to be about 3"-6" long 
depending on your project box size (Figure D). You 
can either solder the other ends of the wires directly 
onto the corresponding pins of the encoder. or you 
can use a piece of stripboard to connect the pins to 
the wires. as I did: this is a bit more durable. 
To get the encoder to fit neatly along the edge 
of my stripboard so that the new axle could face 
upward. I bent apart the 2 metal tabs that secured 
each end of the package to the original board. 
3. Glue the rod in. 
Find a metal rod that fits through the center of your 
encoder. such as a thin nail or a large paperclip. 
Cut your rod to about 3". It needs to be long 
enough to fit through the encoder. through one side 
of the project box. and a good way into the car wheel. 
Put a small dab of super glue onto the rod and slide it 
into the rotary encoder"s center hole (Figure E). 
4. Mount the encoder. 
Drill a hole in your project box that"s the same dlam· 
eter as your metal rod. and stick your rod through 
it. Now mount your encoder to the inside of your 

project box. I stuck it down with double-sided tape, 
then went CHer it with regular tape (Figure F). 
5. Mount the wheel and the board. 
Time to rip the wheel from your RIC car. If it comes 
with a gear in it. as mine did. try leaving it in to act 
as a spacer for your wheel. I simply used super glue 
to mount my wheel. If your wheel's hole is wider 
than the rod (Figure H). roll up some paper to pad 
out the hole, or gum it up with 8lu-Tack poster putty. 
Tapethecircuit board to the bottom of the project 
box and drill a hole in the side of the case for the 
cable to escape through (Figure G). Then clipard/or 
screw the 2 halves of the box together and test it! 
6. Test it. 
Plug your new scroll wheel into your computer and 
give it a whirL I use a USB mouse with my pc, so the 
PS/2 port was free. If you used a PS/2 mouse like 
I did. you'll have to reboot your PC after plugging it 
in for the BIOS to recognize it 
Fire up something scrollable. be it yourWinamp 
library. your browser. or a massive e-book. and give 
it a test. If you find it's too sensitive or not sensitive 
enough, then go into your Control Panel and adjust 
your mouse properties. specifically. how many lines 
, 
you scroll with 1 turn of the wheel. 
As an added bonus, see if your wheel has enough 
momentum to scroll under its own weight with a 
flick of the wrist. like mine does. 
7. Take it a step further. 
I wanted to emulate the PowerMate as much as 
p::>ssible. A little Googling turned up an awesome 
piece of software called Volumouse (nirsoftnet/ 
utllslvolumouse.html). It lets you adjust your PC's 
volume by holding a keyboard button and scrolling 
up or down. It will also resize windows and change 
brightness, all according to the conditions you give it. 
• 
See a video of the PowerFake controlling 
Volumouse at makezine.com/go/diyscrollwheel. 
(Originally published on mstructables.com.) 
Daniel Walker (d'j'danoel«!lgma,l.com) is your average 
16·year·oId who loves to make stuff. somet,mes to save 
money. but mostly for fun. A regular on Instructables,com, 
he loves simple solutions to complex problems 
...... , 167 

Cool beats, aged brass, an analog synth kit, and a guide 
to surviving the apocalypse (steampunk style). 
Dr. Frankenstein's Nursery 
Young Mad S<:lentlst's First Alphabet Blocks 
$40 xylocopa.com 
Nineteenth-century iconography meets 21st-
century craftsmanship in these awesome baby 
blocks from the husband-and-wife learn known 
as Xylocopa Design. Artist Michele Lanan does 
these adorable and clever designs for the 26 letters 
of the alphabet. and Andrew Waser laser-etches 
them into a set of five 1%" American maple wood 
blocks. The results are truly wondertul. with finely 
detailed, precisely cut images that exude whimsy 
and a snarky sense of humor. 
C is lor Caffeine. and shows a mad scientist's 
brewing rig not unlike the Florence Siphon found 
in this issue (page 63). D is for [)jrigible. H is for 
Henchmen. showing a mad scientist. lest lube in 
hand, and his Igor -
the pair show up again in Z is 
for Zombie, where they've otNiously succumbed 
to some experiment gone horribly wrong. 0 is for 
Organs,P is for Peasants with Pitchforks, and U is 
for Underground Lair, depicting an extremely 
detailed cross-section of a Dr, Evil-esquecompound, 
One can only image what one's little monsters 
would grow up to be if this was the symbolic 
vocabulary on which they cut their fangs, 
-Gareth Brany,yn 
Want more? Check out our se .. enable online database of tips and tools at makezine,com/tnt. 
Hwe a tool worth keeping In )'Our toolbox? Let lIS know at toolbox(o.'makezin.e.com, 
168 No ... : VoMno 11 

Torch Carrier 
BemzOmatlc Trlgge .... Start Propane Torch 
$40 bernwmatoc_com 
A propane torch is a useful tool for brazing. low-temperature welding. 
soldering, and just plain burning. Mostly, I use mine for starting the pellet 
stove. I finally gave up on my manuaHight torch head when I tried to close 
the valve and a flame shot out from it. melting the knob. 
To replace it. I bought a BernzOmatic TS4000T.It's just point-and-click: turn 
the safety to the on position, pull the trigger. and out shoots the flame. For long 
jobs, the trigger can be locked on. (The torch head isa bit top-heavy. but since 
it's so easy to ignite, I rever set it down while lit.) It's rated for both propane 
and MAPP gas, and the brass tip is replaceable. With a street price of about 
$40, the TS4000T costs about triple what an ordinary penciHlame torch 
costs, but it's built well and the convenience is worth it. 
-Tom Owad 
--
Cool Beans 
Bean Word Processor Software 
Free bean-osx.oom 
A.$ a _Iter, I'm persnickety about word process-
Ing programs. Maybe It's because I was spoiled ~ 
Mio::rosoft's hallowed Word 5.1 for Mac;, released in 
1992. I clung to It for a decade, butthe updated 
versions were bloated and buggy and Just plain 
ugly, and that goes for OpenOffice. too. 
Enter Bean. a freeware word proeessorfor Mac 
OS X. Created ~ James HOO\Ie, Bean Is svelte (it 
starts almost Instantly), d ean (no overstuffed tool· 
bars or dumb templates), and it doesn't get in your 
way. It does ..nat you need It to do without making 
a fuss. In fact, you baslo::ally forget you·re uslng It. 
It"s just you and your words. Now that's refreshing. 
Bean can do the Important stuff like spell ched<, 
simple formatting. and RTF, but it's not for heavy 
lifting like footnotes and desktop publishing. But, 
hey. you've always got OpenOffio::e there if you 
need it. 
-.Jeremy.J.Jdcson 
Picaxe 08M 
Microcontroller 
$4 pica>:e.co.uk 
Some of MAKE's microcont roller projects can be 
overwhelming to the beginner. The Picaxe DBM chip is 
a great way to begin. Picaxe offers their programming 
IDE and compiler for free, and they even give details 
on how to build the programming cable. All you really 
need to get started is the chip, some spare parts that 
most of us already have in our junk bins, and 5 volt s. 
The 08M chip has three 1/0 pins and one dedicated 
input pin, and can be programmed with up to 80 lines. 
I first used the Picaxe D8M to make LEOs blink 
with simple code. When it's time to move on to more 
advanced projects, the Picaxe has larger ICs with more 
program memory. Projects like digital clocks, security 
systems. automatic plant watering. and data logging 
are all within reach. I started with Picaxe, and now I'm 
ready to make. 
-Robbie Pitts 
....... 169 

In some alternate version of the Old West. folks 
played electronic synthesizers, and they likely 
called 'em Phantastrons, Those searching for 
the new and unusual in DIY synths will find a 
welcome change in this very analog device. 
The kit incorporates two vintage vacuum 
tubes, rolled steel panels, and a hot-iron 
branded wooden crate enclosure ripe for 
customization. Though a basic power supply 
comes mostly assembled, the kit's core forgoes 
fancy-pants printed circuits for a 1930s-era 
.. turret board" soldering experience -
a 
refreshing challenge for seasoned kit bui!ders. 
Don't expect the standard volt-per-octave 
functionality here: this beast of an oscilla-
tor can be steered via amplified audio or 
basic control-voltage signals, reacting with a 
thick and often rebellious voice. The output's 
pitch response can be tamed or tweaked via 
onboard controls, and a rotary selector offers 
"' 
' -.~ 
three different waveforms. 
On the Electric Western website, kit maker 
Lorin Edwin Parker demonstrates the Phan-
tastron using a homebrew riblx>n controller 
appropriately built from bone and wood-
though foil and a length of videotape would 
probably yield similar results. 
Simply plugging my dual·humbucker electric 
straight into the sync/audio jack proved to be 
very fun. My guitar's familiar thumpy twangs 
were translated into staunch square/saw-wave 
plateaus offset by wiry bends and shilts. As an 
effects Ix>x, the device produced a variety of 
sub-octave tones along the lines of DeIQ meets 
Rage Against the Machine. Though it would 
be a more-than-welcome addition to my own 
"guitarsenaL" I foresee the Phantastron being 
best used as the coreo! some original and 
unusual instrument. Hmm ... time for some 
brainstorming. 
-Co/lin Cunningham 

House Bound 
Free awdio.com 
One of the things I miss the most about living in 
Chicago is Smart Bar's legendary House r1lJsic 
sets. And now, thanks to AwdiO, I can listen to five-
streaming sets from Smart Bar and an extensive 
!ist 01 other nightck.Jbs worldwide. for free. 
Awdio is the firs! network to broadcast from a 
multitude of clubs in real time. Their amazingly 
clear sound quality comes from their trademark 
AwdioBox. a professional. 19"'rack IP audio com-
ponent lent to the source clubs, which converts 
analog audio into digital MP3 signals and trans-
mits to Awdio's servers. 
Awdio's sponsors enable them to offer their 
five music service for free. They host more than 
100 clubs on five continents, and aim to triple 
that number in 2009. Their user interface is clean 
and easy 10 navigate, and each club listmg gives 
a sneak peek into that part of the globe. These 
peeps are passionate aoout music and it shows. 
Next time DJ Heather is turning up the heat in 
Chitown. I can clear out the furniture and turn up 
the bass right here in the redwoods. The best part 
is that in a world full of time zones. irs always 
time to boogie somewhere. 
-Go/; Mohammad; 
Tricks of the Trade By Tim Lillis 
_",_-.u._ 
--
Searching lor an aged 
Inside a sealable contaill('r. 
Fume it anywhere Irom a 
brass look lor your nut 
sleampunk project? Use 
this trick. shared by Richard 
Nagy 01 datamancer.lI('t. 
suspend your piece 01 brass 
few hours to a day until the 
a lew inches over a small 
desired effect is achieved. 
cup 01 ammonia. 
Add more ammonia illt 
completelyeo.oaporates. 
==-=-
.-
0 
~.:::.:::.-
-Welcome' ~ 
o. 
0 
You can age gracefully. 
For a burnished effect. lume 
the brass darker than you 
want it. then polish it afler-
ward lor a rich. dark. shiny. 
bron~ed look. 
Have a Irickol the trade? 
Send it to tricks«i'makezine.com. 
A 
Take precautions when using ammonia. Only use outdo~ with 
proper ventilation and Wf!a. rubber glOVf!S and eye protection . 
..... , 171 

M~\I<I: U)01<5 ~\T 5TI:~\MPlJNI< 13001<5 
LUNAR MEN 
TH' ''''~'''''''''''''''' 'HI ,\JTU... 
n 
« Dreruns in the Dark 
The Invention of Hugo Cabret by Brian SeIZlllck 
$23 SchDlastic Press 
There are precious few times when you experience media and feel 
that it's truly fresh, unique -
something that actually imparts magic_ 
Such is the mojo of The Invention of Hugo Cabret. The book is a 
young adult title, but should appeal to anyone who hasn't forgotten 
how to dream. Something of a format-buster. it's filled with hun-
dreds of meticulously drawn pencil sketches, although it's not really 
a graphic novel. And. with its f1ipbook-like interruptions of dozens of 
images between brief passages of text. it's not really a novel, either, 
It owes as much to the world 01 silent film as to that of the book . 
And it's as much artifact as work 01 fiction: a beautifulS26·page 
piece of book art that is what it's about. It's about clocks and time, 
clockwork automata, the birth of cinema, and the nature of dreams. 
It's also something of a fictionalized biography of silent filmmaker 
Georges Melies. And. without giving too much away. the construc-
tion of the book itself works in ways similar to clockworks. silent 
films. and dream states. Heady stuff. Did I mention it's a kid's book? 
And it's one of the most engaging and affective things I read all year. 
« Dorkbot of the ISth Century 
The l Ullar Mell by Jenny Uglow 
S22 Farrar, Straus and Giroux 
-GB 
This remarkable biography paints a gorgeously rendered and reveal-
ing portrait of five 18th-century thinkers and tinkerers who basically • 
rope-started the Industrial Revolution in Birmingham. England: 
toymaker Matthew Boulton. inventor of the steam engine James Watt. 
potter Josiah Wedgwood. discoverer of oxygen Joseph Priestley. and 
physician and evolutionary theorist Erasmus Darwin (Charles' grand-
father). Being involved in the Dorkbot of today. I couldn't help but see 
comparisons (however mooest) to these men's Lunar Society. 
This was a group of deeply curious amateur scient ists_ technolo-
gists. and artists who liked to get together (on the full moon. so 
there was light to walk home) to exchange ideas and debate the 
deeper concerns of the day. 
In the process. they made significant discoveries in science and 
naturalism: were in the vanguard of many new technologies. such 
as hydrogen balloons: and created entire industries, like indu:;trial-
ized pottery production. There was even some robot hacking going 
on. as Darwin drew up plans for a flying clockwork bird powered by 
compressed air. and a mechanical spider driven by hidden magnets. 
The sheer quantity of ideas and ingenuity that poured from this 
handful of humans is staggering. Irs hard to read this book and not 
want to get out your notebook. your magnifying glass. and your 
"beginner's mind:' and set off in search of some Nobel discoveries 
of your own. 
-G8 
• 

« Putting the Punk Back 
St ... mPunll M~z;ne 
$3.50/lssue, fref! PDfs steampunkmagazlne.com 
Every time a pop movement gets "punk" tagged onto it. people 
eventually start asking where the "punk" went. as said movement 
heads toward the mainstream. the mall. and finally. the waste bin of 
used-up (or thoroughly absorbed) cultural movements. If there is 
truly a punk arm of steampunk. it resides in the collective of writers. 
artists. musicians, and makers that creates SteamPunk Magazine. 
First off: it's a zine. On paper! Who does that anymore? And irs 
dedicated to the kinds of anarchist. environmental. and feminist 
issues that punks are "supposed" to be all about. 
So, what does this have to do with the naive scientific romanticism. 
relro-tech gadgetry. and Victorian cosplay usually associated with 
steampunk? Every world needs ne·er·do·wells. rabble"rousers. 
street urchins. and artful dodgers. These guys have fashioned them-
selves up as the chaoticians of the steampunk world. And since 
their magazine has become something of a house organ for the 
movement. their punk is heard far and wide. 
-G8 
« End of the World As We Know It 
A Ste"mPunk"s aulde to theApoc"'ypSf! by Margaret Killjoy and Colin Fonon 
$5 or free PDF steampunkmagallne.com 
With the success of imagined meltdown futures like The Zombie 
Survival Guide and How to Survive a Robot Uprising. one might 
understand the whimsical appeal of A SteamPunk's Guide fo the 
Apocalypse. With the real meltdown of the global economy and 
a climate crisis. this book might be more practical than even its 
authors intended. 
This 56-page guide has info on everything from building satellite 
dish solar cookers. to stripping a car for survival parts. to sanitation 
and self-defense. all done while looking dandy in steampunk street 
couture. Tongue-in-cheek sci-fi silliness? Anarchist wish fulfillment? 
Real-world SUrvival guide? I don't know. but I'm st ashing a copy in 
the emergency preparedness kit just in case. 
-GB 
« Deluxe Pocketbook Disruptors 
Doctor Grwdbort·s Contrapulatronlc Dingus Dlrectol)' by C ... g Broadmore 
$13 wetanz.com/ holicslraygun-dlreclory.php 
From the loony imagination of artist and prop designer Greg 
Broadmore comes this catalog from an alternative retro-future 
where arrogant aristocrats maraud the planets. wielding ray weapons --
with names like '"The Unnatural Selector"' and "The Man Meller:' 
hunting alien big game. and warring with bug-eyed moon men. The 
steamy adventures may be fake. but the rayguns are really for sale. 
available as stunning, high-priced fantasy collectibles. 
-G8 
....... ' 173 

Unleash Your Creativity 
$300 epson.com 
Even with the help of digital imaging software, my 
graphically oriented work would never be confused 
with that prodUCed by even a fledgling artist. At 
least. that's what I thought until I tried the Epson 
Artisan 800. 
The stylish Artisan 800 is a high-definition photo 
Inkjet multifunction device that can print. scan. copy. 
and fax. The focal point is its intuitive 7.8' articulat· 
ing color touch panel that allows users to send a fax. 
change preferences. or view and edit photo previews. 
includes onboard memory card support. stand-alone 
photo editing and restoration. and the ability to save 
to PDF format I was even able to easily turn family 
images into personalized coloring book pages -
perfect for birthdays or the holidays. 
With a maximum 4.800dpi optical resolution, the 
Artisan 800 can scan up to legal-sized documents 
via il s Automatic Document Feeder (AOF) built into 
its 8.5"xll7' flatbed surface. Other image processing 
In addition to its integrated CDlDVD media tray, 
the Artisan 800 also includes a multiuse paper tray. 
It also supports direct connection to both PC and 
Mac as well as Ethernet and wi-fi connectivity. 
The Humble 
Bootjack 
Every winter morning when I go out to feed my horses. I slip off 
my indoor shoes and step into my muck boots. When I come back, 
I don't get my hands dirty pulling off muddy boots. I simply set one 
heel into my bootjack. and step on the jack with the ot her foot. With 
a quick pull. the boot is levered off my loot in a trice -
hands lree. 
Alas. the bootjack is now largely the province of the horseman. 
despite its wonderful utility for anyone who wears boots. Its decline 
is not recent. An account from "an old timer"' published in the New 
York Evening Telegram from 1890 laments: 
"I can easily recall. as I presume nearly all old men can. the time 
when the boot-jack was supreme in every household .... All labor 
was by hand: the tailor, the cobbler. the candle-maker. and all 
the rest had their assured places In the community. But the time 
was fast approaching when, with the increasing enterprise of the 
time. the boot·jack was to be dethroned .... Boots were found to 
be clumsy. stiff. uncomfortable. and heaven knows what besides. 
Shoes came into favor on every side:' 
I. for one. have not forgotten. The bootjack is an elegantly designed 
tool, applying simple principles of leverage to near'miraculous effect. 
Anyone who wears boots should own one. 
-Tim O'Reilly 
-Joseph Pasquini 
Gareth Branwyn isa contributing 
editorforMAKE. 
Collin Cllnnlngham blog5 for 
makezme.Com. 
Jeremy Jackson is a novelist and food 
writer from the faraway land of Iowa. 
Tim LllIIs is afrequentlycontribubng 
illustrator for MAKE. 
Goll Mohammadl is the associate 
m<Vl<lging editor for MAKE and CRAFT. 
Tom Owad fs a Macintosh consultant 
and editor of Applefritter (applefritter. 
com). He's the author of Apple I Replica 
Croafion. 
Tim O'Reilly is the founde!" and CEO 
of O'Reilly Media. 
Joseph Pasquini is an avid amateur 
ra,jo operator and shortwave listener. 
Robbie Pitts is an electronics hobbyist 
and tinkerer from Georgia. 
Have you used somett>ng VoQrth 
keeping in your toobox? Let us know at 
toobol<@makezlne.com. 

"Great stuff!" 
"Truly interesting." 
..... ,""', ....................................... ,"""', .......................... . 
"I find myself smiling 
throughout these episodes." 
"Quality TV IMHO." 
- Comments from makezine.tv 
............................................... MAJOR FUNDING PROVIDED BY: 
••
" ... encowaging people to play. 
d.iscover. and oeale." 
-Robert Stephens. Gee} Squad 
Founder and Chiel lnspector 
V 
PRODUCED BY: tpl 
IN "se>c,,,,o",,,, •. 
......... 
.., 
•••• •• ••••
Make: 
television 
DISTRIBUTED BY: • 
••

•

I ; r---l:' 
501.AI'1-POW~I'1~D 
A!1'1 
COMPI'1~SS~S A!1'1 
A~ PUSH~S!T 
!NTO UND~I'1-
el'1ou~ TANKS. 
HreH-PI'1~SSUI'1~ 
!S I.!K~ A 
ElArr~l'1Y. TH~ 
~N~l'1ey CAN El~ 
1'1~I.MS~D 1.AT~1'1 
TO DI'1!V~ A 
ruI'1El!N~. 
• 
, 
PI'1E'S5URE' 
5PHJ5 TH~ TURIHNE', 
WH!CH DI'1!VE'5 
GE'NE'RATOR TO 
MAKE' E'I.UTR!C!TY. 
...... , In 

HEIRLOOM TECHNOLOGY 
By Tim Anderson 
Island Tricks 
I came across some handy techniques on a recent visit to Maui. 
Here are just some of the island tricks you should know about. 
II Old Tires Boat Rack 
These are the Wailea Canoe Club's 6-person racing 
canoes (Figure A), The canoe never touches the 
ground, The paddlers pick it up in the water, carry 
it onto land, and set it on tires. 
Canoe Dolly with Golf Cart Wheels 
The Wailea Canoe Club has this slick homemade 
dolly for putting boats in and out of the water, 
Purpose-made beach wheels are expensive. 
Wheels from junk golf carts are free (Figure B). 
Homemade Wind Speed Flags 
As seen on Kite Beach, the flags are different 
lengths and possibly different weights (Figure C), 
If a flag is flying straight out, it's easy to read the 
number. That's the wind speed . If a flag is hanging 
and wagging around, there's not that much wind. 
Lazy Man's Cherry Picker 
Johnny V, the surfboard guru, has a Surinam cherry 
tree in his yard in Haiku (Figure D). Here's how you 
harvest them: put some sheets under the tree and 
let it dump cherries on them, He says, "If I don't rake 
them up every day it's like walking through a pile of 
mush, And you can't kill these things, Want some 
saplings?" He points to a forest of Surinam cherry 
tree shoots sprouting under the tree. 
Drink a Coconut 
Even very young green coconuts are full of"coconut 
water:' or coconut juice, Before I knew anything I'd 
try to open them with a hammer, a hatchet. or by 
banging them on the ground. By the time I got them 
open, all the juice had leaked out. 
Here's how to drink a coconut with a knife: 
1. Take your shirt off. Coconut juice and sap will 
stain your shirt yellowish brown. 
2_ Stab the side of the coconut This is easier 
than it sounds, especially if it's a young coco-
nut. Probably a little bit of juice will squirt out. 
since the coconut is under pressure, 
3. Make two more stabs to make a triangular 
hole, Rock the knife to connect the cuts and 
pry the plug out. 
4. Drink it. If you have a straw, use that. Other-
wise arch your back and drink it like you're in 
a commercial (Figure E). 
Digression: Coconut juice has all the electrolytes 
you need in the tropical places where coconuts 
grow, II's also sterile if iI's from a picked coconut. 
They used it in World War II as IV fluid for wounded 
soldiers or soldiers sick from the wet kind of tropical 
diseases. A coconut on the ground is probably sterile 
also, but some of them crack and go sour after they 
hit the ground, 
Prickly Pears 
It's the fruit of the prickly pear cactus, The rest of 
the cactus is edible, too, just so you know. The green 
pads are a great vegetable served raw or cooked, 
They taste kind of like a cucumber-tomato cross, 
The pears sit on top for a long time, The darker the 
color of the pear, the sweeter it is (Figure F), 
These delicious things are covered with tiny hairy 
thorns called g1ochids. You'll get them all over your-
self the first time because they're hard to see and 
you won't believe any of the following. 
Real pickill;: methcx:l: Pick them using leather gloves 
or tongs. Put them in a bucket. What I did: Pick with 
bare hands and put them in my shirt pocket. I got so 
many thorns in my chest that I had a hairy chest for 
the first time in my life, Remove all the thorns! 
Real cleaning method: Rub them with dirt or 
gravel. or put them in a chicken-plucking machine 
with a thousand pencil erasers. Wash them with 
cold water. Skin them while wearing gloves. What 

i • 
~ • 
• 
~ 
~ 
~ 
I; 
I did: Rub them on my pants so I got thorns ... my leg. 
Peel them barehanded SO I got thorns in my hands. 
Eat them so that I got thorns all around my mouth. 
Stationary Van Air Conditioner 
The aloha spint means people get to do what they 
want il it doesn·t hurt someone else. Here's a van 
With a regular house air conditioner In the back 
window (Figure G).I assume the owners were living 
In the van in a hot part of the islalld and had access 
to an extension cord. SO they came up With this 
improvised source 01 cool. 
Pandanus Key Paintbrushes 
The pandanus tree has many uses. Hawaiians 
made sails and sleeping mats by braiding the 
leaves. The fruit IS a big thing that looks sort of 
like a giant pineapple. It comes apart into sections 
called keys. Chew on the orange part and suck the 
iuice. ex pound them and wring out the juice to 
dry into a sort of frUit leather. It tastes like mango/ 
cantaloupe. 
The old fruits make good paintbrushes. I especially 
like them lor epoxy glue. I feel bad about throwing 
away a commercial brush every time I glue some· 
thing. 1 pICked up a bunch of old keys under a tree 
In Lahaina. Rub them on a wire brush to soften up 
the bristles and dislodge any loose ones. The best 
paintbrushes come from keys that get beaten by 
the surf and then wash up. Watch out fOf sand that 
comes out of the inner part of the key. 
Surfboard Shaper Art 
Here·s a nifty chair made from an old Windsurfing 
board and boom (figure H). Seen outSide the Ding 
King surfboard factory in Kahului. it was probably 
made by Mark ··Euroman" Raaphorst. 
Flower Pot From an Old Tire 
Cut the sidewall ofl a tire in a zigzag pattern. Turn 
the tire inside out. You·1I get a graceful vase shape 
(Figure 1).11 you leave the tire mounted on the 
rim. the rim becomes a pedestal for thevase. That 
makes the vase even more graceful. and the cut·off 
chunk of Sidewall acids to the ornate base. 
~ a More Island tricks: mallezme.com/17/helrloom 
i 
Tim Anderson (mot .edllrobot) is the founder of Z Corp. 
See a IuIdred fR)O"e d hI$ PfOIKI$ at ~.com. 
_
179 

............................................................................................................................................. , 
............. , ...................................................................... , ........................................ ..... ........ . 
.. . 
.... 
MAKER'S CALENDAR 
Compiled byWilliam Gurstelle 
Our favorite events from 
around the world . 
...... ................ ... ...................... ...... ...... ...................... ... ...... ...................... ... ... ... ... ....... ...... ... . 
.............................................. , ..... , .................................................... , ........... , .................. , ... . 
.. '. 
100 Hours of Astronomy •••• ~ 
ApriI2-S. worldwide 
100 Hours of Astronomy is a United Nations-
sponsored event consisting of a series of live 
webcasts and astronomical observing events. 
It coincides with the 400th anniversary of 
Galileo's first astronomical observations with 
a telescope. l 00hoursofastronomy.org 
» MARCH 
» RobotChallenge 
March 21, Vienna,Austria 
Irs one of the biggest competi ' 
tions in Europe for autonomous 
and mobile robots. Challenges 
include line following. bipedal 
motion. robot sumo. and free· 
style robot creations. 
robotchallenge.atlen 
» Discovery Week 
March 23-Apr~ 3.San Diego,Calif. 
San Diego's first-ever science 
festival. Scientists will visit local 
schools; companies and universi-
ties will open their labs for tours 
and exhibits: and the Science 
Expo will take place in Balboa 
Park. sdsciencefestival.com 
180 ...... :VWmov 
» APRIL 
« Catapults of Chateau des 
Baux-de-Provence 
ApriI1-Sept. 30. Aries, France 
Three full·scale replicas of 
medieval siege warfare machines 
demonstrate power and grace, 
certain to inspire mechanically 
minded makers to conceive 
their own hurling projects. 
makezine.com/golchateau 
» LU",lr Reconnaissance 
Orbiter Launch 
April 24. Cape Canavt!ral. Fla. 
This launch is the first mission 
in the U.S. Vision of Space Explo· 
ration program, which aims to 
return astronauts to the moon. 
build a lunar outpost. and press 
on to Mars. nasa.gov/missions/ 
high lights/ schedule.html 
» Boston Cyberarts Festival 
April 24-May 10, Boston. Mass. 
One of the largest collaborations 
of electronic and computer-
based artists in North America. 
Techno/artistic events encom' 
pass the visual arts. electronic 
music, dance, and more. 
bost oncyberarts.org 
» MAY 
» 40th Annual Kinetic Grand 
Championship Race 
May 24-26.Arcata. Calif. 
This "triathlon of the art world" 
takes place when human· 
powered kinetic racers tackle a 
3D-plus-mile course of pavement. 
mUd, sand. and water. These 
vehicles are also elaborate works 
of art. kineticuniYefSe.com 
» Maker Faire 
May30-3L San Mateo. Calif. 
Our very own Maker Faire is 
a family·friendly event for 
creative, resourceful people of 
all ages and backgrounds who 
like to tinker and love to make 
things. In other words, it's for 
people Ii ke you. rna kerlai re.com 
IMPORTANT: All times, dates, Iocalioros, 
and I!W!nb are subject In change. Ver~y att 
informati(M'l belom making ptaros to "'tend. 
Know an e.-ent that should be included? 
$end it to evenlsCmakez.ine.eom. 
Sorry. it's not possible to list all 
submirted events in the magazine. 
but they will be listed online. 
If you attend one of these events please 
tel us about 1/ at forurrn;.makezine.c;om. 
~ , 
• t 
• 

MAKE MONEY Chess Set By Tom Parker 
Sometimes it costs more to buy it than to make it from the money itself • 
$4.99 
Cardboard and 
plastic chess set 
from toy store 
... $3.52 
Exchange value of coins 
used as chessmen plus 
$2 for wood and paint 
CHANGE YOU CAN CHECKMATE: 
A: 19605 Japan 5 yen (8) 
B: 1943 Malaya I cent (2) 
C: 1991 Myanmar 25 pyas (2) 
0: 1984 Tanzania 10 senti (2) 
E: 1917 Great Britain I penny (1) 
F: 1967 Great Brita;n 1 penny (1) 
G: 1965 FIJI I penny (8) 
H: 1994 Aruba 50 cents (2) 
I: 1988 India 20 paise (2) 
J: 1970 Rwanda 2 francs (2) 
K: 1939 Great Britain half crown (1) 
l: 1889 Creat BriUan Victorian double florin (1) 
_
181 

RETROSPECT 
By George Dyson 
Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata 
I parked my car at the airport in Seattle. Wash .. and rented a car in Oakland. Calif.. 
after a two-hour flight It cost more to park myoid car than to rent a new one. Have 
machines fmally become less expensive than the space they fill? 
II Because airport parking is always scarce and 
cars are rented below cost on weekends. this is not 
a fair comparison. But the decline in the relative 
cost of machines versus the costs of space and 
people is real. Machines are being manufactured 
less and less by people. and more and more by 
other machines. 
The current economic crisis, like a minus tide 
during a December full moon. is exposing human 
misunderstanding and misbehavior that normal 
water levels have concealed. And there is now no 
concealing that something new isgoing on in the 
world of machines. We are facing the first economic 
downturn to include free cellphones. more automo-
biles than we have room for. and computers that 
cost less than a dinner at a good restaurant yet run 
at billions of cycles per second for years. 
One reason things look so bad is that we measure 
our economy in money. not in things. In an era of 
increasingly self· reproducing goods, we can suffer 
a declining economy while still producing more 
stuff than people can consume. There is a growing 
imbalance between the cost of people and the cost 
of machines. What prices are rising the fastest? 
Health care -
the cost of maintaining human beings. 
What prices are dropping fastest? Computing -
exponentially driving down the cost of information 
that increasingly governs the cost of new machines. 
The 5 kilobytes of random-access Williams tube 
memory that spawned the digital universe (see MAKE, 
Volume 10. page 178) cost roughly $100.000 in 1947 
dollars. Today. the equivalent costs one·hundredth 
of 1 cent -
and it cycles at 1.000 times the speed. 
Similar cost reductions have occurred across the 
technological landscape. from operating systems to 
search engines to numerically controlled machine 
tools. Like rental cars at airports on weekends. prod-
ucts are being sold at nominal cost simply to make 
182 "".o: ~ll 
room for the new products that are about to appear. 
"Why may we not say that all Automata (Engines 
that move themselves by springs and wheeles as 
doth a watch) have an artificialilifeT asked Thomas 
Hobbes on the first page of Leviathan in 1651. Hobbes 
believed that the human commonwealth. given 
collective substance by the power of its institutions 
and the ingenuity of its machines, would coalesce to 
form that Leviathan described in the Old Testament, 
when the Lord. speaking to Job out of the whirlwind, 
had warned. "Upon earth there is not his like. who is 
made without fear." 
Leviathan suggested that an artificial intelligence 
would come to occupy the vacuum between the 
supreme intelligence of God and the earthly 
intelligence of humankind; Hobbes a\lOided being 
condemned to death for heresy only through his 
friendship with King Charles II. who awarded him a 
small pension and protection against his enemies, 
describing him as "a bear. against whom the Church 
played their young dogs. in order to exercise them ." 
The era of digital computation that Hobbes pre-
dicted is now upon us. yet there is still an element 
of heresy to saying that Nature might grant life or 
intelligence to machines. Computers will only do 
what people program them to do! And machines 
do not self-reproduce! Only heretics disagree. 
"Surely if a machine is able to reproduce another 
machine systematically, we may say that it has a 
reproductive system: wrote Samuel Butler, author 
of the 1853 essay "Darwin Among the Machines."' 
"And how few of the machines are there which 
have not been produced systematically by other 
machines? Each one of ourselves has sprung from 
minute animalcules whose entity was entirely 
distinct from our own. and which acted after their 
kind with no thought Of heed of what we might think 
about it These little creatures are part of our own 

In an era of increasingly self-
reproducing goods, we can suffer 
a declining economy while still 
producing more stuff than people 
can consume. 
reproductive system: then why not we part of that 
of the machines?" 
Butler's essay was written by candlelight in a 
remote sheep station at the headwaters of the 
Rangitata River in southern New Zealand. where he 
had emigrated in 1859. as far from his disapproving 
father as he could get. Though taken by some as a 
spoof on Darwin'S Origin of Species. Butler's argu-
ment was not against Darwin. but beyond Darwin. 
"As the vegetable kingdom was slowly developed 
from the mineral. and as in like manner the animal 
supervened upon the vegetable. so now in these 
last few ages an entirely new kingdom has sprung 
up. of which we as yet have only seen what will one 
day be considered the antediluvian prototypes of 
the race." argued Butler. "As some of the lowest of 
the vertebrata attained a far greater size than has 
descended to their more highly organized living rep· 
resentatives. so a diminution in the size of machines 
has often attended their development and progress. 
... It appears to us that we are ourselves creating our 
own successors ... giving them greater power and 
supplying by all sorts of ingenious contrivance that 
self·regulating. self-acting power which will be to 
them what intellect has been to the human race:' 
Eighty-eight years later. John von Neumann and 
Stanislaw Ulam began collaborating on an ambi· 
tious Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata that 
would encompass living. nonliving. and about-to-
become-living machines. "An organism (any reason 
to be afraid of this term yet?) is a universal automa-
ton which produces other automata like it in space 
which is inert or only'randomly activated' around 
it;· explained Ulam. reporting on a conversation with 
von Neumann that took place on a bench in Central 
Park in early November 1952. 
Fifty-six years after that. the unbounded digital 
universe that Ulam and von Neumann had imagined 
as a mathematical abstraction actually exists. We 
are surrounded by codes (some Turing-universal) 
that make copies of themselves, and by physical 
machines that spawn virtual machines that in turn 
spawn demand for more physical machines. Some 
of these digital sequences code for spreadsheets. for 
music, for operating systems. or for sprawling. meta-
zoan search engines. Other digital sequences code 
for proteins. or for a helical gear that is itself part of 
a numerically controlled gear-cutting machine. 
Steam engines have gone extinct. microprocessors 
roam the Earth. and technology is now translating 
freely, in both directions, between strings of digital 
code and strings of DNA. Were Butler alive today . 
he might ask: Are we uSing digital computers to 
sequence. store. and better replicate our own 
genetic code. or are digital computers optimizing 
our genetic code so that we can do a better job of 
replicating them? 
In an age of self-reproducing machines. why 
should people keep making things? Is it simply 
because with so many things to consume. there are 
no longer enough things to do? All those machines 
that are collectively becoming so skilled at making 
other machines. will one day. perhaps when we least 
expect i\.learn to make human beings. We human 
beings need to remember how to make machines. 
George Dyson. a kayak designer and historian of tedlnology. 
is the author of Bdidarka.Proiect Orion. and Darwin Among 
file Machjnes: The EvolutionofGloballntel!~nce, 
II .... : 183 



Make It Yourself 
with a tabletop machine shop 
W
hen kit or stock parts are unavailable or 
not good enough, machine exactly the 
slllall parts you iIeed ill any material. Sherline 
tools make it possible. TIle results are limited 
only by size, 110\ by your imagmalion. Call 
for a free catalog or visit our web site. 
JlIS b.o<UIiw Rieg< • 1'"", • CA 92011 
PI .. 711J.n7·""'1 • F ••. llt1J.n u w 
E· ... ~ !htdioo@l.Wli"u "", 
o.-w .... den, www,ShooiiMDi..a. .... 
www.Sherline.com/800.541.0735 
A T 
N 
Thousands of Electronic Parts 
Available Today! 
LEOS· CONNECTORS 
RELAYS· SOLENOIDS· FANS 
ENCLOSURES· MOTORS 
WHEELS . MAGNETS 
POWER SUPPLIES· PC BOARDS 
SWITCHES· LIGHTS· 
I 
and many more items .... 
next 
www.pllelectronics.coR.) 
You fix it. 
$5oftcoopon I 
MAKEFIXMAC 
We make it easy. 
Parts & Upgrades for iPhone, iPod, and Macs. 
We save you rn:>Oey by ~ 
you repaor 
your Mac or !Pod yourse,'I 
i lixit 
. instructions 

BUILT FROM PLANS! 
Instantly download plans for 
recumbent bikes, trikes, choppers 
lowracers, quadcycles, scooters 
electric vehicles and many more! 
www.AtomicZombie.com 
Precision 
CNC 
Tor ....... h 
PCNC11DD 
F_ur •• , 
• Tabi< "'" 
3,,' x95" 
., 
. ~ 
:;;;::., .--
~~ -
~-
. ~= 
~~ 
~ 
3 A><I. Mill 
Product In","",,<lon and 
.,.,llne ordorlnlr 01 
www.tormach.com 

PIC® Microcontrollers 
starting under $51 
Use PIC MCUs for; 
Motor Control. USB 
Peripherals, 
Ethernet ApplicncfiS, 
Serial 
Communication. Home Automation, Dolo 
Logging, Remole Control, Robot Brains, 
Movie Props and ~I:s. Au1onomous lf9hic/oo, 
Engine Control Units, and infinitely more. 
m&lobs U2 Progromm&r for PIC MCUs 
Package:; 'rom $89.95/0 $144.95 
me/abs also offen: BASIC Compilers, Experimenter 
Boards. Protolyp/ng Boards. Programmers, Serial 
Displays. Books, Example Programs, free Resoorces 
Gi.lItLF.MAN'S EMPORIUM 
Allt/llmtic Period Clothillg 
for a Brfter Tomorrow 
Victorian & Steampunk Clothing 
www.geollemaosempo.inm.com 
cc~ 
F", ..,.... wrono'"", pi ..... ".11 
http 'aDU ~ 
«In "",bbop>.]0Q9 
Desktop CNC Tools 
~ 
CNC La thes 
and Mills 
CNC Routers 
II 
, 1. 
Olfering ... 11,,· . ... (0' """h," i<., d .... gn 
d« o ... 'I.-.. "nd . " , .. ,< ' ppli<a' lo>n. 
IMService 
P.O. 8 0):; 142, New Hudson, Ml 48 165 
Voice: 888-451-1670 
or: 248-486-3600 
• ImSrV.Com 

Advertise 
Here 
Make: 
technology on your time 
makezine.com 
contact: sheena@oreilly.com 

---
Make: MINlmarketplace 
GOODS 
Make Synthesizers Like Grandpa Old! 
Artisanal Electronic SourJd. Synthesizer 
Kits, Vacuum Tube.Analog Controllers. 
Goods Made withVinlage Parts. Hand-
made in N.M. eleclricwestern.com 
Adafruit Industries.: Electronics Kits 
i 
I. 
Re-MAKE America! 
Vis'ttlle Maker Shed for the latest in 
DIY kits. books, T-shirts. and Jl1O!"e. Help 
shape the ne~t generations of risk-takers. 
doers. and Makers. makershed.com 
Backyard Ballistics 
Bui'd potato carnons. Orei"""ti fire kites. 
paper match ro.::kets. tennis ball mortars. 
aod more! backyard-balhst>C$.COlTl 
Outside Images Photography 
Manne -t adventure sports photography. 
When you were a kkl you took things 
apart just to see what's inside. arod some-
bmes )<lumanaged !oPU! it all back 
together, Don't stop playing and tinkering 
Of else )':Xl"1I grow up. crabtu.com 
illustration and Design Services 
Do your talents liee5ewhere. butyoo need 
somecoe wililihe same atteolion to detail 
that yoo'OJe B'ven the other aspects of you-
project? narwha I:::reat .... e.com 
Custom Wood/Furniture Fabrications 

AHA! 
Puzzle This By Michael H. Pryor 
MAKE's favorite puzzles. (When you're ready to check your ans_rs. visit makezine.coml17/aha.) 
"Einstein's Riddle" 
• 
• • Wo 
• • • 
It's rumored that Albert Einstein made up this logic 
puzzle and that he claimed that 98% of the popula-
tion could not solve it. Are you among the 2%? 
There are 5 houses, each of a different color. Each 
of their owners has a unique heritage, drinks a 
certain type of beverage, smokes a certain brand of 
cigarette. and keeps a certain variety of pet. None of 
the owners have the same variety of pet. smoke the 
same brand of cigarette, or drink the same beverage. 
• The Brit lives in the red house. 
• The Swede keeps dogs as pets. 
• The Dane drinks tea. 
• Looking from the front. the green house is just 
to the left of the while house. 
• The green house's owner drinks coffee. 
• The person who smokes Pall Malls raises birds. 
• The owner of the yellow house smokes Dunhills. 
• The owner of the center house drinks milk. 
• The Norwegian lives in the leftmost house. 
• The owner who smokes Blends lives next to the 
one who keeps cats. 
• The owner who keeps a horse lives next to the 
one who smokes Dunhills. 
• The owner who smokes Blue Masters also 
drinks beer. 
• The German smokes Princes. 
• The Norwegian lives next to the blue house. 
• The owner who smokes Blends has a neighbor 
who drinks water. 
Who owns the pet fish? 
Michael Pryor is the «HOUnder and president 01 Fog Creek Software. He runs a technocal inter.iew site at techllterv;ew.<Xi. 
II .... : 191 

HOMEBREW 
My Own Arduino Espresso Machine 
By Timothy Hirzel 

42W Subminiature Audio Amp 
lo1n-1 Multifunction Solder I.oab 
The handiest item lor your bench! 
Includes a RoHS compliant temp oon-
trolled solde<ing station, digital mu~i­
meter, and a regulated lab pO'Ner sup-
ply! All in one small unit lor your bench! It can't be beat! 
LABI U 
1-ln-lMultifundton Solder lab 


