
Additional Praise for Making Rain
Andrew Sobel cuts through the self-imposed complexity of our business
culture with a powerful approach to building client relationships that is re-
freshingly straightforward, practical, and critically important to everyone.
Tom Taggart, Managing Director, Barclays Global Investors
Making Rain truly captures the essence of what it takes to develop a bond
of trust and become a successful client advisor. Full of insight and practical
strategies, it’s a must read that I have recommended to all of my colleagues.
Robin Bidwell, Chairman, Energy Resources Management
The art of selling and relationship building is truly elevated by Andrew
Sobel’s powerful science. Readers enlightened by Making Rain will eat
their competitors for breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
Mike Mulica, Senior Vice President,
Customer Field Operations, Openwave Systems
Andrew Sobel can make rain in the desert. Read this book and bring an
umbrella.
Alan Weiss, PhD, author, The Ultimate Consultant and
Million Dollar Consulting
Reading Making Rain feels like sitting in first class at 30,000 feet, drink
in hand, listening to a war-horse senior partner coaching us on how to
manage the most critical aspect of any professional’s career-creating and
sustaining successful client relationships. 
Bob Frisch, Managing Partner, Accenture
In this new era of professional sales, the ideas in Making Rain are pure
gold. Andrew Sobel does a beautiful job of showing how to deliver real
value to clients and customers and build long-term loyalty within a frame-
work integrity, trust, and value-added.
Wesley Cantrell, former Chairman and CEO,
Lanier Worldwide
Andrew Sobel’s Making Rain gives valuable insights into the process of
creating client loyalty. Anyone interested in having long-term, profitable
relationships with key customers will benefit from this book.
Paul Danos, Dean, Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
Andrew Sobel is the unequivocal master of building client relationships.
He takes us to the next level of consultative selling with this brilliant

follow-up to his highly successful Clients for Life. In Making Rain, Sobel
provides insightful, and sometimes humorous, anecdotal examples for how
to ally yourself with your clients and sustain lifelong relationships that cre-
ate multiple business opportunities.
Alan LaFreniere, President and CEO, DCI Marketing, Inc.
Andrew Sobel understands better than anyone how to add value and cre-
ate true magic in client relationships. Making Rain lays out, step by step,
the principles and strategies that separate great client advisors from the av-
erage professional. It should be a textbook for anyone working in profes-
sional services or account management.
Connie Connors, Chief Executive, Connors Communications
Making Rain picks up where Clients for Life left off, and it’s equally bril-
liant. Andrew Sobel once again demystifies the path to lifelong client loy-
alty, providing detailed strategies and tactics that you can adopt immediately.
Our organization has with great success grabbed onto his principles, which
are as natural and eternal as the laws of thermodynamics.
Doug McKeowan, Senior Vice President, Woodard and Curran
Making Rain is a bible on how to build client loyalty, and it’s filled with
insight, wisdom, and exciting stories. Developing lifelong loyalty is a life-
long challenge, and rather than pushing a simplistic formula, Andrew Sobel
provides us with a variety of powerful and practical strategies to achieve it.
James Kelly, former Chairman, Gemini Consulting,
and author, Transforming the Organization
Andrew Sobel says that Making Rain will help you keep your clients for
the long term, and he delivers on every page. It’s an extraordinary book, and
I found myself underlining and writing in the margin of every page. Clients
for Life was great, but this is even better. Making Rain will be a classic in
the field.
Jerold Panas, Executive Partner, Jerold Panas, Linzy & Partners,
and author of Mega Gifts and Boardroom Verities
This subversive book speaks brilliantly to business professionals about de-
veloping client relationships, and it sets superlative standards of excellence.
It also gives clients themselves the secret codes of consultant candor, bold-
ness, and selflessness with which to design consulting relationships.
John E. Balkcom, President, St. John’s College

MAKING
RAIN
The Secrets of
Building Lifelong
Client Loyalty
Andrew Sobel
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

To Mary Jane, Christopher, Elizabeth, and Emma:
Thanks for the love and laughter.
Cartoons were created by Elizabeth E. Sobel.
Copyright © 2003 by Andrew Sobel. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or
otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance
Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4744.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, e-mail: permcoordinator@wiley.com.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may
be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. The publisher is not
engaged in rendering professional services, and you should consult a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential,
or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993, or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley
products, visit our Web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Sobel, Andrew, 1955–
Making rain : the secrets of building lifelong client loyalty / Andrew Sobel.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and indes.
ISBN 0-471-26459-8 (alk. paper)
1. Customer loyalty.
2. Business consultants.
I. Title.
HF5415.525.S63
2002
658.8′12—dc21
2002013643
Printed in the United States of America.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

v
Acknowledgments
Making Rain is based on six years of research into the ingredients
of enduring client loyalty and the strategies that the most success-
ful professionals employ to establish long-term, advisory relation-
ships with their clients. This research has included a large number
of interviews with senior corporate executives and individual
clients, including over 50 CEOs, about the most valuable profes-
sionals they work with. In addition to conducting an extensive in-
vestigation into great historical advisors, I have interviewed some
of the most prominent living client advisors, and during my work-
shops also collected the perspectives of thousands of professionals
from a variety of fields. I cannot list all of these individuals here, but
without their invaluable insight and counsel I could not possibly
have written this book.
One of the five “Cs” of relationship capital stands for com-
panions—friends and family who nourish your emotional and
spiritual side. In the preparation of this book, my family did that
and far more. Sitting around one evening with my wife, Mary
Jane, and our three children, I proposed my initial idea for a sec-
ond book on relationship building and asked everyone what they
thought. Over the course of the next hour, they made a series of
excellent suggestions about its focus and format, and what you see
in front of you shares much with the concept that emerged dur-
ing that family brainstorm—for example, a book with many short
chapters and humorous illustrations. Then, my family tolerated
with good humor the many weekends and evenings I stole from

vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
them to actually write Making Rain. Thank you, Mary Jane,
Chris, Elizabeth, and Emma.
When I asked my agent, Helen Rees, what an appropriate in-
terval between books should be, her Zen-like response was, “It’s
time for another book when you have one in you that has to get
written.” Whether she knew it or not, this is called empowerment.
Suddenly the next book was up to me, and I was no longer at the
mercy of someone else’s timetable! A brilliant catalyst, Helen found
the perfect editor, Matt Holt, at John Wiley & Sons. Editors are
supposed to be gruff and peremptory, but Matt is anything but
those things. Supportive, enthusiastic, and creative, he takes time to
work with his authors. Pat Wright—technically a freelance editor,
but I prefer to call him a book advisor—was, as usual, brilliant at
sharpening my writing and ideas. Thank you also to Elizabeth
Eaton, who created the elegant graphics that you see in these chap-
ters. Finally, thank you to my teenage daughter, Elizabeth Sobel,
who drew the cartoons for Making Rain. She is a graceful and pre-
cocious artist whose work has already been featured in a number of
exhibitions and publications. As we put these drawings together,
we shared more than a few moments of late-night laughter.

vii
Contents
Introduction: Learning to Make Rain All
of the Time
ix
P A R T O N E
Breaking Through as an Expert
1
The Loyalty Equation: Three Factors That
Determine Your Client’s Loyalty
3
2
Are You an Extraordinary Advisor? 
12
3
Breakthrough Strategies for Experts
21
4
Building Trust in the First Ten Minutes
28
5
More Important than Your 401(k): Building
Your Relationship Capital
34
6
Benjamin Franklin’s Secret Weapon
42
7
Why a Client Might Like You
47
8
The Myth of Meeting Client Expectations
55
9
Leonardo da Vinci: Why Lutes and
Madonnas Matter
60
10
Finding the Hidden Creases: Influencing
Your Clients
68
Part One Summary: Are You Breaking Through as
an Expert? 
77
P A R T T W O
Moving into the Inner Circle
11
I Love My Guru . . . and Other Client Pitfalls
81
12
The Relationship Masters
85
13
The Doubting Mind
90
14
The Deep Generalist and the Branded Expert
96

viii
CONTENTS
15
How to Identify Client Needs
102
16
The Power of Size: Developing Large, 
Multi-Year Client Relationships
111
17
The Right Foot: Four Ways to Start a
Relationship and Position It for the Long Term
116
18
Five Ways to Grow Your Client Relationships
124
19
Are Clients Meeting Your Expectations? 
133
Part Two Summary: Are You Moving into 
the Inner Circle? 
139
P A R T T H R E E
Sustaining Relationships Year after Year
20
Sustaining and Multiplying
143
21
Merlin: Working a Little Magic with Your Clients
151
22
Five Steps to New Business with Old Clients
156
23
The Rothschild Bankers: The Power of
Unique Capabilities
166
24
Cultivating the Attitude of Independent Wealth
173
25
Managing Client Relationships during
Uncertain Times
178
26
Developing Relationships with Foreign Clients:
Try Not to Commit These Gaffes
187
27
Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain: How
Great Organizations Build Clients for Life
195
Part Three Summary: Are You Sustaining Your
Relationships Year after Year? 
209
P A R T F O U R
Getting Started: A Self-Assessment
28
Do You Have the Ability to Make Rain?
Two Assessment Tools for Individuals and
Organizations
213
A Pantheon of Client Advisors
217
Notes
223
Index
229

ix
Introduction:
Learning to
Make Rain
All of the Time
Some years ago, I was subjected to a withering interrogation by the
director of procurement for one of the world’s largest telecommuni-
cations companies. After months of grueling effort, I led a large team
that had beaten out five other firms for a high-profile, multimillion-
dollar consulting project. Now, sitting in a cramped, stuffy room, the
client was cutting and slashing my out-of-pocket expense budget.
“I’m going to allocate one long-distance phone call a week per
team member,” the procurement head snarled.
“But they have families,” I protested.
“They can write letters home,” he snapped back.
This was looking less and less like the sale of the year—I was
going to be a hero at my firm—and more and more like a farm
prison for white-collar criminals.
A few months later, an old client of mine—the CEO of a finan-
cial services company—called me at home. “Andrew, I know this is

x
INTRODUCTION
short notice,” he said, “but I’m getting my top team together next
month, and I really need your help. Can you squeeze this in? I want
you to lead us through a complete re-think of our strategy.” No
questions about my fees—he knew he would get great value.
No need to explain my methodology—he knew how effective my
approach was. And no limitations on my phone calls home.
Isn’t that the way it’s supposed to be?
It turns out that even the most talented professionals periodically
feel the wrath of the procurement director-from-hell who once tor-
mented me. In the course of my consulting work and during the
workshops I conduct with a wide variety of professionals, I con-
stantly hear about the pressure to reduce fees and cut prices. I’m
frequently asked why some professionals get a steady stream of
phone calls from old clients ready to buy while others scramble to
find the next scrap of work. How, my audiences wonder, do you
break into a client’s inner circle of advisors?
In truth, we’d all like to be viewed by clients as an invaluable
resource rather than a vendor who’s barely on the radar screen. We’d
all like to keep our clients for the long term. So if that’s your goal,
read on—you’re in the right place. In this book, you’ll learn how
to break into your clients’ inner circle—their brain trust—and how
to reposition yourself as a client advisor rather than an expert for
hire. You’ll learn how to develop the attributes, attitudes, and
strategies that enable you to consistently add value and build trusted
personal relationships. The reward—not in every case, but in most
cases—will be lifelong client loyalty.
Clients View Many Professionals as Commodities
Ten or fifteen years ago, clients lacked basic market and pricing in-
formation, and the sales and delivery of most sophisticated products
and services required a great deal of client contact. Today, with the
click of a mouse, clients can learn practically everything about you
and your services, and in some businesses force you to bid in a face-
less electronic auction. With another mouse click, they can switch

Introduction
xi
suppliers. Furthermore, the information and expertise once deliv-
ered by professionals are being stripped away and made available to
clients in a variety of digital media and expert software, just as the
New York Times’ content has been separated from its original paper
medium. Less personal contact is required to deliver services to
clients, making it harder to differentiate yourself.
To make things worse, clients today have less time available to
spend with outside professionals and salespeople. If you want to
meet with a client, you are now competing with hours of internal
meetings, several hundred daily e-mails, an overflowing voice mail-
box, and half-a-dozen projects that have to be finished in the next
few weeks. Some clients—often to their detriment—want to make
decisions and choices based on an e-mail or brief written analysis,
with none of the rich context and insight that a skilled outsider can
bring during a face-to-face meeting.
When auditing is automated and requires little client contact,
how does a partner with a large accounting firm add value? When
90 percent of Cisco’s new orders are placed on its Web site, what’s
the role of its salespeople? If your distinguishing characteristic is
that you’re an expert in something, how do you separate yourself
out from the inevitable 10 other experts who are ready to take your
place, perhaps for a lower fee? The answer is: Add more value, build
deeper, more personal relationships with your clients, and go the
extra mile for them. Making Rain is about how to do these things.
The Value of Making Rain All the Time
In Native American tribes, a rainmaker was someone who could
end a drought and make it rain. A rainmaker in our business cul-
ture, analogously, snags the big clients and closes the big deals.
This magician may come into a stalled sale—a revenue drought,
so to speak—and secure the contract while mere mortals stand by
and watch.
Would that every corporation, law firm, or political party had
one. But such rainmakers are few and far between. Many people feel

xii
INTRODUCTION
they are born, not made, and it’s not clear that there are identifi-
able commonalities from one rainmaker to the next, making it dif-
ficult to systematically develop more of them. The author of one
book about rainmakers, in fact, admits that after studying hundreds
of rainmakers, it appears that they come in all shapes and sizes and
employ quite different strategies to reach their goals.1
Moreover, they tend to be very individualistic, even at times
dysfunctional—they can be demanding and disruptive within or-
ganizations that increasingly rely on teamwork to succeed. In addi-
tion, many rainmakers like to make the sale and then move on,
rather than sticking with a client for the long term, a strategy that
today often brings accusations of “bait and switch” from clients.
Today’s sophisticated clients demand value-added from the very
first meeting, and it’s hard to deliver this value if you’re not highly
conversant about the client’s company and his industry. Under the
old in-and-out rainmaker model, this type of knowledge is hard to
accumulate.
So hire rainmakers when you can find them . . . but then
what? What about your average professionals? What would the
impact be of raising everyone’s ability to add value and create loy-
alty by, say 30 percent, versus building a business around a few
hard-to-manage top guns? The former strategy is both possible
and far more likely to succeed.
This book offers a better, more sustainable solution to ending
revenue droughts: Making rain week in and week out. You may not
get a huge thunderstorm every day, but you will get a steady driz-
zle that will amply sustain you and create the foundation for great
personal and firm success. To illustrate, I offer the following story.
The Tortoise and the Hare
At a consulting firm in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where I began
work after graduating from business school, I met William Wal-
lace, a low-key, soft-spoken, and amiable young associate. He
seemed to lack, however, the edge that characterized many of the

Introduction
xiii
young MBAs at the firm. Although it was easy to be his friend, I
sometimes wondered if he had enough drive and ambition to make
it in consulting. As the years passed, William did well, but not as
well as some. He was always promoted a year after everyone else,
and at firm-wide meetings he had a very low profile. Some got on
the fast track to partner, but it took William longer to reach that
milestone. Almost unseen to the rest of us, however, he was quietly
adding value, building trust, and going the extra mile—and in the
process cultivating an intensely loyal base of clients.
Five years later, we merged with another consulting firm. In
contrast to my own firm, our merger partner had assiduously culti-
vated a cadre of “rainmakers”—professional business developers who
were their front-line shock troops for procuring new clients. I fol-
lowed, in particular, the career of one of them—a fellow I will call
John. He was a hero in the acquiring firm, always bringing home the
bacon. When his office was short on sales, they would make sure he
was on the road, knocking on doors and getting the orders.
In the meantime, my old friend William began coming into his
own. Over the years, he had cultivated several large telecommuni-
cations clients, and as the industry deregulated, they needed help—
big help. Suddenly, William was bringing in millions of dollars
worth of work each year. Then one year, it was tens of millions.
The firm made him the head of its telecommunications group,
which became the fastest growing part of the business. William soon
eclipsed most of us in responsibility and prestige within the firm. He
and John, the apparent rainmaker, were running neck-in-neck.
As the consulting business became more competitive, clients de-
manded deep industry and functional knowledge. John began to fal-
ter—he was not very conversant in the actual business issues that his
potential clients faced, and he had little industry understanding. His
strengths were a strong, outgoing personality, a good understanding
of the selling process, and a great golf game. One year he played a
desperate gambit: In November, just before bonuses were allocated
for the year, he called in to say he had just sold a project worth tens

xiv
INTRODUCTION
of millions of dollars. We were astonished—was it possible? No one
had procured such a large piece of work before. Later we learned that
it was a “conceptual sale” that never really materialized!
Meanwhile, William had been so successful—his group, with its
thoroughly loyal clients, was practically pulling the whole organiza-
tion along—that he was named chief operating officer of the entire
company. As William’s star rose, however, John’s grew dimmer.
To help salvage John’s career, William asked John to call on
some former clients of the telecommunications group. Surely, under
the auspices of this large and successful practice, he would regain his
former glory as a rainmaker. He sent John to visit an old client, a
top executive at a $20 billion company, to see if he could use some
of his old “juju” to reinvigorate the relationship. A few days later
William got an angry phone call from the executive. “Next time,”
he said, “don’t send the golf pro! This guy knows nothing about
my business.”
William, the tortoise at the start of our careers, had outrun
John, the hare—and most of the rest of us as well! He did it based
on making rain, regularly, with his clients. Not surprisingly, the
same relationship-building skills that enabled William to create
long-term client loyalty also served him well in building employee
loyalty within his firm.
In today’s markets, you win by assiduously building personal
relationships with clients, being willing to stick with them over the
long term, and adding value every step of the way. Golf and lunch
are nice, but they no longer represent real value to clients—they
can get these from anyone.
What follows are 28 succinct chapters filled with ideas, tools,
techniques, and examples that will help you become an extraordi-
nary advisor who earns long-term loyalty. You’ll read about success-
ful modern professionals as well as a number of famous historical
figures, such as the Rothschild bankers and Benjamin Franklin, who
excelled as advisors and who were masters at building what I call re-
lationship capital. You’ll hear from a variety of clients as they talk

Introduction
xv
about what they look for in outside professionals. In the last chap-
ter, you will find an assessment framework for both individuals
and companies. These assessment tools, which I’ve developed in
conjunction with a leading authority in the field of assessment de-
sign, will help you gain an immediate understanding of your own
strengths and weaknesses at building long-term client loyalty. The
assessments themselves can be found on my Web site, www
.andrewsobel.com. They are available at no charge to readers, and
you can go there either before or after reading this book.
If you’ve read my first book on this subject, Clients for Life:
Evolving from an Expert for Hire to an Extraordinary Advisor,
you’ll find most of this material brand new but very complemen-
tary. Clients for Life sets out the seven attributes that enable you
to evolve from an expert for hire to a trusted advisor—the “what,”
so to speak, of building long-term loyalty. Making Rain shows you
the “how.” It illustrates how to apply the principles in Clients for
Life to every aspect of developing and managing client relation-
ships. It also introduces a number of new concepts, such as the Loy-
alty Equation (Chapter 1); Relationship Capital (Chapter 5);
Relationship Growth Strategies (Chapters 16 through 18); and a
framework for creating an entire firm that is able to systematically
build lifelong client loyalty (Chapter 27).
The chapters are grouped into three sections, one for each of the
basic stages that we all go through as our roles with clients evolve:
 Expert for hire: This is often how a client perceives you when
he first gets to know you. The question is at this point is: How
do you break out and develop a longer term relationship?
 Steady supplier: If you distinguish yourself as an expert, you
are often rewarded with steady, repeat business. This is fi-
nancially attractive, but as a steady supplier you are still a
vendor and certainly not part of your clients’ inner circle. So
how do you evolve into a trusted advisor who is truly an ir-
replaceable resource for your clients?

xvi
INTRODUCTION
 Extraordinary advisor: You’re now in an enviable posi-
tion—but how do you develop and sustain an intellectual
partnership over the long term? How do you continue to add
value year after year?
You will learn, in short, how to break out of the pack as an
expert; how to break into your client’s inner circle; and how to
stay there.
Each of the 28 chapters has a core idea, and each can be read and
appreciated on a stand-alone basis. There is, however, a mental model
that provides an overarching framework for the various chapters and
ties them together. This model can be summarized as follows:
1. Relationships evolve through three distinct phases, and in each
phase your role changes. You start as an expert for hire, become
a steady supplier, and then, possibly, develop into a broad-based
business advisor.
2. Client loyalty is based on the value you add, the trust you build,
and the extent to which you go the extra mile for clients. If
you want to develop long-term loyalty, you have to do these
things consistently—but somewhat differently—during all three
of these phases.
3. There are a variety of strategies and tactics that enable you to
add value, build trust, and go the extra mile. These are de-
scribed in the individual chapters of Making Rain, and they
can be grouped into four areas:
 Attributes or skills (e.g., big picture thinking).
 Attitudes (e.g., independence).
 Relationship strategies—the ways in which you apply your
skills and attitudes to actual client relationships (e.g., identi-
fying client needs).
 Firm strategies—actions that organizations have to take in
order to build client loyalty (e.g., idea development through
intellectual R&D).

Introduction
xvii
I believe you can change your behavior with clients and alter
their perceptions of you. If you do this, you’ll see immediate, mean-
ingful results. Just shifting your own self-image from that of an “ex-
pert for hire” to a client advisor can create dramatic changes—I
have had hundreds of professionals tell me this after they have been
exposed to these core concepts.
Remember that small changes in behavior can have a very big
impact—enduring loyalty is built on a foundation of many small ac-
tions. Any one of the chapters can significantly improve your next
client meeting. Taken together, they’ll put you well on your way to
developing lifelong client loyalty.


PA R T O N E
BREAKING
THROUGH AS 
AN EXPERT


3
1
The Loyalty
Equation
Three Factors That Determine
Your Client’s Loyalty
Several years ago, I was in the midst of a long-term project with a
CEO who suddenly received an attractive offer to sell his company.
After several weeks of negotiations, it appeared the deal would go
through. That morning my client pulled me into his office for a talk.
I was, in truth, a bit nervous. The company owed me some money
for past work, and we had a signed contract for consulting services
that extended several months into the future. A change of ownership
could throw my arrangements into disarray, delaying or putting into
question the payment for my past services and possibly resulting in
the abrupt cancellation of the current assignment I was working on.
“Andrew,” the CEO began, “I just want you to know that if
this deal goes through, I’ve arranged for you to be paid for the
work you’ve already completed—I don’t want that to fall through
the cracks, which it might; I’m going to ensure that you are treated
fairly.” He then added, “I have already spoken to the chairman of
our new potential owners about how much you’ve helped us and 
suggested he meet you to see if you could be a resource for the

4
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
combined entity.” I breathed a sigh of relief and thought to myself,
“Wow, this guy is sticking up for me—he’s loyal!” It was a won-
derful feeling.
This is, certainly, the kind of loyalty we wish all of our clients
demonstrated toward us. We’d like them to keep our legitimate in-
terests in mind, use our services year after year if appropriate, and
recommend us heartily to others if they have no further need to en-
gage us.
But what is client loyalty, really? The word “loyal” shares with
“legal” a common root: In medieval times, citizens were legally
bound to their lord or king through a formal declaration of alle-
giance. Unfortunately, despite my best efforts, very few of my clients
have made legally binding professions of undying loyalty to me!
Today, loyalty has a less strict meaning. Although the term is
bandied about rather loosely, it implies faithfulness to somebody or
something: We talk about employee loyalty, brand loyalty, cus-
tomer loyalty, and client loyalty. The conventional wisdom about
what inspires loyalty for products or companies, however, isn’t all
that relevant for professional-client relationships. The reasons why
we’re loyal to a brand of toothpaste or to an employer are some-
what different from those reasons that compel a client to demon-
strate loyalty to a professional who is providing a complex service
or sophisticated product. A recent best-selling book on leadership
and loyalty, for example, asserts that employees are loyal to a com-
pany when the top management is perceived as having integrity
and when they feel empowered.1 Client loyalty, however, is based
on more than just integrity and empowerment, although certainly
both are important ingredients.
I have conducted hundreds of interviews on this subject with
both senior corporate executives and individual advisors, and it is
clear that there are three main drivers of client loyalty:
1. The value you add.
2. The degree of trust you develop.
3. The extra mile you are willing to go.

The Loyalty Equation
5
Although something as complex and subtle as loyalty cannot be
reduced to a science, these three factors can be combined into a
client loyalty “equation,” as suggested in the following illustration:
Let’s look at each of these in turn.
The Value You Add
A client’s loyalty is tempered by how much value you’ve added.
Generally, adding value means improving your client’s condition:
helping her solve problems, achieve personal and business objec-
tives, and get critical work done. A client’s perception of value-
added, however, will vary enormously depending on the client.
Robin Bidwell, an experienced client advisor who is the chairman
of the global consulting firm Environmental Resources Manage-
ment (ERM), sums this up very well: “Different clients value quite
different things. One client of ours most valued our ideas and in-
tellectual capital and was constantly spending time with our con-
sultants and sitting in on workshops. Another wanted to feel
important, and we had to treat him like a V.I.P. Yet another wanted
personal coaching and was constantly asking us for feedback and
suggestions. You’ve got to figure this out right at the start if you
want to be successful.”
Holding a meeting or writing a memo does not, in and of itself,
constitute value to clients. Rather, you have provided value when
your client perceives that his business or personal condition has been
improved.
Although value can be created in many ways, it’s useful to think
about three broad types of value that build loyalty:
1. Core value. The core value you offer will be the result that you
have agreed to deliver to the client. A client wants to reduce costs,
develop a new strategy, conduct due diligence on an acquisition,
Client Loyalty = [Value-Added] + [Trust] + [The Extra Mile]

6
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
launch a new product, or install a major telecommunications
system—and you help him do it. These outcomes are often re-
ferred to as “deliverables.” The ability to offer or assemble a
bundle of integrated services, by the way, can also be an im-
portant component of core value for some clients.
2. Surprise value. You truly distinguish yourself when you go be-
yond the agreed-upon value and add “surprise value.” This
means raising critical issues, providing insights, or making sug-
gestions about how to fix problems that you haven’t been asked
to address and which the client perhaps wasn’t even aware of.
You surprise the client by adding value to her business in unex-
pected ways.
3. Personal value. Every client has personal objectives and ambi-
tions, and if in the course of your work with her you are able
to further these, you start adding personal value. Personal value
could include getting a promotion, leaving a legacy, or just
learning from the relationship with you and your firm.
Tom Taggart is managing director for corporate communica-
tions at Barclays Global Investors, the world’s largest fund manage-
ment company, and he has hired a variety of professional service
firms during his long business career. Alluding to these additional
elements of value, he told me, “This value-added could be an in-
troduction to someone who could benefit my goals or perhaps a
heads-up about something they learned that could blindside me.
They would do this as a value-added for our relationship, without
billing me. The real secret is that when professionals do this on a
regular basis, they end up making more money from the client any-
way, because the relationship is strengthened.”
In my research into professional-client relationships, I have
found that a common set of attributes and strategies form the foun-
dation for this ability to add value. These include empathy, big-
picture thinking, keen judgment, and others, which are discussed in
the next chapter.

The Loyalty Equation
7
The Degree of Trust You Develop
The trust a client places in you depends on several important fac-
tors. First of all, do you have integrity? Integrity exists when you
consistently adhere to a set of sound values or ethics, you are hon-
est, and there is a wholeness or an “integral” quality to your be-
havior. Integrity also implies reliability and discretion—you follow
through on what you say you’ll do, and you assiduously keep client
confidences. Second, trust is based on a client’s perception of your
competence to do a particular job. I might trust a babysitter to take
care of my children for an evening, for example, but not to take
them on a three-day rafting trip. Similarly, a client has to feel that
you or your company has the skill to effectively tackle the job at
hand. Trust is also based on knowing each other personally—on
some degree of intimacy and “face time.” We need first-hand ex-
perience with an individual to sense whether there are shared val-
ues, personal chemistry, and mutual respect.
Dan Scharre, the CEO of telecommunications equipment sup-
plier Larscom, highlighted this element of trust when I asked him
about his loyalty to various professionals: “I look at their ethics,” he
told me. “The professionals I’m loyal to demonstrate the highest
standards of ethical behavior. Yes, they have to do a very good job,
but if they don’t have integrity, it doesn’t matter. They have to
honestly represent their capabilities to me and follow through on
what they say they’ll do, every single time.”
As individuals, can we be loyal to someone we don’t entirely trust?
It’s possible, but this only occurs in very particular situations, and
usually the result is very narrow and transient loyalty. Within a cor-
poration, you might have an alliance with someone, with an agree-
ment to support each other’s agendas (a kind of loyalty), but there
might be little or no trust in other spheres. In wartime, similarly, one
nation might be loyal to another by virtue of a formal treaty, but trust
in the true sense of the word might be very limited. An example of
this was the United States’ alliance with the Soviet Union during
World War II, which fell apart as soon as the war was over.

8
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
The Extra Mile You Are Willing to Go
When you set aside your own interests and do something extra for
a client—when a client perceives that you have helped him in some
out-of-the-ordinary way and gone the extra mile—the result is
often loyalty. A client of mine, for example, went through some fi-
nancial difficulty and had to implement a major layoff. Over lunch
one day he explained that his company was cutting back on all its
professional services. Despite the fact that I had an ironclad con-
tract signed with the company that did not allow it to simply can-
cel the planned work without adequate notice, I turned to the
executive and said, “How can I help? Do you need to eliminate or
scale back my work with you? Let me know what is best for the
company.” He was enormously relieved, and we agreed to refocus
my work on just a few high-impact issues with a corresponding re-
duction in budget. The amount cut actually turned out to be pretty
small, but my willingness to voluntarily put my head on the chop-
ping block instilled an immense amount of loyalty.
The extra mile can be represented by many different gestures
and acts, and sometimes they have little to do with your formal
contract with a client. As Steve Pfeiffer, chairman of leading law
firm Fulbright & Jaworski says, “If you leave your vacation a day
early to help a client meet a critical deadline, it shows you’re ded-
icated and you care, and this builds loyalty. On the other hand, I
have counseled several clients’ children on the college application
process, and helped them find and get into the right school—this has
nothing to do with the business aspects of the relationship but
everything to do with the human side. It’s appreciated and valued.”
Going the extra mile builds loyalty because it enhances trust—
it shows that you are focused on your client’s interests rather than
your own agenda. There is something else behind going the extra
mile, however, and it’s called reciprocity. The development of rec-
iprocity as a fundamental practice in our society dates back to prim-
itive cultures. The survival of the larger group was ensured by the
willingness of individual members to trade off tasks and favors. In

The Loyalty Equation
9
his book, Inf luence: The Psychology of Persuasion, Robert Cial-
dini cites some extraordinary examples of this reciprocity principle.
After the Mexican earthquake in 1985, Ethiopia, a country that
could hardly afford to give foreign aid, sent Mexico $5,000 to help
with relief efforts. No one could figure out why Ethiopia, a coun-
try with millions of its own starving people, had done this. A jour-
nalist, sensing a good story, investigated and learned that in 1935
Mexico had sent $5,000 in aid to Ethiopia to help relieve the famine
there. Over 40 years later, its government found the right oppor-
tunity to return the kindness!2
With sophisticated clients, reciprocity has to be genuine—both
sides will quickly sense contrived giving and back away. For exam-
ple, presenting clients with lavish gifts, or doing them “favors” that
smack of ingratiation will most certainly backfire. In 1510, Niccolò
Machiavelli commented on this insincere motive at the very start of
The Prince, his famous book on princely power and leadership:
Men who are anxious to win the favour of a Prince nearly al-
ways follow the custom of presenting themselves to him with
the possessions they value most . . . so we often see princes given
horses, weapons, cloth of gold, precious stones, and similar or-
naments worthy of their high position. . . . I value as much as
my understanding of the deeds of great men, won by me from
a long acquaintance with contemporary affairs and a continuous
study of the ancient world.3
Ideas and insights, Machiavelli tells us, are far more valuable to
clients than schmoozing. How little human nature has changed in
five hundred years!
When clients feel that you are willing to go beyond the written
contract, to go beyond the normal call of duty—and that you have
no expectation of getting something back—that’s when this “extra
mile” principle kicks in and reinforces a client’s loyalty to you.
Some clients are less inclined than others to develop long-term
relationships. In the early 1990s, General Motor’s head of purchasing,

10
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
Jose Lopez, achieved significant cost savings for the automaker by
extracting large, across-the-board price cuts from all of GM’s sup-
pliers. It was a Draconian move that immediately improved GM’s
faltering bottom line. It also touched off a highly public firestorm
of protest that created terrible publicity for GM, and Lopez’s
strong-arm tactics poisoned many of the company’s most important
vendor relationships. Ever had a client like Jose Lopez?
Most of us, unfortunately, have had to work with people like
this. These clients don’t want advisors—they want experts for hire
whom they can beat down on price and pit against each other.
They don’t believe in the value of long-term relationships. Their
sense of loyalty—to the extent they have any at all—is fleeting and
mercenary. I think these types of clients represent, fortunately, a
small minority.
There are several factors that influence the degree to which your
client has a relationship orientation. First, the corporate (or family)
culture within which your client has to work will strongly influence
how you’re dealt with. Some organizations have put in tough poli-
cies and procedures, for example, to ensure that no outside provider
develops “favored nation status.” Second, your client’s time frame
for the relationship will temper his attitude toward you. For what-
ever reason, a client may view your relationship as a one-off trans-
action that doesn’t merit any investment. Bob Frisch, a managing
partner at the leading management consulting firm Accenture, puts
it this way: “Sometimes, relationship-building is a bit like game the-
ory. Your client, for example, will act very differently depending on
whether or not he thinks there will be another round.”
I think it is possible, ultimately, to build a relationship with the
vast majority of clients if you can figure out what their needs are
and help them solve their problems. Alan Weiss, a well-known client
advisor and author, puts it this way: “If you can connect with a
client’s vital interests and meet his needs, you can build a relation-
ship. It’s that simple.”
If you can add great value, build both professional and personal
trust, and go the extra mile for your clients, your reward will be

The Loyalty Equation
11
long-term client loyalty. Loyalty doesn’t mean that a client will do
business with you when she doesn’t need your services, or choose
you over others she thinks are more qualified for a particular task.
Dan Scharre, the CEO at Larscom, says this about what loyalty does
mean: “For many years, I’ve had a good relationship with a very ef-
fective sales trainer. Recently, he’s spoken to me several times about
doing some work for my company, but it’s really not the right time
for the kind of service he offers. I feel loyalty to this guy, but that
doesn’t mean I’m going to hire him when I don’t have a real need.
In the last few months, however, I have strongly recommended him
to three or four other executives at other companies. Later this year,
when the timing is better, I will probably hire him to do some work
with us.”
What more could you ask for?

12
2
Are You an
Extraordinary
Advisor?
In the early 1990s, Bell Atlantic, the large telecommunications
company now called Verizon, made a bid for cable giant TCI. The
idea was that Bell Atlantic would be able to use TCI’s cable TV
network to offer telephone service to customers all over the coun-
try. It was a bold move and, at the time, it would have been the
largest corporate merger in history. Once Bell Atlantic had a closer
look at TCI’s technology, however, and understood the difficulty
of sending telephone calls over coaxial cable using the technology
of the time, CEO Ray Smith began to have second thoughts about
the wisdom of the deal. Smith talked to a number of experts about
how to proceed, but one trusted advisor—Steve Jobs, the co-
founder of Apple Computer—added more value than the rest.
Smith describes how the legendary Jobs helped him make a key
decision:
Over several nights, I debated the issues with Steve and he en-
abled me to make the best decision of my career, which ulti-
mately was not to go through with the merger. Steve is not very

Are You an Extraordinary Advisor?
13
interested in your feelings—he is a straight-shooter who is inci-
sive and very objective. He had strong technical knowledge
about the multimedia environment, but also the ability to see
the big picture and conceptualize the application of technology
that hadn’t really been invented yet. He is very direct, but com-
pletely discrete and in this situation was completely focused on
my agenda. He challenged me and probed, asking great ques-
tions. He was, in short, the perfect advisor.
The professionals who develop long-term client loyalty have
evolved from experts for hire to client advisors. Experts for hire
offer expertise on a transactional basis—their service, frankly, be-
comes no more than a tradable commodity. Client advisors, in con-
trast, provide insight and wisdom within the context of a long-term
relationship. Like Steve Jobs, they add value in ways that set them
apart from ordinary experts. But what are the underlying charac-
teristics of these individuals? What are the qualities that enable them
to add so much value?
The seven particular attributes that characterize client advisors
are the focus of Clients for Life: Evolving from an Expert for Hire
to an Extraordinary Advisor, which I coauthored with Jagdish
Sheth. If you have read Clients for Life, this chapter can serve as a
brief review of the personal and professional development that’s re-
quired to become a client advisor. If you haven’t read this earlier
book, you will find that this chapter lays out the theoretical basis for
the practical applications of these seven attributes. They are essen-
tial to successfully building and managing client relationships.
It took four years of extensive research into long-term client
relationships to define these attributes. I interviewed dozens of
CEOs who shared their experiences in working with outside pro-
fessionals. I spoke with many of the most well-known client advi-
sors from a variety of professions and industries. And I researched
the greatest advisors in over 3,000 years of history. These seven at-
tributes can best be described by contrasting the expert for hire
with the client advisor.1

14
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
1. Self less Independence
Experts for hire ultimately seek through compromise and deference
to please the clients who employ them; advisors exercise self less
independence. Great advisors are devoted to their clients but inde-
pendent from them—intellectually, emotionally, and even finan-
cially (at least in terms of their attitude). To be an influential advisor
to your clients, you must look after their interests but also offer in-
dependent views, even if they are opposed to beliefs they hold
dearly. Selfless independence doesn’t mean you are uninvolved with
your clients—it is both consistent with the development of long-
term, trusted partnerships with clients and a necessary ingredient
that ensures these long-term relationships are healthy and balanced.
Chapter 24 looks specifically at how you can develop what I call the
“attitude of independent wealth,” a very powerful technique for
cultivating your independence.
Sir Thomas More, who was Henry VIII’s chief advisor, is a
wonderful example of heroic selfless independence. A more con-
temporary example would be former Attorney General Elliot
Richardson, who stood up to President Richard Nixon during the
Watergate crisis in 1973.
Selfless independence is a foundational attribute for anyone who
works with clients. I believe it also gives you a certain poise, grace,
and strength in managing any business relationship. As the degree
of interdependence between service providers and their clients in-
creases, the checks and balances that independence provides will
grow in importance.
2. Empathy
Experts provide answers and tell; advisors ask great questions and
listen. The artist Picasso once said, “Computers are useless. They
can only give you answers.” The great management sage Peter
Drucker says he is no longer a consultant but rather an “insultant,”
a distinction reflecting the difficult, provocative questions he asks
his clients. As professionals, we are trained to provide answers, but

Are You an Extraordinary Advisor?
15
in many important respects, thought-provoking questions that help
clients reframe their issues are more useful. To successfully em-
pathize with a client, you have to tune into his feelings, his
thoughts, and the context of his daily life. There are three basic en-
ablers of empathy: Self-awareness and self-control, which allow you
to perceive others—independent of your own biases and neuroses—
as they really are; humility, including a belief that you can learn
from your clients; and keen listening skills.
3. Knowledge Depth and Breadth:
Deep Generalists
Experts have depth; advisors are deep generalists who have depth
and breadth. “Find a niche or specialty, and make your name there”
is still the common wisdom about how to succeed as a professional.
The problem is that most people spend their whole careers drilling
deeper into their core expertise, rarely investing the time to broaden
their experiences and make the knowledge connections necessary
for big-picture thinking.
Advisors focus on learning in three different arenas. First, they
continually refine and improve their knowledge of their core spe-
cialty; second, they become deeply knowledgeable about their
clients and the “ecosystem” that surrounds them; and third, they

16
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
eagerly engage in broad-based “personal learning” that could in-
clude studying a foreign language, collecting antique clocks, re-
pairing cars, or playing a musical instrument. All three of these
learning arenas relate in unexpected and mysterious ways that ulti-
mately enable you to offer broad perspectives to your clients. If you
doubt this and wonder what your hobbies have to do with client re-
lationships, just remember that personal chemistry, shared values
and experiences, and just being an interesting person are all key in-
gredients of healthy relationships, business or otherwise.
At my old consulting firm, the final hurdle for all potential re-
cruits was the “Chicago snowstorm test.” You had to ask yourself:
“If I were stuck in the Chicago airport with this candidate for eight
hours during a blizzard, how would I feel afterwards? Ready to
send him packing? Or energized by having learned something and
having had a series of enjoyable, provocative conversations over the
course of the eight hours?”
Aristotle, who tutored Alexander the Great, was one of the most
brilliant deep generalists in history. Contemporary business figures
who fit this mold include management sage Peter Drucker and ad-
vertising great David Ogilvy.
In this book, in addition to the Deep Generalist profile that
I’ve been discussing, I have added a second development path—the
Branded Expert, which is discussed in Chapter 14.
4. Synthesis, or Big-Picture Thinking
Experts analyze; advisors synthesize. Listen to what clients say
about their most valuable and trusted advisors:
 “He gives me a global view.”
 “She provides additional perspective and helps me to recon-
ceptualize the problem.”
 “He brings big-picture thinking to the discussion.”
 “He handles the details, the tactics, but is also able to see the
overall strategy.”

Are You an Extraordinary Advisor?
17
Clients, in short, treasure value big-picture thinking in their
outside advisors, not least because they are often unable to get the
big picture from their own internal staff. “The problem,” says Bob
Galvin, the former chairman of Motorola, “is that where you sit
is where you stand. Corporate executives usually look at a prob-
lem from the narrow perspective of the particular function they
represent.”
We are all trained to do good analysis—to break down a prob-
lem into pieces and analyze each bit separately. Synthesis, in con-
trast, is big-picture thinking—finding patterns, identifying key
issues, framing ideas in a way that clarifies them, and creating new
ideas out of old data. A recent study of the consulting industry by the
Wall Street Journal, for example, showed that the number one rea-
son why top executives hire a consultant is to gain “new perspec-
tives” on their business. Regardless of your profession or industry,
you need these big-picture thinking skills to craft new perspectives
for your clients. How do you develop them? The first step is to be-
come a deep generalist. Without a breadth of knowledge, you can’t
make the connections necessary for good synthesis. Next, you need
to develop the techniques and practices that foster the development
of big-picture ideas. These include tapping into multiple perspec-
tives, using analogies and simplifying frames, identifying patterns,
suspending your judgment, and taking time to reflect.2
5. Judgment
Experts make judgments based on the facts; advisors first help
their clients avoid bad judgments, and then they base judgments
on facts, experience, and their personal value system. Great advi-
sors are always on the lookout for the many well-documented judg-
ment traps that can ensnare their clients—think of the arrogant
“groupthink” that bogged Microsoft down during the company’s
antitrust trial in the late 1990s, or the “prior commitment” syn-
drome that allowed President Kennedy to launch the ill-conceived
and ultimately disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1962.

18
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
Great advisors, in contrast, avoid groupthink by bringing their own
and their client’s unique value systems into play when making de-
cisions. The result is often an unusual but highly effective solution.
One of my favorite examples of an historical client advisor
with brilliant judgment was John Pierpont Morgan, who was the
first relationship banker in the modern sense of the word. With
just a few moments of intense concentration, Morgan could make
keen judgments involving enormous sums of money, and he was
usually right.
6. Conviction
Experts have conviction based on the accuracy of their information;
advisors have deep-seated conviction based on personal values and
a sense of mission. Clients are deeply moved by genuine, heartfelt
conviction. Says Sir Win Bischoff, the chairman of Citigroup Eu-
rope and a well-known top management advisor, “If you want to
have an impact, you have to have conviction. The authoritative de-
livery of a judgment is absolutely key.” For many famous advisors,
in fact, their defining moments have come in making those diffi-
cult decisions based on strongly held convictions. Think of Sir
Thomas More refusing to endorse Henry VIII’s split with the
Catholic Church, or General George Marshall, who had the con-
viction to repeatedly stand up to British Prime Minister Winston
Churchill and his own client, Franklin D. Roosevelt, when critical
decisions were being made during World War II.
There are some professionals, unfortunately, whose conviction
is superficial and pretentious. I have heard many so-called man-
agement experts quote from Machiavelli’s The Prince, for exam-
ple, yet most of them, I discovered, have never actually read the
book and have no interest in the historical context in which it was
written—that is, as an instruction book for a leader who Machi-
avelli hoped would finally unify the war-torn Italian city-states.
The day-to-day persuasiveness that you bring to your client rela-
tionships should, in contrast, be rooted in your core beliefs and

Are You an Extraordinary Advisor?
19
values and your sense of mission as a professional, and the more
you are in touch with these, the more you’ll be able to resonate
with deep, genuine conviction.
7. Integrity That Builds Trust
Experts have professional credibility; advisors build personal trust.
When you’re credible, clients believe that your data is accurate, your
information useful. Trust, which is the glue that holds together
every long-term client relationship, goes far deeper. It’s a client’s
belief that you will act in her best interests and personally uphold
the highest standards of integrity and competency, both inside and
outside the office. When a client trusts you, anything is possible—
your recommendations carry more weight, and when you propose
an additional sale, your client sees sincerity, not salesmanship.
In the past several years, clients have paid even more attention to
the trustworthiness of the professionals they do business with. Dur-
ing the dot-com boom of the late 1990s, outlandish claims were made
and many individuals and companies pretended to be something they
were not. When the Internet bubble burst in 2001, and huge firms
such as Enron and Global Crossing filed for bankruptcy, people felt
their trust had been betrayed.
Since developing and articulating these attributes in Clients for
Life, I’ve had the opportunity to discuss and validate them with
tens of thousands of professionals from a variety of fields, including
consulting, law, advertising, accounting, and corporate sales and
marketing. I’m often asked: Don’t these same attributes serve you
well in developing long-term relationships in general, not just those
with clients? The answer is a resounding Yes! If you are a corporate
staff executive, for example, the same principles apply: To add value
to your relationship with your boss—to really stand out—you have
to become a deep generalist (not just a staff specialist), demonstrate
big-picture thinking, show keen judgment, and build a trusted per-
sonal relationship.

20
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
There are other characteristics and skills, of course—optimism,
ambition, and the ability to communicate, to name a few—that are
necessary to succeed in business and life in general. The seven dis-
cussed here, however, are specifically needed to excel with clients.
They are the ones that, in your client’s eyes, will truly set you apart
from your competitors. When you approach your client relation-
ships with the mind-set of a broad-based advisor and infuse them
with these seven attributes, you will create the foundations for life-
long loyalty.

21
3
Breakthrough
Strategies for
Experts
The senior management of a Fortune 500 company was convinced
that the high turnover of its managers was due to serious weak-
nesses in its compensation practices. To address this issue, the ex-
ecutive vice president of human resources (HR) convened a
summit meeting of internal and external experts. Sitting around
the conference table were half a dozen of the company’s staff pro-
fessionals, including the vice president of compensation, as well as
a group of consultants from Hewitt Associates, a leading human
resources consulting firm. The head of HR waxed on at length
about how the company needed to redress major problems in the
compensation systems to reverse the exodus of talent. Fifteen min-
utes into the meeting, Bob Gandossy, the senior consultant from
Hewitt and one of its global practice leaders, interrupted. “You
don’t have a compensation problem,” he stated with calm author-
ity and conviction. All eyes turned toward him. “Systemwide at-
trition is rarely caused by lapses in compensation. That’s not why
you’re losing people. People leave managers—they don’t leave
companies. We need to look at your fundamental management
practices to find the answer.”

22
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
As the meeting descended into a cacophony of different con-
versations, the executive vice president of HR had already made
up her mind: Gandossy was going to be her consultant for the job.
Instead of selling a small project to review compensation, Hewitt
developed a long-term, multimillion-dollar relationship with this
client that focused on a broad set of changes in supervisory practices,
delegation, and career management, with a consequent decrease in
turnover. By effectively reframing the client’s issue, Gandossy suc-
cessfully broke out of the pack and distinguished himself as some-
one able to add more value than the typical HR consultant.
When you first start working with a client, you are typically po-
sitioned as an expert: Clients hire you because they perceive you
have expertise, experience, and a set of products or services that
can help them solve a pressing business issue or enable critical work
to get done. Ironically, while clients ultimately treasure the valu-
able role that a trusted advisor can fulfill, they don’t typically go out
looking for an advisor—usually, they want an expert. The trick,
then, is to demonstrate great subject matter knowledge and the skills
and behaviors of an advisor.
In this chapter, I discuss nine strategies you can use, in the early
stages of a relationship, to differentiate yourself in your clients’ eyes
and move closer to their inner circle.
1. Do It Faster
Responsiveness is valued by almost everyone, and if you meet your
client’s deadlines and demands, this alone will put you one notch
above your competition. If a client asks for a document on Friday,
get it to her on Thursday. If a client leaves you a voice message, get
back to her within an hour or two. More than once I have answered
inquiries from prospective clients within minutes of their leaving a
message or e-mailing me, and every time I am greeted with sincere
gratitude and a bit of incredulity: “Thanks so much for getting
back to me this quickly!”

Breakthrough Strategies for Experts
23
2. Do It Better
Some things never change: There is simply no substitute for qual-
ity, completeness, thoughtfulness, creativity, and accuracy that ex-
ceeds what your client is used to or has seen from your competitors.
If you want to become a steady supplier—to gain repeat business
right from the start—just demonstrate that you are better than the
next expert!
3. Be Different or Clever, Not Corny
After sitting through nearly a dozen pitches from bankers wanting
to take his company public, Intraware CEO Peter Jackson told in-
vestment banker Frank Quattrone that he would “feel like a mule”
traveling all over the country to attract investors. The next morn-
ing, Quattrone had one of his junior bankers stand in Intraware’s
lobby with a live mule and a sign imploring Jackson to choose Quat-
trone’s firm, Credit Suisse First Boston, to lead the initial public
offering. Credit Suisse did indeed get the business, and Jackson later
acknowledged that the mule “may have made the difference.”
Sometimes, efforts to stand out can flop disastrously—just ask
any executive recruiter about the multicolored, scented resumes he
receives that go right into the circular file—but a clever, original
approach can sometimes tip things over the edge to your favor.
4. Be Better Prepared
In John Grisham’s novel The Firm, Mitch McDeere, a brilliant
third-year law student, goes to an interview with a secretive but in-
triguing law firm. Halfway through the conversation, Lamar Quin,
one of the lawyers interviewing him, criticizes Mitch’s modest un-
dergraduate degree, saying, “I don’t imagine Western Kentucky is
much of an academic school.” What happens next astonishes the
staid partner:

24
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
“Sort of like Kansas State,” Mitch replied. They froze, all of
them froze, and for a few seconds stared incredulously at each
other. This guy McDeere knew Lamar Quin went to Kansas
State. He had never met Lamar Quin and had no idea who
would appear on behalf of the firm and conduct the interview.
Yet, he knew. He had read the biographical sketches of all of
the forty-one lawyers in the firm, and in a split second he had
recalled that Lamar Quin, just one of forty-one, had gone to
Kansas State. Damn, they were impressed.1
My father, a man of meticulous organization, used to tell me,
“There is no substitute for genuine lack of preparation.” It’s an
ironic phrase that alludes to the disasters that lack of preparation
can cause. Some professionals I know are so quick on their feet that
they can go into client meetings with only a modicum of prepara-
tion, but they are the exception, not the rule—there is nothing
worse, in fact, than scrambling to remember the basic facts about
your client’s company and issues.
Surprisingly, I’ve had quite a few clients tell me stories about
professionals who show up for an initial meeting with little or no
knowledge about the clients’ company or industry. The threshold
to appear better prepared than the next person may be lower than
you think!
5. See the Problem Anew
In the opening example of this chapter, consultant Bob Gandossy
reframed the Fortune 500 company’s issue from a compensation
problem to a systemic issue involving a variety of interrelated man-
agement practices. This ability to reframe the client’s issue—to zero
in on what the problem really is—is one of the hallmarks of great
client advisors. The willingness to act on it is a mark of self-
assurance. Both are enormously valuable to clients. It is almost al-
ways productive to challenge your client’s definition of the
problem—in the worst case, you’ll simply have to back off; at best,
you’ll distinguish yourself.

Breakthrough Strategies for Experts
25
6. Provide Unique Information
In a world where clients have instant access to almost unlimited
data, there is still great power in providing unique information
and insights. Connie Connors, who heads Connors Communica-
tions, a well-known public relations firm, told me about a new
client who was participating in a large request for proposal (RFP)
to the board of education in New York City: “As it turned out,
through several of my contacts I was quite familiar with this RFP,
and I was able to provide information to my client on who the
other competitors were and advise her generally on how to max-
imize her bid. This was a value-add on that really surprised and
delighted her.” Unique information can come from many sources:
knowledge of competitors, proprietary market research that you’ve
conducted, customer interviews, and key relationships that you
maintain with thought leaders in your client’s industry. In Chap-
ter 23, we’ll see how the Rothschild banking family used propri-
etary information to create an overwhelming competitive
advantage for itself.
Your information and insights have to be relevant. I knew one
“guru” who kept telling his clients interesting and even brilliant
things that were completely unactionable and impractical. Finally,
one exasperated client blurted out to him, “I just don’t know what
I’m supposed to do with that piece of information!”
7. Establish an Emotional Connection
Listen again to Connors, as she talks about establishing the per-
sonal relationship that brings you into a client’s inner circle: “To
take your client relationships to the next level, you’ve got to ex-
perience an emotional breakthrough. This has to be based on face-
to-face, honest, open communication that creates some kind of
emotional bonding. Sometimes this happens when you have a dis-
agreement or an argument. I had a client, for example, who put
out a press release at five in the afternoon. That night, I picked it
up on a search and, after reviewing it, thought it was poorly done.

26
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
I called my client at eight in the evening, and told him what 
I thought. He was furious—‘I’ve had one hell of a day,’ he told 
me, ‘and the last thing I need is my agency telling me I’ve done a
lousy job!’ On reflection, the release was not as bad as I first 
believed, and in fact he was at least partially right—I probably
should have waited for a better time to discuss it with him. I apol-
ogized profusely for being insensitive. The next day, he called 
me to apologize in turn for having flown off the handle about a
minor issue. Our relationship really started to grow from that
point onwards.”
8. Be Readily Accessible
How often do you call someone and get voice mail instead of a live
voice—and then wonder how long it will take to have your mes-
sage listened to by a living, breathing human? Have you ever sent
an e-mail with an attachment, and since you don’t get a reply,
wonder if the recipient ever received it? Have you ever disputed an
invoice, only to have the process linger on for months and require
multiple phone calls to resolve? Ease of use, surprisingly, can dif-
ferentiate one provider from another. It includes things like:
 The ability to get in touch easily.
 Speed of response and the personal nature of the response.
 Rapid resolution of accounting and billing questions.
 A feeling, on the part of the client, that he is recognized when
he calls your office. (I’ve had executives tell me that they
spend over a million dollars a year with a company, and when
they call, no one recognizes them!)
 Demonstrated knowledge of the account on the part of sup-
port staff and junior professionals. It’s immensely reassuring
to a client when he calls about an important document, and
someone in your office knows exactly what the client is talk-
ing about.

Breakthrough Strategies for Experts
27
9. Listen and Learn Fast
Last year I sat in on an interview that my son had with the head of
admissions at a college to which he was applying. I’m usually very
observant, but that day I noticed nothing special about the woman’s
jewelry or clothing. At the end of the one-hour interview, my son
said to the admissions director, “I notice you’re wearing an Outward
Bound pin. Are you a graduate?” Indeed, she had a tiny pin on her
dress that had completely escaped my notice. “Oh, yes,” she beamed.
“This past summer I finally took one of their adult courses—it was
something I had wanted to do for years.” The two of them then spent
10 minutes excitedly exchanging war stories about their respective
Outward Bound experiences. (This story also illustrates the previous
point: You break through when you make an emotional connection
with someone.) Listening and learning can be as simple as noticing
the little details, or something as profound as investing the time to do
a complete analysis of your client’s competitive position in the mar-
ketplace. The more you observe and learn about your client, the more
likely it is that you will stand out from the crowd of experts who are
also trying to get in the door—or in my son’s case, from the crowd
of other high school seniors! (He did, by the way, get accepted at this
college, which was his first choice.)
If you’re meeting with a new, potential client, or you’re in the
early stages of the relationship, think carefully about how you’re
going to break through as an expert. Will you focus on being bet-
ter, faster, or different—or all three? Can you find opportunities to
establish an emotional connection and bond with your client? Do
you have some unique and useful information that you can supply?
Would enhanced accessibility be valued by your client? Can you be
bold and reframe the client’s issue?
Clients can make rapid judgments about the professionals they
work with, and you may not have the luxury of time to prove your-
self. By adopting the right mix of these breakthrough strategies,
you’ll greatly improve the odds of getting hired in the first place
and, later on, of breaking into your client’s inner circle.

28
4
Building Trust
in the First
Ten Minutes
Michael, a client of mine, used to be permanently tethered to a
PC-powered 50-page PowerPoint presentation. He dragged his lap-
top around like a ball-and-chain as he visited prospective clients at
Fortune 500 companies all over the United States. For every ten
clients who viewed his presentation, two would ask him for a pro-
posal, which he would dutifully e-mail to them a few days later. For
every ten proposals he wrote, he would win one. The arithmetic
was miserable: 50 presentations to get one job. Something wasn’t
right, and my affable, intelligent friend knew it.
Michael presented himself as a vendor—an expert for hire—
and he simply wasn’t building trust and credibility in his client
meetings. Today, Michael’s batting average has gone from 1 in 50
to nearly 10 in 50. He enjoys meeting with prospective clients, and
he enthusiastically networks within the organizations of his exist-
ing clients. At the end of this chapter, I’ll share with you a re-
markable letter he recently wrote to me. But first, let’s look at four
factors—the same ones that Michael learned to use—that affect the
degree of trust clients will place in you when they first meet you.
We first mentioned these factors in Chapter 1 when we looked at

Building Trust in the First Ten Minutes
29
the ingredients of client loyalty. Now we’ll examine them in the
context of a first client meeting.
Integrity
Discernment between right and wrong, a coherent value system,
consistency, and reliability are the foundations of integrity. In the
first couple of meetings with someone, these intangibles are com-
municated through the little things: Are you consistent in how you
describe yourself? Do you give credit where it’s due? Is there open-
ness to your communication and body language? Do you answer
tough questions honestly and straightforwardly, especially about your
experience and capabilities? Are you focused on your client and his
needs, or are you absorbed in yourself and your own agenda? Your
client will immediately pick up any obfuscation or inconsistency.
Michael already had strong integrity, but it didn’t come across to
his potential clients. His focus was on his own presentation and on
trying to demonstrate his personal expertise—not on his client’s is-
sues. This misalignment prevented any real rapport from developing.
Competence
A client’s trust in you rests in part on his or her perception of your
competence to perform a certain type of work. Many professionals,
unfortunately, try to establish credibility by saying how competent
they are. “We have 58 offices in 20 countries . . . we have 10,000
associates . . . we’ve worked for 300 of the Fortune 500 . . . and so
on. Would-be advisors make such claims, invariably with the help of
high-tech projection systems and colorful graphics.”
This was what Michael used to do—he felt all the statistics in
his PowerPoint slides would win over skeptical clients. On the con-
trary, clients are bored to tears by such assertions and no more as-
sured of a professional’s competence.
Recently, an incident involving a major software company un-
derscored why clients are so skeptical of such claims. The com-
pany’s CEO announced at a press conference that “many leading

30
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
corporations, including General Electric, are running their entire or-
ganizations on our software.” When one journalist actually checked,
the statement turned out to be a gross exaggeration—General Elec-
tric told him that one small factory in Latin America was testing the
software in question, a far cry from using it run the whole company’s
operations! The CEO was subsequently skewered in the press.
A far better way to establish competence is by asking thought-
ful questions that implicitly show your expertise and by describing
examples of past client work that you’ve done. Good questions
demonstrate an understanding of the issues: “Can you talk about
your relative emphasis on domestic versus international expan-
sion?” or “What is the balance between organic growth and ac-
quisitions in your new strategic plan?” are far more useful questions
than “What are your sales?”
Client examples are much more interesting and build credibil-
ity faster than bland descriptions of what you do. Rather than
pulling out a deck of PowerPoint slides, you might say, “Perhaps
the best way to describe what I do is to talk about a couple of re-
cent client assignments.”
These examples should have three parts to them: the problem
the client faced and the pain he or she was feeling; what you did to
solve the problem; and the results that were achieved. Two hun-
dred words, at most, are plenty—you want to be able to describe
several of these examples over a five-minute period. You’ll be
amazed at how a good, brief example can establish credibility, draw
out a client, and get her to talk about her own issues.
Stand-up presentations have their place, but they tend to kill
open, informal dialogue and ultimately put you in the position of
a “vendor” who is “pitching” something rather than an equal who
sits on the same side of the table to discuss important business issues.
If and when you do make a slide presentation to a client, it should
be all about the client and his issues, not about you and your firm.
If you already have a relationship with the client, case histories
or examples are also useful to reposition yourself and your capabili-
ties. I recently learned that a client of mine, the CEO of a financial

Building Trust in the First Ten Minutes
31
services company, needed advice on salesforce effectiveness and in-
stitutional relationship management. But he told one of his lieu-
tenants that I probably couldn’t help since I focused on “improving
relationships with high net-worth individuals.” How he got this
rather narrow idea I don’t know, but I quickly corrected the mis-
perception by describing to him four different clients I have worked
with on similar issues. He quickly reached out to me for help. In
retrospect, a preemptive discussion on my part to broaden his un-
derstanding of my capabilities would have been smart.
Intimacy and Rapport
Clients do business with people they like, and one of the main dri-
vers of “likability” is familiarity (see Chapter 7 for an in-depth dis-
cussion of this subject). The more face-to-face meetings you have
with a client, the higher the odds that you’ll win the proposal. If it’s
a competitive situation, more meetings will dramatically increase
your odds of winning, assuming even a modicum of personal chem-
istry. More face-time means more chances to understand a person’s
integrity—her values, her consistency, her reliability—and more
opportunity to see if there are shared interests and beliefs. My client
Michael, unfortunately, had not yet created the dialogue that would
allow this intimacy to develop.
Today, harried clients often want “mail-order” proposals—“Just
shoot us something by e-mail,” they’ll tell you. You might as well
mail it to Santa Claus at the North Pole and then light a candle.
Your success rate on such opportunities will rarely make the required
investment worth your while. Today, when clients ask Michael to 
e-mail them a proposal, he offers a simple alternative that is almost
always accepted: “Let’s meet again next week, and I’ll walk through
an outline of how I would approach this assignment.”
Risk
I know a very successful executive coach who refuses to be paid until
his clients have been able to verify real personal change. His fees are

32
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
delayed—sometimes by as much as a year—but his guarantee of ac-
tual results has resulted in a waiting list of clients and fees that are at
the top of the market. I’m not recommending this approach for ev-
eryone, but it clearly illustrates the power of reducing risk for clients.
The trust a client places in you will vary depending on his per-
ceived risk of trusting you. If there is a feeling that you will stand
by your commitment to excellent work—that there is an implicit if
not explicit guarantee—then risk is reduced. Patricia Fripp, a well-
known professional speaker, often punctuates her speeches on cus-
tomer service by telling her audiences, “I guarantee that these
techniques will improve your ability to retain customers.” Does she
hand out warranty cards? No, her intense personal conviction and
energy are enough to back her claims. The result? Her audiences
are far more willing to go away and try something new and unfa-
miliar—itself a guarantee that some positive change will occur.
What I have described may be simple, but it works. When
clients meet you for the first time, they think of you as an expert
in solving a problem they have. The approach I’ve set out allows you
to demonstrate your expertise while behaving like an advisor—a

Building Trust in the First Ten Minutes
33
powerful combination. It also sets the stage for broadening the re-
lationship further down the road.
Shortly after he began to work on implementing these principles,
Michael sent me a letter. He was in a state of delighted shock at how
just a few small changes in his approach were dramatically improv-
ing his ability to build trust and establish credibility with clients:
Dear Andrew,
While I was driving to my meeting with this prospective
client (a Fortune 500 corporation), I was thinking about your
suggestion to use short client cases and thoughtful questioning
to help clients understand what we do and build credibility—
and your advice to stay away from the PowerPoint presentation
and instead focus on the dialogue with the client.
When I joined the meeting on Friday morning, I was sur-
prised to find a room of 11 people instead of just two. I was put
at the end of the table and asked to talk about our global capa-
bilities. My first reaction was, Oh no! But then I thought, here
is my chance to take a risk and get outside my comfort zone. So,
I set aside my laptop with the PowerPoint slides and just spoke
about two recent client assignments with major companies. I
could not believe how engaged the audience was, what excellent
questions they asked, and how much credibility I built. I didn’t
realize the sense of freedom one has not using a presentation. I
still covered all the information I wanted without using the doc-
ument. The client seemed to trust me after that session, and we
are now discussing a major proposal.
Take care and thanks again for all your help and advice.
Michael
It may seem like a very small step that my client took, but I can
tell you that his enthusiasm for going out and meeting with new
clients and rekindling relationships with old ones has soared because
of the experience he describes—and so has his income.

34
5
More Important
Than Your 401(k)
Building Your
Relationship Capital
While interviewing CEOs and senior corporate executives for this
book, I noticed a distinct shift in emphasis and tone compared to
similar discussions I held in the late 1990s. Then it was clear that
clients gravitated toward professionals they knew and trusted, but
now this tendency is even more pronounced. Clients are asking,
more than ever, “Whom can I trust?”
What’s changed? Quite a bit, in fact. First, the dot-com collapse
of the late 1990s left many clients feeling burned by the outlandish,
hollow claims that became routine during this business bubble. Sec-
ond, major corporations such as Enron, Cendant, and Waste Man-
agement—as well as a handful of leading financial institutions and
professional service firms—have, in recent years, been involved in
scandals characterized by lying, financial obfuscation, and putting
client and customer interests last. Finally, the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks gave all of us a renewed sense of the importance of
our closest, most trusted relationships.

More Important Than Your 401(k)
35
We have entered into what I call the networked age or the age
of relationship capital, and the implications for business profes-
sionals are profound. It means that your success will depend more
than ever on your ability to develop trusted relationships with
clients and on the general richness of your personal network. Lis-
ten, for example, to Fred Lawrence, a former top Sprint executive
and current partner with a leading venture capital firm: “When
someone comes in with a new idea and wants funding, chances are
that five other people also have the same idea. The real question is,
does this person have the network of relationships that will allow
him to hire a management team, acquire his initial customers, and
develop business partners who can provide leverage?”
Let’s put this observation into some historical perspective. In
the agrarian age, wealth and position were inherited, and the chief
asset was land. Wealth, therefore, was concentrated in royalty and
nobility. During the industrial age, financial capital became pre-
eminent, and the greatest wealth was created by bankers and the
industrialists who deployed that capital into transportation and fac-
tories—people such as J. P. Morgan, Henry Ford, and John D.
Rockefeller. For the last 20 years, intellectual capital has reigned;
ideas, rather than land or money, have been the currency of the in-
formation age. Not surprisingly, our most wealthy and famous busi-
ness figures today are people like Microsoft’s Bill Gates and Oracle’s
Larry Ellison.
We are quickly transitioning, however, into yet a fourth era:
the networked age, where individual and corporate successes are in-
creasingly determined by relationship capital. Our technology em-
phasis echoes this shift: Whereas the focus from 1980 to 2000 was
making more complex software and faster chips (to manage infor-
mation), the focus now is clearly on the number of interconnected
nodes on a network and connection speed (bandwidth), required
both to foster and manage relationships.
The ability to leverage a network of relationships, in short, is
becoming more important than just ideas or information. Several
forces underscore the importance of building relationship capital:

36
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
 Mergers and acquisitions have grown, leading to great tran-
sience in the corporate world.
 Job switching has increased, from four to five times in a ca-
reer to seven to eight times.
 All business professionals—whether corporate employees or
independent professionals—are in a sense free agents.
 Many forces, such as the Internet, expert software, and dig-
ital technology, are turning most products and services into
commodities. It’s the value-added relationship around these
products and services that makes them especially valuable
to clients.
Haven’t relationships always been important? Yes, but there have
always been significant barriers to building them—and these barri-
ers have finally fallen, as illustrated here:
Compared to what was possible fifty or one hundred years ago,
today’s business professionals have unparalleled opportunities—if
they are tenacious and skilled—to build relationships with a wide
variety of individuals.
What constitutes your relationship capital? There are five types
of individuals with whom you need to build relationships. One of
them, of course, is clients, but what I have observed is that the most
successful client advisors also have an abundance of the other four

More Important Than Your 401(k)
37
types. In fact, these other relationships are essential to their ability
to develop and keep clients. Let’s look at each of these briefly:
 Clients and customers. These are the people and organiza-
tions we do business with. They are the lifeblood of service
professionals and executives who work in sales and market-
ing. Making Rain is especially focused on developing this as-
pect of your relationship capital.
 Counselors. Counselors advise and mentor us during our ca-
reers, providing support, encouragement, and guidance. A
number of new studies have demonstrated the importance of
mentors in our professional career, and this is especially true
for women and minorities who have traditionally had fewer
role models to guide them.
 Catalysts. A rare breed, these individuals can introduce us to
others and make deals happen. Catalysts have a particular per-
sonality and way of operating—they can be impatient and
even difficult—but having a relationship with the right cat-
alyst can transform a business opportunity overnight. Cata-
lysts are often bankers, venture capitalists, and agents—but
they can come in many guises. My literary agent, for exam-
ple, is a classic catalyst. I once called her to tell her about a
particular concern that I had (a very minor one, I might add),
and she responded, “You know, Andrew, I’m just not very
good at handholding with authors.” Maybe she was not good
at handholding, but she is a superstar when it comes to mak-
ing a literary deal happen!
 Collaborators. These can be business partners but also indi-
viduals we might hire into our organization. An accountant
might be an important collaborator for a financial advisor,
for example, just as family practitioners are collaborators for
the medical specialists they recommend to their patients. My
network of collaborators includes a variety of other profes-
sionals with whom I exchange information, share referrals,
and sometimes work on an ad hoc basis.

38
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
 Companions. These represent the final category of relation-
ship capital. Companions are family and friends—a class
often ignored by today’s workaholic professionals—who nur-
ture our emotional and spiritual side. Companions help us to
be effective with our clients in many direct and indirect ways.
Above all, they provide needed balance to our lives, giving us
the emotional stability and strength to deal with difficult mo-
ments at work. They also often serve as counselors to us, act-
ing as sounding boards and providing calm advice when we
are puzzled or uncertain about a particular situation. Usu-
ally, our family and friends are able to put our interests first
when listening and giving advice. Noting this point, Eileen
Friars, a former top Bank of America executive, said to me,
“Why is it that many men turn to their spouses when they
need a trusted advisor? Because each one knows she has only
his interests at heart.”
There are two important points to remember about these differ-
ent types of relationships. First, there can be overlap—it is quite pos-
sible for someone to be both a counselor and a catalyst for you, or to
be a client and a collaborator. For example, I worked with one client
as a strategy consultant (a counselor) but also collaborated with him
by jointly authoring an article. Similarly, a few of my clients have be-
come personal friends. That said, there are important distinctions be-
tween these roles, and each offers a different kind of added value.
Second, in serving your clients, you need to be clear about
which role you are playing and what your client really wants from
you. Chuck Lillis, the former CEO of cable giant MediaOne (now
part of AT&T Comcast), told me an interesting story in this regard
about his advisors: “We were involved in a major transaction with
another Fortune 500 company and my advisors included legal, pub-
lic relations, and consulting professionals. In all three cases, there
were specific individuals who added value way beyond the con-
tractual work. It turned out that our attorney personally knew two
of the board members of the other company; the public relations

More Important Than Your 401(k)
39
guy knew their investment bankers, and our consultant owned a
house on Martha’s Vineyard right next door to the CEO. A mid-
priced consultant would have come up with some complex strat-
egy—this person ended up inviting the CEO over to his house, and
it helped to cut through a lot of issues.” In this particular case, these
advisors’ ability to act not only as counselors but also as catalysts,
made them truly stand out.
When present in balance and abundance, our relationship
capital—customers, counselors, catalysts, collaborators, and com-
panions—form the foundation for our professional success and our
personal satisfaction. But how do we build these relationships? It’s
useful to think about four phases of relationship building:
1. Affiliating. This is the process of meeting people and getting
them interested in knowing you better or doing business with
you. Chapter 7 explores the roots of “likability” and how we
can increase the odds that others will want to move ahead and
develop a relationship with us. Many would call this step “net-
working,” but I prefer to use affiliating because its root mean-
ing better reflects the concept of finding common interests.
2. Adding Value. For a relationship to work, you have to add
value—this is what eventually shifts someone from being a
mere acquaintance to becoming a loyal fan. Virtually all of the
chapters in this book focus on different ways of adding value.
Part of the secret of creating loyalty is properly understanding
what constitutes “value” for each of your clients. My earlier
book, Clients for Life, looks specifically, from a developmen-
tal point of view, at the qualities you need to develop to do this.
(Chapter 2 also summarizes these attributes.)
3. Sustaining. One of the biggest problems for professionals is sus-
taining relationships over time, especially when they provide a
service or a product on a periodical basis (for instance, consult-
ing). Sometimes, years will go by before a client needs their par-
ticular service again—so what do they do in the interim to stay
in touch? Successful client advisors use a variety of techniques to

40
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
maintain contact and periodically appear on their clients’ “radar
screen.”
4. Multiplying. This is the fourth and most neglected stage of re-
lationship development. Just as our savings and retirement plans
grow in value to us, so should our most established relation-
ships. There are many ways of multiplying your influence
through established clients—the two most common ones are
through the printed word and referrals. These and others are
discussed in Chapter 20, “Sustaining and Multiplying.”
These various elements are summarized in the following figure:
The great client advisors I’ve studied typically have an abun-
dance of relationship capital. Their ability to develop rich, endur-
ing client relationships is underpinned by supporting relationships
that include catalysts, collaborators, counselors or mentors, and
companions. Whereas experts for hire focus on networking and
adding value narrowly (e.g., fulfilling the specific deliverables of
the contract), advisors are adept at all four stages of relationship
building. They add value that goes well beyond stated client needs.
They invest to sustain their relationships over time, and their best
clients help them leverage and spread their ideas and influence.
Growing Your Relationship Capital
Add Value
Affiliate
Sustain
Multiply
Catalysts
Companions
Clients
Counselors
Collaborators

More Important Than Your 401(k)
41
It is useful to think about your professional career as a drama
with both leading characters—your clients—and supporting ones
such as catalysts and collaborators. Remember that affiliating with
people—what we traditionally call networking—is only the first
act of a four-act play.
How do you know how well you’re doing at building relation-
ship capital? Ultimately, success should translate into professional
prosperity and personal satisfaction with your career. But these are
hard to quantify. Furthermore, you could have great relationships
but not make them work for you—you could be weak, for exam-
ple, at marketing yourself and representing your capabilities. The
best approach, I think, is to periodically ask yourself the following
key questions:
 Do I consistently follow up with the people I establish rela-
tionships with, adding value and sustaining them—where ap-
propriate—over time?
 Do I consciously seek to build relationships with a variety of
professionals and organizations that can play the roles of col-
laborator and catalyst?
 Do people in a position to refer clients to me actually do so?
If not, what action can I take to develop more referrals?
 Who can help me build my client base, and what can I offer
that contact?
 Am I satisfied with the balance between the time I invest in
my professional relationships versus the time spent with
friends and family?
 What if all of my clients disappeared tomorrow? Do I have
enough relationships with other types of people that I could,
with their help, rapidly rebuild my client base?
Systematically develop your relationship capital, and you’ll
have an asset that is even more valuable to you than your retire-
ment savings.

42
6
Benjamin
Franklin’s
Secret Weapon
In 1721, the printer James Franklin launched a newspaper called
the New England Courant. James hated the conservative Boston
religious establishment of the time, in particular the prominent,
arch-conservative, fire-and-brimstone preacher Cotton Mather. He
lashed out at Mather in acerbic editorials, and Mather didn’t hesi-
tate to counterattack. Under fictitious names, James also published
articles and letters attacking Mather. One morning, to his delight,
a well-crafted, humorous letter appeared under his door written by
“Silence Dogood”—a pseudonym, unknown to James, adopted by
his sixteen-year-old brother Benjamin, who had served as his ap-
prentice since the age of twelve.
Whereas James made direct attacks on public figures in his arti-
cles and editorials, Silence Dogood used prodding humor and irony
to satirize everything from Harvard University to Boston politi-
cians. A few months later, James was arrested and jailed, ostensibly
for refusing to reveal his journalistic sources but most likely for his
scathing public criticisms. He left Benjamin, at the age of a typical
tenth-grader today, as the editor and publisher of the Courant.

Benjamin Franklin’s Secret Weapon
43
Ben Franklin had learned his lesson: Humor and indirect ques-
tioning produced many friends and few enemies, while drawing at-
tention to the important issues. He later wrote about his “indirect
method”:
I was charmed with it, adopted it, dropped my abrupt contradic-
tion, and positive argumentation, and put on the humble inquirer
and doubter. . . . I practiced it continually and grew very artful
and expert in drawing people even of superior knowledge into
concessions the consequences of which they did not foresee.1
This was only one of many qualities that made Franklin a mas-
ter at building relationship capital. It might not have been so. As bi-
ographer H. W. Brands writes in The First American, “Genius is
prone to producing envy. Yet it was part of Franklin’s genius that he
produced far less than his share, due to an unusual ability to disarm
those disposed to envy.” He adds that Franklin “learned to deflect
credit for some of his most important inventions. He avoided argu-
ments altogether. Laughing, his opponents listened and were per-
suaded.”2
Benjamin’s brother James was eventually released from jail, and
the younger Franklin decided he could no longer abide by the near-
slave status that characterized an apprenticeship in the eighteenth cen-
tury. At the age of seventeen, Benjamin ran away from Boston and
went to Philadelphia, where he hoped to make his fortune. He arrived
in the state capital in 1723, penniless and disheveled after weeks of
travel. It was soon apparent that Franklin was highly adept at build-
ing relationships with influential individuals who would later help his
career. His broad intellect and range of knowledge—Franklin had al-
ways been an avid reader—were unusual for a seventeen-year-old,
and adults invariably found him an interesting, curious, and engaging
individual. People liked Franklin as soon as they met him, and they
usually wanted to get to know him better.
A cousin of Franklin’s, Robert Homes, wrote to him from
Delaware, asking him to return to his family in Boston. Franklin

44
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
wrote a careful letter back to Homes, thoughtfully explaining his
motivations for leaving Boston and describing how happy he was to
be in Philadelphia. The provincial governor of Pennsylvania, William
Keith, who happened to be with Homes when he received the let-
ter, read it and was amazed to learn that the author of such an artic-
ulate letter was so young. He knew that Philadelphia had hardly any
good printers and decided to seek out this young man and encour-
age him to set up shop.
Keith went to visit one of only two printing shops in Philadel-
phia, and coincidentally found Franklin working there as a part-time
helper. The owner of the shop was flabbergasted as the governor of
his province grabbed Franklin, whom he knew only from his
thoughtful letter, and took him off for a glass of port at a nearby
tavern. Finding him even more impressive in the flesh than on paper,
Keith agreed to help him start his own printing business. Although
Keith later let young Franklin down when he went to London to
buy printing equipment, the story illustrates how people were drawn
to Franklin, who later went on to become the leading printer in the
American colonies.
Another quality that endeared Franklin to everyone who came
into contact with him was his focus on ideas and relationships rather
than money. Some of us may think of Franklin as the prototypical
American capitalist, and while he was an enormously successful
businessman, making money was never his primary objective. As
Brands puts it, “For Franklin the getting of money was always a
means to an end, never the end itself.”3 Once he got his printing
business up and running, his energies turned elsewhere—to politics,
scientific invention, and other pursuits. In 1740, for example,
Franklin invented the free-standing wood stove—then called the
“Pennsylvania fireplace,” today known as the Franklin stove. This
marvelous invention greatly reduced the amount of wood required
to keep a house warm in the winter (fireplaces are notoriously in-
efficient for heating a room, due to loss of heat up the chimney).
The governor of Pennsylvania offered Franklin the exclusive rights
to sell his new fireplace in the province, an arrangement that would

Benjamin Franklin’s Secret Weapon
45
have made Franklin a very wealthy man, but he refused. “That as
we enjoy great advantages from the inventions of others,” he wrote,
“we should be glad of an opportunity to serve others by any in-
vention of ours, and this we should do freely and generously.”4
Franklin went on to an illustrious career. He was an extraordi-
narily successful inventor, and probably the individual most re-
sponsible for the American colonies’ victory over Britain in their
war for independence—Franklin’s successful efforts to convince the
French to support the colonies helped turn the tide against the over-
whelmingly superior British forces. After the Revolutionary War,
he was the guiding hand at the convention where the new consti-
tution was crafted.
It was Benjamin Franklin’s ability to build relationship capital,
however, which is of particular relevance to modern business profes-
sionals. Although extraordinarily bright, Franklin was self-effacing.
He was also interesting—he was well read and a great conversation-
alist—and all of these qualities combined into an appealing whole
that attracted others to him and helped him to establish relationships
immediately. Furthermore, his indirect, humorous means of getting
his points across endeared him even to his few ostensible enemies. As
a result, Franklin had an abundance of the different types of rela-
tionship capital outlined in the previous chapter—catalysts, like Gov-
ernor William Keith, who made key introductions for him in
Philadelphia; collaborators or business partners, many of whom
joined Franklin in the various printing businesses he founded; and
clients, who were drawn to his publications by virtue of his high-
quality writing and printing. Franklin was also brilliant at all four of
the phases of building relationship capital—affiliating, adding value,
sustaining, and multiplying. Publishing your ideas, for example, is a
powerful way to multiply your influence, and Franklin honed his
writing abilities from a young age. Later, through his printing and
publishing endeavors, he ensured that he always had a public outlet
for his thinking.
In 1790, Benjamin Franklin died at the age of eighty-four with
his family and friends at his side. He was a man of solid material

46
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
riches, but more important, he was beloved and admired on two
continents. He faced his own death with the same calmness and
equanimity he had demonstrated throughout his life, even joking,
when told that by shifting his position in bed he would breath more
easily, that “a dying man can do nothing easy!” Over 20,000
Philadelphians turned out for his funeral.
Franklin also wanted to influence future generations. As a youth
he had been staked several loans to begin his first printing business,
and he wanted to offer the same support to other young men and
women. He therefore left £2,000 in a special fund, split between
Boston and Philadelphia, that would provide small, low-interest
loans to up-and-coming professionals who had finished their ap-
prenticeships. Two hundred years later, in 1990, the funds were
worth $4.5 million and $2.0 million, respectively, and to this day
they continue to provide scholarships for worthy students.
Benjamin Franklin was America’s counterpart to Italy’s
Leonardo da Vinci, the Renaissance genius whom you’ll read about
in Chapter 9. Apprenticed at an early age, neither man received a
formal education. Self-taught outside their trades (printer and
artist, respectively), they both made indelible marks in history.
Whereas Leonardo was an irascible, prickly genius, Franklin—no
less intelligent—exemplified the consummate relationship builder.
He knew how smart he was but rarely let it show. He had many of
the answers but preferred to ask provocative questions. Although
he quickly discerned others’ faults, he allowed them to discover
them for themselves through his humor and indirect approach. He
was one of the most knowledgeable men on the planet, but his in-
satiable curiosity and zest for learning new things never flagged.
Not a bad approach for building client relationships in the
twenty-first century.

47
7
Why a Client
Might Like You
In a letter penned to her sister on Christmas Eve in 1798, the En-
glish novelist Jane Austen wrote, “I do not want people to be very
agreeable, as it saves me the trouble of liking them a great deal.”1
On the face of it, this is a rather odd statement. Austen was an ex-
traordinarily astute observer of human nature, however, and in her
letter she hints at something quite relevant for twenty-first-century
professionals: When we like someone, we are inclined to help them
and develop a relationship with them. Although it’s hard to know
today exactly what Austen was thinking when she made this state-
ment, I can’t help but believe she clearly recognized the obligation
that liking someone can bring.
In business, we are generally motivated to build long-term re-
lationships with people who can help us reach our goals and whom
we like. This is not always true in our personal lives, but that’s a dif-
ferent story. Sometimes we have neurotic reasons for associating
with someone, and it has nothing do with liking them.
If we don’t like someone, we may do business with him, but
he’ll be a vendor who never becomes part of our inner circle. Then,
if competitors offer a product or service that’s just as good, and we
also like them, there’s a good chance we’ll switch suppliers. It’s that
simple. What’s not so simple is precisely why we like some people

48
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
and not others. What genuine behaviors and attitudes spur a client’s
interest in getting to know us and wanting to work with us? Let’s
explore the roots of likability and see how you can put your best
foot forward, so to speak, each time you meet a new client—or
anyone, for that matter.
In 1936, Dale Carnegie wrote How to Win Friends and In-
fluence People. In his book, he sets out a series of principles that we
can employ to encourage others to like us. They include: Be inter-
ested in others; smile; use first names; be a good listener; talk in
terms of others’ interests; and make people feel important.2 In many
ways, Carnegie is right on the mark. Since he wrote this book,
however, there has been a great deal of scientific research done on
why we like people. Furthermore, today’s clients are relatively so-
phisticated and are unlikely to be easily swayed by a smile or because
they’re addressed by their first name.
Drawing on the interviews I have conducted with corporate
executives and individual clients over many years, as well as ideas
developed by Robert Cialdini in Inf luence: The Psychology of
Persuasion, I propose the following framework of six major fac-
tors that influence whether and to what extent we like someone at
a first meeting.
1. Similarity
A law firm bids for a large assignment and is chosen over half a
dozen other competitors. Did this group of lawyers win because
they were perceived as having better legal expertise? No, the client
views the top three bidders as being equal on this score. So what
pushes this plum contract their way? One of the lead attorneys lists
“polo” on her resume under recreation, and, you guessed it, the in-
house counsel choosing outside lawyers also plays polo, a somewhat
esoteric and rarified pastime. Unfair? No, human nature—we like
people with whom we have things in common.
This principle applies to even banal similarities. A study done in
the 1970s, for example, had young people go onto a college campus

Why a Client Might Like You
49
and ask students for a dime to make a phone call. When the exper-
imenters were dressed in a similar fashion to the students, the request
was granted more than two-thirds of the time; when they were
dressed differently, the success rate was far lower.3 Other studies have
shown that we are more inclined to sign a petition if we perceive the
petitioner to be similar to ourselves in dress and appearance.4
From a practical standpoint, it’s important to find commonali-
ties and connection points with clients. These could include just
about anything: family status (you both have teenage children, or
perhaps a newborn baby), education (you went to the same school
or had the same major in college), sports (you played Jai-Alai in col-
lege, too?), or just about any other shared experience. If I meet a
client from Minnesota, I would probably bring up my month-long
experience at the Minnesota Outward Bound School located near
the Minnesota/Canada border. I might ask a potential client if he has
any favorite business book authors—perhaps I know one of them
personally, and suddenly there is another point of intersection.
The objective is to find and explore genuine areas of common
interest. Insincerity or ingratiating behavior is usually patently ob-
vious and even repulsive to clients.
2. Familiarity
I have a rule of thumb that rarely fails me and has successfully been
used by many other professionals: If you are making a proposal to
a new client, the more face-to-face meetings you have, the more
likely you are to win the business. This sounds obvious, but many
people don’t follow it—they meet once or twice with a client and
then fire off a proposal.
Simply put, we like things we are familiar with. I remember a
comment an Italian friend made to me about restaurants in Rome:
“New restaurants in this city almost always fail. Italians like famil-
iar places with familiar faces, and they just stick to their habitual
restaurants where they are treated extremely well.” We are all a 
bit like that, actually. We gravitate toward familiar foods, familiar

50
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
surroundings, and familiar people. The more contact a client has
with us, the more she can get a sense for personal chemistry, trust-
worthiness, personal values, and integrity. Occasionally it doesn’t
work out—some people just aren’t very compatible—but in general
familiarity creates an advantage over the competition.
3. Positive Association
I once made an appearance on CNBC News to talk about building
long-term client relationships, and on the air the interviewer said to
me, tongue-in-cheek, “Well, we see that some of your clients have
included Citibank and American Express, and that’s of course why
we wanted you on the show!” In fact, she didn’t realize how true
that statement, said in jest, really was. If a person is associated with
something or someone that we like or respect, a transference oc-
curs and we are more inclined to also like that person. That’s why
corporations pay millions of dollars to celebrities to endorse their
products: Through positive association with a movie or rock star we
adore, they hope that we will like and then buy their products.
So how do you make positive association work for you? First of
all, as a general principle it means you always have to be discerning
about whom you associate with, because clients—like others—will
judge you by the company you keep. To the extent you have worked
for some admired or blue-chip clients, either individuals or corpo-
rations, make that known up-front. Have you been published in a
reputable journal or been interviewed by a well-known TV network
personality, radio announcer, or journalist? Have you ever had the
opportunity to work with a respected corporate executive, aca-
demic, or accomplished public figure? Be sure to communicate this
experience to potential clients.
4. Praising What’s Good
Numerous studies have shown that we feel more positively toward
people when they give us compliments, even if we know the

Why a Client Might Like You
51
statements are untrue.5 In other words, we like people who praise
us and whom we believe like us; conversely, no one enjoys criti-
cism. Dale Carnegie points out that even the most hardened crim-
inals, when confronted with their crimes, feel unjustly attacked and
misunderstood. “Under my coat is a weary heart, but a kind one—
one that would do nobody harm,” a famous mobster in the 1930s
proclaimed—with complete sincerity—to the police after he was
finally arrested after years of committing mayhem and murder.6
Joe Girard, who is listed in the Guinness Book of World
Records as the world’s greatest car salesman, exemplifies this prin-
ciple put to practical use. He sold an average of five cars a day and
earned a hefty six-figure income. His secret? “A fair price and
someone they like to buy from.”7 Apparently, he sent every one of
his 13,000 former customers a card every month of the year—
146,000 cards in total. And what did those cards say? Simply, “I
like you.”
These research findings are fascinating, but I don’t mean to sug-
gest that you throw away the objectivity and independence you
must show as a client advisor and become an insincere flatterer. The
lesson is that we must accentuate the positive as well as the negative.
It’s just as important to tell clients what they’re doing right—both
at an institutional level and on a personal level—as it is to pick apart
their performance. When I conduct a series of executive interviews
at the beginning of an assignment, for example, I always begin my
report to management with what’s working well. I also try to give
individual clients positive feedback about their performance as ex-
ecutives. Remember that senior executives don’t necessarily get a
lot of praise and positive feedback from their own organizations.
They are constantly confronted by problems they have to solve, and
their boss isn’t usually spending a lot of time telling them how well
they’re doing. A word of encouragement from a trusted outsider
can be welcome and motivating.
I recently introduced a friend to my own financial advisors,
Mallory White and Carl Luff of Raymond James, and asked them
to review his portfolio. I sent my friend to them because, frankly,

52
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
his investments were a complete mess and I knew it. When Mallory
and Carl prepared their initial analysis of his portfolio, I was braced
for a scathing assessment. I could just hear them saying, “It’s the
worst we’ve ever seen,” and then pinching their noses in disgust. In-
stead, they started with the positives: “The bonds in the portfolio
are really terrific,” Mallory said as she began the conversation.
“You’ve done a great job putting that part of your investments to-
gether. You’ve also made some excellent stock picks that are very
appropriate for your age and financial situation.” Then, they
pointed out the shortcomings and weaknesses. I remember feeling
relief but also an enhanced sense of trust in these advisors—they
weren’t completely trashing my friend’s investments in an attempt
to persuade him to hire them.
5. Openness
At a client meeting recently, a best-selling author who was a respected
expert in his field made frequent allusions to past clients and invest-
ment situations, but cloaked them in vague language and inscrutable
insinuations. I felt as if I were talking to a CIA agent. His answers
were always a bit evasive, and it was clear that he wasn’t going to re-
veal much information until he was on the client’s payroll. Later, I
discovered that while clients hired him to speak at corporate confer-
ences, they rarely followed up and used him for consultation. He was
a closed book, and because of that, clients didn’t particularly like him
or feel inclined to build a relationship with him.
In contrast, my colleague William Wallace, whose story I told
in the Introduction, has always had an openness that is highly invit-
ing to anyone he meets. Everything about his demeanor says, “This
guy has nothing to hide.” Not surprisingly, since leaving consult-
ing, William has had a successful career as an entrepreneur and now
as a top corporate executive in his job as president of a major divi-
sion of Verizon.
The quality of openness is very appealing to clients. Here are
some of the factors that convey such an attitude:

Why a Client Might Like You
53
 Body language. Successful advisors practice looking a client
in the eye, shaking her hand firmly, maintaining an open,
erect posture when sitting at a table, appearing interested in
what a client has to say, but not fawning and gushing over
every word.
 A willingness to share. There is a school of thought that
until a client is actually paying you, you shouldn’t reveal too
much information. I think this is bunk. The more you share
with a client up-front, the more he will be inclined to hire
you. Wouldn’t you be more enthusiastic about hiring a fi-
nancial advisor if, during your first hour with her, she gave
you good insights about your issues and provided some valu-
able information?
 Honesty. When clients ask you tough questions, do you beat
around the bush or do you just give them an honest answer?
Whenever I am asked a difficult question, I always try to fol-
low up with another question to understand what’s important
to the client. So if a client asks, “Have you ever worked in the
specialty chemicals industry before?” I answer honestly—but
I then inquire, “What are you looking for in an outside re-
source?” or “How much industry experience do you think is
necessary?”
6. Rapport
To some extent, a general sense of rapport is the result of many of
these behaviors. But there is a particular aspect of rapport that de-
serves a separate discussion, and that is the specific feeling on the
part of clients that we are in sync with them. This feeling will be
based on the extent to which we are matching our client along a
number of dimensions, including voice, gestures, style, and content.
For example, rapport will be enhanced if you match your client in:
 Pacing the conversation.
 Degree of formality or informality.

54
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
 Pitch and tone of your voice.
 Body language.
 Energy level.
 Orientation toward people as opposed to the task.
 Dress.
 Personal space.
 Degree to which you are fact-based rather than merely
anecdotal.
In practical terms, if a client is informal, enjoys talking about
things outside of work, and has a sense of humor, respond in kind
and you’ll start to develop rapport. If you compensate by constantly
redirecting the conversation to business issues, the client will have
a vague sense of being out of sync—of just not relating to you.
Don’t be artificial or insincere, but do your best to relate to
clients in a way that maximizes their receptiveness to your ideas and
the possibility of a personal relationship rather than just an arm’s-
length transaction.
These same principles of likability, by the way, apply to any sit-
uation where you are meeting someone new. A friend of mine re-
cently interviewed for the top job at a major hospital, for example,
and before he went for the first round of interviews, I walked him
through these six behaviors. A highly educated doctor, he was very
concerned with thoroughly communicating his medical credentials
and experience. As a result of our practice interviews, he focused
on finding similarities and commonalities with the senior medical
staff interviewing him, first praising them for what he saw as the
strengths of their hospital, but then honestly critiquing the hospital’s
shortcomings. He presented his accomplishments, mentioning several
respected individuals he had worked with in the medical profession;
and he was sensitive to his interviewers’ pacing, tone, and body lan-
guage. He reported to me afterward that in just a few hours he es-
tablished a degree of rapport with his interlocutors that on other
occasions had taken days to build. Not surprisingly, he got the job.

55
8
The Myth of
Meeting Client
Expectations
“Identify and then meet or exceed your client’s expectations!” This
exhortation has become the accepted wisdom about how to excel
with clients. It is indeed a useful axiom—that is, if you see your
role as that of an expert for hire. If you aspire to be a client advisor
who builds long-term loyalty, however, it is a dangerously limiting
and even misleading piece of advice. Consider these examples of
client relationships gone sour:
 A shipping company retained a major consulting firm and
asked it to help improve the efficiency of its operations. The
senior partner in charge of the engagement delegated most
of the work to a team of bright young associates whose in-
sightful analytic work identified profit improvement oppor-
tunities that exceeded the client’s stated goals. Halfway
through the project, however, the client’s CEO called the
partner and abruptly cancelled the work for unspecified rea-
sons. Six months later, a friend of the CEO told the consult-
ing firm that the CEO had anticipated a one-on-one

56
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
counseling relationship with the senior partner, but it had
never materialized—“I got this team of young MBAs in-
stead,” he complained.
 An advertising agency designed an effective set of commer-
cials that resulted in meaningful sales increases of the client’s
product. When the campaign was over, the client put the ac-
count out to bid, saying that it had a policy of periodically
looking at other agencies for good ideas. In fact, the client’s
vice president of marketing didn’t like several key members
of the agency’s team and felt the overall personal chemistry
was poor. He wanted an agency that was more enjoyable to
work with.
These are true and not atypical anecdotes about professionals
who got canned even though they met and even exceeded clearly
stated and formally negotiated client expectations. So what’s up
here? How do we cross this minefield called “client expectations”?
Here are four principles that will provide you with the broad-
est possible palette for adding value to your clients:
1. Clients always have hidden or unarticulated expectations
that have nothing to do with quantitative business objectives. In
the first example, the client’s CEO thought he was buying a rela-
tionship with a highly experienced partner who was going to pro-
vide a forum to bounce around big-picture ideas about his business.
Yet even a thorough and questioning proposal development process
failed to uncover this assumption. In the second example, the client
wanted, in addition to good ads, a warm, enjoyable, personal rela-
tionship with his agency staff. In neither case would these expec-
tations ever have been stated out loud, and in any event they were
ignored until the consulting firm or ad agency was fired.
Client advisors focus as much on the qualitative, personal as-
pects of the business relationship as they do on meeting stated op-
erational goals, and they have the sensitivity to recognize them even
when the client cannot or will not express them. Sometimes there

The Myth of Meeting Client Expectations
57
are client expectations that are simply unknowable. This is why
principle 2, that follows, is so important—you won’t always be able
to grasp every one of your client’s expectations, and so you have to
take a broad focus on improving his business in ways he has asked
as well as in ways he hasn’t even expressed.
2. Most professionals define “expectations” and “client” too
narrowly. A CEO I once worked for referred me to a far-flung di-
vision within his company, ostensibly to do the same type of strat-
egy development effort that I had successfully completed for him.
The division head, indeed, wanted a new approach to the market.
The CEO, however, was hoping I would instigate a cultural
change—a mind-set shift—among the division executives, some-
thing I discerned only over a long dinner punctuated by several bot-
tles of French Burgundy (I took a taxi home). Suddenly my task
was much more complicated, and meeting my new client’s expec-
tations (a revitalized market strategy for the division) alone would
have constituted failure in the mind of the CEO.
Your “client,” in the broadest sense, is far more than the exec-
utive who hired you. It could include a more senior executive
you’ve never even met, a young up-and-coming manager who is
part of a team you’re working with, or the spouse or grown chil-
dren of your client if you advise individuals.
3. Improving your client’s condition, not just meeting expec-
tations, is paramount. I have a current client who asked me to de-
sign and facilitate a quarterly strategy meeting offsite with his senior
management team. I have done that, and the sessions have been ex-
tremely successful (I am not advocating that you dodge expected de-
liverables in favor of something else—I take the client’s explicit goals
very seriously). In between these sessions, however, I have added sig-
nificant value, including introducing my client to a potential strate-
gic partner, coaching two senior executives on their managerial style,
and helping the CEO prepare his year-end evaluation for his board
of directors. These value-added activities were not part of the client’s

58
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
stated—or even hidden—expectations for this assignment. Yet if you
asked the CEO about the value of my work, he would cite these lat-
ter contributions as being just as important as the workshops we for-
mally contracted for.
Some readers may be wondering if they should be compensated
for such extra services. The short answer is “Yes, but it may not al-
ways happen.” You have three choices here: Price them in at the be-
ginning; negotiate them as additions to your contract; or give some
of them away, especially the ones that are high value but take up lit-
tle time.
4. Tell your client, tactfully, about how you’ve helped her. If
you’ve been married or had a partner for more than a year or so,
chances are that individual does things for you that you are already
taking for granted. The same thing happens in professional-client re-
lationships. Whereas in a close, romantic relationship it is tacky and
even neurotic to recite all of your contributions to the partnership
(we rely on each other to reach out and recognize them), it is often
appropriate and indeed necessary to do it in business. Some clients are
great at recognizing your value, but others are so preoccupied with
running their businesses that they don’t really add it all up.
You can elegantly highlight the value you have provided in sev-
eral ways: First, you can sit down and periodically review your per-
formance with your client, and in that session both give and solicit
comments about your contributions as well as about what you could
do better. Second, you can encourage others in the organization to
give your principal client feedback about your contributions. Re-
member, third-party endorsements are far more powerful than any-
thing we say about ourselves. So when a manager in your client’s
organization tells you how much she enjoys working with you or ex-
presses gratitude for your contributions—by all means encourage
her to tell that directly to your client. The turning point in the re-
lationship with one of my own clients came when a subordinate told
him, “I don’t know how much we’re paying Sobel for his work, but
whatever it is, he’s worth far more his fees.” (I’d like to tell you that

The Myth of Meeting Client Expectations
59
every client of mine says this about me, but that would be a lie.
Maybe they think it without saying it out loud. . . .) When an ex-
ecutive hears this from one of his managers, it is very powerful.
Rethink what you’re trying to do for your clients. Experts for
hire and “steady suppliers” merely try to identify and then meet or
exceed their clients’ expectations—a level of performance that
often keeps them employed. Great advisors, in contrast, look for
myriad ways to improve their clients’ business condition, and they
help the individuals they serve become better managers and better
people. This success enables them to become part of their client’s
inner circle.
Which kind of professional—expert for hire or long-term
advisor—do you aspire to become?

60
9
Leonardo 
da Vinci
Why Lutes and
Madonnas Matter
In 1481, at the age of thirty, the Italian artist Leonardo da Vinci left
Florence and moved to Milan in search of a patron or client. While
living in Florence, he had completed his apprenticeship to Andrea
Verrocchio and established his early reputation as a brilliant and
original painter. Florence had an abundance of artistic talent, how-
ever, and the competition for patrons—wealthy rulers or noblemen
who could afford to give out commissions for works of art—was in-
tense. Milan lacked Florence’s artistic resources, so Leonardo headed
to a city where he had a greater chance of establishing his own base
of loyal patrons.
When Leonardo arrived in Milan, he brought with him a rare
lute he had constructed in the shape of a horse’s head. (In addition
to being an accomplished painter, he was also a skilled lutenist.)
Milanese high society was apparently quite taken by his musical tal-
ents and his unusual instrument, and the social contacts he devel-
oped as a result of his hobnobbing—not unlike some modern

Leonardo da Vinci
61
consultants or bankers—turned out to be instrumental in procur-
ing art commissions.
Eyeing his ideal client, Leonardo drafted a letter offering his
services to the Milanese ruler Ludovico Sforza: “I offer to execute,
at your convenience, all of the items briefly noted below.” The
extraordinary list consists almost entirely of descriptions of innova-
tive military inventions that could be put at Sforza’s service. “I have
a model of very strong but light bridges, extremely easy to carry.
. . . During a siege, I know how to dry up the water of the
moats. . . . I have models of mortars that are easy to transport. . . . I
will make covered vehicles, safe and unassailable, which will pene-
trate enemy ranks . . .” and so on. The list is amazingly prescient—
it describes many military inventions that didn’t come into
mainstream use until centuries later. Interestingly, only at the very
end of this letter does Leonardo mention putting his prodigious
artistic talents to work for the Milanese leader, saying, “Moreover,
[a] bronze horse could be made that will be to the immortal glory
and honor of the lord your father.”1
Why did Leonardo, an artist who had no particular experience
in designing or building weapons, position himself to Sforza as a
military engineer? The answer is quite simple: In 1482, most of the
Italian city-states were on a war footing—the Turks had invaded
southern Italy, and Venice had hired Swiss mercenaries and was
threatening Milan. Sforza was being inexorably drawn into the con-
flict. Leonardo, no slouch, was adjusting his service offering to his
client’s presumed needs at the time. Sforza needed ideas about how
to wage war, not altarpieces with depictions of the Virgin Mary.
The ever-creative Leonardo emphasized his inventive engineering
skills rather than his artistic abilities.
Great client advisors have both depth and breadth, and Leonardo
da Vinci was an example of a consummate deep generalist. An ille-
gitimate child who grew up in a small town in Tuscany, Leonardo
had virtually no formal education. When he was brought to Flo-
rence and apprenticed to Verrocchio at age 15, he knew nothing of
Latin and probably could barely read. Although he lacked education,

62
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
Leonardo rarely failed to master whatever discipline or task he set
himself to. At his death, he had become one of the most accomplished
artists in history. He had designed hundreds of inventions, including
a water-powered alarm clock, a parachute, a variable-intensity table
lamp, and a helicopter—all of them well before their time. Moreover,
he created anatomical studies that were unequaled for nearly three
hundred years. Leonardo was simply fascinated by everything around
him, writing, “The desire to know is natural to good men.”
Leonardo’s own humble origins clearly shaped his approach to
learning and his philosophy of education. First of all, he believed
that imitation was a waste of time. “The painter will produce
mediocre pictures,” he wrote, “if he is inspired by the work of oth-
ers.” Artists and scientists, he felt, should base their work on direct
observation and analysis. Leonard exemplified an important trait of
great learners—he got his hands dirty! He valued hands-on learn-
ing rather than academic study, perhaps a reaction to the fact that
he found himself keeping company with highly literate Renaissance
scholars who quoted left and right from recently discovered Greek
and Latin texts. He wrote, “Anyone who invokes authors in a dis-
cussion is not using his intelligence but his memory.” His studies of
human anatomy, for example, are based on hundreds of hours spent
dissecting corpses—not a common activity in Renaissance Italy!
Many of the modern professionals I have interviewed talk about
the need to get deeply involved with the nuts and bolts of your re-
lationships, no matter how senior you are, to experience the client’s
situation and issues first hand. Former General Electric chief exec-
utive Jack Welch calls it “diving deep”—he once spent an entire
week with Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton, for example, in an ef-
fort to understand why his retail chain was so successful. Abraham
Lincoln, as a young lawyer, similarly “dived deep” by riding the
Eighth Judicial Circuit for three months each year across the state
of Illinois. He traveled by horse with a judge and other lawyers,
working with clients in dozens of small towns across 11,000 square
miles of rural countryside. Despite the hardship—sometimes 
Lincoln would sleep in a hotel room with a dozen other men—he

Leonardo da Vinci
63
accumulated a wealth of practical experience and knowledge
through his exposure to so many different clients and legal issues,
most of which had to be resolved in a few days. “Getting his hands
dirty” yielded another benefit: He built relationships with thou-
sands of voters who later supported his political career.
Leonardo also put great emphasis on inventiveness, which, ac-
cording to some historians, explains why he actually painted so few
works. Writes one biographer, “He was incapable of repeating what
had already been done by someone else, and only took up his
brushes once a revolution in the mind had been accomplished.”2 He
developed a innovative technique in his early paintings, for exam-
ple, that involved carefully applying many fine layers of thin paint
over a primed surface, resulting in a mysterious luminosity created
by the light as it passed through the surface layers and was reflected
back. When he painted the famous Last Supper, he completely broke
with convention, and instead of placing Judas off to the side with-
out a halo (the custom among Renaissance painters), he placed him
close to Christ and on the right, differentiating him with nuances
of expression and shadow. Leonardo designed a 24-foot bronze
horse for Ludovico Sforza, and because of its great height, had to in-
vent an entirely new way of casting bronze. Unfortunately, his
client was drawn into a war on the eve of the casting, and Sforza’s
army requisitioned the 72 tons of bronze that had been accumulated
for the statue and used it to make cannonballs and artillery shells.
Leonardo’s most famous employer was the vicious, despotic
Cesare Borgia, who ruled over Milan with an iron fist. One biog-
rapher writes, “The two men must have taken an instant liking to
each other. The boldness of the artist-engineer corresponded in
some ways to the audacity of the prince. . . . [T]hese two bastard
children respected each other for their intelligence, independence of
mind, and scorn for convention.”3 Borgia hired Leonardo as his
chief military engineer, and Leonardo spent many months touring
the battlefields of northern Italy, acting as a consultant on how to
improve fortifications and drain swampy land. Interestingly, during
this time Leonardo met Niccolò Machiavelli, who had been sent

64
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
by the Florentine government to observe Borgia’s operations up
close. The two hit it off and spent many late nights in deep con-
versation about the world’s problems—who wouldn’t want to have
been a fly on the wall during one of those sessions! Within a year,
Leonardo left Borgia’s service; whether he became fed up with
Borgia’s ruthless style and walked away or simply moved to greener
pastures is hard to tell.
Leonardo was highly trained as a master artist, but he branched
out into many other disciplines. He constantly went to the source
for his learning, studying the ripples in a pond with the same in-
tensity he had for the subjects of his paintings such as the Mona
Lisa. He was not satisfied with imitation but rather insisted on
bringing something new and different to all of his creations. He
also challenged conventional wisdom—he took nothing for granted,
and constantly questioned why things were done a certain way,
whether it was the traditional technique of applying paint to a can-
vas (he invented his own style) or the accepted way of swaddling
newborn infants (they were wrapped far too tightly, he asserted).
Even in his sixties, near the end of his life, Leonardo was busy
studying new areas of science, and cooking up more projects than
ever—one of his last proposed inventions was a huge parabolic mir-
ror that could be used to harness solar power to use in the dying
of textiles.
Although Leonardo was clearly born with innate genius, his
learning habits—which anyone can emulate—are relevant for mod-
ern professionals. There are six important learning arenas that you
need to focus on in order to evolve from a narrow specialist to a
deep generalist:
1. Yourself. Self-knowledge is the starting point for your learn-
ing journey. Self-knowledge is absolutely necessary for empathy, and
honest self-appraisal provides you with insight into your intellectual
and emotional strengths and weaknesses. Leonardo kept detailed
journals his entire life, recording daily events but also reflecting 
on his perceptions and his moods—a technique, interestingly, 

Leonardo da Vinci
65
advocated by some modern psychotherapists as a means of getting in
touch with ourselves.
2. Your core specialty. You’ve got to be top-flight at your core
expertise. It’s your ticket to admission as far as getting the attention
of new clients, and you need to continually develop it during your
entire career. Leonardo himself, despite his precocious and prodi-
gious natural talent, spent nearly 15 years as an apprentice to the
Florentine master Andrea Verrocchio. Even as he branched out into
new areas like anatomy and engineering, he continued to refine and
develop his painting skills for the rest of his life.
3. Your personal interests. Ideally, work is play, but most of us
have interests that go beyond our chosen professional focus. Your
personal interests—whether they include collecting antiques, play-
ing the piano, scuba diving, biking, or something else altogether—
have a way of combining with your professional learning to create
a balanced whole. They subtly influence your perspectives and make
you a more interesting person to your clients. It was Leonardo’s lute
playing, for example, that first established him in Milan and en-
abled him to network with wealthy aristocrats.
4. Your personal knowledge of your client. The better you
know your client personally, the more effective you will be at ad-
vising him and tailoring your services to his needs. You’ll have a
clearer understanding of how to go the extra mile and add value
beyond your what is specified in your written contract. You’ll also
become more adept at tailoring your communications style to your
client’s particular personality type. Personal knowledge and famil-
iarity, as we have seen, are also critical for building trust.
5. Your client’s organization. Just as Leonardo spent months
trudging around the freezing countryside to study Cesare Borgia’s
fortifications and encampments, you need to develop intimate
knowledge of your client’s organization, her strategy, and her 

66
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
operations. Insights about your client’s business emerge when you
combine your own experiences with deep client knowledge.
6. Your client’s industry and environment. You can’t be very
useful to your client if you don’t have a thorough understanding of
the industry and the overall business ecosystem that he lives in. This
is why, for example, many professional service firms and corpora-
tions have developed a marketing focus on industry segments or
“vertical markets.” A strong knowledge of industry trends and prac-
tices, an understanding of what’s going on with our economy, and
a more general feel for management trends and ideas all form an im-
portant backdrop to the specific client issues you are working on.
In our culture, we tend to revere experts—individuals who have
an enormous depth of knowledge in one area. As the half-life of
knowledge shrinks, however, we have to question the very concept
Learning Journeys: Client and Self
Client’s Environment
Client’s Organization
Client as Individual
Client
Self
Self-Knowledge
Core Expertise
Personal Interest

Leonardo da Vinci
67
of acquiring “expertise” that then serves us for the rest of our lives.
A college or graduate education should teach us how to think logi-
cally and how to learn going forward, not dump a body of soon-to-
be obsolete knowledge into our brains. As one historian says about
Leonardo, “He had not been to a university. He learned through
chance meetings, by observation, or by reading and asking ques-
tions.”4 Leonardo used to refer to himself as “a disciple of experi-
ence.” Not a bad approach once you’ve finished your formal
education.
I picture Leonardo as an old man, physically weak but as excited
as ever about his latest project or his newest discovery. He sits on
the seashore, resting, but his ever-sharp mind focuses on the in-
coming surf and the shifting tide, speculating about the nature of
wave energy. He stares at a seashell and pockets it, thinking it might
make a good design for a staircase. He makes a few notes in his
handwritten lexicon, which already contains nine thousand words.
Leonardo da Vinci passed away nearly 500 years ago, but he’s
still an inspirational role model for twenty-first century learners!

68
10
Finding the
Hidden Creases
Influencing Your Clients
Physical labor is often a fundamental part of Zen training. During
his studies with a famous Zen archery master in Hawaii, Kenneth
Kushner found himself engaged in the arduous task of moving large
rocks to make way for a new footpath. A psychotherapist by train-
ing, Kushner found it nearly impossible to dislodge the heavy boul-
ders, and he was quickly exhausted by his futile efforts. In his book
One Arrow, One Life, he writes about an important lesson he
learned from his Zen teacher:
Tanouye Roshi watched me with considerable amusement. He
explained I was trying to impose my will on the rocks; I was
trying to make them go where I wanted them to go. “You have
to learn to push the rock where it wants to go,” he explained to
me. He explained further that, if I could do that, I could coax
the rocks to where I wanted them to go. He then showed me
that, because the rocks are unevenly shaped, there is usually one
direction in which, if pushed, the rock is easier to unbalance
and flip over. He told me that I must learn how to utilize the

Finding the Hidden Creases
69
direction in which the rock “wanted” to go in order to move it
where I wanted it to go. . . . He continued to demonstrate how,
by repeating the process of pushing the rock in its favored di-
rection and occasionally spinning the rock so as to reorient the
direction it “wanted” to go, it was quite easy to move it where
I wanted it to go.1
Influencing clients is very similar to moving boulders. All of
your clients will have in mind a direction they wish to take, and you
will naturally try to persuade them to follow your direction. This
is true whether you’re a consultant, a public relations professional,
or a salesperson trying to convince a client to place an order for
your products. A client’s favored direction could be thought of as a
“hidden crease”—he will be predisposed to moving that way, just
as a piece of paper will easily fold again where it has been previously
creased. The Zen approach to life is to find the hidden creases in
every activity—the “naturally correct” way of doing things, as
Kushner says.
You don’t have to become a Zen Buddhist to influence clients,
but this principle has relevance to professional-client relationships.
The best strategy with clients is not to bludgeon them into taking
your advice but rather to understand where they want to go and
then influence their trajectory 10 or 20 degrees at a time. As Ben
Franklin said, “If you would persuade, you must appeal to interest
rather than intellect.”2
I once had a client who was dead set on promoting a certain
executive to a position I felt he was completely inappropriate for.
Not only did he lack the skills for the job, but his promotion and
ostensibly closer relationship with my client threatened to send a
bad signal to the broader organization. When I first raised my ob-
jections, it was like trying to move one of the heavy boulders that
stymied Kenneth Kushner in the previous story—my client was set
in his direction.
My next line of attack was to spin my client on his axis ever 
so slightly: I suggested I help him develop the detailed roles and 

70
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
responsibilities for the new position. Since this client was a Baby
Boomer—we’ll explore the implications of this later in the chap-
ter—he was very comfortable creating detailed documentation
around the new position, something that an older executive from
the Traditionalist generation might have resisted. We did this, and
I successfully began to orient the new role more toward internal
coordination rather than working externally with clients, some-
thing this individual was very weak at. Next, we worked on the
reporting relationships for this executive—should he report di-
rectly to my client, who was the division head, or to my client’s
chief of staff?
My client had long complained about not having enough time for
his role as strategist and visionary leader of the business, and I em-
phasized this to him in debating the right reporting structure. I also
appealed to his desire to shake things up in his business unit—again,
a typical characteristic of Baby Boomers who wanted to change the
establishment in the 1960s and still do. Furthermore, I got the chief
of staff to pull him aside and argue why this new executive should re-
port to him rather than my client. Again, I was moving my client in
a direction he wanted to go—more time for strategic thinking and
leadership—but also in a direction I felt he should go. At the end of
this process, the client felt he had made great progress, and I was sat-
isfied that I had moved him in the right direction and done the best
I could for him and his organization.
Because I have a bit of a stubborn streak, sometimes I have
wanted to say to my wife, “Before you say anything, let me struc-
ture the nature of your advice so that I can accept it!” My urge il-
lustrates a fundamental point: Part of the art of working with clients
is understanding how best to communicate effectively and persuade
them. And practicing that art depends on how well you can under-
stand clients’ hidden creases.
A case-in-point is John Balkcom, who took over as president
of St. John’s College after a distinguished career in business, in-
cluding a long stint as a partner at consultants Booz, Allen &

Finding the Hidden Creases
71
Hamilton. St. John’s, with twin campuses in Annapolis and Santa
Fe, has a unique curriculum that teaches the great books. Despite
possessing several degrees, including a master’s degree in the clas-
sics from St. John’s itself, Balkcom does not have the typical pedi-
gree of a college president—that is, he does not hold a PhD and
cannot claim long experience in teaching in a university setting.
When he first arrived, Balkcom—like any good strategic 
consultant—thought about the need to develop a new strategy for
St. John’s. After meeting at length with his faculty, however, some
of whom have taught at St. John’s for over 30 years, he changed his
mind—he realized it was not a good idea to immediately propose
major changes in direction to an institution whose strength is teach-
ing the classics to students in small discussion groups. Instead of ad-
vocating a grand vision or strategy, he formed three “college
committees,” led by experienced faculty, to examine three particu-
lar issues of great strategic importance: enrollment levels, faculty re-
newal, and community outreach. He asked the committees to come
back to him with ideas for change. By first trying to discern the
hidden creases of his client—the faculty—Balkcom has set the stage
for long-term change at St. John’s that will come from within and
have the support of its major constituencies.

72
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
Numerous frameworks have been devised to categorize peo-
ple’s communications styles and personality types, and if this sub-
ject interests you, I’d suggest you explore two in particular. The
first, developed by Gary Williams and Robert Miller of “Strategic
Selling” fame, is based on a large study of how executives make de-
cisions. Their results have been published in an article entitled
“Change the Way You Persuade.”3 The second framework, devel-
oped many years ago by David Merrill and popularized by Robert
and Dorothy Grover Bolton,4 is based on a person’s degree of as-
sertiveness and emotional control (“responsiveness”). These ap-
proaches and others can be useful, but the difficulty I have with
them is that it’s hard to determine which category a client fits into.
How do you know with any certainty, for example, whether a client
is an “analytical” or an “expressive” (from the Bolton book)? You
can develop a skill for making such distinctions, but it takes a seri-
ous investment of time.
An easier and quite powerful framework can be built around de-
mographics. One advantage of using generational groups to under-
stand clients’ motivations is that you can tell immediately who
belongs in which category. I conduct frequent workshops with my
clients, and I was recently struck by the different habits that they
have when it comes to scheduling and implementing these sessions.
One, who is in his late fifties, likes to carefully plot out our sched-
ule of meetings for months to come. He also tends to limit the par-
ticipants to those who are directly involved in the issue at hand or
who have a “need to know.” Another client, who is in her forties,
also likes to plan in advance, and she takes a slightly broader but
very hierarchical view of who should come to the workshops—it’s
very much based on titles. Often, she wants to use a weekend to
limit the number of workdays consumed. A third client is in his
early thirties, and he wouldn’t think of scheduling a workshop on
the weekend—or on any other day when the meeting might inter-
fere with family or personal issues. He likes to invite just about ev-
eryone and his dog to our offsites—“better to be inclusive than

Finding the Hidden Creases
73
exclusive,” he tells me; and sometimes we schedule them at the very
last minute.
Sound familiar? These styles are representative of the three
major demographic groups that we are now dealing with in the
workplace. Each has very different goals, attitudes, and habits:
 Traditionalists, born before 1945 (sometimes called veterans).
 Baby Boomers, born between 1945 and 1964.
 Generation Xers, born between 1964 and 1980.
There is a fourth group, called by various names including
Generation Y, the Echo Boom, and Millennials. Since they are just
entering the workforce, however, we know less about how they
will behave inside organizations. In terms of size, they are as nu-
merous as the Baby Boomers, who number 79 million.
These three major generations can be further characterized:
 Traditionalists were born during the Depression or World
War II. They are driven by loyalty and accustomed to a tra-
ditional command-and-control, hierarchical management
style. They want to leave a legacy and are motivated to work
for the satisfaction of a job well done. Job security is impor-
tant. They can be paternalistic, and they don’t believe in
freely sharing information—it’s on a need-to-know basis.5
 Baby Boomers are highly competitive—after all, they grew
up competing with 79 million others for the best schools and
jobs. For Boomers, who are mostly in their forties and early
fifties, work is self-fulfillment. They are the 1960s generation
at work, and they still want to shake things up and fix them.
They aren’t so concerned with leaving a “legacy,” but they
do want to have standout careers. They are motivated by
money, titles, recognition, and the opportunity for self-
fulfillment. Making the boss look good is important, since
by doing so they enhance their own careers.

74
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
 If Baby Boomers want an outstanding career, Generation
Xers want a portable career—they have experienced corpo-
rate disloyalty and the erosion of trust firsthand, and their
focus is more on developing their own skills than being loyal
to an organization. If traditionalists are motivated by job
satisfaction and leaving a legacy, and Baby Boomers value
money and titles, Gen Xers want freedom. Studies consis-
tently show that many Gen Xers will trade off money and
promotions for the freedom to pursue their own interests
and spend time with their families. Whereas traditionalists
believe fervently in our traditional institutions, and Boomers
want to change those institutions, Gen Xers are just plain
skeptical—they’ve been burned too many times before.
Boomers live to work, whereas Gen Xers work to live.
As you can see, there are some fundamental differences in the
motivations and beliefs of these different generational groups. Each,
in short, has its own set of “invisible creases.” If you can identify
them, you’ll do a much better job at communicating, persuading,
and managing the overall relationship.
You need to think about how to manage each of these rela-
tionships somewhat differently. Traditionalists, for example, won’t
be very interested in your feedback about them as managers—for
someone of that generation, no news is good news when it comes
to performance feedback, and getting this from an outsider would
seem inappropriate. A Baby Boomer, in contrast, might relish 
sitting down with you and getting your views, backed up with
supporting examples, particularly if your advice is going to help
him better manage his career. A Gen Xer, on the other hand,
would be open to frequent feedback during your time working
together—she wouldn’t want to wait until six months or a year
had passed.
I’ve summarized some of approaches you might try as you man-
age relationships with—and try to influence—clients who belong
to these three different generational groups:

Finding the Hidden Creases
75
Some clients will be at the cusp of one of these generational
groups, with one foot in the Baby Boomer camp, for example, and
another in the Generation X grouping. These individuals may, in
fact, behave in ways that reflect the generations they straddle, and
you need to take this into account.
Remember that this typology, like others, should be used di-
rectionally. We all know that individual behavior can often go
Influencing Clients from Different Generations
Generation Xers (1964-1980)
Traditionalists (pre-1945)
• Stress how your work together will help leave a legacy.
• Ensure project goals clearly align with institutional goals.
• Carefully respect your client’s guidance about who 
   should be involved and informed.
• Emphasize the need to do the job right.
Baby Boomers (1945-1963)
• Stress the opportunity to shake things up and really fix them.
• Show how working with you can enhance their career.
• Always help your clients look good in front of their boss or 
   senior management–respect their position in the hierarchy.
• Occasionally be prepared to provide career guidance 
   and advice.
• Stress how your work together will help improve and expand 
   your client’s professional competencies and skills.
• Be highly respectful of personal time and space.
• Strive to inject fun into the relationship and 
   project-related activities.
• Don’t be put-off by skepticism–learn to overcome it by 
   delivering the goods and showing flexibility.

76
BREAKING THROUGH AS AN EXPERT
against the norm, and we should never blindly typecast or stereotype
clients. Furthermore, we need to know ourselves. Just as we have
biases and attitudes that spring from being a man or a woman, a
person of color or a WASP, so we have them based on the genera-
tion we grew up in.
It can be helpful to try to categorize your client in terms of be-
liefs and motivations, but equally important is careful questioning.
Just as the Zen student at the beginning of this chapter had to study
the boulders his teacher asked him to move, you need to do a thor-
ough job of assessing at the outset where your clients want to go. If
you don’t understand the direction in which they are inclined to
roll, you’ll never be able to take them in the direction that you feel
they should go.

PA RT ON E SUM M A RY
Are You Breaking Through as an Expert?
 Are you focused on the three foundations of client loyalty:
Adding value, developing a trusted personal relationship, and
going the extra mile?
 If asked, would your clients be able to describe something dis-
tinguishing that you’ve done for or with them?
 Do you put nearly as much effort into building personal trust
as you do on the technical aspects of your client engagements?
 Do you think of yourself as an expert for hire or as a client ad-
visor who has both a core specialty and a broad knowledge of
related disciplines and your clients’ environment?
 When developing new relationships, do you seek to find com-
monalities, build familiarity, demonstrate openness, bring
forth positive associations, praise what’s positive, and cultivate
rapport in face-to-face meetings?
 Do you directly attack clients’ positions, or do you use indirect
methods and humor to raise objections? Do you look for your
clients’ “hidden creases”—the directions they already want to
go in—and use these to begin the process of influencing them?
 Do you focus only on the specific outcomes defined in your
contractual arrangements with clients, or more broadly on im-
proving your clients’ condition in any way possible?
 Do you find your clients consistently keeping you at arm’s
length, like a supplier, or slowly bringing you into their con-
fidences and discussing their broader issues with you?
 Is price becoming less important in discussions with your re-
peat clients?


P A R T T W O
MOVING INTO
THE INNER
CIRCLE


81
11
I Love My Guru
. . . and Other
Client Pitfalls
I’m often asked the question, “How do I handle a client who is ob-
sessed with the latest buzz words and fascinated with gurus? I’m
doing great work, but it comes across as boring compared to my
competitor’s flash and sizzle.” Indeed, some clients love the self-
proclaimed gurus who spout recycled clichés or proffer just plain
bad—but sassy—advice.
Big-picture thinking, which is one of the core attributes of great
advisors, is often the playground of these gurus. I’ve come to real-
ize that some clients, unfortunately, don’t care if an idea is right or
wrong as long as it seems sufficiently bold and counter-intuitive.
Let me give you an example.
A few years ago, I sat with a group of senior executives from a
mid-sized company in the northeast. This was our first meeting,
and they were interested in having me help them develop a turn-
around strategy for the company. Also at the meeting was a well-
known academic, a guru of sorts in the client’s industry. The
meeting was going well, and I was rather pleased with how I had
conducted myself: I had listened carefully, uncovered the client’s
81

82
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
key issues, and established my credibility as an experienced strategy
advisor. Right before the coffee break, I succinctly summed up the
client’s situation. Despite my thorough and professional approach,
at the break I found myself alone, staring into my coffee. All six ex-
ecutives had rushed to the other end of the conference room to
speak with the guru, surrounding him like fans pressing toward
their favorite rock star.
What was the source of his magnetism? After my own text-
book handling of the first half of the meeting and a pithy summary,
he interjected and said to the group, “By the way, you need to con-
front the fact that the Internet is going to collapse by the end of the
year. And, of course, the geo-political leaning of Russia’s new lead-
ership means that you’ll have to completely rethink your Asia strat-
egy.” Just like that! Was the physical Internet actually in danger of
collapsing in the next eight months? Impossible, I thought—but
then again, maybe this guy knew something I didn’t.
“We’ve got to talk,” one executive shouted at the guru as I
poured myself another desultory cup of coffee.
“I need to discuss the Internet with you—do you have some
time later today?” asked a second.
“How can we prepare ourselves?” shouted a third client.
“I just love exchanging ideas like this,” exulted yet another.
In the end, I did get the assignment—but just barely. I resolved
afterwards, however, to stay away from clients who are fascinated
with the “flavor-of-the-month” management approach and to focus
instead on ones who appreciate insight, wisdom, and judgment
grounded in solid experience.
I should add on the positive side that this experience did teach
me a lesson: Clients value boldness over blandness. Does this mean
you should say outrageous things to get their attention? Of course
not. But I’ve observed a great many well-known client advisors
over the years, and most of them are willing to go out on a limb,
to be controversial, and to reach reasonable conclusions based on
partial data. When Citibank hired strategy authority and author

I Love My Guru . . . and Other Client Pitfalls
83
C. K. Prahalad as a consultant, he told them that they ought to set
as a strategic goal the acquisition of one billion customers. Ridicu-
lous, some said—at the time Citibank had only about 30 million
customer relationships. In fact, such bold advice can put clients on
a razor’s edge—will you send them off the deep end in pursuit of
something unattainable or push them to new heights? Sometimes,
these big, bad ideas can help invigorate a client’s own thought pro-
cess, sharpening the debate.
I lived and worked in Italy for four years, and I’ve always re-
membered a delightful Italian expression often used as a commen-
tary on interpersonal dilemmas: “Si vede il buon giorno dalla
mattina”—“You can tell a good day from the morning.” Profes-
sionals that I work with often come to me with convoluted tales
about their client from hell—but usually it’s an inferno they could
have anticipated had they been more observant. You can often dis-
cern right from the start that you’re never going to have a good re-
lationship with a client.

84
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
Here are some warning signs to watch out for:
 Your client immediately tries to micromanage and control
every facet of the relationship, rewriting your proposals, re-
port outlines, and so on.
 Flashy appearances and public persona seem to be more im-
portant to your client than substance.
 Your client is hostile, angry, mean, or just not terribly nice.
Maybe he’s having a bad day; more likely, that’s just his
character.
 Even though others in the organization need to participate in
or approve the work you’re proposing, your client refuses to
recognize this broader process and wants to keep you in a lit-
tle box for herself.
 You discover a history of failed or conflicted relationships
with previous outside professionals.
 Your client is inherently distrustful and insists on checking
up on your every move.
 Your client demands disproportionate investment—in other
words, he wants you to do a lot of upfront, unpaid work
without any commitment or investment on his part.
Back to the question: How do you handle a client who loves his
guru? You have a simple choice, really: If you’re very patient and
tolerant—and just can’t afford to turn down the business—take the
time to educate your client about the solid, day-in and day-out value
you provide; otherwise, leave him to his impresarios with their
“leading-edge” concepts, and move on.
Remember, carefully check the weather during your initial
meetings with a client—it may save you from getting rained on
later in the day.

85
12
The
Relationship
Masters
Imagine an organization whose employees are so highly educated,
versatile, and motivated that they can take on any job, anywhere in
the world, and perform at the highest levels. Without visiting cor-
porate headquarters for years at a time, employees still maintain a
laser-sharp focus on their corporate mission. Imagine that these same
employees are able to develop long-term advisory relationships with
other professionals, business leaders, and leading politicians wher-
ever they go, wielding an influence completely disproportionate to
their relatively small numbers. An enviable set of capabilities—per-
haps we’re talking about General Electric or Microsoft?
No, I’m referring to the Jesuits, the Catholic order founded in
1540 by Iñigo de Oñaz y Loyola. Regardless of your religious per-
suasions, the Jesuits represent a fascinating case study on how to
build relationship capital and become an influential advisor.
If you had been a parent to the teenage Loyola, you would have
torn your hair out and despaired for his future. A Basque born in
1491, Loyola was an absolute hellion as a young man. He had a ter-
rible character, and after a failed career as a royal pageboy and
knight, he was arrested for what a judge called “atrocious crimes.”

86
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
A contemporary police report described him as “cunning, violent,
and vindictive.” He served time in jail, and later suffered a terrible
cannonball wound to his left leg, which crippled him.
Like Paul on the road to Damascus, Loyola experienced his own
profound religious conversion and spent many years in quiet medita-
tion and spiritual reflection. With the blessing of Pope Paul III, he
founded the Society of Jesus with a clear, higher purpose: ad majorem
dei gloriam—for the greater glory of God. Loyola’s original concept
was for a cadre of deep generalists who would promulgate the word
of God in any place and at any time. Whereas other Catholic orders
such as the Franciscans, Dominicans, and Benedictines were special-
ized and had a particular focus, the Jesuits would be broad-based,
“polyvalent” problem-solvers who would enter many different pro-
fessions. In his book, The Jesuits, Malachi Martin writes, “They
would have to be trained not for one task, but for hundreds . . . a fast-
moving strategy would be their success. Their ‘specialty,’ in other
words, would be the ability to tackle any job expertly.”1 Jesuit priests
became—depending on the requirements of their particular mis-
sions—teachers, philosophers, entomologists, paleontologists,
chemists, lawyers, or any one of dozens of other professionals.
The cornerstone of the Jesuit approach was a deep, broad edu-
cation. To turn out his deep generalists, Loyola insisted on an ex-
traordinarily long and rigorous schooling for his priests. Young
Jesuit trainees were called scholastics because they had to study var-
ious “schools” of knowledge: humanities, philosophy, theology, sci-
ence, and so on. At his death in 1556, Loyola had founded no fewer
than 35 colleges in a dozen countries. Today, Jesuit-founded uni-
versities and schools educate hundreds of thousands of students
around the world.
In addition to his concept of the broadly educated problem-
solver, Loyola instilled in his organization several other character-
istics and practices that helped his priests become influential advisors
to businessmen and politicians around the world. Both individual
professionals and organizations that aspire to build their relationship
capital can learn from these:

The Relationship Masters
87
 A higher sense of purpose. Through their religious and spiri-
tual training, the Jesuits were imbued with a strong sense of
purpose: to peacefully spread the word of God. Having a clear
mission gave the Jesuits great conviction in all of their dealings
with other people—a hallmark of successful client advisors.
Remember that experts for hire have conviction based on a
belief that their information is accurate; advisors have a
deeper-seated conviction based on their personal values and
sense of mission.
 Institutionalized mentoring. Loyola institutionalized a process
called the “account of conscience,” whereby more seasoned
Jesuits would meet regularly with less experienced ones to
discuss the latter’s strengths, weaknesses, hopes, fears, aspira-
tions, and religious practice. This mentoring ensured a
thoughtful and purposeful development of each young Jesuit’s
career, as well as a transfer of knowledge and experience from
one generation to the next.
 Independence. The Jesuits were created as a distinct and sepa-
rate organization that reported directly to the Pope. Wherever
they operated around the world, they were independent of the
main Catholic hierarchy. Jesuits were free, in other words, to
pursue their mission without getting embroiled in or stymied
by the vast church bureaucracy. Another factor that con-
tributed to the Jesuits’ independence: For many centuries they
were banned from acting as principles in any type of business,
a policy that had the effect of lending great credibility and ob-
jectivity to the advice they gave to their business and political
contacts. This independence helped the Jesuits form myriad
relationships that would have been impossible to develop if
they had had particular political leanings or were engaged in
conflicting business interests.
 An understanding of the mind and soul of their converts. De-
spite their fierce allegiance to the Pope and Catholic doctrine,
the Jesuits showed enormous empathy in trying to win con-
verts. In eighteenth-century China, the Jesuits were the only

88
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
religious order that ever succeeded at converting great numbers
of the Chinese to Christianity. Other missionaries had pro-
hibited the dearly held Chinese ceremonies honoring the Em-
peror, Confucius, and one’s ancestors. As a result, they failed
miserably in their efforts to proselytize. Through detailed
analysis of Chinese writings and practices, the Jesuits demon-
strated to the Pope that these rituals did not venerate Confu-
cius or the Emperor as divinities, and that furthermore, the
Chinese people would never accept Christianity if these rites
were banned. Only if the church accepted these local customs,
they argued, would the locals in turn accept Christianity.
Wherever they were posted in the world, Jesuit priests tried to
absorb local customs and language. Pedro Arrupe, for example, who
headed the Jesuits during the last century, lived in Japan for many
years and became a complete Japanophile during his stay. He spoke
perfect Japanese, and even used to pray sitting on a cushion in the
Zen meditation position.
Baltasar Gracián also typified the success achieved by the many
Jesuits who benefited from this system of personal development 
and professional practice. A sixteenth-century Jesuit priest and 
author who advised many influential Spaniards, Gracián was be-
friended by a wealthy nobleman named Vicencio Juan de Lastanosa.
De Lastanosa had a huge library in his baronial mansion and
granted Gracián full access to it. Delighted with the company of
such a highly educated, learned individual (a rarity in those days),
de Lastanosa later paid for the publication of several of Gracián’s
books. One of them, The Art of Worldly Wisdom, continues to
be widely sold today. De Lastanosa was a true catalyst for Gracián,
helping him to reach and influence many other important
Spaniards. Gracián, in turn, served as a counselor—a mentor—to
the younger Lastanosa, advising him on everything from the ex-
pansion of his library to his family relationships.
As a result, of these practices, many leaders throughout history
have turned to individual Jesuits for counsel and advice, valuing their

The Relationship Masters
89
enormous breadth of learning, independence, and objectivity (in sec-
ular affairs, at least), and impeccable integrity. What accrued to the
Jesuits was an abundance of relationship capital—a wide circle of
accomplished companions, wealthy political and business figures who
acted as catalysts to further the Jesuits’ mission, and an abundance of
“clients” (converts, in this case) who were won by the Jesuits’ abil-
ity to empathize and understand their minds and souls.

90
13
The
Doubting
Mind
“I used to work for an old-fashioned rainmaker,” a client of mine
once told me. “He had that ‘take-no-prisoners’ approach to sales
and customer relationships. His motto was, ‘Sometimes wrong,
never in doubt.’ ” Never in doubt, indeed. It’s one thing to have
deep-seated convictions about your views, quite another to obscure
the truth with overconfidence and bluster—something that clients
today won’t put up with.
Doubt plays an important role for client advisors who build
long-term relationships. There are three types of doubt that are use-
ful to cultivate:
1. External doubt. Skepticism that what your clients tell you about
their problems is really true, and a willingness to challenge con-
ventional wisdom.
2. Internal doubt. The ability to step back and recognize that you
may be wrong.
3. Doubt about outcomes. The willingness to suspend judgment
about what’s “good” and “bad” about events whose eventual
consequences we cannot, in truth, fully predict.

The Doubting Mind
91
First, great advisors are bit skeptical about what clients tell them.
They watch clients’ feet, not their mouths. They are convinced by
observable behavior and data, not by mere words. Client advisors,
metaphorically, all come from Missouri—the “Show-Me” state.
Schroders, the global merchant banking firm, should have been
so lucky. In the early 1980s, when the London financial markets were
deregulated, a strict separation between investment banking (securi-
ties underwriting and issuance) and brokering (distribution and trad-
ing) took place. As these walls were removed, it was assumed that
every merchant bank would have to rush into stockbroking in order
to hold onto its market share and client base. When Schroders, one
of the top three merchant banks at the time, hired James Kelly as its
advisor, they expected to receive similar advice—the question was
really how to implement this shift. Kelly, who had deep experience
in the U.S. financial markets, thought it would be suicide for
Schroders to plunge into a trading business they knew nothing about.
Rejecting the accepted wisdom, he convinced Schroders to remain
independent and focus on its core strengths—investment banking,
mergers and acquisitions, and fund management. One by one, its
competitors tried to become full-service banks, and one by one, they
stumbled and were picked off by larger institutions at bargain prices.
Sixteen years later, Schroders’ market value had increased more than
25-fold and, at the peak of the market, it sold its highly valued in-
vestment banking business to Citigroup, where it continues to pros-
per (the fund management side remained independent). Kelly, who
founded and was CEO of a major consulting firm, says, “You have
to be skeptical when you see the herd thundering in one direction.
You just have to doubt whether it makes sense for your client.”
Alan Weiss, a popular author and consultant known for his
contrarian views, tells a similar story: “The CEO of a division of a
Fortune 500 company asked me to improve his company’s sales ef-
fectiveness and closing time. When I asked him why, he said that
that they had 25 percent annual ‘uncontrollable’ customer attrition,
which necessitated increasing their acquisition efforts. When I asked
him what uncontrollable attrition was, he said that some customers

92
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
went out of business, were acquired by larger companies, or stopped
being customers for reasons completely outside the client’s control.
I then pressed him to tell me how he knew this, and he explained
that the sales force carefully collected and reported these statistics to
him. So I set out to find out for myself, and personally interviewed
a group of customers who had left for ‘uncontrollable’ reasons.
Ninety percent had, in fact, defected due to poor service or other
reasons completely within the control of this company. They didn’t
need more sales effectiveness—they needed to address a host of other
issues such as quality and service. You can’t always accept clients’
basic premises.”
How often have you heard the following assertions?
 “We have the best quality in the business.”
 “Our management team is second to none.”
 “We have the lowest employee attrition in our industry.”
 “Our competitor’s products use inferior/outdated/incom-
patible technology.”
 “We’ve already implemented that” [whatever it is you’re sug-
gesting to them].
 “Our brand is one of our most valuable assets.”
 “I manage my own investments and do much better than
the pros.”
As an advisor, you should politely question and challenge state-
ments like these. Ask for evidence that they are true. Through di-
rect inquiry, find out for yourself. Your clients will, ultimately,
thank you.
The flip side of doubting your client’s assertions or rejecting
accepted wisdom is questioning your own premises. One of the
traps that experts fall into is a blind belief in their infallible exper-
tise. Many governmental and corporate blunders—for example, the
Iran-Contra scandal of the 1980s and the dot-com meltdown of the
late 1990s, just to cite some contemporary examples—can be traced
to this hubris.

The Doubting Mind
93
My brother, a prominent surgeon, told me about a medical case
that illustrates the dangers of a lack of doubt: “A patient at my hos-
pital,” he explained, “had suffered a brain injury, and it was deter-
mined that he was essentially ‘brain dead’—according to his
doctors, there was no hope whatsoever of recovery. He would never
regain consciousness. The family, ever hopeful, refused to allow life
support to be removed. For months, the man lay in a vegetative
coma. One day, a nurse was brushing his teeth, and he suddenly
blurted out, ‘Leave me alone!’ He did something that the medical
experts considered an impossibility.”
I recall a client in Italy who asked a major consulting firm to
evaluate a proposal to open several bank branches in Milan. The
firm had extensive experience in the banking industry and had de-
veloped a sophisticated model for determining branch profitability.
The model, in essence, showed that a bank could become profitable
by clustering its branches in one geographic location rather than
dispersing them. They told my client, in no uncertain terms, that to
open just a few branches in the north of Italy would be a disaster.
Instead, they said, he should concentrate new branches near his ex-
isting ones in central Italy. Against the consultants’ advice, my client
opened the Milan branches, and they were a huge success. I won’t
go into all the reasons why they worked out so well—but the con-
sultants had applied a business model that had worked in many other
countries, notably the United States, without understanding this
client’s particular context and business environment. They refused
to entertain any doubts about their stock advice. As a result, they left
behind one very dissatisfied client.
The third type of doubt you need to exercise is about outcomes.
In the West, we are very certain that some things are good for us and
others are bad. A competitor comes out with a similar product or
service to one that we offer—terrible! We are audited by the IRS—
horrendous! Someone threatens to sue us—heinous! At other times,
we are sure some events are good. We get offered a promotion, for
example, or better yet, win the lottery. What great fortune, every-
one says.

94
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
Zen philosophy, in contrast, espouses a neutral attitude toward
the world and the events of life. It encourages us to doubt our pre-
conceived notions about events being either favorable or unfavor-
able. Apparent disasters may be blessings in disguise, just as much as
windfall events can bring trouble and sadness. You’ve won the lot-
tery? You should read the studies that have been done of lottery
winners—for many of them, winning the lottery ruined their lives!
On the flip side, when a competing product hits the market, why
are we so sure that’s a bad thing? Perhaps the new product will
stimulate the market and renew demand for our own product; or
the competition will spur our organization toward greater innova-
tion, resulting in increased profits down the road. After Bernie
Marcus was fired from Kmart, he promptly went out and cofounded
Home Depot—he’s now a billionaire.
This principle is beautifully illustrated in W. Somerset
Maugham’s short story “The Verger,” in which a man named Albert
has been the verger (a lay caretaker) at a small church for 16 years.
One day a new vicar arrives at the church, and, discovering that
Albert cannot read or write, fires him. Feeling depressed and desti-
tute as he walks along the street near the church, Albert notices that
there are no shops nearby, and decides to start a small kiosk selling
tobacco and candy. He proves to be quite adept at business, and in a
short time ends up owning a whole chain of kiosks and shops. Years
later, Albert has become a very wealthy man. One day he goes to the
local bank to make a large deposit and asks the bank manager for as-
sistance, casually explaining that he cannot read or write. Hearing
his story, the manager exclaims in astonishment, “Good God, man!
What would you be now if you had been able to?”
“I can tell you that, sir,” replies Albert. “I’d be verger of 
St. Peter’s, Neville Square.”1
So don’t be so sure that an outcome is good or bad for your
client—or for yourself. Remember the old Zen saying, “Small
doubt, small enlightenment; great doubt, great enlightenment.”2
Things may not turn out to be as bad—or as good—as you think

The Doubting Mind
95
they will. The next time a client turns you down, don’t wring your
hands and mope around the house; it’s not the end of the world, and
another door may open for you where you least expect it. Corre-
spondingly, when you win a big assignment or your client scores a
victory, celebrate but don’t think all your problems are over—you
and I both know they aren’t!

96
14
The Deep
Generalist
and the
Branded Expert
Few of us could forget the trial of O. J. Simpson in 1996, and the
unprecedented media frenzy that surrounded it. It was a drama that
included a remarkable cast of legal talent and more than a few
larger-than-life personalities, including the flamboyant Johnny
Cochran, the notorious F. Lee Bailey, and Harvard Law School pro-
fessor Alan Dershowitz, famed for his defense of Claus von Bulow,
Michael Milken, and Mike Tyson. Rounding out the defense team,
Barry Scheck confounded the prosecution with his extraordinary
grasp of the esoteric science of DNA analysis.
So how does the O. J. trial relate to making rain for your
clients? It’s actually very relevant. Cochran, Bailey, and Dershowitz
were the deep generalists on the case, with Dershowitz being an es-
pecially good example. A fierce client advocate, he is deeply
grounded in several legal specialties, but at the same time has an 

The Deep Generalist and the Branded Expert
97
extremely broad understanding of the law. He has written over a
dozen books, covering topics as diverse as the U.S. Constitution,
the criminal justice system, and politics and the law. He is active
in a variety of nonprofit causes. He reads widely and is, well, kind
of a Renaissance man. A popular professor of law, he has success-
fully taken on a diversity of cases.
In contrast, Barry Scheck, at least in the eye of the public, is a
branded expert. He has carved out a very specific niche in foren-
sic DNA analysis. The media seek him out for comment and “ex-
pert” analysis on this specific topic. Dershowitz and Scheck
illustrate two career paths—or at least two sides of our career de-
velopment—for professionals of all types: the deep generalist and
the branded expert.
In Chapter 2, I said that the vast majority of professionals who
develop broad-based, long-term client relationships are deep gen-
eralists. They have great depth of knowledge in one or two core
specialties, and a breadth of knowledge about their clients’ orga-
nization, industry, and environment. They read widely, and part
of their stock-and-trade is to bring big-picture thinking to their
clients. They move beyond just providing data and information—
something that ordinary experts can do—to become educators 
and navigators to their clients. Deep generalists tend to have a
small- to medium-size group of clients whom they serve as trusted
advisors.
Whereas the deep generalist builds a broad base of knowledge
and gets closer to clients, a branded expert goes deeper into a spe-
cific expertise. These experts deliberately and systematically use a
variety of distribution channels and media to disseminate and pub-
licize their ideas and expertise. They publish articles and books;
“productize” their intellectual capital in the form of seminars,
workshops, and curricula; exploit broadcast media; create tapes
and videos; leverage the Internet; and develop expert software to
allow access to their ideas without having to appear in person.
In the field of management Ken Blanchard of One Minute
Manager fame and the Stern Stewart consulting firm are both good

98
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
examples of branded experts. On the one hand, Blanchard pub-
lishes prolifically on employee motivation and customer loyalty.
His consulting and training company disseminates his ideas through
workshops, tapes, and videos. Stern Stewart, on the other hand,
specializes in consulting on economic value added (EVA). Its
founders took some basic financial theories about the relationship
between cost of capital and return on capital, and packaged them
into the EVA concept. The Stern Stewart consulting firm sells soft-
ware to help companies implement and manage shareholder value
concepts, but its consulting platform is narrow rather than deep—
in contrast, say, to McKinsey, which represents the deep general-
ist strategy.
Branded experts are different from “plain-vanilla” experts or
experts for hire, as I call them. The services of experts for hire can
be traded as if they were commodities. Branded experts, in con-
trast, are über-experts who gain extensive notoriety and who ag-
gressively employ a variety of strategies to get their ideas out to as
many potential clients as possible.
In summary, deep generalists develop a selected group of
broad-based, advisory client relationships, whereas branded experts
have a large number of narrow relationships and are more trans-
actionally focused. Deep generalists go deeper into their client re-
lationships; branded experts focus on increased mastery of their
specialized expertise.
Some of you are no doubt asking, “Can’t you be both a deep
generalist and a branded expert? Don’t deep generalists have to fol-
low many of the same media- and publishing-focused strategies that
characterize branded experts?”
Yes, many deep generalists also publish, give workshops, use the
Internet, and become well known for a specific expertise. In fact,
some have multiple brands that appeal to different client bases.
Deep generalists and branded experts often borrow from each
other’s playbooks, and some may indeed maintain dual identi-
ties. Among a small group of clients, I am known as a generalist

The Deep Generalist and the Branded Expert
99
strategy advisor, a trusted advisor with a small number of deep,
long-term client relationships. In broader circles, I’m the “client
relationship expert,” a branded expert who does speeches, work-
shops, and consulting on keeping clients and customers for the
long term.
There is a subtle tension between these two strategies, how-
ever, because they represent different business models with differ-
ent key success factors. In practice, I could spend 100 percent of my
time on being the branded expert, building more products and even
software around client relationship development, creating training
companies, and so on. But then I wouldn’t have any time to pro-
vide in-depth advice to clients and cultivate long-term relation-
ships with them, something that I enjoy immensely.
Ultimately, the distinction between a deep generalist and a
branded expert is useful for two reasons: First, it highlights impor-
tant sides of any advisor’s persona that require development; and
second, it calls attention to a natural tension and a set of choices
that need to be consciously balanced.
Within large professional service firms, this dichotomy has
some very practical implications. Among your staff, what mix of
deep generalists and branded experts do you want, and how do
you make room for both types of professionals? How you respond
to these questions depends on your strategy: Relationship-oriented
firms such as bankers Goldman Sachs and consultants McKinsey
& Company tend to cultivate many deep generalists within their
ranks; specialist firms such as consultants Stern Stewart or bou-
tique law firms have a preponderance of branded experts. You
need career tracks for both types of professionals, with distinct ap-
proaches to training and development, different compensation
metrics, and appropriate mentoring. In working with clients, there
is a delicate art to putting teams together with just the right mix
of generalist versus specialist skills.
The different tactics required to pursue this balance are sum-
marized in the following figure:

100
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
Which strategy, or mix of strategies, is right for you? It depends
on several factors. Are you a solo practitioner, or do you work
within a large firm? If you work on your own, you’re going to have
to develop at least some of the deep generalist capabilities that I’ve
described; otherwise, your ability to market yourself and acquire
new clients will be handicapped. Inside a large firm it may be pos-
sible to carve out a purely specialist niche, leaving client acquisition
and management to others.
By dint of personality, skills, and the activities you enjoy, are you
oriented toward great depth in one subject matter, or do you have
broader interests you want to pursue? Do you relish developing one
or two ideas and then getting them across to dozens or hundreds
of clients around the country, or do you prefer to dig in with a few
clients and really get to know their people and their organizations?
One thing is for sure: You don’t want to be stuck in the old-
fashioned expert-for-hire role, which in today’s markets is tanta-
mount to being a vendor—a commodity. You’ve got to distinguish

The Deep Generalist and the Branded Expert
101
yourself, which you can do by developing close, broad-based client
relationships where you play the role of navigator and educator, or
by creating a branded persona around a specific expertise. Some
professionals will be able to combine elements of both of these.
Whatever path you choose, do it consciously and deliberately, and
make sure that it plays to your own particular strengths.

102
15
How to Identify
Client Needs
“I’ve met several times with the CEO,” I told my colleagues, “and
his need is pretty clear: His company is faltering abroad, and he
wants to develop a new international strategy to help jump-start
growth outside the United States.” At the time, I was a senior part-
ner with a large international consulting firm. The occasion was
an account development session to brainstorm a new proposal for a
prospective client. I had carefully reviewed all of the background in-
formation on the company and summarized for the assembled group
how I thought we could help.
In the back of the room, someone piped up, “This company
doesn’t just need an international strategy—it needs to completely
transform its business.”
“That may be,” I replied, “but I think right now the interna-
tional piece is what the CEO is focused on.” A chorus of voices
drowned me out, insisting that I had misread the situation and
that what the client really needed was a wholesale overhaul of its
organization, including its operations, marketing, and sales.
“This company is a prime candidate for our business transfor-
mation services,” one of my colleagues informed me, even as I kept
resisting.

How to Identify Client Needs
103
“They need to take a fresh look at the U.S. market as well,”
said another.
“Get with the program!” urged a third.
Frustrated, I ended the session and thanked everyone for con-
tributing. A few months later, I left the firm to start my own in-
dependent consulting practice.
This anecdote illustrates a major pitfall of trying to identify
client needs: The inability to separate out what you think the client
needs—or what you need personally—from what the client really
needs. All too often, we look at our clients’ situation through the
lens of our own service offerings and our own desire for a sale, and
fail to understand the best way to help them.
Identifying how you can help your clients isn’t always easy.
Sometimes clients themselves don’t know what they want or need.
Here are seven strategies that can help you get in touch with your
clients’ needs.
1. Create a Client Panel
Every year in March, Environmental Resources Management
(ERM), a large environmental services consulting firm, brings its
senior management and about 35 top clients to a summit meeting
in Phoenix, Arizona. Many companies hold meetings like this, but
they tend to be “schmoozfests” with lots of golf and alcohol and a
few morning seminars where subject matter experts hold forth for
an hour or two. ERM takes a very different approach: Its senior
executives conduct workshops to explore the most important and
problematic issues that its client executives face, as defined by the
executives themselves. These executives share experiences in an
open atmosphere, and ERM opens a valuable window onto the
daily challenges facing its clients, who in turn benefit from valuable,
peer-to-peer exchanges.
“But doesn’t it seem like you’re pumping them for their issues
just to go back later and try to sell them on something?” I asked an
ERM board member who participates in these sessions.

104
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
“It works precisely because we don’t do that,” he replied. “We
don’t go back a month later and try to sell them on a solution to an
issue they raised and that, by itself, reinforces trust. Just by creating
these forums, we’re adding value in ways that our competitors can’t
and don’t. The experience enhances our relationship with the exec-
utives, giving us insight into their issues; thus, we’re able to better
evolve our own service offerings.”
Some firms create a small client panel that has a fixed number
(10 or 15) of client executives who meet once or twice a year to
provide advice on overall strategy and service offering development.
Others, such as ERM, invite to an annual event a large group of
clients, whose composition changes slightly from year to year.
2. Conduct Industry Research and Analysis
This is a time-honored approach to uncovering potential client
needs, and it can also garner valuable publicity. I recall vividly a
study done some years ago by the MAC Group, a Boston-based
strategy consulting boutique where I began my own consulting ca-
reer and that later became part of Cap Gemini. The MAC Group
had analyzed the financial performance of hundreds of publicly held
banks and sorted them into four groups with catchy names. The
“sharks,” whose returns well exceeded their cost of equity, were
poised to eat the “minnows,” whose profitability was weak. The
study attracted enormous media attention and stimulated a lot of
meetings with potential clients to talk about their position in the
industry and whether they were doing enough to bolster their fi-
nancial returns. Sometimes, simple frameworks that you synthesize
from industry research (remember Boston Consulting Group’s
“Growth-Share Matrix”?) can become powerful tools to get clients
to open up and discuss their issues.
Despite the effectiveness of this type of research, it is typically
the domain of high-end consulting firms. Other professional service
firms—for example, in law, public relations, and accounting–do far
less of it, which is a mistake. As these markets become increasingly

How to Identify Client Needs
105
competitive, the firms that thrive will be the ones that are very
skilled at knowledge creation.
3. Invest Extra Time to Get to
Know Your Client
During the normal course of your work with clients, you’ll have the
opportunity for exposure to their organization and operations. Are
you prepared to invest the extra time required to truly get to know
them? If you and your firm are busy, this can be hard to do—your
time is probably already tightly allocated among competing de-
mands. But going the extra mile—which is part of the loyalty equa-
tion—can yield you valuable insights that you won’t pick up any
other way. This means offering to attend meetings that you haven’t
necessarily been invited to, working hard to expand your network
of relationships within your client’s organization, and investing in
deep client learning.
My father, a retired psychiatrist who chaired the department of
child psychiatry at Dartmouth Medical School, used to have a
packed schedule of patients nearly every day. A highly successful
therapist, he routinely did something very unusual that set him apart
from all of his peers: Early in his relationship with each patient, he
visited the patient in his home or family environment. He describes
his unique approach this way:
I almost got kicked out of the psychoanalytic society for doing
home visits. They had this crazy notion that you had to be un-
seen and ambiguous—a nonperson—in your treatment of pa-
tients. I wanted to see what was going on in patients’ homes,
however. I learned a tremendous amount that helped me be a
better therapist. When you walk into the house of a patient and
you almost fall through a hole in the hallway floorboards that’s
been there for two years, what does it say? Or you get there,
and an enormous German Shepard is lunging at the screen door
and the patient tells you, “Oh, we forgot to tell you about the
dog”—what does it say about their relationship to you? I would

106
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
ask for a tour of the house, which might be a disaster . . . or so
compulsively clean you could eat off the floor. You’d see how
kids kept their rooms, what they put on the walls. For five min-
utes they would act like they do in therapy, but after that they
would revert to their real selves and lapse into their normal re-
lationships—the children would be eating standing up, the hus-
band and wife would stop talking to each other and so on.
“Why don’t all therapists do this?” I asked him. You can prob-
ably anticipate his answer:
A home visit could take three or four hours. Therapists don’t
know how to bill for it or if they can bill for this kind of time.
Furthermore, from a personal point of view, visiting a patient
outside your office makes you vulnerable. What does it say if
you drive up in a BMW or in an old wreck? What if you’re 
a few minutes late? How will you react to an embarrassing 
situation?
The dynamics my father describes closely resemble those of
client relationships in a business setting. The insights you gain from
taking the time to make, metaphorically, a “home visit” to your
client’s world, the difficulty of billing for the time you spend, the
personal vulnerability you feel—most of us have experienced these
with our clients.
4. Talk to Your Client’s Customers
Talking to your client’s customers can yield valuable insights into
service requirements, new product opportunities, and competitive
trends. I’ve seen firms do this in the proposal stage, subsequently
embedding valuable perspectives about the client’s strengths and
weaknesses in the final proposal, as well as doing it during a paid
project. Some former colleagues of mine wrote an excellent article
on this subject, “Spend a Day in the Life of Your Customer,” which
was published in the Harvard Business Review.1 The concept is

How to Identify Client Needs
107
that by understanding the needs and everyday business problems of
your clients’ customers, you will have a better idea of what you can
do for your client.
5. Ask
Asking your clients directly about their needs is tricky, for several
reasons. They may not actually be aware of what they really need, or
they simply may not open up to you. They may also omit something
because they don’t perceive you as a resource to deal with it. This
doesn’t mean you shouldn’t try, however. Generally, I find indirect
questions work better than direct ones. Here are some suggested
phrasings:
 “What’s keeping you awake at night?”
 “When you’re stuck in traffic, and you’re thinking about the
business, what runs through your head?”
 “You’ve told me about your strategy and goals. Are there any
soft spots you’re concerned about? Where’s the greatest risk
of failure or of falling short?”
 “If you successfully achieve these goals, what will be differ-
ent or better? How will things be different for the average
employee or customer a year from now?”
Most clients are occasionally kept awake at night by a concern
or worry. One client, however, once replied to me, “Nothing keeps
me up—I sleep like a baby every night.” It turned out he was an in-
dividual fundamentally motivated to capture the next opportunity
rather than solve problems.
To have the right to ask these types of questions, you need to
establish some credibility with the client. Some of the techniques for
doing this are described in Chapters 4 and 25.
Another good technique to draw a client out is to use compar-
ative frameworks, which will vary depending on your profession
or industry. Here are some examples:

108
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
 “Some companies take a market-based approach to compen-
sation, whereas others are driven by internal equity. Still
others develop a mix of the two criteria. Where do you fall
on this spectrum?”
 “As you move forward with this program, which is your
greatest concern—speed, quality, or cost?”
 “Some of our clients are investing in global branding; others
are creating a family of distinct brands. How would you char-
acterize your approach?”
 “Where would you put yourself on a scale between these two
extremes—wanting to earn the highest possible returns on
your investments or preserving your capital at all costs?”
I find that clients respond well to these conversation starters that
ask them to place themselves on a continuum. They are a useful
way of getting clients to talk about themselves.
6. Use Comparative Benchmarks
Using comparative and competitive benchmarks is an excellent way
to stimulate your client’s thinking and get him or her to talk about
possible needs. It’s quite powerful when you can say to a client,
“Your company spends 9 percent of revenue on sales, whereas the
industry average is 5 percent. What do you think accounts for the
difference?” You might get a number of responses to this question,
including: “We serve more small- and mid-size customers than our
competitors, and that drives our cost of sales way up. We really
would like to migrate upward, but right now I don’t think we have
the correct product suite,” or, “We have high-quality individuals on
our salesforce, but they lack selling skills and product knowledge.”
In a different realm, I know a litigation attorney who has at his
fingertips a variety of statistics on the success rates of different types
of litigation in various courts. He uses these very effectively with
clients, comparing their own track records to the averages, and

How to Identify Client Needs
109
drawing out their perception of their strengths, weaknesses, and po-
tential future needs in regard to litigation.
7. Talk to Company Observers
There are many sources of data and perspectives on a given company
that you can tap as a way of identifying client needs. If the company
is publicly held, stock analysts can be an excellent source of infor-
mation, and nowadays, many of their reports can be obtained at no
cost from your broker or banker. Other “experts” can include sup-
pliers, consultants who specialize in the industry, and trade associ-
ation executives.

110
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
Keep in mind that a client’s need for your services will often be
triggered by observable events. These include a merger or acquisition,
a change in leadership, a reorganization, a new competitor, new reg-
ulations, new technology, and changes in its financial condition or
stock price. You need to be constantly attuned to these internal and
external events, and ready both to interpret their implications for
your client and respond to clients’ specific requests.
Identifying client needs is sometimes easiest, ironically, when
you first begin the relationship—usually the client has carefully
thought through what he wants and is actively reaching out to en-
gage a professional to solve a particular problem. It’s later on, as the
relationship evolves, that it gets harder—the urgency has dimin-
ished, and the client, having tackled an important issue, may feel
that things are on a more even keel. If you want to systematically
tune into legitimate ways you can help improve your client’s busi-
ness, you need to utilize both institutional mechanisms such as
client panels and industry research, and ad hoc approaches such
as customer interviewing, “walking the halls,” competitive bench-
marking, and soliciting company observers. Behind all of these has
to be the explicit willingness to invest personal time and resources
in the relationship.
Think about your two or three highest potential clients. What
investment are you making today to learn about their needs and
build for the future?

111
16
The Power of Size
Developing Large, Multi-Year
Client Relationships
Mel Immergut, a masterful client advisor and the chairman of lead-
ing law firm Milbank Tweed, once described to me how he devel-
oped a major relationship:
An attorney, who had helped my firm on a case a number of
years ago, became the general counsel of a Fortune 500 corpo-
ration. I called on him several times to see if Milbank could as-
sist his company on a particular legal issue. Unfortunately, the
CEO had a strong existing relationship with several other law
firms, and nothing came of the discussions. Finally, though, the
general counsel saw an opening for us to help on a very narrow,
targeted issue, and he managed to bring us in. The company had
some investments that had not gone well, and they needed help
in sorting these out. Several of our associates threw themselves
into the work, devoting themselves to learning everything they
could about these investments and the client’s organization. 
A year later, the client was immensely impressed by both the
quality of the work and the personal dedication they saw in our
attorneys. We quickly became the law firm to handle all their
legal work surrounding these investments.

112
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
I continued to meet regularly with the general counsel, and
discovered they were trying to grapple with some sticky issues
around patents and intellectual property as they bought up new
companies. I talked about our very strong intellectual property
practice, and he asked us to handle one specific case. I suggested
we go further and hold a daylong working session, hosted by
our most experienced partners, which would focus on a broad
set of intellectual property issues. Their top people flew in for
this session, which was highly successful, and we were soon han-
dling a large amount of this client’s intellectual property work.
In another meeting with the general counsel, I discovered
they were trying to expand their business in Asia. I had one of
our associates in Asia spend several weeks with the client’s ex-
ecutives in that region, and we were able to propose several good
ideas for how best to structure the new company. More work for
us in Asia followed.
Based on what had now emerged as a broad-based, long-term
relationship, the client asked us to do some work in a very spe-
cialized area of the law that we have never cultivated as a firm.
It was tempting to use this as a platform to develop a capability,
but I decided instead to recommend a small, specialist firm.
Sometimes you just have to know what you’re good at and not
good at, and be honest with the client about your capabilities.
Immergut’s success is not an accident. He and his firm:
 Carefully followed up on Immergut’s relationship with the
individual who later became the chief legal officer for a major
corporation.
 Did an extraordinarily good job on a small, initial piece of
work, and also cultivated strong personal relationships with
the local client.
 Followed up regularly with senior management to assess the
progress of the work.

The Power of Size
113
 Constantly kept attuned to other possible areas of need.
 Invested in an expensive working session with top partners
that turned a small opportunity (one piece of patent work)
into another major axis of the relationship.
 Turned down an assignment where Milbank could not deliver
at the top level and introduced a specialist firm that could
better meet the client’s needs.
Large-scale client relationships can offer huge rewards. For
both firms and individual practitioners, just one large relationship
can transform the practice. I recall that when I moved to London
in the early 1980s to help my firm develop its international prac-
tice, there were just four of us in a small, one-room office. (The
nearest bathroom was four stories above us!) Over the next two
years, we developed three major, multimillion-dollar relation-
ships—two with major banks and a third with a large U.K. indus-
trial company—that grew our backlog from two to nearly twelve
months of work. We hired several dozen highly talented consultants
who were eager to join a fast-growing consulting practice, and we
were able to move into a new office (it even had its own bath-
room). Best of all, we did great work for these three clients and,
with those references in hand, grew the business to over 100 con-
sultants in just a few years.
Here are some of the many benefits you can accrue from these
types of relationships:
 Economies of scale. Managing and administering a large re-
lationship doesn’t take up much more time than it does for a
small one. The ratio of dollars of revenue per unit of your
time is more favorable. Profit margins can also be much
higher on large projects (sometimes the reverse is true, and
large orders are won only on the basis of volume discounts,
which reduce gross margins. Many other important benefits
still apply, however).

114
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
 Secure backlog that enables you to hire and grow. If all you
have are short assignments, it’s harder to make the invest-
ments in hiring, people development, R&D, and marketing
that are necessary to grow your business.
 The opportunity to become highly knowledgeable about your
client’s organization and business. A one-week project with
a client or a very small order doesn’t allow you to gain that
much knowledge about your client. A large piece of work
typically plunges you deeply into the client’s company, and
the intimate knowledge you develop of his needs becomes a
major barrier for competing firms to overcome. You also be-
come exposed to a variety of other potential buyers in the
client’s organization.
 Valuable intellectual capital. Large, complex client relation-
ships such as the one described by Mel Immergut encourage
a firm to develop invaluable skills and experiences dealing
with difficult, sophisticated business issues.
Conversely, many small client relationships can lead to high
overhead costs as a percentage of revenue, lack of a stable backlog,
and work that lacks depth.
Because of these factors, many firms are careful not to take on
too many small assignments unless there are clear reasons for doing
so. These could include growth potential, the opportunity to learn
something important or new, the opportunity to develop younger
staff, and so on. When strategy consulting firm Bain & Company
was expanding internationally, for example, it only opened an of-
fice in a country once it had acquired a flagship client there. This
strategy resulted in a profitable set of offices right at the start. Bain’s
practice stands in sharp contrast to that of many other companies
that have typically opened an office first—with all of its associated
overhead—and then slowly tried to grow a client base.
There are also risks involved in developing large-scale clients. If
an unduly high percentage of your revenue derives from one client,
your business can be seriously damaged if you lose that account,

The Power of Size
115
something that can happen frequently in the advertising profession.
Furthermore, your independence and judgment can be adversely af-
fected by the steady stream of cash, a phenomenon symptomatic of
a number of major corporate scandals in recent years (think of
Enron, Sunbeam, and Waste Management). Large, long-term rela-
tionships make sense only if your client continues to benefit from
your work. It will almost always end badly if you start feeding at the
trough, so to speak, while the client gets diminishing returns.
In thinking about how to grow relationships, you have to con-
sider both how you initially engage a client and what your migra-
tion strategy is afterward.
Keep in mind that average relationship size can be a key driver
of your growth and profitability. Your revenues are based on the
number of opportunities you see, times the percent that you win,
times the average size of each engagement. If you contain your sell-
ing costs while increasing the size of your relationships, you can sig-
nificantly increase both the profitability and growth of your business.
In the next chapter, I’ll talk about the four starting points for a
relationship. Then in Chapter 18, I’ll address five strategies for
growing a relationship once that relationship has begun.
Developing Large-Scale Client Relationships
S T A R T I N G
P O I N T S
Migration Paths
Market Share Growth
New Issue
New Client
Implementation
New Business Unit
“Let's Go”
Value-Added Proposal
Request for Proposal
(RFP)
Assessment

116
17
The Right Foot
Four Ways to Start a
Relationship and Position
It for the Long Term
When you begin a relationship with a new client, you want to po-
sition your firm and your work in a way that maximizes, right from
the start, the long-term potential of the relationship. Even in the
proposal stage, you need to differentiate yourself as someone who
has great expertise but who acts like an advisor rather than an ex-
pert for hire whose proposals are indistinguishable from those of
other experts.
This chapter looks at four ways a relationship can get started. I
have not tried to provide a comprehensive treatment of all aspects
of proposal writing or marketing to new clients; instead, for each
option I’ve highlighted a few reminders that will help position you
for success and growth.
1. Let’s Go
Sometimes a client has in mind a specific assignment and, because
she knows you or because you’ve been highly recommended to her,
she may be willing to start work with only minimal documentation.

The Right Foot
117
She calls you up and says, “Let’s get going.” This kind of eagerness
usually happens with relatively small projects or orders—unless you
have a long-standing relationship, it’s unlikely someone is going to
give you a multimillion-dollar assignment without going through
a more detailed proposal process.
Here’s what you need to watch out for in these cases:
 Clear needs and objectives. Even though you’re not writing
a formal proposal, you still need to clarify and articulate the
client’s need, what his objectives are for the work, what it is
you’re actually going to do, and how success is going to be
measured. Without a clear articulation of these issues, you
risk a fatal misunderstanding.
 A focus on the right problem. You need to make sure you’re
not underselling yourself and overlooking the client’s real
problem. One of the hallmarks of a client advisor—versus an
expert for hire—is the willingness and vision to slow the
client down and look at the bigger picture. Sometimes clients
rush to start something without taking the time to think the
whole project through. How does the proposed work relate
to other initiatives? Does it have the full support of senior
management? Are there any detractors in the organization
with whom you’ll have to deal? Does management have di-
vergent perspectives on how the work should be done and
the nature of the problem itself?
 Proper positioning. If you’re starting on a small piece of
work, it’s especially important to position your capabilities
properly with the client; otherwise, you’ll be forever pigeon-
holed as someone who does tiny things. If I accept an assign-
ment to do a day’s worth of work analyzing a client’s
competitor, for example, and I haven’t set the right context,
I risk being labeled as “the competitive analysis guy” who
does one-day projects! We naturally position people and their
capabilities, and put them into a slot. Don’t let your clients
do this to you.

118
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
2. Value-Added Proposals
When you write a value-added proposal, you invest significant re-
sources to understand the client, his problem, and the potential so-
lutions. An advertising agency would put together a sample set of
advertisements. A consulting firm might exhaustively analyze a
client’s competitive position and perhaps even interview the client’s
customers to shed light on the significant issues. A company selling
sophisticated software might do a comprehensive needs analysis and
draw up detailed implementation proposals, whereas a financial ad-
visor will typically do an in-depth analysis of a potential client’s
current financial position. I know firms that will spend 10 percent
to 20 percent of a contract’s potential value on developing a value-
added proposal—not an insignificant sum! A well-conceived value-
added proposal, in short, can be instrumental in winning large
contracts.
Here are some principles to follow in developing value-added
proposals:
 Maximize face-to-face meetings. The more face-to-face
meetings you have with the client prior to submitting a final
proposal, the higher your likelihood of winning. If you get
four meetings to your competitor’s two, you have the ad-
vantage. Clients (like the rest of us) do business with people
they like (see Chapter 7), and familiarity is one of the main
drivers of likability. Furthermore, your sense of the client’s
needs and context will be sharpened by each direct encounter.
 Be insightful. Always provide a valuable insight, conceptual
framework, or piece of information in the proposal that is
fresh and new to the client. This could be a tidbit of infor-
mation about a competitor that the client is unfamiliar with,
or some surprising piece of customer feedback. Think of a
value-added proposal, at least in part, as a report to your client
describing how he can improve his business. When a client
reads your proposal, he should feel that the assignment has
already started and you are already adding value.

The Right Foot
119
 Show you’re a peer. Value-added proposals should read like
a partnership contract, rather than a sales document prepared
for a potential buyer. You need to spell out not just what you
are going to do but also what the client’s responsibilities are.
 Get conceptual agreement first. The final written proposal
should ideally be no more than a record of work you have al-
ready agreed to do for the client. In other words, there is con-
ceptual agreement on the approach and the expected results;
the proposal is just a formality.1 Naturally, if the bid is com-
petitive, this may be harder to accomplish. Avoid shooting pro-
posals off in the mail or through e-mail (which clients often ask
us to do) without first reaching agreement. Your odds will
never be great with this “light a candle and pray” approach.
3. Request for Proposal (RFP)
Everyone hates RFPs because they strip away much of your ability
to add value during the proposal process and to differentiate your-
self from the competition. Companies that issue RFPs typically
limit access to their executives during the proposal process. They in-
sist that everyone propose to do the exact same thing, and they
often ask for reams of mindless documentation that takes days or
weeks to put together. The result is a set of nearly identical proposals
that vary little in their approach, methodology, and cost. Here are
a few suggestions for dealing with RFPs:
 Don’t always accept an RFP. If you feel an RFP process
will not allow you to demonstrate your uniqueness and value,
and that it requires an inordinate investment of time for a
limited payoff, don’t participate! I know some professionals
who, once they review the terms of an RFP, politely decline
to submit a proposal. If the contract is for $500,000, and you
are one of five competitors, you have approximately a 20 per-
cent chance to win $500,000 in business—$100,000 if
viewed on a probability-weighted basis. If your net margins

120
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
are a robust 25 percent, and your probability-weighted profit
is therefore $25,000, is it really worth investing $50,000 to
prepare a proposal? Of course, this is the expected profit on
the first go-around, so your decision to accept will hinge on
whether you think the initial RFP can turn into a longer
term relationship. You need to carefully assess the risk of los-
ing money on these types of deals!
 Define the terms in your favor. Always try to define the
terms of an RFP so that it allows you to demonstrate your
strengths. If an existing client decides to issue an RFP and
lets you bid on it, you should spend time with her to help
clarify her needs and articulate what it is she really wants—
and reflect this set of priorities in the RFP. Chances are the
RFP, rather than being a one-dimensional, boilerplate doc-
ument, will be more thoughtful and perhaps more focused
on the kinds of services you can offer. Jerry Panas, who heads
the nation’s leading fundraising consulting firm, Jerold Panas,
Linzy & Partners, typically gives prospective clients a com-
prehensive document entitled “How to Choose a Fundrais-
ing Consultant.” He says, “Boards of Directors of nonprofit
institutions have very little experience in choosing consul-
tants. The checklist gives them a detailed set of criteria and
includes space to score each firm on each factor. It really in-
forms what they look for when asking for proposals from
multiple firms.” Obviously, Panas feels that such a compre-
hensive checklist is going to favor his firm, which offers a
broad set of services. In any event, the checklist, which is
nicely formatted and professionally printed, is perceived as a
value-added service by clients.
 Offer options. Always include several value-added options in
your proposal. I don’t mean you should write three proposals.
Rather, set forth your program of work, and then offer options
that add more value. Author Alan Weiss calls this a “menu of
yeses” that enables a client to make a choice of how to proceed
rather than being forced to give a simple yes or no.2 This range

The Right Foot
121
of options will differentiate you from competitors, who are
unlikely to be so thorough, and it also gives clients a chance to
migrate upwards and choose more value (in my experience,
they often do).
 Try to create a personal bond. It’s worth repeating: Be ag-
gressive about trying to meet face-to-face with your prospec-
tive client during an RFP process. Too much familiarity may
breed contempt, but a little bit can give you an edge!
4. Assessments
Some companies offer to do a free assessment or diagnosis for a
client, betting that the problems they uncover will persuade the
client to do business with them. One productivity consulting firm
was notorious for this approach, offering to do a free, one-week fac-
tory productivity assessment for potential clients. Legend has it that
this free assessment focused on creating terror and a fear of failure
rather than a balanced picture of the client’s strengths and weak-
nesses. However, I think that this can be a very powerful technique

122
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
if it is done properly. Many firms waste their resources by not po-
sitioning such an assessment phase in the right manner. Here are
some basic principles to follow:
 Don’t give it away for free. In most cases, you should
charge something for an assessment. When a client pays
nothing for a product or service, it becomes devalued in his
mind. Something that is “free” can also raise a client’s sus-
picions: “If you’re not charging for it, you must be the one
getting the benefit!” One good approach is to offer to do
this type of diagnostic phase at a shared cost. You might say,
“I believe in creating long-term partnerships with my
clients, and I’m suggesting that each of us make an invest-
ment in this first step. I’m willing to invest my profit mar-
gin if you are willing to invest my cost. Like partners in a
business venture, we’re each putting something into it at
the start.”
 Focus on relationship building. Spend as much time building
a relationship with the client as you do gathering facts and
analyzing them. I have seen some firms, for example, pour all
their energy into creating an airtight business case that falls
flat on its face because they haven’t bothered to get to know
each client executive’s hot buttons, likes, and dislikes.
 Start out on the right foot. Position the assessment from day
one as only the first step in creating a long-term relation-
ship and identifying a significant issue that you’re going to
work on together. Don’t engage in insecure behavior by
constantly telling your client that she can simply walk away
when you’re finished if she doesn’t like the result. Never
forget that the purpose of the assessment is to define and
launch a major engagement, not produce a stand-alone
analysis for free.
The most common pitfalls associated with each of these start-
ing points are summarized next:

The Right Foot
123
Client relationships can begin in many ways. Whether a client
simply calls and says, “Let’s get going” or e-mails you a 100-page
RFP, it’s up to you to distinguish yourself as a cut above the crowd
of experts for hire lining up at his door, and to position yourself for
the long term.
In the next chapter, we’ll look at five ways of growing a rela-
tionship once you’re in the door.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

124
18
Five Ways
to Grow
Your Client
Relationships
Whether a client relationship grows or withers depends mostly on
you. Are you consistently adding value by solving your client’s
problems and improving his business? Have you developed a trusted,
personal relationship with your client? Do you consistently go the
“extra mile”?
If you can answer yes to these questions, there is a very good
chance you will have a client for life, or certainly someone who
will strongly recommend you to others once your work is com-
pleted. In addition to implementing these principles, developing a
relationship over time requires a careful strategy for growth. There
are five specific growth strategies—I call them migration paths—
that you can follow if you want to successfully expand your rela-
tionships. These are not “sales” strategies per se (Chapter 22 sets out
some basic principles for relationship selling), but rather different
routes to broadening and deepening your relationships.

Five Ways to Grow Your Client Relationships
125
1. Increase Your Market Share for
Your Service
This is particularly applicable when you’re dealing with a known
purchasing volume and several competitors who divide up the
market—this could be the case for anything from telephone
switches to advertising services. Many companies are consolidat-
ing their suppliers, and the question is how to be one of the few
who are left if your client travels down this road. (This trend, in
turn, is leading to consolidation among service firms and other
suppliers, who often have to provide a full range of services to
survive as one of the finalists.)
Many books and articles have been written about ways to in-
crease market share. My focus is on how to strengthen the client re-
lationship. All of the breakthrough strategies described in Chapter
3 can be used to grow market share in this type of situation—for ex-
ample, being easier to do business with, being faster, and more re-
sponsive.
I will highlight two particular strategies. First, build deeper per-
sonal relationships with your client and learn more about him—his
strategy, his organization, and his industry—than your competi-
tors. This depth of knowledge will ensure that you are the first to
hear about his emerging needs, and it will help you come up with
a steady stream of new ideas and suggestions for him. Second, de-
velop partnering opportunities that bring you closer than arm’s
length. These could include codeveloping some intellectual capital;
having your client outsource an activity to you, which you can do
better and cheaper; providing exclusive access to your products or
services; and establishing longer term contractual arrangements
based on mutual cost savings and other efficiencies.
2. Migrate to New Issues Where Your
Expertise Is Valuable
When you have a trusted relationship with a client, this migration
can happen naturally. My personal attorney helped me with my

126
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
house purchase and later did my estate planning. I assisted a client
by evaluating a strategic program that was being badly implemented
and later helped him assess a potential acquisition. There are several
things you can do to accelerate this process:
 Demonstrate that you are a deep generalist and not just a
narrow specialist with limited expertise. This is a subtle pro-
cess that involves both push (from you) and pull (from your
client). You have to constantly ask thought-provoking ques-
tions about your client’s business and organization. You have
to demonstrate, in your casual conversations, that you have
both a curiosity and breadth of knowledge about business
matters in general.
 Illustrate your specific competency to handle other issues be-
sides the one you’ve been called in to deal with. This needs
to be done subtly yet elegantly. A friend of mine who works
for a large advertising agency, for example, brought a col-
league who is a branding expert to lunch with a long-
standing client. The client had a branding issue, but had not
perceived my friend’s firm as having expertise in this area.
You can give a client an article you’ve written, or de-
scribe a client assignment you successfully completed in the
relevant area. This evidence can testify to your credibility to
do work in areas other than those you are primarily known
for. Mel Immergut of Milbank Tweed, for example, orga-
nized a daylong meeting with a client and brought in several
senior partners to showcase his law firm’s capabilities in a
new area.
 Constantly listen and observe. You need to create face-time
with clients, walk the halls, and read and learn as much as
you can about their business. When I worked with a large
consulting company, I once had lunch with a European client
and noticed on the way to the dining room that a conference
room sign had the name of one of my firm’s competitors on

Five Ways to Grow Your Client Relationships
127
it. When I asked my lunch guest about it, he said, “Oh, I
asked one of my people to talk with a few firms about CRM
[customer relationship management] and some related tech-
nology issues we need to address.” He didn’t perceive me as
a resource for this particular problem, but I told him that
they ought to talk to my firm before making a selection. In
fact, we got the job.
3. Migrate to Working for Other Executives in
the Same Company
At some point, your client may no longer need your services, or he
may have exhausted his budget for what you do. But in most com-
panies of any size, there are often several other executives who could
hire you. I have done assignments, for example, for the CEO, the
head of marketing, and the HR director—all executives in the same
company. To make this strategy work, you have to network exten-
sively within your client’s organization and get to know as many
executives as possible. This is also important because it can be dan-
gerous to place all your bets on just one client—after all, what do
you do when he or she suddenly leaves?
How do you do this? Here are some suggestions:
 Early in the relationship, meet as many executives as you can
from different functional areas. This interaction is critical to
gathering the multiple perspectives you’ll need anyway
to properly inform your own work.1
 Halfway through the project you are working on, talk to your
client about additional points of view you should solicit be-
fore reaching any final conclusions. This will serve to pub-
licize your work and provide introductions to other key
players.
 At the end of your engagement—or if you’re selling a so-
phisticated product such as software, when the client has

128
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
taken delivery—take this as an opportunity to network and
meet with other managers who are in some way affected by
your product or service.
Many professionals I have worked with have a narrow defini-
tion of who their “client” is. People are surprised by how complex
the influences on buying can be, especially in large organizations.
Corporate purchasing and procurement managers now get in-
volved in contracting for all sorts of services, and functional heads
are more sensitive than ever to the opinions of the line executives
that they serve.
By the way, if you serve individual clients (as opposed to orga-
nizations), think about the family unit as a surrogate for “the cor-
poration.” Many individual advisors, for example, have migrated
from working for just one family member to serving the needs of
parents, siblings, and cousins.
4. Help Your Client with Implementation
Much of the growth of professional service firms in the last 10
years, especially among consulting companies, has been based on
helping clients implement the advice they’ve been given. It’s no sur-
prise that one of the fastest growing areas for high-technology firms
is professional services, which are designed to help clients and cus-
tomers properly use the equipment and software they’ve purchased.
IBM’s growth engine over the past five years, for example, has been
its global services division.
These professional services can include project management,
systems integration, design work, and management consulting. 
In addition, there are few services today that U.S. companies
haven’t outsourced or considered outsourcing. For your clients,
the benefits can include getting the work done faster; relieving
the client’s managers of the burden of a temporary, burdensome,

Five Ways to Grow Your Client Relationships
129
and one-off project load; and ensuring that the implementation is
done properly.
Having someone take care of implementation is, for me, one of
the benefits of a personal financial advisor: She gets the work done!
Many of us can come up with a reasonable financial management
strategy on our own—for instance, the right allocation of stocks
versus bonds—but implementing that strategy and periodically ad-
justing it takes time, attention, and focus. These can be some of the
values that a good advisor offers.
To sell implementation services to your clients, you have to do
several things:
 Make it clear at the beginning that you are effective at work-
ing with clients to implement new ideas and programs.
 Learn to quantify and sell the benefits of implementation.
 Invest time to properly market this service—if it’s an add-on
at the end of your final presentation, your chances of winning
implementation work are slim to none. Your capabilities and
the client’s need have to be established well before you con-
clude your current assignment.
 Get references from past clients that highlight your imple-
mentation work.
5. Work with Multiple Divisions of the
Same Company
In consulting with the division of a large U.K. retailing company, I
arranged with my client, the division head, to invite the CEO of the
parent corporation to a presentation I made to the division’s top 100
managers. Afterward, I met privately with the CEO to give him a
personal briefing, after which he turned to me and said, “I’d like to
spread this program to several of our other divisions.” I ended up
working with his firm for many years. This works very well for 

130
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
international business because each country or region can be treated
like a separate business. Some years ago, for example, I developed
expertise in a particular marketing program for American Express.
The company’s top European marketing executive introduced me to
a number of regional vice presidents, and soon I found myself flying
all around the world to consult on marketing strategy (this was great
fun and I sampled the cuisine of over 20 countries, but the assignment
severely pigeonholed me as the go-to person for a specific, narrow
consulting service). Especially if you are dealing with Fortune 500
companies, this is an effective strategy for creating large accounts.
Here are a few things you need to do if you want to improve
your chances of implementing a multidivisional growth strategy:
 Have a clear methodology and approach that can be easily
rolled out to other divisions. The more custom-tailored your
work—the less generalizable it seems—the harder it will be
for your client to imagine it easily replicated in another part
of his company. Make it easy to hire you to do the same thing
elsewhere!
 Identify forums where you can showcase your work to other
division executives. If your client has quarterly or annual
meetings with his peers, offer to develop a presentation that
one or both of you can give at one of these meetings.
 If your client’s organization is highly decentralized, invest
the time to network on your own. Offer to meet with other
divisional managers who might have an interest in what
you’ve done.
 Be proactive. Do your homework on your client’s other busi-
nesses, and show how your services can produce similar or
better results for them as well. Ask for a referral or recom-
mendation!
 Sell benefits. You have to be able to describe, in quantitative
or qualitative terms, the impact your work has already had on
the company.

Five Ways to Grow Your Client Relationships
131
An excellent treatment of cross-selling, which implicitly
underlies many of these growth strategies, can be found in Ford
Harding’s book Cross-Selling Success.2
When you think about growing a client relationship, focus on
potential migration paths. Doing good work alone isn’t enough—
you have to develop a clear strategy for expanding your relationship
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

132
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
with your client and spreading the gospel, as it were, to other parts
of his organization.
If that sounds a tad commercial, ask yourself these questions:
“Am I proud of the work I do with clients, and do I believe I add
significant value to my clients’ business? Am I better than my com-
petitors?” If you can answer yes to both, then you should feel good
about growing a small relationship into a large one.

133
19
Are Clients
Meeting Your
Expectations?
When I was a young associate with a large international consulting
firm, I was given the chance to take the lead in selling and manag-
ing an important new project. That year I was under a lot of stress:
My wife had just had our first child, our expenses were growing,
and I was looking forward to a possible promotion—that is, if I
made the kind of superhuman contribution that seemed expected
of me. I was delighted to be given this opportunity, but the bloom
quickly came off the rose when I realized that the client wanted
about $100,000 worth of work done for less than half that amount.
When I protested to the senior management of my firm, they sim-
ply said, “Do what you have to do to sell it.” So I did, and the next
six months of my life were hell.
I ended up working nights and weekends to complete the proj-
ect while struggling to adapt to my new home life with a young
baby. But the worse part of it was the client, who turned out to be,
well, a bastard. I should have recognized the warning signs: Early on
I observed him yelling at his own staff and acting like a small-time

134
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
dictator. He was respectful enough of me at first, but as the project
progressed, he became more and more demanding, treating me like
a lackey who had nothing else to do in life except serve his needs.
When he read a summary memo I had written, he paused halfway
through, his eyes bulging. “There’s a typographical error in this,”
he screamed at me. “This is shoddy, unacceptable work.” And that
was just the beginning of his merciless abuse.
Today, I would never, ever tolerate that kind of treatment. And
neither should you—or even anything close to it.
We often talk about trying to meet our clients’ expectations,
but rarely do we think about our own needs. In fact, our profes-
sional and personal satisfaction is very much based on working with
interesting, enjoyable clients who treat us with respect.
First, let’s look at what we should expect from our clients:
 Respect for our knowledge and experience. This may seem
obvious, but it never ceases to amaze me how often clients
second-guess the professionals they hire. This happens less, I
think, in professions such as law and medicine where formal
certification, licensing, and a well-defined body of knowl-
edge are standard. In fields such as management consulting,
advertising, and public relations, however, clients feel freer to
challenge views that are based on a complex blend of experi-
ence and judgment rather than specific statutes. (I’m not say-
ing clients don’t question their lawyers and that patients never
challenge their doctors—it’s a bit easier to defend your opin-
ion, however, if you can point to a specific, supporting stan-
dard or ruling.)
 Personal respect. When I was starting out, some clients con-
sistently kept me waiting for appointments and frequently can-
celled or postponed them. From a professional perspective,
these same clients were among the most demanding I’ve ever
had. They took little interest in me as a person, treating me as
merely an expert for hire. After completing my work for these

Are Clients Meeting Your Expectations?
135
executives, I never solicited new projects and made no effort
to continue whatever semblance of a relationship existed.
 On-time payment. When clients buy heavy equipment,
they are used to adhering to detailed, ironclad contracts that
specify payment terms and timing. When they buy services,
many executives take a lackadaisical approach and figure
they can pay you whenever they feel like it. The exception
seems to be medical services, at least when the patient is
paying directly. A psychotherapist, for example, expects and
receives payment at the time of service, and no one ques-
tions this demand.
If you work with a large firm, someone else in your or-
ganization is probably worrying about collecting the fees, but
your company’s year-end profits are being reduced by the
carrying cost of these receivables. If you’re an independent
professional or have a small company, late payment of your
invoices can really hurt.
Many service professionals don’t like to send invoices
until the end of the month when they have completed a por-
tion of the work. I have asked my own clients about this
practice, and many have sheepishly admitted feeling the need
to “demonstrate some value” to justify sending a bill. This is
a self-deprecating and unfounded belief. Clients are used to
receiving an invoice upon delivery of a tangible product, and
paying within 30 or 45 days even if the product won’t be op-
erational or usable for months. Why shouldn’t they do the
same when you start work?
 Respect for agreed-upon fees. What? Isn’t it enough that they
pay us? There are several things that I look out for when it
comes to my clients’ attitude toward my fees. First, once we
establish what it’s going to cost, I expect the silly, demean-
ing jokes to end. I don’t mind the positive ones—I had a
client, for example, tell his subordinates, “Given the kind of
money we’re paying Andrew, I expect you to listen to what

136
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
he has to say and give it your full consideration.” But the
ongoing patter—“I’d like to have lunch with you, but I’d
rather buy a Corvette instead”—is demeaning and a form of
harassment you should not have to tolerate.
The second behavior that is untenable is arguing with
the bill after the fact. I don’t mind questions or constructive
discussion, but trying to reduce an invoice after the fact (as-
suming you’ve performed against the agreed-upon contract)
is unexcusable. I know of one major law firm that tells
clients: “If our invoice is not acceptable, pay the amount you
feel comfortable with. But don’t ever call us again.”
Advice on this subject varies greatly depending on
whom you talk to. One authority I know recommends ask-
ing for 50 percent of your fee up-front, and the second half
after the first month of work—an approach that may not
always be possible to implement but which eliminates this
type of client complaining altogether.1 Author David Mais-
ter recommends that if a client is unhappy with the bill, you
suggest he pay an amount that he feels represents fair com-
pensation for whatever value he did receive.2 If you and your
client are very clear about the work you’re going to do right
from the start, you shouldn’t have many problems of this
nature.
 Interesting work. But not all client work is interesting, you
are thinking. True enough, but I want to do interesting as-
signments, and I’m willing to be selective, which is a key
aspect of the foundational attribute I call selfless indepen-
dence. When I started my consulting career in 1981, the
U.S. cellular industry was just taking shape, and to apply for
a license in any given geographic area each nascent cellular
company had to produce a voluminous demographic analy-
sis of the desired territory. When my firm was hired by a
company wanting to acquire a cellular license, we quickly
delegated the work to our group of young, smart “research
analysts” who were all recent graduates of top colleges.

Are Clients Meeting Your Expectations?
137
They did such a great job that soon more work flooded
our office, and in no time we had multiple teams of these
young research associates employed day and night on the
deadly boring task of crunching thousands of numbers. On
a Friday evening six months later, the entire group of re-
search associates, looking more like a lynch mob than Ivy
League professionals, paraded into the managing partner’s
spacious corner office. “We refuse to do any more cellular
studies,” their leader announced. The partners were appalled,
but the other young associates and I laughed among ourselves,
amused by the scene and pleased that someone had taken a
stand against uninteresting consulting work that provided no
professional growth or stimulation.
What about things you should not expect from clients? Here
are a few to think about:
 Your client doesn’t have to become your friend. Most pro-
fessionals I know have found that a few client relationships
develop into long-term friendships, but you shouldn’t expect
this degree of familiarity. Some clients like to be schmoozed
and taken to sports events or out to dinner; others could care
less. With some clients, you’ll share the personal chemistry
that leads to friendship, but it isn’t a prerequisite to a trusted,
long-term relationship.
 Your client isn’t going to praise you all the time. It’s nice
when you get told what a great job you’re doing, but remem-
ber that giving praise doesn’t come easily to some people (just
ask their spouses). Besides, you are being paid to do a great
job, and some clients therefore don’t feel—for better or
worse—the same need to heap praise on you the way they
would a volunteer worker.
 Your client may not make an effort to stay in touch after the
work is done. This is your job, so don’t be offended when
you don’t get a birthday card next year!

138
MOVING INTO THE INNER CIRCLE
I expect clients to accord me professional and personal respect,
to accept and pay their bills on time, and to offer me the opportu-
nity to do interesting work that enables me to grow as a profes-
sional. Sometimes they lavish praise on me for my excellent work.
Occasionally, they become my friends as well. What more could
you ask for?

PA RT T WO SUM M A RY
Are You Moving into the Inner Circle?
 Are you bold with your clients? Do you occasionally go against
the grain and reach conclusions even when you don’t have all
the data that you wish you had?
 Do you have a doubting mind? Do you periodically question
your clients’ and your own basic assumptions, and reserve
judgment about whether certain outcomes are good or bad?
 Do you wait for your clients to tell you what they need, or do
you systematically invest in understanding their issues and
identifying ways in which you can help?
 Do you rush into new contracts, or do you ensure that the
foundations are in place: clear objectives, a client who can au-
thorize the work, enough face-to-face meetings to establish
trust and credibility, and a focus on work that is consistent
with your abilities and desired positioning in the market?
 Do your clients ask you for advice and counsel on issues that
extend beyond what you’re ostensibly contracted to do for
them?
 Does a significant percentage of your revenue each year come
from clients you had last year?
 Are you conscious of the different migration paths—increasing
market share, working on a new issue, working with a new
client executive, doing implementation, winning business with
a different business unit or department—that allow you to
grow your relationships?
 Are you clear about what you expect from your clients, and
do they, for the most part, meet your expectations?


P A R T T H R E E
SUSTAINING
RELATIONSHIPS
YEAR AFTER YEAR


143
20
Sustaining and
Multiplying
I recently spoke by telephone with an executive who used to work
for an old client of mine. We had not talked to each other for sev-
eral years, but we had a pleasant conversation catching up on our
respective careers. As it turns out, he is now a top executive at a
rapidly growing company. At the end of the conversation, he said,
“You know, I get my top team together every quarter for an off-
site planning session. Would you be interested in being a guest
speaker at one of these?” Rather than feeling flattered, I first
thought rather cynically, “Why hasn’t this guy called me up be-
fore? He knows I’m here!”
So indeed, why didn’t he get in touch? Because I did a bad job
at his old employer? No—on the contrary, he told me he recalled
with great enthusiasm the work I did. Because he didn’t like me
personally? No, he was delighted to hear from me. Actually, the
answer is simple: I wasn’t on his radar screen. I had dropped out of
sight, and sometimes, out of sight really is out of mind.
In Chapter 5, I discussed the four phases of building relation-
ships: affiliating, adding value, sustaining, and multiplying. In some
ways, sustaining relationships is one of the hardest parts of our jobs.
Because the demand for certain products and services is by nature
periodic, you may naturally find yourself out of touch with a client

144
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
for months or years at a time. Even if there is an uninterrupted de-
mand for what you do, you face the problem of energizing and re-
vitalizing your relationships as time goes by.
The story of my friend who never called clearly illustrates the
“radar screen” theory of buying behavior. When a client has a need
for something or is trying to solve a particular problem, she will
often turn to the individual or firm on her radar screen at that mo-
ment. Now wait, you’re probably saying: What about the idea of
clients for life? Shouldn’t they always call me, even five years later?
Well, yes and no. Clients are human, and their memories fade. A
well-documented decision bias, called the “recency effect,” shows
how we are disproportionately influenced by recent or very visible
events. If we see a picture of a car wreck or a house fire in the news,
immediately we tend to assign an unrealistically high probability to
the same thing happening to us. Or, if our next-door neighbor sells
his house for a high price, we generalize and start believing that
house prices are skyrocketing everywhere. The same phenomenon
can occur in business: You may have done fabulous work for me
five years ago, but I just attended a conference, and there was this
fellow there who had something quite interesting to say about the
death of strategic planning. I may be more inclined to call him
rather than someone I worked with years ago.
The solution is to stay on your clients’ radar screen. But achiev-
ing this degree of visibility is an infinitely harder task than it was
10 or 20 years ago. The amount of marketing material, books, and
magazines that cross the desk of the average top executive is sim-
ply overwhelming. Our personal time is shrinking, yet we face a
growing menu of choices. This phenomenon led Seth Godin to
write an interesting book entitled Permission Marketing.1 Godin’s
thesis is that traditional advertising and marketing—what he calls
“interruption marketing”—is dying, and it is being replaced with
“permission marketing.” We pay less and less attention to unso-
licited bids for our attention—print and TV ads, direct mail solic-
itations, and so on. In their place is a new kind of marketing that
has been requested by the target buyer. Simply defined, permission

Sustaining and Multiplying
145
marketing occurs whenever we agree to receive a marketing effort
someone wants to bring to us. For example, amazon.com practices
permission marketing when I buy a book at the company’s Web
site and I am asked, “Would you like to receive notification of new
books by this author?” When I then get an e-mail a year from now
heralding the arrival of the author’s latest tome, I am far more likely
to read the e-mail and buy the new book.
So how do you stay on a past client’s radar screen? First, you
need to create a discipline around staying in touch. This is one of
those crucial activities that are in the “Important/Not Urgent”
quadrant of Stephen Covey’s time management matrix.2 The most
successful professionals treat this activity almost like a daily exer-
cise: They do a little bit each day or each week. Some consult a set
of dog-eared note cards, while others use the latest contact man-
agement software. Whatever mechanisms they use, these success-
ful advisors systematically keep in close contact with past clients.
Remember that you don’t have to say in touch with everyone.
Focus on the most important individuals (more than 10, less than
100) who can provide strong references, and use holiday cards or
other means that aren’t time consuming to periodically reach a
broader group.
You may find any number of techniques work for you, for
example:
 Publish a regular newsletter or magazine. Some large profes-
sional service firms, especially in the consulting industry, pub-
lish a glossy, quarterly magazine with sophisticated content.
This can also be quite effective for individual practitioners as
well, assuming you have something interesting to say on a reg-
ular basis. I publish a free, monthly e-newsletter, for example,
called Client Loyalty, which I occasionally promote directly
to clients and which visitors to my Web site can subscribe to.
It’s become widely circulated, and I have found it an excellent
way of staying in touch with old clients (including the ones
that got away!) as well as other members of my network. Don’t

146
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
underestimate, however, the time and energy it requires on a
monthly or quarterly basis to produce a newsletter.
 Write articles and books. A book project is obviously a major
undertaking, but articles may seem less daunting. Both give
you an excuse to get in touch with past clients. When I pub-
lish an article or a book, I typically do a mailing to a selected
group of past clients and other contacts who I feel will have
interest in the subject matter.
 Periodically send something of interest. This is a time-tested
way of staying in touch. Know your clients’ interests, and
constantly be on the lookout for articles or ideas that they
might find useful. I have several past clients who are very in-
terested in the Southwest, for example, and from time to time
I have sent them blurbs about new hotels or cultural events
in New Mexico, where I live. The online booksellers are a
real boon to this type of sustaining activity. It takes almost no
time to buy a book on amazon.com or bn.com and have it
sent directly to your client with a note that you type into the
online form. What could be easier?
 Have lunch or dinner with an old friend. I’ve always won-
dered about the obsession that businesspeople have for meet-
ing over a meal, and it turns out there is a scientific basis for
it. In the 1930s, the famous psychologist Gregory Razan con-
ducted studies that showed our positive feelings about good
food are transferred to the person we’re with and the subject
we’re talking about while eating.3 In other words, if I have a
good meal with you, I am likely to feel just a bit more posi-
tive about doing business with you and more inclined to agree
with your positions. (The research doesn’t indicate, as far I’ve
read, whether or not the food has to be good in order for this
transference to occur; I’d play it safe, though, and choose a
restaurant you know has superior food!)
The question is, what do you talk about, and what is the excuse
for wanting to meet? If the client is a friend, or you’ve known him

Sustaining and Multiplying
147
for many years, it’s fairly easy to pick up the phone once or twice a
year and say, “Let’s have lunch. I’d like to catch up.” If your rela-
tionship is more formal, I find that any one of several ice-breakers
can work. Remember that it helps to arouse clients’ curiosity. For
example:
“I was thinking of you because I just finished a project that has
real relevancy to some of the issues I know you’re grappling
with. I thought it would be useful if we sat down over lunch and
I shared some of the things I’ve learned.”
“I called because it’s been ages since we spoke, and I’ve been
doing some work that I think you’d find interesting. Why don’t
we get together or schedule some time in the next few weeks
to talk?”
“We haven’t talked since we worked together two years ago,
and I’d love to buy you lunch and catch up.”
“I just completed a research study on the relative performance
of initial public offerings and I’d love to share the conclusions
with you—I think you’d find them fascinating.”
I recently did a workshop with a group of professionals who, at
my urging, had decided to initiate a past client “call back” program.
The problem was that while everyone had committed to calling at
least five past clients, no one was making the calls. I asked the group,
“What is keeping you from calling your old clients?” Here’s what
they said:
 “My clients have had their budgets cut, and they don’t have
money to spend right now. They don’t want to hear from me.”
 “I really don’t know what to say.”
 “It’s embarrassing—they’re probably going to tell me they
don’t want to meet.”
 “It’s just an awkward thing to do. I haven’t spoken to some
of these people in years.”

148
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
After cataloguing all of the reasons why my clients were not
making these calls, we actually role-played some hypothetical con-
versations. Soon, everyone was confident enough to agree that dur-
ing the next week they would get in touch with at least a couple of
past clients.
The results they reported were nothing less than spectacular.
This success was not due so much to my coaching, but to the fact
that their clients liked them and they had done good work in the
past. So virtually everyone they called was quite receptive to hav-
ing a conversation, either in person or on the phone. In fact, I re-
ceived a flurry of e-mails after the session with actual copies of
client responses. “Your phone call was well timed,” wrote a senior
executive from one large company, “and I’d like to immediately
get a proposal from you for a six-country study.”
 Ask for advice. Some people love to proffer opinions and give
advice, and clients are often flattered when you call them and
ask for their views on an issue. For example, I will often
show one or two past clients of mine the draft of an article
I’m writing and ask for some feedback. I’ve also shown clients
collateral marketing material I’m developing to get their re-
actions. Often, I’ll call to discuss a substantive business
issue—for example, “How are you managing R&D in your
firm right now? I’m doing some work with a client in this
area, a company which is not competitive with you, and some
interesting issues are surfacing.”
When Clients for Life first came out, a client of mine bought
1,000 copies. He distributed them as holiday gifts to his customers,
employees, and a number of financial institutions that his com-
pany worked with. In a direct sense, my client was helping to 
multiply my inf luence, which is the final stage of the process of
building relationship capital. You might object, “I don’t have a
book that I can ask my clients to distribute!” Maybe not, but 
you have other things that can be “distributed,” such as your ideas

Sustaining and Multiplying
149
and your reputation. Here are some simple ways to multiply your
influence:
 Ask clients to pass on your ideas. If you’ve published an ar-
ticle or newsletter, conducted some research, or written a
white paper on a particular issue—ask your clients directly
if they know anyone else who might be interested in read-
ing it.
 Ask for referrals. Entire books have been written on this
topic. Asking for a referral is awkward for many profession-
als because they feel it’s indelicate to have to ask.4 “You’re fa-
miliar with my work and my capabilities,” you might say to
a past client, “and in fact I’m always looking for new clients.
Could you suggest a couple of names of contacts you have
who could benefit from what I do?” The best professionals I
know at getting referrals are financial advisors. Because it’s
very hard to advertise or market this type of service, private
bankers and high-end brokers have to develop their skills at
getting personal introductions. One good technique is to tell
a new client, as you start work with her, “My lifeblood is get-
ting referrals from highly satisfied clients. I’m hoping that a
year from now I can come to you and ask you to give a ref-
erence and recommend me to some of your own contacts.”
 Ask for introductions. Old clients can serve as catalysts for
you. These are, you will recall from Chapter 5, those individ-
uals who make introductions and facilitate deals. A past client
of yours may know someone you want to meet—it could be
the head of a professional association, for example, or a board
member of a company with whom you’d like to do business.
Networks facilitate exponential growth—in other words, if
five of your clients each tell three people about you, and if each of
them just tells one other—you’ve suddenly reached 30 potential
new clients. This is why I believe you should make it a habit of
giving away good ideas to clients instead of hoarding them until

150
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
someone cracks open the checkbook. The more your ideas are
spread around, the more notoriety you’ll achieve and the greater
the chances that someone will call you directly or be receptive
when you do get in touch.
A final way of taking long-term client relationships to new lev-
els is to partner with clients in innovative ways. Mike Mulica, the
senior vice president of sales and customer field operations for Open-
wave Systems, the leading supplier of mobile Internet software for
cell phones, describes how powerful these innovative partnerships
can be:
Early on in the development of this market a number of other
large players were entering with competing products. There was
a limitation on the number of companies that could really cre-
ate and manufacture software for the wireless Internet environ-
ment, however, and we decided to use this fact to develop some
partnerships that would create advantages for both sides. I sat
down with the VP of marketing at BT (formerly British Tele-
com), and we mapped out a partnering arrangement that went
way beyond the typical product purchasing agreement. Funda-
mentally, we offered BT, and they contracted for, a lock on our
factory capacity for two years and a series of as-yet unknown
product innovations in five different product categories. In other
words, they bought guaranteed industry capacity and future in-
novation from us, all in the context of a long-term partnership.
This client became our biggest advocate in the industry, and
helped us to springboard our sales to other major telecommuni-
cations companies.
Your relationships with former and current clients represent a
huge asset. Regular efforts to sustain, deepen, and multiply these re-
lationships will give you one of the highest returns on investment
you’ll ever get, anywhere.

151
21
Merlin
Working a Little Magic
with Your Clients
Imagine a personal advisor completely dedicated to your success,
with little regard for his own agenda—someone who is highly ed-
ucated and equally skilled at helping you develop both big-picture
strategies and winning tactics. Picture an advisor who, at the mo-
ment of your greatest successes, slips unnoticed into the background
so that you receive all the credit. In your times of difficulty, he sud-
denly appears, always helping to turn the tide in your favor. Some-
times he even seems to be working a little magic on your behalf.
Nonsense, you think—there’s nobody around like that. Well, maybe
not right now, but there used to be. This advisor was real, and his
name was Merlin.
Don’t laugh—read on. Some historians now believe that King
Arthur’s famous counselor was a real person who lived from 450 A.D.
to 536 A.D.1
Merlin, in many respects, is the archetypal advisor: His qualities
and character surface again and again in our history, literature, and
culture. Nearly 1,500 years after his death, Merlin is a fixture in our
popular culture. His exploits are the fodder for numerous Hollywood
movies and television specials, and as a symbol he crops up just about

152
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
everywhere. The Star Wars movies draw heavily on the Merlin leg-
end: Obi-Wan Kanobi, who is Luke Skywalker’s first teacher, is a
Merlin look-alike, replaced later on by the enigmatic Yoda, who
completes Luke’s Jedi Warrior training in the wilderness. Dozens of
books have been written about Merlin or borrow from his exploits.
He embodies many of the qualities we seek in great advisors; in leg-
end, he also takes on other characteristics that satisfy our many sub-
conscious wishes and desires. The basic facts of Merlin’s life can teach
us much about being a great advisor.
Historians believe that Merlin was a Welsh priest, who advised
not one but four kings: Yortigern, Aurelius Ambrosius, Uther Pen-
dragon, and finally, Arthur. The stories of his exploits were handed
down through oral tradition; it was not until about 1200 that they
were finally written down. The legends about Merlin were obvi-
ously very powerful, as they became quite widespread and were
eventually recorded by many different cultures in multiple lan-
guages, including English, Latin, and French.
Merlin was born around 450 in what is now Wales. Legend has
it that his mother was a mortal woman and his father a demon and
that he was extremely precocious from birth. His first “consulting”
assignment came at age six, when a local king was having problems
building his new castle. Every time the castle walls were erected,
they fell to the ground. Advisors told the king that he must sacrifice
a young boy to ensure successful completion of the building. Merlin
was chosen for the sacrifice and brought before the king. Merlin
spoke up rather cheekily and told the king, “Your advisors have told
you to sacrifice a young boy, but they haven’t answered the question
why the walls collapse.” Merlin continued, “Dig down under the
foundations of the castle. There, you will find an underground river.
Divert it, and you will be able to build the castle.” Sure enough, the
king had his men dig, and they found the hidden waters. Even at age
six, Merlin demonstrated conviction in the face of overwhelming au-
thority, and he was able to reframe the king’s problem by asking a
provocative question.

Merlin
153
Merlin grew up and lived in the woods. He built a hideaway
near the Welsh seacoast, far up on a cliff (recalling Batman’s cave or
Superman’s fortress of steel at the North Pole). Years later, after the
Romans left England and returned to their disintegrating empire in
the south of Europe, Merlin realized that a great leader was needed
to organize the Celts against the invading Saxons. He hatched a plan
to take a baby with a strong genetic inheritance—the future
Arthur—and train him to be a great king.
Naturally, the right baby was born, Merlin appeared, and he
whisked the baby off to his hideaway. There, for the next 15 years,
he educated Arthur and trained him in the arts of war and state-
hood. Merlin then arranged for the sword Excalibur to be placed in
a stone, to set up the first “proof ” that Arthur should be king. The
young boy successfully pulled the sword out, and he became king.
Merlin remained close by as his most trusted advisor.
Whenever Arthur got into trouble, Merlin appeared. If it was
during a battle with the Saxons, a red dragon—Merlin’s symbol—ap-
peared over the battlefield, just as Batman projected the bat symbol
over the Gotham City skyline. This sight rallied Arthur’s troops and
presaged Merlin’s imminent arrival to save the day. Interestingly, ac-
cording to tales of his exploits, Merlin gave Arthur rather specific
advice: “Send a detachment of soldiers to a spot two miles down the
river from here,” Merlin told Arthur, helping him to set up an am-
bush. Then, he helped Arthur lay out a master plan for the battle.
Merlin exemplified virtually all of the qualities that character-
ize great advisors. He had a learning attitude, constantly studying
and reading; he developed an enormous depth and breadth of
knowledge (from literature through warfare), and instilled this in his
pupil; he was skilled at both grand strategies and short-term tactics;
his judgment was always keen—in fact, it was Merlin who con-
ceived of the idea for Arthur’s round table, whose design was in-
tended to overcome the problems of hierarchy and preference that
many of the knights held fast to; and he assiduously built trust with
Arthur, always putting the king’s agenda first.

154
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
In terms of his relationship with Arthur, he was self less, pre-
ferring to fade into the woods when victory was at hand (actually,
he frequently disguised himself when doing good deeds), yet he was
also completely independent—he lived on his own far away from
Arthur’s castle and never accepted payment for his services. Merlin
was discrete, never using his relationship with Arthur or special
knowledge of the king to further his own ambitions. He also had
absolute conviction about his views; indeed, he was rarely swayed by
others’ opinions. Merlin also adhered to a set of higher principles—
freeing the north country from the Saxon invaders, for example,
was a higher calling than serving any one client.
In some versions of the myth, Merlin’s aging process was re-
versed once he became an old man, and he subsequently grew
younger each day. There is some useful symbolism here: In our
work with long-standing clients, we have to approach each meet-
ing, each encounter, with renewed freshness and vigor. We have
to bring the same invigorated enthusiasm and new ideas to the
hundredth meeting that we brought to the first one when we were

Merlin
155
wooing that client. We have to treat every long-standing client
like a brand-new one.
Become a little more Merlin-like in your work with clients.
You don’t have to wear a wizard’s cap or live in a hideaway in
the woods. Focus on developing the behaviors and attributes that
Merlin exemplified so well, and your own clients will start feel-
ing as lucky as Arthur did to have such a magical advisor.

156
22
Five Steps to
New Business
with Old Clients
In any given year, many companies derive 70 percent to 80 percent
of their revenues from clients and customers they did business with
the year before. Among established firms, the vast amount of sell-
ing in business actually takes place within the context of existing re-
lationships. This doesn’t mean that acquiring new clients isn’t an
essential task; new clients are crucial for both financial and intel-
lectual growth, and your ability to add value increases with the di-
versity of your client experiences. Your current relationships,
however, usually represent your largest short-term potential to de-
velop new revenue at a low sales cost.
There are two schools of thought about relationship selling. One
says that if you simply do a great job, you’ll be asked back again.
Under this philosophy, there’s actually no need to “sell” to exist-
ing clients: Just do good work or supply great products, and the or-
ders will subsequently roll in. A second school argues that you must
aggressively exploit your existing relationships. In a sense, you are
constantly selling.
The best approach is somewhere in-between. Because they are
so competitive, most markets don’t permit us the luxury of sitting
back and waiting for the phone to ring. On the other hand, clients

Five Steps to New Business with Old Clients
157
today feel oversold-to. The frustrated client of one large accounting
firm, for example, felt relentless pressure from his auditor to buy
additional tax and consulting services. Exasperated, he finally asked
his outside audit partner, “Are you my auditor or my salesman?”1
George Fisher, the former chairman and CEO of Eastman Kodak
Company, put it this way during a discussion I had with him about
the importance of trusted advisors: “Some of the outside profes-
sionals I have used focus on adding value the whole time they are
working; others are in there aggressively trying to sell the next proj-
ect, which is just irritating.”
If you do the things that create long-term client loyalty—if you
add value, build personal trust, and go the extra mile—you will be
well positioned to develop new business within your existing rela-
tionships. There are two typical mistakes that professionals make,
however. First, they don’t actually build a relationship with their
client. They focus on being a good supplier of services but then ne-
glect or underestimate the second part of the loyalty equation—
trust. Second, they ignore the fact that whether they are selling to
a brand-new client or to a client they’ve known for years, five
building blocks need to be in place.
To sell a complex service such as consulting or investment bank-
ing, or a sophisticated product such as enterprise software, you need
to establish all five. Regardless of how long the client has known
you, the following five points are essential:
1. Build trust and credibility.
2. Identify the real problem.
3. Determine the impact of fixing the problem.
4. Propose a solution.
5. Close.
There are many excellent selling “systems” that have been de-
veloped over the years. Some of them are highly complex, with bells
and whistles such as six-by-six matrices you have to fill out. In the
end, though, they all boil down to these five basic principles.

158
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
Occasionally you can hit all of them in one meeting; sometimes
it might take 10 meetings. You may feel that the process is “differ-
ent” for you or your particular type of business, but in reality these
are universal stages. If you want to be an advisor who delivers so-
lutions rather than plain-vanilla expertise, you need to think in
terms of these five basic points.
Whether we’re talking about software, advertising, consulting,
or legal services, clients buy products and services to solve a prob-
lem or resolve a business issue they have. They feel most comfort-
able buying from people they trust and who are credible. If what
you sell costs clients a large amount of money—and you’re proba-
bly not reading this book unless that’s the case—they won’t buy
from you unless they believe they are receiving value in excess of the
price they pay. So you have to demonstrate, in some way, the value
of what you’re doing. Finally, no one buys unless you present a con-
crete proposal and close.
These five principles, as you can see, are intuitively natural, es-
sential phases of the buying process. The art lies in the nuanced way
in which you accomplish them. When you have a long-standing re-
lationship with a client, the entire process will look and feel differ-
ently, but close analysis will show that you’ve still touched each of
these bases.
1. Build Trust and Credibility
In Chapter 4, I discussed how to build trust in the first meeting
with a client, how to communicate integrity and competency—
and how to reduce a client’s risk of trusting you—while building
face-to-face rapport. If you’re already working with a client, per-
haps you feel this is a superfluous step since you have already es-
tablished trust and credibility through your prior work. Don’t take
this step for granted, however. Remember that a key element of
trust is a client’s perception of your competence to do a certain task.
You may have built trust with a client based on a certain service
you’ve already provided, but not for something new that you are

Five Steps to New Business with Old Clients
159
now proposing. Furthermore, you may be talking to a new execu-
tive within the same organization, and while you will benefit from
positive association (described in Chapter 7), your new contact still
has to find a comfort level with you.
Building trust and credibility is an ongoing process in your re-
lationships. Here are some reminders for achieving these qualities:
 Throw away all those PowerPoint slides extolling you and
your firm. Remember my client in Chapter 4, Michael,
who dragged his presentations around like a ball-and-
chain? At best, these should be a “leave-behind” after a face-
to-face meeting. If you make a presentation, it should al-
ways be about your client—his problems and issues—not
about you.
 Establish credibility by asking good questions and by pre-
senting brief examples of how you’ve helped other clients
with similar issues. This is important whether the client
knows you well or has just met you. In less than 200 words,
a case study should describe the client’s issue, your solution,
and the benefits to the client. Good questions then provoke
deeper thinking, uncover key issues, and demonstrate your
knowledge of a client’s business and industry.
 If it’s a new client within the same organization, discuss your
prior work for the company to create a positive association. If
someone he or she trusts also trusts you, the battle is half won.
 If you work for a firm, bring in other experts to demonstrate
competence in the new issue being discussed.
2. Identify the Problem
Sometimes the problem is very straightforward, and a client simply
wants someone to fix it. Other times, a major part of the value you
add is helping a client clarify what the real issues are. Why isn’t it
as easy as asking clients, “Tell us what the problem is?” It’s not so
simple, for several reasons.

160
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
Often clients think they know what the problem is, but they re-
ally don’t. One client says, “We lack brand awareness” but the culprit
is poor product quality. Another wants to launch a huge reengineer-
ing project to reduce costs, but his executive team hasn’t bought into
the company’s strategy and vision.
Moreover, clients frequently confuse symptoms with root
causes. Indeed, one of the hallmarks of great advisors is their abil-
ity to distinguish causes from effects and to go after real problems
rather than proposing a band-aid solution to cover up an unsightly
blemish. For example, attrition is a symptom of low employee
morale. On the other hand, poor front-line supervision is a problem
that may be causing that low morale.
Clients may have a problem, but it may not be causing them
enough pain to justify paying you to do something about it. So it’s
critical to probe not just for the real problem, but to verify how
much pain it’s causing. For example, you might ask:
 “I understand that attrition is very high. What’s that costing
your organization?”
 “Sales are flat, and your traditional customer base is aging.
What kind of impact do these conditions have on the bot-
tom line?”
 “Have there been efforts to solve this problem using internal
resources?” (If something is really a problem, usually an or-
ganization has struggled with it before calling in an outsider.)
 “If we don’t do this work within the deadline you’re sug-
gesting, what do you think the costs will be?”
 “You’ve been managing your own investments for the last
five years. Do you feel you have achieved your goals?” 
3. Determine the Impact of
Fixing the Problem
To motivate a client to fix a problem, you have to get him to weigh
the pain that problem is causing against the benefits he imagines

Five Steps to New Business with Old Clients
161
would result if it were fixed. Dick Carlson, a consultant and author
who trains professionals in solution selling, puts it this way: “Before
a client will buy, there has to be either problem impact or results im-
pact in evidence. A client may complain about something to you, but
unless he can articulate either the pain it’s causing or the results that
resolving it will achieve, he won’t ultimately pay you to fix it.”
Some pundits call this “envisioning the future” or creating a
“future state vision.” The point is that you need to help your client
envision a future state where her problems are solved. Often, I think
it’s more practical and useful to ask the simple question, “What is
the value of fixing this problem?” Here are some typical phrasings
that will help you get to this information:
 “If you successfully solved this problem, what would the or-
ganization look like a year from now?”
 “What do you think is the value of fixing this problem?”
 “What kinds of benefits would you expect from a good so-
lution to this matter?”
 “Once the strategy you’ve described is fully implemented,
how will your business be different?”
 “If this merger or deal goes through, what results do you
expect?”
4. Propose a Solution
If you haven’t built trust and credibility, identified the real prob-
lem and the degree of pain it’s causing, and assessed the impact of
fixing the problem, your client isn’t very likely to buy anything
from you. But if you propose a solution too early in this process,
you can lower your success rate significantly. Many professionals
jump quickly to what they sell rather than trying to understand
their client’s needs and issues. Why? We’re trained that way, and it
feels safe. It’s much easier to sell only black Model T cars, as Henry
Ford did, than to spend the time digging into what customers re-
ally want in a car. Shortly after making his famous statement that

162
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
consumers “can have my cars any way they want, as long as they’re
black,” Ford was eclipsed by General Motors, which offered its cus-
tomers vehicles in bright colors.
Clients also contribute to this phenomenon. Some now want the
“elevator pitch,” a 30-second attempt to “sell them” on your prod-
uct or service. If you’re in a long-term relationship, you are less likely
to receive such a ridiculous request. The truth is, however, that we
live in media-driven culture that thrives on the sound bite, and you
do need to be able to describe what you do in one or two sentences.
You need to clearly describe a benefit that clients receive—for ex-
ample, “I help clients revitalize declining brands”; “We improve
long-term business performance”; or, “I help medium-sized com-
panies gain access to private equity financing.”
Don’t let yourself be forced into the elevator pitch. Describe
what you do, and then add, “We tailor our work to each individ-
ual client, and if we can meet to explore your business’s particular
issues, I’ll then be able to describe exactly how we can help and
what the benefits would be to you.”
When proposing a solution, you should always present it as a
draft. It’s best to do this in person, where it provides an opportu-
nity for the client to “put his fingerprints” on the approach. Never
send a letter that is a final proposal if you haven’t already discussed
it with the client.
5. Close
Has this ever happened to you? You’ve moved through the four steps
I’ve described. You’ve formalized your proposal in a crisp engage-
ment letter. Your client is enthusiastic about starting the work—
next week, in fact. He’s ready to commit to a major contract.
Suddenly, silence. You don’t hear back for a week—or a month.
Anxious, you call. “Well, this has to go through an approval process
involving our chief financial officer and vice president for opera-
tions,” he tells you, adding, “But I’m optimistic they’re going to
like this a lot.” Nobody ever mentioned these other executives!

Five Steps to New Business with Old Clients
163
When something untoward happens at the end of the business
development process, it’s usually because one or more of the first
four steps haven’t been properly completed. Typical pitfalls include:
 It turns out that the problem isn’t serious enough to warrant
paying your fees.
 The problem is owned by a different executive than the one
you are talking to.
 The client is unable to articulate the real pain that the prob-
lem is causing him.
 The value of solving the problem hasn’t been identified, so
the client doesn’t feel it’s worth the investment.
 You’ve never talked to the “economic buyer”—the person
who can say “yes” to hiring you—and when presented with
the project, he or she declines, having never met you and
never understood the value of the work.
 You are in a complex sale that includes many constituencies
(e.g., the CEO, COO, or other line managers) and you
haven’t met all the key players and understood their perspec-
tives, determined their hot buttons, and sold them on the
value of the work.
Often, the client will close the engagement himself ”: “Okay,
this looks good, so when can you start?” (Don’t we wish more said
that?) Sometimes, you have to force the issue:
 “Do you have all the information you need to make a final
decision?”
 “Would a start date of June 1 make sense for your
organization?”
 “Is there anything else we need to do to enable your organi-
zation to make a final decision on going ahead with this
work?”
 “Is there anything I need to know about your organization
and its people before implementing this solution?”

164
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
 “Are you able to authorize this expenditure, or does that
come from elsewhere? If so, it would probably make sense
for us to talk to the person who handles that budgetary line;
that way, he’ll have a first-hand sense of who we are and of
the impact this work will have.”
As I mentioned in Chapter 18, what motivates a client to buy
from you in the later stages of the relationship can be somewhat
different than what motivates him at the beginning. When a client
first decides to do business with you, it’s often based on the per-
ception that you have new ideas, a new approach, or a hot product
to offer. Later on, other factors come into play: the innovation
you’re able to offer that is tailored to the client’s business; partner-
ship arrangements; risk-sharing; and the insight and wisdom you
can bring based on an intimate knowledge of the company’s strat-
egy and its management talent.
As you can see, careful questioning is at the heart of uncover-
ing the exact dimensions of a client’s need. An excellent treatment
of this can be found in SPIN Selling by Neil Rackham, which pre-
sents a taxonomy of four types of questions—situation, problem,
implication, and need-payoff—that you need to employ at different
points in the selling process.2
Ultimately, to develop new business within an existing rela-
tionship you must become as knowledgeable as possible about your
client’s issues. This knowledge includes a thorough understanding
of his organization, an extensive investment in networking and
meeting other buyers, and the development of industry expertise.
Then, you need to integrate these discussions (problem, desired re-
sult, solution) into your day-to-day work with an existing client.
In practice, it can be helpful to invest in additional meetings to
discuss your findings and stimulate a client’s thinking about inter-
connected issues that need resolution. Midway through the current
project, take an assessment of the client’s needs and make a new
proposal now, not at the end. The most pathetic sight in the world
for a client is an outside professional who, at his final presentation,

Five Steps to New Business with Old Clients
165
makes a surprise, desperate stab at getting follow-on business! If
you start the problem/result/solution cycle during your last meet-
ing with a client, you’ll have a delay of typically weeks or months,
even if you are successful, before getting new work. Finally, if you
work in a large firm, expose your client to the full range of capa-
bilities that you and your colleagues offer. Remember, trust de-
pends in part on a client’s belief in your competence, so you need to
manage that perception.
It’s important to remember that client needs evolve and change
over time, and if you want to be able to effectively serve clients for
the long term, you’ve got to demonstrate versatility. If you’re purely
a one-trick pony, you will find yourself working with clients on a
very periodic basis. At both the firm and individual level there is
great utility in having at least several core areas of strength; even
boutiques need some breadth if they want to have staying power.
This is useful not just for serving an individual client over the long
term, but also for diversifying your market risk—if you only appeal
to one narrow segment of clients, and that market goes south, you’re
going to be in trouble.
At best, the relationship selling process should be almost seam-
lessly woven into the fabric of your day-to-day client interactions.
You add great value, build personal trust, and go the extra mile.
You listen carefully and constantly look around for ways to help
and problems you can solve. You meet other potential buyers within
the organization. Your client may come to you with a particular
issue, or you may propose one to him. You help him articulate the
pain the problem is causing and the expected benefits of fixing it.
You may explore partnering in a way that deepens the relationship
and benefits both sides. You draft an approach and agree to begin
work. At this point, both you and your client are experiencing the
benefits of a long-term relationship.

166
23
The
Rothschild
Bankers
The Power of
Unique Capabilities
In 1813, England’s Duke of Wellington was waging war against
both Spain and France, and he was in a pickle. “An army marches
on its stomach,” Napoleon had said, and Wellington was running
out of money to buy food and supplies for his far-flung troops on
the continent. “Unless this army should be assisted with a very large
sum of money at a very early period,” he wrote, “it will be quite
impossible for me to do anything.”1 If he couldn’t pay his soldiers,
they would plunder the local towns, which would be a political dis-
aster for the English.
Two problems had to be surmounted: First, Wellington needed
large loans, and second, he needed huge quantities of gold and sil-
ver coins distributed to his troops all over continental Europe, an
enormous logistical undertaking. The British government, despite
its size and advanced financial system, lacked the resources to meet

The Rothschild Bankers
167
Wellington’s need. So whom did he turn to? Only one institution
in the world had the means to finance the English army and ensure
its payroll was met with the right currencies in multiple countries:
the Rothschild banking family.
Nathan Rothschild, who ran the family’s English bank, had as-
siduously cultivated a relationship with John Charles Herries, now
the English Commissary-in-Chief. In this moment of crisis, Herries
turned to Nathan and asked for his help. With merchant banking
houses in five major European financial centers—London, Paris,
Frankfort, Vienna, and Naples, which were run by Nathan, James,
Solomon, Amschel, and Carl, respectively—the Rothschild family
had in effect become a global bank. Over the next two years, it han-
dled the financing of England’s extensive war efforts. The Roth-
schilds took English sterling, converted it into gold and silver coins
in various currencies, and arranged for transport to the battlefields
where Wellington’s troops were dispersed. The English prime min-
ister, Lord Liverpool, later wrote to a friend, “I do not know what
I should have done without him last year.”2 As they had many times
before—and would do again in the future—the Rothschilds were
able to solve financial problems that no other bank could touch.
The Rothschild dynasty was started by Mayer Amschel
Rothschild, who was born in the Frankfort Jewish Ghetto in
1744. At that time, Jews had few rights in Germany or elsewhere.
They were not entitled to citizenship, and in Frankfort they had
to live in an unbelievably cramped neighborhood—a ghetto—
which was walled off from the rest of the city. Mayer Amschel got
his start as a dealer in antique coins. Early on, he built a clientele
of affluent aristocrats—including William IX, who headed the
wealthy German state of Hesse-Kassel—who would later become
banking clients. It was natural to occasionally extend credit to his
coin customers, and by the late 1790s Mayer Amschel had ex-
panded into an array of financial services.
How Mayer Amschel actually did this is instructive. His real
breakthrough came when he graduated from just extending credit to
coin clients to participating in the buying and selling of English bills.

168
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
This was facilitated by the friendship he cultivated with a man named
Karl Friedrich Buderus, who had worked for William of Hesse-
Kassel as a tutor. Buderus moved rapidly through the ranks of
William’s civil servants, and ended up in his financial administration.
In 1796, Buderus successfully recommended that Mayer Amschel be
allowed to bid with other established firms for a block of English bills
that William was selling. Buderus later became, in strategic selling
terminology, Mayer Amschel’s “coach.” On several occasions he pro-
vided tips to Mayer Amschel on how much he should pay for notes
in order to underbid the competition, and although some of this busi-
ness was unprofitable, it gave the Rothschild patriarch an entree into
a much bigger league than he had previously been playing in.
When the French invaded Hesse-Kassel, Mayer Amschel was
one of several friends who hid and protected William’s wealth. Al-
though this story was later wildly exaggerated—Mayer Amschel
had only a minor role in preserving William’s fortune—it became
a myth propagated by the family itself by way of underscoring the
Rothschilds’ “exceptional probity as deposit-holders” and the fact
that they would “risk everything rather than fail to protect and pay
interest on a client’s money.”3
Mayer Amschel had five sons who initially were primarily in
the business of exporting textiles from England. Over time they
moved into financial services and merchant banking activities. By
the time Nathan, his eldest son, died in 1836, the Rothschilds were
the wealthiest family in the entire world. In the space of only a few
decades, Mayer Amschel and his five sons had created, relatively
speaking, the most powerful financial institution in history. Neither
the house of Morgan in the late-nineteenth century, nor any of
today’s largest banks, has come close to achieving the influence and
power wielded together by the five Rothschild banking houses.
Several notable factors—all quite relevant to modern profes-
sionals—contributed to their success:
1. A relentless emphasis on relationship-building. By success-
fully cultivating relationships with government officials like

The Rothschild Bankers
169
Buderus, Mayer Amschel successfully leveraged the early client re-
lationships he built in his antique coin business into much larger
ones. He did whatever it took—including sharply discounting his
fees—to capture business with high-profile royalty in his home
country of Germany. After his death, his five sons frequently re-
membered his advice about building key relationships, quoting it
frequently in letters to each other (for example, “When he had oc-
casion to apply to an inferior or a man who had little power to as-
sist him in carrying an object he had in view, [Father] spoke with
the person as if the whole depended entirely on him, though per-
haps he knew he had but the smallest possible influence in the busi-
ness”).4 Mayer Amschel was skilled at making even the lowliest clerk
feel important.
Because much of the Rothschild banking business involved
government loans and bonds, intelligence on political events was
crucial to the family’s success. The five brothers cultivated gov-
ernment officials at the highest levels, sometimes lending them
money or letting them participate in deals, and they built lavish
homes throughout Europe in which they entertained the political
elite. James Rothschild once wrote, speaking about his brother in
London, “Nathan’s relations with these gentlemen [of the Trea-
sury] is such between brothers.”5 Not all of these practices would
be appropriate today, but the focus on building relationships and
gaining intelligence is still of utmost importance for contemporary
client advisors.
2. A close-knit partnership based on mutual trust. Few family
businesses last more than one or two generations, but the Roth-
schilds’ has endured, in one form or another, for nearly 200 years.
Despite many opportunities for disagreement and schisms, the five
sons worked together in relative harmony for decades. In Chapter
27, you’ll read about how rain-making firms engage in trust-
building activities that not only reassure clients but enable their pro-
fessional staff to work together in the best interests of clients.
The Rothschild brothers achieved this trust-building in spades.

170
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
Biographer Niall Ferguson writes, “If there was a single ‘secret’ 
of Rothschild success it was the system of co-operation between the
five houses.”6 Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli remarked at the
time, “The prosperity of the Rothschilds was as much owing to 
the unity of feeling which alike pervaded all branches of that nu-
merous family as in their capital & abilities.”7 Every few years, the
five brothers fine-tuned their partnership agreements so that each
knew where he stood and what he might expect. The brothers trusted
each other completely, and this mutual confidence enabled them to
freely act on each other’s behalf during even the most sensitive, high-
stakes negotiations.
3. Unique sources of information. The Rothschilds had three
unique sources of information that enabled them to add value to
their clients and also make profits for their own accounts. First, they
maintained a network of salaried agents in all of the world’s
stock markets. These agents wrote daily dispatches to the five main
Rothschild houses, informing them of the latest news and develop-
ments. Second, the Rothschild brothers cultivated relationships
with politicians around the world, especially in England, the Eu-
ropean Continent, and Russia. Finally, they occasionally used a net-
work of carrier pigeons to ensure that they had the absolute latest
news about important events such as war and revolution. Use of
these pigeons allowed the Rothschilds in London to learn about
Wellington’s victory over Napoleon at Waterloo well before the
English government did.
4. A mission oriented to their Jewish identity. A fourth element
of the Rothschilds’ success was the fact that they embraced and re-
tained their strong Jewish identity. In the nineteenth century, it
was quite common for wealthy Jews to convert to Christianity in
order to become accepted into mainstream society. Many of the
Rothschilds’ banking rivals followed this route, abandoning their her-
itage in exchange for societal acceptance. Anti-semitism was rife at
the time, and being Jewish was a significant impediment to financial

The Rothschild Bankers
171
and social success. One factor that distinguishes great client advisors
is a mission orientation, and the Rothschilds were driven by a deep
commitment to their heritage and faith. An important piece of their
personal mission was to raise the lot of Jews. They consistently used
their vast wealth and connections to improve the status of Jews
throughout Europe, lobbying hard for citizenship rights and other
forms of recognition they had been denied. Their closeness as siblings,
no doubt, was also enhanced by their sense—very much based in
reality—of being a besieged minority.
5. Innovative client solutions. Nathan Rothschild, who set up
the family’s English branch, could have easily written the chapter on
breakthrough client strategies. When he started the family’s textile
export business, based in Manchester, he always pushed to offer his
clients a better value proposition than his competition. He cut out
the middleman, and by going directly to suppliers in remote areas of
the British Isles, he was able to offer lower prices. He ensured he
had the largest variety of patterns. He organized the fastest means of
shipment. Later, as a banker, Nathan was always able to do some-
thing unique for clients, and make hefty profits for himself and his
family to boot. Because of their interconnected operations in so
many financial centers, the Rothschilds were able to undertake
transactions—such as the financing of Wellington’s army—that no
one else could touch. Similarly, their grasp of exchange rate fluctu-
ations were such that they could usually turn a tidy profit on the
transactions they conducted for clients, at lower risk than the com-
petition. Because of their unique sources of information, they were
able to offer clients the most current information on the financial
markets and the political events that drove them.
The Rothschilds, in short, were extraordinarily adept at build-
ing their relationship capital and then leveraging it through their
proprietary information and interlocking banking operations across

172
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
Europe. It’s instructive to compare the Rothschilds with the
Jesuits, whom we looked at in Chapter 12. The two certainly fell
at opposite ends of the religious spectrum: devoted Jews, on the one
hand, versus arch-Catholics, on the other—but they actually had
many important qualities in common. Both were deep generalists—
the Jesuits were trained to undertake any task, anywhere, and the
Rothschilds were broadly talented businessmen as opposed to nar-
row financial specialists. Both enjoyed an enormous sense of inter-
nal cohesion based on high standards that engendered mutual trust
and a mission orientation. Mentoring was important to both:
Recall the Jesuits’ formal process for mentoring called the “account
of conscience”; and in a similar vein, the five Rothschild brothers
carefully tutored and developed their young nephews, preparing
them to take their places in running the family business. Both also
had, to differing degrees, a mission focus—the Jesuits determined
to spread the word of God and the will of the Pope, the Rothschilds
deeply concerned with using their wealth to improve the condition
of Jews. Although the Rothschilds were not altruistic client advi-
sors along the lines of a Sir Thomas More or General George
Marshall, we can still learn important lessons from their success at
cultivating and serving the needs of powerful clients.
Nathan Rothschild was the first of Mayer Amshel’s sons to die,
and his demise in 1836 rocked the financial markets around the
world more severely than the outbreak of a major war. The family
business went forward, however, and even today some of Mayer
Amschel’s direct descendants are involved in international finance.

173
24
Cultivating the
Attitude of
Independent
Wealth
What I’m about to describe is one of the most powerful things you
can do to attract and keep clients. If you are successful at it, you’ll
create a perceptible aura around you that is enormously attractive
not only to clients but to anyone with whom you have a business
relationship. It doesn’t cost anything, and the implementation is en-
tirely up to you. Sound easy? It is—sort of.
Here goes: One of the secrets of building long-term client loy-
alty is to behave with clients as if you’re not getting paid. That’s
right, work 60 or more hours a week, hustle to meet deadlines, and
lie awake at night wondering if there’s any flaw in the project you
just completed—and then pretend you’re doing it for free. “Ridicu-
lous,” someone once said to me after I had recommended this dur-
ing a speech. “My firm needs to make a profit, and clients should
pay for our services,” he told me afterwards, having interpreted my
advice a bit too literally. Indeed, he was right—you need to charge
clients fair fees for your services, send out bills on time, and do all

174
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
of the other things that make you profitable. But when you’re with
a client, you can’t have the meter running in your head. You have
to exude enjoyment and enthusiasm for what you do and treat the
client like a friend. No matter how skinny your bank account, you
have to convey the semblance of independent wealth.
The opposite of the attitude of independent wealth—let’s call it
the scent of greed or scarcity—is repugnant to clients, and they can
smell it a mile away. A colleague once described to me the training
program he went through many years ago at a large brokerage firm.
When cold-calling prospective clients, he was taught to envision,
just before picking up the phone, the yacht or expensive sports car
he would buy with his year-end bonus. When I told this story to a
friend of mine who is a well-known financial advisor, he exclaimed,
“Good grief! This fellow was being taught to visualize greed!”
Developing an attitude of independent wealth is an excellent
way to cultivate self less independence, which is one of the founda-
tional qualities of great client advisors that I described in Chapter
2. Arguably, many of the biggest corporate scandals of the last
decade have had at their roots a systematic lack of independence on
the part of virtually everyone involved, including the professional
service firms hired by these companies, senior management, and
the boards of directors.
Throughout history, we have admired individuals who are truly
independent. The legendary Cincinnatus, for example, was the
Roman soldier who took a few days off from his farm to lead the
rescue of a besieged Roman army in 458 B.C.. He then refused en-
treaties to become emperor for life and instead returned to his pas-
tures. Thomas More famously stood up to his client, Henry VIII,
and was beheaded when he refused to give up his independence and
endorse, against all his principles, Henry’s divorce and the split with
the Catholic Church. Our admiration for this quality applies to
every field: In sports, for example, the boxer Muhammad Ali took
on the establishment with an independence of spirit that initially
enraged entrenched interests like the Mafia (which ran boxing in
those days) and the boxing regulatory authorities. When the

Cultivating the Attitude of Independent Wealth
175
Supreme Court finally overturned his conviction for draft dodg-
ing—Ali had refused on religious grounds to be drafted for service
in Vietnam—he was free to don his boxing gloves again and win
the heavyweight championship. Thereafter, he rose to the status of
national hero and today is one of the most famous and widely rec-
ognized Americans outside the United States.
So how do you cultivate the mind-set of independent wealth?
It’s not easy, at least not in the context of Western culture. We live
in a society that seeks wealth and the trappings of wealth—a trophy
home, new cars, and exotic vacations. Furthermore, we want to win
at any cost, and we have instilled this desire in our children (in a re-
cent study of 4,500 teenagers by Rutgers University, 75 percent of
them admitted to serious cheating at school).1 All this materialism
runs counter to building the inner confidence and strength that un-
derpin a sense of personal rather than monetary wealth. That said,
here are some suggestions to explore:
 Make sure you are doing work that you love. In his book,
Making a Life, Making a Living, Mark Albion talks about

176
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
having finally found work that is so rewarding and enjoyable
that he cannot distinguish between “work” and “play” any-
more.2 When someone asked him how many hours a week he
works, he replied, “How many hours a week do I breathe? I
don’t count my work hours because I can’t really distinguish
between those hours and any others.”
 Think often about the people who are most important to you.
Reflect on how wealthy you are in terms of the relationships
in your life. I remember being thrown into an absolute panic
years ago by an incident with a major client that occurred
while I was living in Europe. My mother, who happened to
be visiting at the time, watched me reach the boiling point
and almost collapse with anxiety. On a walk one evening,
she said to me, “You know, in 10 years you won’t even be
able to recall why you were so upset this week. But your fam-
ily and close friends will still be with you. They are what
counts.” And you know what? Today I can barely remember
the conflict with the client, and I deeply regret the turmoil
I caused my family during those days.
 Rationally evaluate the importance and impact of losing a
client or missing a sale. I ask myself two questions when con-
fronting news that could potentially shake my sense of inde-
pendence and my confidence: First, does this event pose a
physical or emotional threat to my family or me? Second,
will it have a serious, long-term effect on my career and pro-
fessional life? If I cannot answer “Yes” to one or both of these
questions, then it’s simply not worth getting agitated. How
often does a setback with a client pass this test? You guessed
it: It’s never happened to me even once.
 Think about how you would spend your time if you didn’t
have to work for money. Warning: This is a risky exercise!
An even more dangerous corollary is to ask yourself: If you
were not currently with your spouse or significant other,
would you choose that person again right now to be with for
the rest of your life? If your answer is that you’d do the exact

Cultivating the Attitude of Independent Wealth
177
same work you’re engaged in now, you’re lucky and have
100 percent alignment between work and play. If they don’t
coincide, think about how you might slowly begin to add
more of the activities and pursuits that you wish you could
have more of or would prefer to do. Even a small move in
this direction will greatly increase your sense of personal
wealth, regardless of the remuneration.
 Spend more time developing your physical and mental self in
ways that are unrelated to your client work. I play guitar,
for example, and find that my late-night sessions help create
a healthy escape from the ups and downs of my professional
practice. Physical activity, be it just a walk in the foothills
around my house or a day skiing with my wife, also “un-
hooks” me from work and contributes to a centeredness that
gives me an independence vis-à-vis my clients.
For those of you who feel that this chapter is a bit soft or self-
helpish for your taste, just recall the words of a well-known CEO,
Charles Lillis, who said this to me about outside advisors: “I wish
all of my professional advisors were independently wealthy. They
would then be objective, independent, and less likely to be pushing
their own agenda.”3 Although few clients could articulate this con-
cept as well as this particular executive, they all recognize it when
they see it. It boils down to having complete intellectual honesty
with your clients—which means always telling them the way you
really see things; putting their interests and well-being ahead of
your personal financial gain; and cultivating your own inner con-
fidence. If you do this—and don’t forget to send out your bills
while you’re at it—you’ll experience wealth of all sorts over the
long term.

178
25
Managing Client
Relationships
during Uncertain
Times
During the economic boom of the late 1990s, there was such de-
mand for certain services that some businesses routinely turned
clients away. Every new dot-com startup, for example, wanted pub-
licity and brand awareness. Public relations firms experienced an
unprecedented surge in demand. Some consulting firms and invest-
ment banks began asking for not only their normal fees but also eq-
uity “kickers” in the form of stock or options in their clients’
company. “If we’re going to put our reputation on the line and help
one of these companies gain access to capital,” one prominent lawyer
told me during this period, “then, sure, we ask for a piece of the ac-
tion in addition to our full fees.” Alas, all good things must pass.
As you read this book, the economy may be robust or faltering.
The business outlook may be bullish or bearish. One thing is for sure,
however: At some point you will have to deal with managing clients
in an environment of great uncertainty. During uncertain times, what
needs to change in terms of how you go about acquiring new clients

Managing Client Relationships during Uncertain Times
179
and managing your ongoing relationships? The nice thing about
managing client relationships using time-tested principles is that
you can rely on them through thick and thin—economic or polit-
ical uncertainty shouldn’t affect your basic approach. Add great
value, build a trusted personal relationship, and go the extra mile—
these fundamental building blocks of client loyalty don’t change
with the ups and downs of the stock market or with changes in in-
terest rates.
When times are difficult, what often holds us back is our own
attitude. The old truism that we are our own worst enemies came
to life for me recently when, as a student of Japanese Shotokan
karate, I entered a tournament. During a training session for the
sparring event, several of us were nervously pumping our teacher
with questions that were fundamentally rooted in insecurity: “What
if the other guy charges right off the line?” “What if she’s faster
than I am?” “What’s the best way to block a spinning hook kick?”
The sensei replied quite simply, “When you go into the match,
you are not fighting your opponent so much as yourself.” My
teacher’s point was that we overestimate our competition, under-
estimate our own abilities, and allow fear slow us down or even
paralyze us.
The same thing happens in business. We are held back by nu-
merous assumptions, beliefs, and attitudes that, when taken to-
gether, form myths about the managing of client relationships in
uncertain times:
Myth: “My clients just don’t want to see me.”
Many businesspeople think that their clients don’t want to see them
when the economy is doing poorly, reasoning that if a client doesn’t
have any money to spend, he doesn’t want to be “sold” to. This at-
titude says more about the mind-set of the professional than the
client. In reality, your clients need you more than ever during times
of crisis—their issues are more complex and sometimes quite per-
sonal, the decisions they face are difficult, and they need trusted ad-
visors who can serve as level-headed, experienced sounding-boards.

180
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
Developing new business may well take longer—sometimes, caring
and empathy for clients is the order of the day, not hard selling.
Principle 1: Get out into the market—actively seek out your clients
and try to help them with whatever issues they’re facing. Listen, be
patient, and be prepared to invest extra time.
Myth:
“I need to cut my prices to attract business.”
Clients would always like a price break, and when they press hard, it’s
usually because you’re perceived as a tradable “expert” and your ser-
vices are seen as commodities that can be bargained for like salt pork
or railroad cars of grain. When times are good, your clients aren’t
going to pay you more than your standard fees, and when times are
bad, you shouldn’t discount them either.
What you should be willing to explore, however, are flexible
means of payment and delivery. These could include: breaking a
large project down into several discrete pieces, which can be de-
cided on and paid for one at a time as the work progresses; agree-
ing to delay some or all of the invoicing so that it falls into the next
fiscal year or budgeting period; conducting a preliminary diagnos-
tic phase of work for a reduced fee, with the explicit understand-
ing that if the benefits are demonstrated, it will lead to a larger
phase of full-price work; and offering value-added services as a free
“add-on.” As a last resort, you may have to reduce your fees or cut
your prices, but only do this if you also cut back on what you ac-
tually deliver to the client—negotiate what benefits and values are
in and which ones are out. Finally, remember that if you grant a
client a concession, always ask for one in return.
Principle 2: Don’t let clients negotiate your prices downward unless
you also negotiate less value (adding more value for the same
price is vastly better). If necessary, be willing to propose flexible,
creative, and even unorthodox ways of structuring your services
and invoicing for them.

Managing Client Relationships during Uncertain Times
181
Myth: “Large companies are a safe port during storms.”
Large companies with equally large budgets have historically been
the mother lode for a variety of services firms. Their loyalty to ser-
vice providers and vendors, however, is fleeting. With more cen-
tralized control over corporate expenditures than ever before, many
Fortune 500 companies now routinely enact across-the-board edicts
to reduce operating expenses, leaving outside suppliers high and
dry. Furthermore, decision making can become absolutely frozen in
these large corporations. The value you add at a small or mid-size
company is frequently more clearly recognized. You’re often work-
ing with higher level executives compared to your interlocutors at
a corporate behemoth, and you may also find there is greater loy-
alty to you as an individual or a firm.
Principle 3: Don’t ignore small and medium-size companies, which
often have greater flexibility to retain and pay a professional who
can really add value.
Myth: “Now is the time to cut back across the board.”
Indeed, in some areas you will need to monitor and trim your ex-
penditures. But there is one place where, when there is a recession
or economic uncertainty, you need to increase investment: market-
ing and sales. This is an opportunity for the strong to get stronger.
Principle 4: A recession is a good time to increase your market share
through enhanced marketing efforts and greater investment in
identifying client problems you can solve.
Myth: “It’s more important than ever to demonstrate my specific ex-
pertise—it’s the only thing clients will pay for when money is tight.”
The slightest discomfort sends most professionals running back to
their expert-for-hire bunker. There is some truth to the notion that
in good times “generalists” sell well, and in bad times “experts” are

182
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
more in demand. The real distinction is that especially in bad times
clients won’t buy unless they clearly see the benefits they’ll reap,
and if you cannot articulate these, you’re in for a difficult sale. Re-
member, expertise is great, but without the ability to create trusted
personal relationships, serve as a navigator, and generate real insight
for clients, it’s worth very little.
Principle 5: In a crisis, insight, judgment, wisdom, and plain level-
headedness are often more important than expertise. Experts for
hire are commodities in good times and bad.
Myth: “I need to take any business I can get in times like these.”
The successful professionals I’ve studied all temper their devotion to
clients with great independence, which includes being selective
about their clients. Choosing the right clients for your particular
services and market focus is one of the most powerful things you
can do to shape and grow your business. Don’t starve for your prin-
ciples, but don’t panic either, throwing your independence and se-
lectivity out the window.
Executive search professional Susan Bishop, in an article enti-
tled “The Strategic Power of Saying No,” describes building her re-
cruiting firm from scratch and the early pressure she felt to take
any client she could get.1 It was only when she learned to focus on
the clients who truly matched her strategic focus and strengths—
and began saying no to others—that her business truly blossomed.
Principle 6: Accepting any and all business may look good now, but
it can eventually drag you down and put you in a potentially worse
position when things rebound later on.
Myth: “I need to spend my time with paying clients.”
We all want to work with winners, but sometimes our clients—like
us—are down and out, and that’s when they especially need us! I

Managing Client Relationships during Uncertain Times
183
have frequently helped clients who were between jobs. I introduced
them to executive recruiters, helped them polish their resumes, and
acted as an informal career coach. I didn’t do this because I thought
there would be some “payback,” but when you’ve lent a hand to
someone in need, it is in fact rarely forgotten.
I recall a friend who opened his first ski shop right before a win-
ter with virtually no snow. “I almost went under,” he told me, “but
a few suppliers supported me and because of them I made it through.
I will do business with those companies for the rest of my life.”
Remember, too, that if someone loses his job, there is a huge
comedown in terms of status and the attention that is lavished on
him. Your continuing help and respect will be a breath of fresh air.
Principle 7: A client in need is a client indeed.
Myth: “It’s time to wheel out the tried-and-tested crowd-pleasers—
the stuff my clients always used to buy.”
There’s nothing wrong with restoring the glitter to tarnished silver
or even serving old wine in new bottles. But don’t forget that vir-
tually all professional services are knowledge businesses, and the
profit in most product businesses comes from knowledge-based ser-
vices that are sold alongside the product. Former General Electric
CEO Jack Welch was no slouch, and he began pushing the growth
of General Electric’s services years ago. Lou Gerstner, who rescued
IBM from near-oblivion in the mid-1990s, did the same thing by
building up IBM Global Services; not surprisingly, Sam Palmisano,
his successor as CEO, headed that division.
Ask yourself: What new knowledge—insight and wisdom that
I will ultimately offer to my clients and embed in my day-to-day
work with them—am I going to create this year? This “knowl-
edge” could derive from many different things, including an arti-
cle that you write, new research that you conduct, a particularly
interesting or different piece of client work that you undertake, or
a significant course or workshop you attend. At the beginning of

184
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
each year, leading firms such as McKinsey and Goldman Sachs set
up formal R&D budgets aimed at knowledge creation. Why
shouldn’t you do this as an individual professional?
My coauthor for Clients for Life, Professor Jagdish Sheth of the
Goizueta Business School at Emory University, is considered a
thought-leader in the telecommunications industry. Each year, for
example, he delivers a major speech at an industry gathering where
he offers a radically new perspective on the evolution of that sec-
tor. His audience hungrily debates each year’s new idea and looks
forward to his latest thinking at the next get-together.
Baltasar Gracián, a sixteenth-century Jesuit priest and advisor
to wealthy Spanish nobles, wrote in his book The Art of Worldly
Wisdom, “You will be esteemed as long as you are new. Novelty
pleases everyone because of its variety. . . . A brand new medioc-
rity is more highly regarded than an extremely talented person to
whom we have grown accustomed. When eminences mingle with
us they age more quickly.”2 I’m not suggesting that your clients
will inevitably dump you and hire the first person who comes along
with a new idea, no matter how mediocre he is, just so long as it’s
“new.” But Gracián’s observation does highlight a particular as-
pect of human nature that I think has changed very little in the
last 500 years. In other words, you need to bring fresh ideas and
perspectives to your clients if you want to keep them engaged over
the long term.
Principle 8: Constantly strive to make your old ideas relevant to your
clients’ current problems, and each year consciously work to de-
velop your next set of frameworks and points of view.
Myth: “Clients have firm plans and budgets that guide their buy-
ing decisions.”
Especially in an uncertain environment, clients often have great dif-
ficulty planning and budgeting. They also may feel there is a greater
risk associated with taking on an unknown supplier or signing a

Managing Client Relationships during Uncertain Times
185
new contract with a professional they are already doing business
with. Here are some things you can do to reduce your client’s un-
certainty:
 Invest extra time and energy to understand your client’s en-
vironment and the different ways it may affect his business.
 Guarantee satisfaction with your work. Product-style guar-
antees are relatively rare in the world of services, but they
can achieve the same effect—the reduction of risk and a cor-
responding increase in trust.
 Offer flexibility in structuring projects and invoicing.
 Shower prospective clients with testimonials and offer twice
as many references as they request.
 Set out options and contingency plans that you periodically
review together.
Principle 9: Systematically work to reduce your client’s uncertainty.
Myth: “My clients like my work so much they will tell everyone
they know about me.”
I blithely believed this myth for years. I always assumed—
wrongly—that my most satisfied clients spontaneously gave my
name to other business executives every chance they got. I discov-
ered how invalid this assumption was when I asked a couple of my
clients for referrals. Their reactions were similar—both were
shocked, in a good sense. One said to me, “You always seem so
busy—I never dreamed you’d want more business! Of course I’ll
think of some colleagues I can talk to.”
As I outlined in Chapter 5, the final and most often unrealized
phase of building your relationship capital comes when your long-
standing clients help you to multiply your influence. The most com-
mon and direct way of achieving this expansion is by getting
referrals. Asking a client for a referral may seem distasteful or 
embarrassing to you, but if you’ve done a great job for someone,

186
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
why wouldn’t she be delighted to refer you to someone else? There’s
a further benefit: When a client publicly states his opinion about
you, it reinforces his belief enormously. Typically, in fact, a ref-
eree’s enthusiasm for you will only grow over time each time he
tells another potential client about how much value you’ve added.
Principle 10: Ask your most loyal clients to recommend you to po-
tential clients.
Myth: “Publicity is only available to Nobel prize winners and beau-
tiful movie stars.”
Compared to markets of 10 or 20 years ago, those today are more
crowded, and third-party endorsements and recognition are more
powerful than anything we say about ourselves. So whom would
you rather hire: Stockbroker A, who tells you how good he is but
you’ve never heard of him; or Stockbroker B, who also tells you he’s
great and who writes a monthly column on wealth creation for a
major newspaper? You may believe you are not newsworthy, but the
most absurd things now get people in the media (at the height of
last year’s holiday shopping season, someone’s “10 Worst Toys” list
appeared on CNN—and this is news?). Think about something you
are (or can be) unique at, or a particularly controversial or even off-
the-wall perspective that you might write or speak about. Governor
Gary Johnson of New Mexico, for example, rocketed overnight
from utter obscurity to international celebrity by publicly advocat-
ing the decriminalization of drugs. Develop a truly distinctive point
of view. You don’t have to be as controversial as Governor Johnson,
but remember that clients admire boldness, not blandness.
Principle 11: Remember Andy Warhol’s observation and get your 15
minutes of fame!

187
26
Developing
Relationships with
Foreign Clients
Try Not to Commit
These Gaffes
The meeting could not have been more high profile. Sitting at the
end of the long, mahogany conference table was the oil minister
of Venezuela. His 20 most-senior staff flanked him on both sides.
After months of waiting, he was finally going to hear the results
of the analysis conducted by a group of prestigious American con-
sultants. All eyes and ears turned to an oversized projection screen
on the far wall where the first slide flashed up. “Today,” the lead
consultant began in heavily accented Spanish, “we are presenting
to you Venezuela’s first, comprehensive five-year plan for its en-
ergy resources.”
Unfortunately, the title slide, also written in Spanish, did not say
“The Five-Year Plan.” It said, “The Five Anuses Plan.” The room
exploded into hysterical laughter. The consultants became a laugh-
ingstock, and the group was never quite able to regain focus on the

188
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
business issues at hand, especially since “The Five Anuses Plan” was
written at the top left of every slide in the package!
This really happened to a group of my colleagues 20 years ago.
They were in such a rush preparing for their meeting—and so over-
confident about their linguistic abilities—that they didn’t bother to
have a native Spanish speaker proofread their presentation. They knew
that when you capitalize a word in Spanish you drop the accent marks
(say, over an E). But they forgot that ñ is a separate letter of the al-
phabet and when capitalized becomes Ñ, not N—the tilde remains on
the top because it’s an integral part of the letter, not a separate accent
mark. So the word año, “year,” became the much different and much
funnier word ano, “anus,” to their Venezuelan client.
In your professional career, you may work abroad or have an oc-
casion to deal with clients from another country. Despite the fact
that English as a language is more universal than ever, and not with-
standing the “homogenization” of cultures around the world, there
remain powerful differences in behavior and thinking patterns be-
tween different nationalities.
This chapter contains some original and, in some cases, very
funny stories I’ve wanted to tell for some time, but more practically,
it sets out some suggestions to help you in developing relationships
with non-U.S. clients. Every nationality is different, so think of
these as broad principles rather than specific guidelines for individ-
ual countries. That said, they are based on practical experience: I
lived and worked abroad for 13 years, primarily in England and
Italy, but I also spent significant periods of time in countries such
as Mexico, Peru, and Japan. I speak four languages, and have done
business in 30 countries.
Be Careful with the Language
Shortly after I moved with my family to Rome, my wife went out
to a pharmacy to pick up some supplies. A French and psychology
major in college, she is quite talented with languages and had 

Developing Relationships with Foreign Clients
189
already made serious efforts to learn Italian. She walked into the
pharmacy and, in her best Italian, asked the white-jacketed young
woman behind the counter for “preservative-free contact lens so-
lution.” Here is an English translation of what she actually said to
the clerk:
“May I have lentil broth without condoms, please?” (I am not
kidding.)
The clerk, probably not wishing to embarrass my wife, simply
replied, “I’m sorry, we don’t carry that.” 
A stupid mistake? Hysterically funny, yes—stupid, no. I won’t
dissect the linguistic nuances of this episode, but to give you an ex-
ample, preservativo in Italian means “condom” not “preservative!”
This event highlights one of the first pitfalls of being a beginner in
a language: Beware of misleading cognates or “false friends.” These
are words derived from the same root but having unforeseen deno-
tations in one of the two languages.
I’m a strong advocate of learning at least a few words of the lan-
guage your client speaks. It shows you’re interested and willing to in-
vest the time to understand his world. But be very, very careful—it’s
extraordinarily easy to put your foot in your mouth. Even little ex-
pressions that people pick up are usually misused and can come
across as insulting or foolish.
For example, in all of the Romance languages and German as
well there are important linguistic distinctions between formal and
informal usage and titles. There are usually two words for “you” sin-
gular (for example, “you” formal and “you” informal), and if you use
the wrong one, it is quite a gaffe. I’ve often heard Americans con-
veniently adopt the Italian ciao, which means both hello and good-
bye. In Italy, however, it is normally only used with friends and
family. You would never say ciao to a client you had just met—it
would come across as silly and improper, and it would make you
sound like a child.
Not to be outdone by my wife, I committed an equally absurd
gaffe—based on a miniscule alteration of pronunciation—with a

190
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
prospective client a few years later, at a point when I was highly
fluent in Italian. In an attempt to convince this potential client to
hire my firm, I tried to tell him that after a major project I did
with another client, the top executives were “charged up” by 
the results. Instead, I told him in Italian, “After the project was
completed the management team was gassed.” He looked at me,
appalled, obviously not wishing to hire me and suffer the same
fate! The difference was in spelling (and pronouncing) gasati ver-
sus gassati.
The confusion over the word año that reduced the meeting with
the Venezuelan oil minister to hysterics may seem extreme, but ac-
tually it’s pretty typical of some people’s overconfidence and in-
sensitivity. As a young associate, I was part of a team preparing a not
dissimilar presentation to the senior management of a large Mexi-
can company. One of the main themes of the meeting was “alloca-
tion of resources.” We wrote the slides in Spanish and, like the team
in Venezuela, didn’t have the document properly reviewed before-
hand. We translated “resource allocation” as alocación de recursos
(sounds pretty similar, so why not?) and that phrase filled the report.
We arrived in Mexico City to deliver our presentation, and when
the assistant to the CEO reviewed the slides, he was aghast. “Do you
know what alocación de recursos sounds like in Spanish?” he asked
us testily. “It means something like ‘driving resources crazy.’ ” We
hung our heads in shame.
By the way, don’t think that just because you’re in England,
where we all theoretically speak the same language, you’re going to
get away without misunderstandings. A few months after I moved
to London, my secretary walked up to my desk and, seeing me
struggle to correct a chart I had sketched out in pencil, asked me,
“Would you like a rubber?” She meant an eraser, of course, not a
“condom.” Shortly afterward, a female friend who had been part of
a luncheon leaned over before departing and said to me, “Well,
come knock me up sometime.” I turned red, but all she meant was
“Come pay me a visit.”

Developing Relationships with Foreign Clients
191
Learn to Live with Ambiguity
In American business culture, we’re used to clear communications,
transparency of operations, and a democratic sharing of informa-
tion. We like to know where people stand on a transaction, and we
want to understand the process being used to reach a decision. In
many non-U.S. cultures, however, there is often a great deal of 
ambiguity that surrounds business dealings. I have found this espe-
cially true in Asian and Latin countries, where information is less
widely shared and decision making more convoluted.
In America, we are usually told in advance of a meeting who
will be there and why they are participating. I can’t tell you how
many times I have attended business meetings in countries such as
Spain, Italy, and Mexico, where twice as many managers as I ex-
pected showed up and people mysteriously wandered in and out of
the room as the discussions progressed. I once worked for months to
set up a meeting with a potential client in France and, when I ar-
rived, discovered that the client had sent, in his place, two executives
I had never heard of. I was flustered, but they thought nothing of it.
I remember some U.S. clients being enormously frustrated by
a European company to which they were trying to sell a software
product. They never got a definitive “yes” or “no” regarding a
standards compatibility issue—the manager they were dealing
with kept giving them highly ambiguous signals and would 
never fully share with them the engineering analysis that had been
completed.
Does this mean clients from these countries are more devious
and Machiavellian than their American counterparts? Absolutely
not! A number of factors are usually at work. By not giving a de-
finitive answer to a request, for example, they may be simply try-
ing to keep their options open. These managers may have to
contend with more organizational politics than American execu-
tives do, and in some cases, they have to deal with more extensive
government regulation and interference.

192
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
Think Relationship, Not Transaction
Anyone who has worked with businesspeople from countries in Eu-
rope, Latin America, and Asia will tell you that they are more
relationship-oriented than Americans. Put simply, they want to get
to know you as a person before agreeing to do business with you.
I was particularly struck by this behavior when I moved back to the
United States from Europe in the mid-1990s—everywhere I turned
a request for proposal (RFP) appeared and clients didn’t seem to
have much time or even interest in face-to-face meetings.
Outside the United States, there has always been less financial
transparency, and I think that historically people have gravitated to-
ward individuals they knew and trusted, specifically friends and fam-
ily. Whereas in the United States I might meet just a few times with
a potential client before starting some work, I found that in Europe
I often had to hold five or more meetings over many months.
This development of trust also depends on where a person grows
up. I had a client, for example, who had been raised in a small town
in the south of Italy. A wonderful man, he was very traditional and
quite suspicious of outsiders, an attitude he no doubt developed
while growing up in his remote country village. I met with him
every other month for an entire year before he became comfortable
enough with me to ask me to do a project for his division. The
turning point came when he told me, in a state of extreme anxiety,
that his eighteen-year-old daughter was going to spend the sum-
mer in London, and he was worried sick about her. Having lived for
many years in London, I naturally offered to introduce her to some
English and American friends there, so that she wouldn’t feel totally
isolated (this is a small example of going the “extra mile”). After
that summer, he hired me as his consultant, and he ended up being
extraordinarily loyal to me.
Expect Slower Decision Making
Nowadays, many foreign companies are quick, nimble exemplars of
modern management practice. Some, however, still make decisions

Developing Relationships with Foreign Clients
193
very slowly. You may have dealings with a state-owned enterprise or
a company that has the government as a major shareholder, and the
government bureaucracy will inhibit rapid decision making. You
may find yourself working with an Asian client, for example, who
isn’t delegated the authority a typical American manager might
enjoy while abroad. You need to be patient and invest extra time to
understand how decisions are actually made in the organization
you’re dealing with.
Recognize Your Own Cultural Biases
Just as we stereotype foreigners, they stereotype Americans. Amer-
icans think that the French are arrogant about their food and wine
(okay, maybe they are), that Latin Americans don’t work as hard
(totally false), and that the Japanese aren’t creative (hey, the people
who invented tube hotels and Pokeman can’t be that stodgy). Amer-
icans are, depending on whom you talk to, loud, obnoxious, too
familiar, boorish, culturally ignorant, lousy cooks, right-wing, and
politically naïve.
When you work with clients from other countries, try to rec-
ognize the biases you may implicitly be acting on. At the same time,
be more neutral in your own behavior, and try to listen more and
talk less. I’ll never forget sitting in a famous restaurant along the Via
Veneto in Rome, having lunch with the chairman of a U.S. com-
pany. He was an extraordinarily intelligent, kind, and thoughtful
man. But after being served a cappuccino, he waved to the waiter
and shouted quite loudly, “You know, the one thing you guys just
don’t know how to make in this country is a good cup of coffee!”
I wanted to crawl out of my skin and hide under the table. The
waiter just smiled and waved back. Thankfully, he didn’t speak a
word of English.
To succeed in working with non-U.S. clients, you’ve got 
to accept greater ambiguity and uncertainty, be patient with the
decision-making process, and invest in building a relationship be-
fore you win a transaction. It helps to learn some of their language,

194
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
but tread carefully as you try out your newfound vocabulary—
you may end up ordering something in a restaurant that you won’t
be able to eat. Listen more and talk less as you tone down your
own chauvinism.
Come to think of it, these aren’t bad practices for building bet-
ter relationships at home.

195
27
Becoming a
Firm That
Makes Rain
How Great Organizations
Build Clients for Life
Some organizations seem to draw clients in and keep them by means
of some powerful gravitational pull. Showing exemplary internal
teamwork, they serve their clients’ needs reliably and confidently.
Others—and I’ve encountered more than a few—struggle with
client defections. When there’s a sale, everyone bickers about who
should get the credit. When something goes wrong, they quickly
point fingers. What makes the difference?
Many of the principles guiding you as an individual professional
to develop client loyalty can be applied to firmwide or institutional
strategies for making rain on a regular basis with clients.
There are seven areas that your organization can focus on to
enhance its rain-making abilities with existing clients: professional
development, relationship management, knowledge creation, 

196
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
compensation and rewards, client service, trust, and culture. Over-
looking any one of them is likely to bring on a client-threatening
drought.
Slogans don’t make you a client-focused organization—you
reach this goal by implementing many small things and having se-
nior management set a clear example. If you want to become a firm
that consistently makes rain by building long-term client loyalty,
look hard at your policies and practices in each of the following
seven areas.
1. Professional Development
As you might expect, in their training and development programs,
most organizations focus on teaching technical skills and core pro-
fessional competencies. Training on “softer” topics such as client re-
lationship management, however, is often absent. There are two
primary reasons for this oversight: First, many managers assume this
is an intuitive skill that cannot be taught; second, until recently there
haven’t been any established curricula that effectively do teach it.
The hierarchy of developmental needs for any business profes-
sional includes:
 Core competencies of the profession—for example, legal
skills for a lawyer, selling skills for a salesperson; systems in-
tegration knowledge for an IT consultant.
 Product knowledge.
 Industry knowledge.
 Management and leadership skills.
 Client relationship-building skills.
Some firms that I have worked with or observed are doing sev-
eral things to enhance their professional development efforts around
the last item on this list. A major accounting firm, for example, has
developed a “business advisor” program for all of its partners.
Drawing on the principles in my first book, Clients for Life, as

Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain
197
well as other sources, this firm’s business advisor program focuses
on teaching client listening, big-picture thinking, trust building,
and the other core attributes of client advisors.
In addition, a large consulting firm created for its consultants a
similar training program called “The Influential Advisor.” It is a
comprehensive learning experience divided into five two-day mod-
ules that begin with “establishing trust and credibility” and end
with “adding continuous value.” At its center is a complex client
case that slowly develops its various facets during the five modules.
A variety of tools are available to the course participants: informa-
tion about consulting methodologies, short videos on different as-
pects of relationship-building, an archive of tips and suggestions
from more experienced consultants.
I would encourage you to look broadly at your company’s pro-
fessional development efforts, and ask whether they include these
relationship-oriented skills that are becoming increasingly impor-
tant. For instance, in his book Emotional Intelligence, Daniel Gole-
man says that most studies of executive performance show that
two-thirds of success is due to emotional intelligence factors—in-
terpersonal skills, empathy, optimism, motivation, the ability to
communicate—whereas only one-third is based on intellectual
skills.1 Historically we have tended to emphasize the latter, while
ignoring the former.
2. Relationship Management
The more products and services that you offer to your clients, the
more difficult becomes the task of relationship management. Banks
faced this dilemma years ago, as financial services products prolif-
erated in the 1970s and 1980s. A financial institution might have
10 or 20 distinct products or services, each marketed to the same
client base. So how do you coordinate this set of offerings?
There are three distinct dimensions to relationship management
that you need to think about: assignment of a relationship manager,
account development, and institutionalized listening.

198
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
First, should one person be responsible for the overall relation-
ship? Many companies are moving toward this solution, especially
for their largest and most important clients. At the consulting firm
Hewitt Associates, for example, a senior level managing consultant
(MC) is responsible for each major client relationship. The MC be-
comes that client’s trusted advisor for all of its human resources
needs. The MC coordinates the marketing and delivery of a vari-
ety of Hewitt services, from consulting to benefits outsourcing,
and he or she meets frequently with client executives to explore
their needs and ensure that Hewitt is delivering on its promises.
A relationship manager is expensive and doesn’t always make
sense. If the buyers for your services within the client’s organization
are completely different, then coordination may not be worth the
cost. If it’s a relatively small client, then spending a lot of resources
on high-level relationship management also isn’t worthwhile.
Second, relationship management has to include a client or ac-
count development process. This is different from account “plan-
ning,” which is often a dry exercise conducted at the beginning of
the fiscal year and which typically suffers from lack of follow-up.
The client development process, in contrast, is a highly effective
discipline that very few companies implement, and it can have an
important impact on the breadth and richness of the relationship.
Here is a very simple process that you can follow for your top-
tier clients: Twice a year, organize a two- or three-hour account 
development session. It should include staff who are working on the
client relationship; a facilitator (who can be the relationship or as-
signment leader); and at least one senior-level executive or profes-
sional who is not involved in the client relationship at all. I
recommend preparation of a background package of five or six slides
to include client background, a history of your business with the
client, key industry trends, strategic and operational issues facing
the company, organizational structure and key decision makers, and
possible further areas for collaboration. The facilitator leads the
group through this information, with a focus on idea generation:
“Are we dealing with the right level of executive? Who else in the

Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain
199
company should be part of the network? What other needs does
this client have that we could fulfill? Could we partner with this
client to add value in new ways?” The end result should be a list of
action steps aimed at better serving the client; deepening the rela-
tionship; and pursuing specific opportunities for expansion that
have been identified.
The third dimension of relationship management is institution-
alized listening, which I discussed at the start of Chapter 15. This
can be done on several different levels. Hewitt Associates surveys
several hundred of its clients each year, distributing a comprehensive
questionnaire that covers everything from client satisfaction to the
client’s perception of the skills of Hewitt’s lead consultants. On an-
other level, the leading law firm of Fulbright & Jaworski has devel-
oped a program of “chairman’s visits.” Each year, its chairman
personally visits its top twenty clients. These are not just lunch-and-
golf sessions but substantive exchanges about the client’s emerging
needs and satisfaction with Fulbright’s legal services.
Clients rarely tell you in advance that they are going to leave.
Usually, they just stop doing business with you, or the amount of
business slowly declines over time. Only by institutionalizing your
ability to listen and tune in can you prevent a small dissatisfaction
or misunderstanding from turning into a client defection. On the
positive side, this type of multifaceted listening will allow you to
become aware of client needs that previously escaped your notice.
3. Knowledge Creation
A Boston management consulting firm called Emergence Consult-
ing, which specializes in growth strategies, works with a small
group of leading academics who have developed several break-
through concepts in the area of strategic innovation. What’s unique
about Emergence is that it has institutionalized the development of
intellectual capital—of knowledge creation and dissemination—by
organizing itself around key idea areas. It has, for example, assigned
a permanent project manager to work with each academic in his or

200
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
her area of focus. This person helps to develop and codify the the-
ory, create practical ways to implement it in business organizations,
and train other consultants. Francis Gouillart, Emergence’s founder,
describes this institutionalization of knowledge creation: “We’ve
essentially organized the firm around several powerful concepts of
strategy and innovation, and then created formal roles to manage
them from theory to delivery.”
On a different scale, consulting giant McKinsey has fostered an
entire culture around the concept of knowledge creation. Every
year each industry sector or practice head is charged with develop-
ing a “knowledge creation agenda” for his or her business, and in-
dividual consultants are evaluated on their yearly contribution to
knowledge development.
Why is institutionalized knowledge creation—and its ultimate
transfer to clients—so important? As mentioned previously, most
basic products and services, from telephone switches to legal con-
tracts, are commodities: Many suppliers provide them. What dis-
tinguishes you are those fresh ideas about your client’s business and
industry and insights into how your product or service can help
solve problems and enable your client to meet his goals.
But there’s an additional reason, which is more subtle: Like all of
us, clients are enamored of hot ideas and hot products. As Baltasar
Gracián wrote 500 years ago, “Novelty pleases everyone.” You need
to continually bring fresh ideas and perspectives to your relationships
or else you risk being supplanted by “brand-new mediocrities.”
Most corporations have formal R&D budgets, but many pro-
fessional service firms, oddly, do not. They assume innovation and
idea development happen naturally during the course of client as-
signments. To avoid the inevitable spiral of commoditization, you
need to think about creating a formal R&D or innovation bud-
get within your organization. Each year, you might fund promis-
ing research efforts focused on industry trends, competitive
developments, or the policies and practices of leading executives
who are your clients. The results can be channeled into speeches,

Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain
201
books, articles, seminars, and a host of other marketing activities
that create opportunities to get in front of key client executives.
These efforts will inform your current services and fuel the de-
velopment of new offerings. They also increase the prestige of your
company. The polling firm Gallup, for example, created an entire
consulting practice off the back of its book First, Break All the
Rules. Advertising great David Ogilvy’s brilliant book, Ogilvy on
Advertising, is still widely read by executives both inside and out-
side that industry.
4. Compensation and Rewards
As you will recall, the “rainmaker” I described in the Introduction
grossly exaggerated the magnitude of a client sale right around
bonus time. If compensation is overly focused on sales or business
origination, the results can be tragic: a culture develops in which
revenue rules over quality and service, and the only news you re-
ceive about sales and marketing efforts is filtered and positive.
Ultimately, revenue should be a measure of client satisfaction,
but in the short run, even this relationship can get distorted. One
company I knew had a powerful selling process but poor delivery of
its services. Its revenues grew tremendously over several years, but

202
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
mostly because the company moved from client to client, deploy-
ing its nearly unstoppable new business development “machine” to
great effect.
Egon Zehnder International (EZI), a large executive search
firm, presents an interesting counterpoint to the traditional wis-
dom that you must single-mindedly reward individuals for revenue
growth. Its founder, Egon Zehnder, says this about compensation:
“Today, most consulting firms, law firms, and so forth consider se-
niority irrelevant—and occasionally something much worse. They
believe pay should be based on performance and, more specifically,
individual performance. That’s why at most professional firms, peo-
ple are paid according to the size of their client billings and how
good they are at bringing in new clients.”2 Many EZI clients are
multinational corporations, and cooperation between its various of-
fices around the world is paramount to conducting successful
searches. EZI has grown in revenue and profits every year for the
last 37 years, and has a partner turnover rate of 2 percent, which is
a fraction of the industry average. How does it pay its partners to
achieve these results? As Zehnder explains, “We prefer to stick with
the old-fashioned way to pay. In addition to base salaries, the firm
gives partners equal shares of the profit and another set of profit
shares that are adjusted only for length of tenure as a partner. There
is no formal procedure for tracking the performance of country of-
fices, let alone individuals.” Rewarding seniority seems like an an-
tiquated concept, yet in this business, the longer your tenure, the
broader your network of executives, the deeper your knowledge of
hundreds of organizations, and the more continuity you have with
long-term clients.
I’m not advocating that EZI’s approach is right for every orga-
nization, but it certainly gives us food for thought. Some would
argue that EZI’s compensation system might not, at least in theory,
sufficiently motivate individual professionals, especially younger
ones with less tenure. Clearly, though, it has developed a culture of
achievement that is fueled by individual self-motivation and a group
ethos oriented toward marketplace success. In most businesses, 

Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain
203
internal teamwork is essential to serving clients’ interests, and in
EZI’s case, this aspect is especially emphasized by the compensation
system. The point is that a company’s rewards system needs to take
into account much more than just individual revenue production.
The timing of revenue inflows should also be part of the equa-
tion. I know a few firms, for example, which based incentive com-
pensation not just on the initial sale but also on the residual revenues
for years afterwards. In a similar vein, Siebel Systems bases most of
its incentive compensation for its salespeople on customer satisfac-
tion scores at least four quarters after the sale.
5. Client Service
Jeff Klopf is the general counsel for Security Capital Corporation,
one of the country’s largest property companies that was recently
purchased by GE Capital. Over the years, Klopf has used many of
the largest law and accounting firms in the country to advise on
Security Capital’s frequent M&A and corporate finance transac-
tions. In speaking of client service, he says, “As far as the basic legal
work goes, there are many firms that can do a good job. A few,
though, really distinguish themselves through extraordinary client
service. For example, the partners at one firm I deal with are always
reachable and available to me. I never get voice mail, which has be-
come irritating not least because I never know when someone is
going to listen to my message. Instead, my call is forwarded through
to another office where they’re working or to their cell phones. Or,
I speak to their assistant who is always completely knowledgeable
about the issues we’re working on. In contrast, I called a firm last
week and left three messages—a day later I still had no reply! That’s
completely unacceptable.”
Client service can include many different dimensions:
 Availability of key professionals.
 Knowledgeable support staff who are entirely familiar with
each client assignment and know the client by name.

204
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
 Rapid resolution of administrative questions or glitches in-
volving things such as invoicing.
 Your ability to respond rapidly to client requests and inquiries.
Client service will mean different things to different clients. The
best way to find out what’s important is to ask your clients what re-
ally matters to them and what standards they expect from you.
6. Trust
Just as individual professionals need to build trust with clients, so
does the institution as a whole. There are a number of things you
can do at the firm level to create a “trusted brand.” These include:
 Ensure consistent quality of staff. If every person a client
encounters from your organization meets the highest quality
standards and does great work—be they a professional, man-
ager, or a member of the administrative staff—then individ-
ual trust will be transformed into institutional trust. This
works internally, as well. If I work in the Chicago office of
a large company but have doubts about the caliber of my
counterpart in San Francisco, then I’ll hesitate to involve him
in my client relationship, even if he brings badly needed skills
to the table. Any company-wide approach to relationship
management will fail if this type of trust between colleagues
is not consistently strong. Some of the best professional firms
I know actually turn away a qualified candidate out of fear
that they may hire a person who is not right for the job. They
believe that the actual cost of the latter is greater than the
opportunity cost of the former.
 Offer service guarantees. As mentioned in Chapter 4, these
guarantees are a way of reducing risk and building trust. It’s
important for a client to know that the individual he is work-
ing with will always come through for him. If in addition

Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain
205
there is some form of firm-sponsored assurance, the effect is
even more powerful.
 Only undertake business you can successfully deliver. In a
manufacturing business, customers will still tolerate (or are
forced to put up with!) a certain number of defects. In ser-
vice businesses, in contrast, there is almost zero tolerance of
less-than-perfect work. During the dot-com mania in the late
1990s, many service firms undertook assignments in areas
where they lacked real capability. The result was, ultimately,
tainted reputations and clients who were burned.
 Cultivate positive associations. If we perceive that an indi-
vidual associates with people we respect, we are more likely
to feel positively about him or her. For example, if a finan-
cial advisor we meet manages the investments for the mayor
of our hometown, we are automatically predisposed to like
her (assuming we respect the mayor). I believe the same ef-
fect works at the firm level: To the extent you work with
well-respected clients and have prestigious business partners,
there will be a stronger halo of institutional trust around your
organization. This is why, for example, you will see small
technology companies advertising their partnerships with or-
ganizations such as Microsoft, General Electric, and Cisco.
 Rigorously uphold the highest ethical and professional stan-
dards. By systematically cultivating a culture of high ethical
standards—and communicating your policies to clients—you
will greatly increase clients’ trust in your entire organization.
After the debacle at Enron, many clients are looking for ex-
plicit assurance that their interests are consistently put first.
7. Culture
In every organization, a set of implicit beliefs and values guides daily
behavior. A client-focused culture will help ensure that decisions
are consistently made in favor of actions that add value, build trust,

206
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
and go the extra mile for clients. To a great extent, your organiza-
tion’s culture will be driven by all of the factors discussed here—
the rewards structure, relationship management, client service
standards, and so on. At the top of my list is also the behavior of top
management, which, after all, sets the example for everyone else. I
have worked with some firms where the managing directors or
partners actually spend very little time with clients. They delegate
most of the delivery work, and focus on setting and monitoring
internal policies and procedures, generally by holding interminable
internal meetings. In contrast, I recall a discussion with Orit
Gadiesh, the chairman of consultants Bain & Company. A well-
respected CEO advisor, Gadiesh told me, “I spend 70 percent of
my time with our major clients.”
An exemplar of a CEO who has created this type of client-
centered culture is Tom Siebel of Siebel Systems. Siebel Systems sells
complex customer relationship management software to corpora-
tions around the world, and Siebel has systematically built an orga-
nization to sell and service this software that is itself completely
customer-centric. In an interview published in the Harvard Busi-
ness Review, Siebel said, “If we have to choose between dealing
with a customer satisfaction issue or developing a product, we deal
with the customer first. If we have to choose between pursuing a
new sales opportunity or dealing with customer satisfaction, we
deal with the customer first. At every fork in the road, it’s ‘cus-
tomer first.’ And it always pays off.”3
Early in the company’s development, Siebel was offered a huge
contract with MCI, which at the time was a small customer. He
concluded that because Siebel Systems did not have the resources to
ramp up its MCI business and service other customers, he had to
decline the contract. Eventually, despite being turned down for the
order—or perhaps because of it—MCI became one of Siebel Sys-
tem’s biggest accounts. In another telling example, when a major
Siebel Systems installation at Sun Microsystems was not working
well, Siebel sent in a team of engineers to fix it. They worked in

Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain
207
24-hour shifts, seven days a week, until it was working properly.
Siebel says, “As it turned out, the problem didn’t have anything to
do with our software, but we didn’t point fingers at the other ven-
dor and say, ‘The problem is with you guys.’ Our approach was to
solve Sun’s problem and get the system live.”4
In designing and facilitating offsite strategic planning retreats
with my clients, I always recommend including, in some way, the
voice of their customers. Sometimes I’ll organize a panel of cus-
tomers or clients to attend the session, or have them call in to be in-
terviewed while the entire executive group listens to the feedback.
It’s always illuminating.
Organizations that build strong loyalty with clients are often
also good at building internal loyalty. After all, the same factors that
instill client loyalty—value-added, trust, and the extra mile—
motivate employees to stay with your company. Employees have to
Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain
Practices
People
Culture
Relationship Management
Knowledge Creation
Client Service
Professional
Development
Rewards
Trust
Building

208
SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS YEAR AFTER YEAR
feel that their company is adding-value by giving them interesting
work today and helping them build the skills for a successful career
in the future; that their colleagues and top management have in-
tegrity and can be trusted; and that the company will go the extra
mile for them if they have a personal or professional issue to grap-
ple with.

PA RT T H R E E SUM M A RY
Are You Sustaining Your Relationships 
Year after Year?
 Do you regularly stay in touch with past clients, keeping
abreast of their work and careers?
 Do your clients provide you with referrals and leverage their
network to disseminate your reputation and ideas?
 Do you treat every long-standing client like a brand-new
client? Do you bring to each meeting the same freshness, en-
thusiasm, and new ideas that you were able to offer when you
first started the relationship?
 Have you become partners with any of your clients in ways
that extend beyond the normal buyer-seller relationship?
 Do you bring information or insights to your clients that are
unique or proprietary?
 Have you cultivated an attitude of independent wealth, or do
you have a scarcity outlook?
 When dealing with foreign clients, do you expect the same
speed of decision-making and organizational clarity that you’re
used to at home? Or do you consciously take into account cul-
tural differences and invest the extra time that may be required
to form a relationship?
 Do all elements of your company’s organization, systems, and
processes—professional development, rewards, relationship
management, R&D, and so on—support the development of
long-term client relationships?


P A R T F O U R
GETTING
STARTED:
A SELF-ASSESSMENT


213
28
Do You Have
the Ability to
Make Rain?
Two Assessment Tools for
Individuals and Organizations
In this book, you’ve been exposed to many different ideas and
strategies that can help you build long-term client loyalty. So where
do you start? I suggest that you begin by evaluating your existing
client relationships, and then assessing your and your firm’s ability
to make rain.
First, evaluate what role you’re really playing with your clients.
For each of your clients, are you an expert for hire, a steady sup-
plier, or a trusted advisor? Don’t worry—very few professionals can
honestly say that they are a trusted advisor to all their clients. It’s
quite natural that some relationships will fall into each of these three
categories. The point is to recognize where you stand, understand
why, and then develop strategies to move to the next level. It’s also
useful to think about those relationships where you really are part

214
GETTING STARTED: A SELF-ASSESSMENT
of the inner circle: What’s the secret to your success with these par-
ticular clients?
Next, you need to inventory your own skills and, if you work
with an organization, your company’s ability to create long-term
client loyalty. Working with a leading authority in the area of as-
sessment design, I have developed two separate assessment tools to
help you do this. Both, at this writing, will be available free for one
year after publication. The first is focused on you as an individual
professional; the second, on your company. The assessments them-
selves are located on my Web site, which is www.andrewsobel.com.
When you go to the site, you will see clear instructions on the home
page for accessing the Making Rain assessment tools. A series of
prompts will lead you through each questionnaire, and your score
will be automatically calculated. The tests themselves will be a valu-
able review, because they systematically go through many of the key
learning points in this book.
These assessments will take you through all of the major facets
of relationship-building and loyalty creation, that I’ll briefly sum-
marize here.
The Self-Assessment
The self-assessment asks you to evaluate yourself and your client re-
lationships along a number of dimensions, including:
 Personal attributes. This section of the assessment focuses on
the core attributes of successful client advisors, which are the
principal subject of my book Clients for Life. It covers things
such as empathy, selfless independence, big-picture thinking,
judgment, and other characteristics.
 Trust-building. This section addresses the elements of the
trust formula, such as integrity, competence, and intimacy,
and all of the strategies that contribute to likability.
 Relationship strategies. Here, you’ll be asked to assess your
competence and understanding of a variety of tools, techniques,

Do You Have the Ability to Make Rain?
215
and strategies that help build and develop long-term rela-
tionships. These include the client loyalty equation, the use
of breakthrough strategies, relationship capital, migration
paths, and so on.
 Relationship philosophy and attitudes. The professionals I
have studied who keep their clients for life have very distinct
attitudes and outlooks, including focus on clients’ hidden
creases, use indirect methods, exercise a doubting mind, em-
ploy a mission orientation, and have an abundance outlook.
 Client behaviors. The ultimate test of whether or not you
build lifelong client loyalty is actual client behavior. In this
part of the assessment, you’ll be asked to describe the nature
of your client relationships along several important dimensions.
The Company Assessment
The company assessment asks you to evaluate different facets of your
organization’s strategy, structure, processes, and culture that com-
bine to institutionalize the ability to make rain and build long-
term loyalty. These points are consistent with the framework I set
out in Chapter 27:
 Professional development. Do your firm’s learning and de-
velopment programs—and career management practices—
address the core competencies needed to build and manage
long-term relationships?
 Trust building. Does your organization engage in practices
that create an institutional brand that clients trust?
 Relationship Management. Does your firm employ multiple
strategies to ensure comprehensive management of key client
relationships, including institutionalized client listening, for-
mal relationship management structures, account develop-
ment, and management of your client base as a portfolio?
 Client service. Client-centered companies that consistently
make rain demonstrate extraordinarily high levels of client

216
GETTING STARTED: A SELF-ASSESSMENT
service along several dimensions. This section assesses your
practices and capacity for great client service.
 Rewards. To what extent does your reward system motivate
the behaviors that are necessary for long-term relationship
building?
 Culture. Does senior management and your colleagues ex-
emplify values and principles that support client-centered
behavior? 
 Knowledge creation. Does the organization have any formal
processes to create new ideas, concepts, and approaches for
clients?
 Client behaviors. In this section, you’ll be asked questions
about your firm’s client base that will provide a “check” to
your answers in the first seven areas.
These assessment tools will provide you with an excellent sense
of your strengths and weaknesses. Ultimately, you will be able to
compare your own assessment with those of other professionals.
The practices that build client loyalty—adding value, building
trust, and going the extra mile—take time to implement. Rela-
tionships, by their very nature, require patience and hard work to
develop. Remember that you’ve got many assets you can leverage,
including your existing relationship capital—especially your past
and present client relationships—as well as your professional skills
and experience. 
In thinking about the process of building long-term relation-
ships, I’m reminded of a story told about the great French Marshal
and statesman, Louis Hubert Lyautey. He once asked his gardener
to plant a tree in his garden. The gardner objected, telling Lyautey
that this particular type of tree would take nearly 100 years to reach
maturity. “In that case,” the Marshal responded, “there is no time
to lose. Plant it this afternoon.” 
So don’t procrastinate or get discouraged. Start now and begin
to apply, day-by-day, these ideas and strategies to your own client
relationships.

217
A Pantheon of
Client Advisors
Throughout history, great leaders have availed themselves of trusted
counselors drawn from a variety of professions and disciplines. This sec-
tion profiles a number of these historic advisors, some of whom have had
an enormous impact on the outcome of major events such as World War
II. The art of advising has been around for thousands of years, and we
can learn a lot from those who went before us.
The Oracle at Delphi (about 600 B.C. to 362 A.D.), Greece, was
located in the temple of Apollo which was a pilgrimage for leaders
throughout the ancient world for nearly 1000 years. The actual oracle
was a woman, called the Pythia, who would chew laurel leaves prior
to each consultation, and then, in a delirium, mumble her answer.
When King Croesus asked the Pythia if he should attack Persia, she re-
sponded, “If you attack, a great empire will fall.” Unfortunately, he
forgot to ask which empire, and he was roundly defeated by the
Persians.
Aristotle (384–322 B.C.) acquired a breadth of knowledge that is
probably unrivaled in intellectual history. He was a great scholar and
philosopher but also an advisor to influential Greeks and Macedonians.
He wrote over 50 books, with titles such as On the Soul, On Pleasure,
On the Sciences, On Magnets, and Proverbs, and introduced the
revolutionary concept of bodies of knowledge, which is a cornerstone of

218
A PANTHEON OF CLIENT ADVISORS
our modern educational system. His most famous student and advisee
was Alexander the Great, whom Aristotle tutored for three years while
he was an adolescent.
Merlin (450–536 A.D.), according to some historians, was a real
person, although clearly the Arthurian legends are a blend of both fact
and fiction. A Welsh religious figure, Merlin advised not just King
Arthur but his father, Uther, and several other monarchs as well. It was
reputedly Merlin who counseled Uther to establish the Knights of the
Round Table, and he foretold that Uther’s true heir would be revealed
by a test that involved drawing a sword from a stone. Legend holds that
Merlin raised Arthur in the forest, educating him and preparing him
for his eventual role as king.
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) became one of the greatest artists
and most inventive minds in history with virtually no formal educa-
tion. An elegant dresser who had impeccable posture, Leonardo cut a
striking figure as he strolled around Renaissance Florence. Like
Aristotle before him and Benjamin Franklin after, he was a perpetual
learner whose curiosity was never sated. He had a doubting mind that
never accepted that the way things were done was necessarily the best
or right way. Although most of his extraordinary inventions were
never built during his lifetime, a handful of his paintings, such as the
Mona Lisa, survive today, and they are considered among the master-
works of Western culture.
Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527) was in many ways the precursor
to Tom Peters and other twentieth-century business book authors. His
book, The Prince, sets out the principles for great leadership, just as
Peter’s In Search of Excellence tried to codify the characteristics of
successful companies (arguably, The Prince has stood the test of time a
bit better than the Peter’s book). A diplomat, brilliant thinker, and
superb writer, Machiavelli has to some extent been unfairly criticized
over the centuries for advocating corrupt leadership practices in The
Prince. This view is far too narrow, and there has recently been a
resurgence of interest in his writing over the past 10 years.
Thomas More (1478–1535) was a brilliant lawyer who, because of
his impeccable judgment and rock-solid integrity, was drawn into

A Pantheon of Client Advisors
219
Henry VIII’s inner circle of advisors, eventually becoming lord
chancellor. More was an example of “heroic” self less independence—he
was devoted to his client, the king, but also independent from him, and
unwilling to compromise his most dearly-held principles and religious
beliefs. More was immortalized twice—first by the Catholic Church,
which bestowed sainthood on him, and second by Robert Bolt’s play 
A Man for all Seasons, which chronicled his rise and fall and was 
made into a major motion picture. Peter Ackroyd’s 1999 biography of
More, The Life of Thomas More, is a marvelous evocation of that
period in history.
Iñigo de Oñaz y Loyola (1491–1556), the founder of the Jesuits, was
a troubled youth who had more than one run-in with the law in his
early years. As an adult, he underwent a spiritual awakening, and
subsequently created an organization that has endured for nearly 500
years. Loyola insisted on a deep, broad education for his followers, and
Jesuit schools have educated millions over the centuries. The Jesuits,
who are trained to be able to expertly undertake any task, anywhere, are
exemplars of the deep generalist that succeeds so well in business today.
Baltasar Gracián (1601–1658) was born in Aragon, Spain. Gracián
became a Jesuit priest, senior church administrator, and advisor to many
famous Spaniards. He was known for his clever aphorisms, many of
which are found in his delightful book The Oracle, which is full of
wisdom and insight about human nature. Throughout their history, the
Jesuits have exercised enormous influence as advisors to business and
political leaders; today, consultants McKinsey & Company have
sometimes been compared to the Jesuits in terms of their influence on
corporate CEOs.
Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) is in many ways America’s answer
to the multitalented Leonardo da Vinci. There is hardly a sphere that
Franklin did not contribute to, including politics, literature, science,
government, and others. An avid inventor, the free-standing stove he
designed survives even today in modern form, and his early experiments
with electricity placed him at the forefront of the scientific investigators
of his time. He developed his “indirect” method early on, using humor
and gentle prodding rather than direct criticism or disagreement as a
means of influencing others. He was a master at building relationship

220
A PANTHEON OF CLIENT ADVISORS
capital, making many friends and few enemies despite his enormous
successes. Franklin’s autobiography, full of self-improvement maxims,
could easily be considered a harbinger of today’s self-help books that
populate the bestseller lists.
Mayer Amschel Rothschild (and family) (1744–1812) started out
selling antique coins, but in short order was able to parlay his
relationships with wealthy German aristocrats into a banking business.
His five sons ran merchant banking operations in five major European
financial centers, and together constituted the first true multinational
bank. They were able to consistently underbid their rivals as well as
offer banking services that few if any competitors had the scale and
capability to match. The Rothschilds were masters as cultivating
relationships with a variety of government officials, high and low, and
they developed their own unique sources of information about the
financial markets in which they operated. In the early nineteenth
century, they were the wealthiest family in the world, and their capital
resources exceeded those of the Bank of France.
John Pierpont Morgan (1837–1913) was the first relationship
banker. He wasn’t content to simply lend money to his clients—he
wanted to become their chief advisor, confessor, and, ultimately,
shareholder. Morgan was driven by an intense need for order and
stability more than power, money, or even the desire to run a large
bank. Many of his business investments were based on his desire to
create order in chaotic markets like railroads and steel. Business and
political leaders of all kinds sought him out for advice, and he relished
the role. He was an excellent listener, and would often let others go on
for hours before interjecting his opinion or trying to steer the outcome
a certain way. The House of Morgan by Ron Chernow and Morgan:
American Financier by Jean Strouse, are excellent books about
J. P. Morgan and his bank.
Gertrude Bell (1868–1926) is one of the few female historical
advisors about which good documentation exists. The daughter of a
wealthy English industrialist, Bell was one of the first women to attend
Oxford, and shortly after graduating she set off for an extended journey
through the Middle Eastern. She had an uncanny knack for being

A Pantheon of Client Advisors
221
quickly accepted by the various Middle Eastern cultures and her keen
intelligence, objectivity, and great listening skills made her a sought-
after advisor by both Western and Arab leaders. Toward the end of her
life, she became the most important personal advisor to King Faisal, the
first ruler of modern Iraq. Desert Queen, by Janet Wallach, is a colorful
account of Bell’s remarkable life.
George Marshall (1880–1959) was a mediocre student in high
school, but once he enrolled in the Virginia Military Institute, he began
to shine. He was a man of enormous integrity and conviction, and he
always spoke his mind, even in the face of overwhelming authority. He
was one of the few individuals in the military who was willing to stand
up to Franklin Roosevelt, a quality which led the powerful president to
pull Marshall into his inner circle. After leading the Allied armies to
victory in World War II, he designed and implemented the Marshall
Plan to rebuild Europe. A key advisor to both Roosevelt and Truman,
he became Truman’s secretary of state in 1947 and secretary of defense
in 1950. Marshall was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1953.
Harry Hopkins (1890–1946), who was trained as a social worker,
worked for Franklin Roosevelt while he was governor of New York.
When Roosevelt became president, he quickly called on Hopkins—
someone he had learned to respect and trust unconditionally—and
brought him into his administration. Hopkins lacked any kind of
experience in politics and economic affairs, but he was a versatile
problem solver, and he never lost sight of the president’s agenda. Other
world leaders also developed great confidence in Hopkins, and they
respected his capacity to translate Roosevelt’s objectives into realizable
plans and specific actions. Roosevelt sent Hopkins to visit Churchill
during the blitz, and Hopkins became instrumental in convincing
Roosevelt—and eventually the whole country—that Britain desperately
needed U.S. support against Hitler. Hopkins had fatal intestinal ailment
that halted his political ambitions but which increased his influence and
power as an advisor.
Peter Drucker (1909–
), alive and well, can fairly be called
“historic” in the sense that he is already a leading if not the leading
figure in the history of modern management philosophy and practice.

222
A PANTHEON OF CLIENT ADVISORS
Today, he sometimes refers to himself as an “insultant” rather than a
consultant—a reference to the difficult, prickly questions he asks his
clients. Drucker is a key advisor to leaders in the nonprofit sector, and
continue to write articles and books even though he is in his early 90s.
David Ogilvy (1911–1999) practiced a number of trades—apprentice
chef, stove salesman, farmer, and British intelligence agent—before
entering the advertising profession. He then went on to become one of
the greatest advertising geniuses of all time. Ogilvy was a true deep
generalist—multicultural in outlook and widely read, he worked with
the famous pollster George Gallup for several years in the United
States, learning about emerging quantitative market research
techniques. Ogilvy wrote several witty, clever books (such as Ogilvy
on Advertising) and was always full of irreverent advice (such as “you
should fire one major client every year”). He is best remembered today
for his establishment of the importance of branding.
Henry Kissinger (1923–
) is a brilliant big-picture thinker—he
truly epitomized the advisor who is able to pull vast amounts of
information together into a coherent whole, see the patterns, and draw
relevant conclusions. As advisor to two U.S. presidents, Richard Nixon
and Gerald Ford, during the Vietnam and Cold War eras, Kissinger was
frequently torn between looking after the interests of his presidential
clients and enhancing his own prestige. Walter Issacson’s biography,
Kissinger, is an entertaining read that chronicles the bizarre relationship
between Kissinger and his main client, President Richard Nixon.

223
Notes
Introduction: Learning to Make Rain All of the Time
1. Ford Harding, Rain Making: The Professional’s Guide to Attracting New
Clients (Holbrook, MA: Bob Adams, 1994).
Chapter 1: The Loyalty Equation: Three Factors That Determine
Your Client’s Loyalty
1. Frederick F. Reichheld, Loyalty Rules! How Today’s Leaders Build Last-
ing Relationships (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2001).
2. Robert Cialdini, Inf luence: The Psychology of Persuasion (New York:
William Morrow, 1984).
3. Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince, trans. George Bull (London: Penguin
Books, 1995), p. 1.
Chapter 2: Are You an Extraordinary Advisor?
1. This framework of seven attributes is drawn from Jagdish Sheth and An-
drew Sobel, Clients for Life: Evolving from an Expert for Hire to an Ex-
traordinary Advisor (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000).
2. These techniques are discussed in detail in Chapter 5 of Clients for Life,
“The Big Picture: Cultivating Powers of Synthesis.”
Chapter 3: Breakthrough Strategies for Experts
1. John Grisham, The Firm (New York: Random House, 1991), p. 7.
Chapter 6: Benjamin Franklin’s Secret Weapon
1. H. W. Brands, The First American (New York: Doubleday, 2000), p. 3.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid., p. 166.
4. Ibid., p. 167.

224
NOTES
Chapter 7: Why a Client Might Like You
1. Jane Austen, Selected Letters 1796–1817 R. W. Chapman, Editor (Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 1955), p. 19.
2. Dale Carnegie, How to Win Friends and Inf luence People (New York:
Pocket Books, 1936).
3. Robert B. Cialdini, Inf luence: The Psychology of Persuasion (New York:
William Morrow, 1984).
4. Ibid., p. 173.
5. “Flattering Classes,” Daily Mail Associated Newspapers (April 26, 2002,
p. 23). Professor Roos Vonk of the University of Holland, after a trial in-
volving 300 volunteers, states that “It’s in superficial relationships, espe-
cially with others at work, that flattery is most powerful.”
6. Carnegie, p. 4.
7. Cialdini, p. 174.
Chapter 9: Leonardo da Vinci: Why Lutes and Madonnas Matter
1. Serge Bramly, Leonardo: The Artist and the Man (London: Penguin
Books, 1992), p. 173.
2. Ibid., p. 187.
3. Ibid., p. 323.
4. Ibid., p. 267.
Chapter 10: Finding the Hidden Creases: Inf luencing Your Clients
1. Kenneth Kushner, One Arrow, One Life (Boston: Charles E. Tuttle:
2000), p. 62.
2. http://www.cp-tel.net/miller/BilLee/quotes/Franklin.html.
3. Gary A. Williams and Robert B. Miller, “Change the Way You Persuade,”
Harvard Business Review, May, 2002, p. 65.
4. Robert and Dorothy Grover Bolton, Social Style/Management Style: De-
veloping Productive Work Relationships (New York: AMACOM, 1984).
5. Elements of this framework are adapted from Lynne C. Lancaster and David
Stillman, When Generations Collide: Who They Are, Why They Clash,
How to Solve the Generational Puzzle at Work (New York: Harper Busi-
ness, 2002), and Bruce Tulgan, Managing Generation X: How to Bring Out
the Best in Young Talent (Santa Monica, CA: Merrit Publishing, 1995).
Chapter 12: The Relationship Masters
1. Malachi Martin, The Jesuits (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987), p. 177.

Notes
225
Chapter 13: The Doubting Mind
1. W. Somerset Maugham, “The Verger,” in The Complete Short Stories of
W. Somerset Maugham, vol. 3 (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1952),
pp. 572–578.
2. Anthony Man-Tu Lee and David Weiss, Zen in 10 Simple Lessons (Lewes,
New Zealand: The Ivy Press Limited, 2002).
Chapter 15: How to Identify Client Needs
1. Francis J. Gouillart and Frederick D. Sturdivant, “Spend a Day in the Life
of Your Customer,” Harvard Business Review, January 1, 1994.
Chapter 17: The Right Foot: Four Ways to Start a Relationship
and Position It for the Long Term
1. I have always practiced this in my own advisory work, although the phrase
“conceptual agreement” was coined by Alan Weiss, who has authored a
number of excellent books on the consulting business (e.g., The Ultimate
Consultant; New York: Jossey-Bass, 2001).
2. Alan Weiss, Million Dollar Consulting (New York: McGraw-Hill Profes-
sional Publishing, 1997).
Chapter 18: Five Ways to Grow Your Client Relationships
1. Jagdish Sheth and Andrew Sobel, Clients for Life: Evolving from an Ex-
pert for Hire to an Extraordinary Advisor (New York: Simon & Schuster,
2000), p. 129.
2. Ford Harding, Cross-Selling Success (Avon, MA: Adams Media Corpora-
tion, 2002).
Chapter 19: Are Clients Meeting Your Expectations?
1. See, for example, Alan Weiss, Million Dollar Consulting (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1997).
2. See, for example, David Maister, True Professionalism (New York: Free
Press, 1997).
Chapter 20: Sustaining and Multiplying
1. Seth Godin, Permission Marketing (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999).
2. Stephen Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1989).
3. Robert Cialdini, Inf luence: The Psychology of Persuasion (New York:
William Morrow, 1984), p. 167.

226
NOTES
4. See, for example, Bill Gates, Unlimited Referrals (Silver Spring, MD:
Thunder Hill Press, 1996). 
Chapter 21: Merlin: Working a Little Magic with Your Clients
1. For example, see Norma Lorre Goodrich, Merlin (New York: Harper-
Perennial, 1988).
Chapter 22: 5 Steps to New Business with Old Clients
1. Ianthe Jeanne Dugan, “Depreciated: Did You Hear the One About the
Accountant? It’s Not Very Funny,” The Wall Street Journal, March 14,
2002, p. A1.
2. A top Citigroup executive once told me this story: “We had a group of
consultants analyze our credit card business, which is an important con-
tributor to corporate profits. They did a very good job during the course
of the project, but the final presentation was awkward. After describing
their findings, they dedicated the last 45 minutes of the meeting to telling
us how important it was for them to help us with implementation. It was
embarrassing, and we felt pressured. A slide or two on the subject would
have been okay—but they went on and on. Everyone in the audience was
uncomfortable. It had the opposite effect to what was intended—it made
us want to use them less, not more.”
Chapter 23: The Rothschild Bankers: The Power of
Unique Capabilities
1. Niall Ferguson, The House of Rothschild: Money’s Prophets 1798–1848
(New York: Penguin Putnam, 1998), p. 88.
2. Ferguson, p. 89.
3. Ferguson, p. 65.
4. Ferguson, p. 77.
5. Ferguson, p. 120.
6. Ferguson, p. 267.
7. Ferguson, p. 105.
Chapter 24: Cultivating the Attitude of Independent Wealth
1. For example, Laurence Hall, “An Honest Look at Our Standards of Truth,”
The Star-Ledger Newark, April 12, 2002, p.23; or Becky Mollenkamp,
“When Kids Cheat,” Better Homes and Gardens, March 2002, p. 82.
2. Mark Albion, Making a Life, Making a Living (New York: Warner Books,
2000).

Notes
227
3. Jagdish Sheth and Andrew Sobel, Clients for Life: Evolving from an Ex-
pert for Hire to an Extraordinary Advisor (New York: Simon & Schuster,
2000), p. 43.
Chapter 25: Managing Client Relationships during
Uncertain Times
1. Susan Bishop, “The Strategic Power of Saying No,” Harvard Business Re-
view, November 11, 1999.
2. Baltasar Gracián, The Art of Worldly Wisdom (New York: Doubleday,
1991), p. 152.
Chapter 27: Becoming a Firm That Makes Rain: How Great
Organizations Build Clients for Life
1. Daniel Goleman, Emotional Intelligence (New York: Bantam, 1997).
2. Interview with Egon Zehnder in “A Simpler Way to Pay,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, April 2001.
3. “Tom Siebel of Siebel Systems: High Tech the Old-Fashioned Way,” Har-
vard Business Review, March 2001, p. 118.
4. Ibid., p. 120.


229
Accessibility, 26, 203
Adding value (phase of relationship
building), 5–6, 12–13, 38, 39, 56–59
Advice, asking for, 148
Affiliating phase of relationship building,
39
Agrarian age (land as capital), 35
Albion, Mark (Making a Life, Making a
Living), 175–176
Ali, Muhammad, 174–175
Ambiguity, foreign clients and, 191
American Express, 130
Analysis vs. synthesis, 16–17
Aristotle, 16, 217–218
Assessments (starting client relationship),
121–122, 123
charging for, 122
focus on relationship building, 122
pitfalls, 123
positioning as first step in creating long-
term relationship, 122
Austen, Jane, 47
Baby Boomers, 70, 73, 74
Bailey, F. Lee, 96
Bain & Company, 114, 206
Balkcom, John, 70–71
Bell, Gertrude, 220–221
Bell Atlantic, 12
Benchmarks, comparative, 108–109
Bidwell, Robin, 5
Big-picture thinking (synthesis), 16–17, 81
Billing. See Payment/invoicing
Bischoff, Win, 18
Bishop, Susan (“The Strategic Power of
Saying No”), 182
Blanchard, Ken (One Minute Manager), 97
Body language, 53
Bolton, Dorothy Grover, 72
Bolton, Robert, 72
Branded experts. See Deep generalists, vs.
branded expert
Brands, H. W. (The First American), 43, 44
Budgets, client (myth about), 184–185
Capital, historical ages and types of, 35
Carlson, Dick, 161
Carnegie, Dale (How to Win Friends and
Inf luence People), 48, 51
Catalysts, 37, 45, 88, 149
Chernow, Ron (The House of Morgan), 220
“Chicago snowstorm test,” 16
Cialdini, Robert (Inf luence: The Psychology
of Persuasion), 9, 48
Cincinnatus, 174
Citibank, 82–83
Cleverness (vs. corniness), 23
Client(s):
behaviors (assessment dimension), 215, 
216
defining, 128
foreign (see Foreign clients)
gurus and (valuing boldness over
blandness), 81–84
individual vs. organizations, 128
knowledge of:
of issues, and selling new business with
existing relationships, 164–165
in depth (strategy for increasing market
share), 125
of firm/organization, 65–66
of industry and environment, 66
personal, 65
losing (rationally evaluating
importance/impact), 176
motivation to buy from you (beginning
vs. later stages of relationship), 164
panel, 103–104
partnering opportunities, 125, 150
relationship capital, 37
Index

230
INDEX
Client(s) (continued)
uncertainty, systematically working to
reduce, 185
using examples, for establishing
credibility/competence, 30–31
warning signs, 83–84, 133–134
Client advisors:
attributes of (vs. experts-for-hire), 13–20
conviction, 18–19, 90, 154
empathy, 14–15
integrity, 19, 29
judgment, 17–18, 153
knowledge depth/breadth, 15–16, 153
selfless, 14, 154, 174, 219
synthesis, or big-picture thinking,
16–17, 81
expertise and (“powerful combination”),
32–33
improving client’s condition (vs. merely
meeting expectations), 59
pantheon of historical, 217–222
Client expectations, 55–59
examples of relationships gone sour (even
though expectations were met),
55–56
hidden/unarticulated, 56–57
improving client’s condition, vs. merely
meeting, 57–58
narrowly defined, 57
Client loyalty, 3–11
factors in equation for:
degree of trust you develop, 7 (see also
Trust)
extra mile you are willing to go, 8–11,
124
value added, 5–6, 12–13, 38, 39, 56–59
firms wide strategies for, 207–208
typical mistakes (two) that professionals
make, 157
Client needs, identifying, 102–110, 164
asking client directly, 107–108
conducting industry research and analysis,
104–105
creating a client panel, 103–104
investing extra time to get to know your
client, 105–106
pitfalls, 102–103
talking to client’s customers, 106–107
talking to company observers, 109–110
using comparative benchmarks, 108–109
Client relationships:
adding-value phase, 39, 56–59
affiliating phase, 39
evaluating your existing, 213–214
company assessment, 215–216
self-assessment, -214–215:
growing (migration paths), 124–132
helping with implementation, 
128–129
increasing market share, 125
key enablers, 131
migrating to new issues using your
expertise, 125–127
working with multiple divisions of the
same company, 129–130
working with other executives in same
company, 127–129
large-scale, 111–115, 181
benefits of, 113–114
migration strategy, 115
risks, 114–115
uncertain economic times and, 181
multiplying phase, 40, 45, 148–150
stages in building, 39–40, 143–144
starting off on right foot, 116–123
assessments, 121–122, 123
“let’s go” (only minimal
documentation), 116–117, 123
pitfalls, 122–123
requests for proposal (RFPs), 119–121,
123
value-added proposals, 118–119, 123
sustaining phase, 39–40, 143–148,
156–165, 209
checklist, 209
having lunch/dinner with an old
friend, 146–147
publishing regular newsletter or
magazine, 145–146
relationship selling, 156–165
sending something of interest
periodically, 146
techniques, 143–144
writing articles/books, 146
Close, 162–165
Cochran, Johnny, 96
Collaborators, 37, 45
Commoditization, 36, 98, 100–101
Communication styles, categorizing, 72
Companions (type of relationship), 38
Comparative benchmarks, 108–109
Comparative frameworks, 107–108
Compensation/rewards, 201–203, 216
Competence, 29–31
managing perception of, 165
reestablishing, with old clients, 158

Index
231
trust and, 29–31, 165
using client examples for establishing, 30
Connors, Connie, 25
Consulting industry:
billing (see Payment/invoicing)
career paths for professionals (see Deep
generalists, vs. branded experts)
recent study by Wall Street Journal on
(number one reason why top
executives hire a consultant), 17
service guarantees, 31–32, 185, 204–205
Conviction, 18–19, 90, 154
Core specialty, 65
Core value, 5
Counselors (relationship type), 37, 88
Covey, Stephen, 145
Credibility, establishing, 28–33, 107,
158–159. See also Trust
Credit Suisse First Boston, 23
Cross-selling, 131
Cultural differences. See Foreign clients
Culture, corporate, 205–207, 216
Curiosity, arousing clients’, 147
Customers:
panel of, 207
relationship type, 37
talking to client’s, 106–107
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 46, 60–67, 218, 219
Decision bias, recency effect, 144
Decision making speed, and foreign clients,
192–193
Deep generalists, 15–16, 96–101
vs. branded experts, 96–101
distinction useful for two reasons, 99
distribution media, 97, 100
dual identities, 98–99
examples from O.J. trial, 97–98
functions performed, 100
subtle tension between two strategies
(different key success factors), 99
tactics/strategies for both, 99–100
Da Vinci as example of, 60–67
Jesuits as example of, 86
learning areas, 64–66
migrating to new issues (growth
strategies), 126
uncertain economic times (myth about),
181–182
De Lastanosa, Vicencio Juan, 88
Demographics, 72–76
Dershowitz, Alan, 96–97
“Diving deep,” 62–63
Doubt, 90–95
external (skepticism about what your
clients tell you), 90, 91–92
internal (questioning your own premises),
90, 92–93
about outcomes, 90, 93–94
Drucker, Peter, 14–15, 16, 221–222
Economic uncertainty (myths about
managing client relationships during),
178–186
client budgets/plans, 184–185
client referrals, 185–186
cutting prices, 180
down-and-out clients, 182–183
expectations of clients’ need for services,
179–180
experts vs. generalists in, 181–182
large companies, 181
marketing efforts, 181
new vs. old ideas, 183–184
publicity, 186
selectivity, 182
Egon Zehnder International (EZI), 202–203
E-mail, proposals by, 31
Emergence Consulting, 199–200
Emotional connection, establishing, 25–26,
27
Empathy, 14–15
Environmental Resources Management
(ERM), 103–104
Ethical standards, upholding, 205
Executives:
growth strategy (cultivating relationships
within same company), 127–129, 159
survey of (number one reason for hiring
consultants), 17
Expectations:
client (see Client expectations)
what consultants should expect from
clients:
interesting work, 136–137
on-time payment, 135
personal respect, 134–135
respect for agreed-upon fee, 135–136
respect for our knowledge and
experience, 134
what consultants should not expect from
clients:
friendship, 137
praise all the time, 137
staying in touch after work is done,
137–138

232
INDEX
Expertise:
cultural reverence for, 66
demonstrating (while behaving like an
advisor: “powerful combination”),
32–33
migrating to new issues and, 125–127
questioning concept of acquiring, 66–67
uncertain times, and (myth), 181–182
Experts-for-hire:
vs. branded experts, 98 (see also Deep
generalists, vs. branded experts)
breakthrough strategies for, 21–27
being readily accessible, 26
better service, 23
cleverness, 23
establishing emotional connection,
25–26
faster responsiveness, 22
listening/learning fast, 27
preparation, 23–24
providing unique information, 25
seeing problem anew, 24
checklist, for breaking through, 77
vs. client advisors, 13–20, 59
conviction, 18–19, 90, 154
empathy, 14–15
integrity, 19, 29
judgment, 17–18, 153
knowledge depth/breadth, 15–16, 153
selfless, 14, 154, 174, 219
synthesis, or big-picture thinking,
16–17, 81
as commodities, 98, 100–101
identifying/meeting clients’ expectations,
59
uncertain times/recession and, 181–182
“Extraordinary advisors”. See Client
advisors
Extra services, compensation for, 57–58
Familiarity (likability principle), 49–50, 121
Family/friends, importance of, 176
Ferguson, Niall, 170
Financial capital (industrial age), 35
Firmwide/institutional rainmaking
strategies, 195–208
assessment of, 215–216
client behaviors, 216
client service, 203–204, 215–216
compensation and rewards, 201–203, 216
culture, 205–207, 216
ethical/professional standards, 205
knowledge creation, 199–201, 216
professional development, 196–197, 215
relationship management, 197–199, 215
trust building, 204–205, 215
Fisher, George, 157
Flexibility in structuring projects and
invoicing, 185
Food and transfer of positive feelings, 146
Ford, 161–162
Foreign clients, 187–194
ambiguity, 191
decision-making speed, 192–193
language, 188–190
recognizing your cultural biases, 193
relationships vs. transactions (emphasis),
192
stereotyping, 193
Franklin, Benjamin, 42–46, 69, 219–220
Friars, Eileen, 38
Friend(s)/friendship:
importance of, 176
not expecting client to stay in touch after
work is done, 137–138
not expecting friendship from client, 137
treating client like a friend (vs. “meter
running” mentality), 174
Fripp, Patricia, 32
Frisch, Bob, 10
Fulbright & Jaworski, 199
Future state vision, 161
Gadiesh, Orit, 206
Gallup polling firm (First, Break All the
Rules), 201
Galvin, Bob, 17
Gandossy, Bob, 21–22, 24
General Electric, 183
Generalists. See Deep generalists
General Motors, 9–10, 162
Generational groups, 72–76
approaches for influencing clients in each
group, 75
Baby Boomers, 73, 74
cusps, 75
Generation Xers, 73, 74
Generation Y (the Echo Boom, and
Millennials), 73
Traditionalists, 73
Gerstner, Lou, 183
Girard, Joe, 51
Godin, Seth (Permission Marketing), 144
Goldman Sachs, 99, 184
Goleman, Daniel (Emotional Intelligence),
197

Index
233
Gouillart, Francis, 200
Gracián, Baltasar, 88, 184, 200, 219
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, 88, 184
The Oracle, 219
Greed, 174
Grisham, John (The Firm), 23–24
Groupthink, 17–18
Growth strategies ( five migration paths),
124–132
helping with implementation, 128–129
increasing market share, 125
key enablers, 131
migrating to new issues using your
expertise, 125–127
working with multiple divisions of the
same company, 129–130
working with other executives in same
company, 127–129
Guarantees, 31–32, 185, 204–205
Gurus, 81–84
Harding, Ford (Cross-Selling Success), 131
Hewitt Associates, 21, 198
Historical ages, and different types of
capital, 35
Homes, Robert, 43–44
Honesty, 53
Hopkins, Harry, 221
Humility (enabler of empathy), 15
IBM Global Services, 128, 183
Immergut, Mel, 111–113, 126
Implementation services, 128–129
Independence:
cultivating attitude of financial, 173–177
Jesuits example, 87
selfless, 14, 154, 174, 219
Indirect method, 42–43, 219
Industrial age (financial capital), 35
Industry research and analysis, 104–105
Influencing clients (“finding hidden
creases”), 68–76
categorizing personality types and
communication styles, 72
demographics and, 72–76
understanding client trajectory and
influencing 10 or 20 degrees at a
time, 69–70
Zen philosophy, 68–69
Information, providing unique, 25
Information age (intellectual capital), 35
Institutional strategies. See Firmwide/
institutional rainmaking strategies
“Insultant,” 14, 222
Integrity, 19, 29
Intellectual capital:
development of (knowledge creation),
183–184, 199–201, 216
information age and, 35
Interruption marketing, 144
Intimacy/rapport, 31
Introductions, asking for, 149
Jackson, Peter, 23
Jesuits, 85–89, 219
characteristics and practices, 86–87
conviction (higher sense of purpose), 87
founder (Loyola), 85–89, 219
independence, 87
institutionalized mentoring, 87
relationship masters, 85–89
Rothschild banking family, comparison
with, 172
understanding of mind/soul of converts,
87–88
Jobs, Steve, 12–13
Johnson, Gary, 186
Judgment, 17–18, 153
Keith, William, 44
Kelly, James, 91
Kissinger, Henry, 222
Klopf, Jeff, 203
Knowledge:
about client (see Client(s), knowledge of )
creation, 183–184, 199–201, 216
depth/breadth, 15–16
shrinking half life of, 66
support staff, 203–204
Kushner, Kenneth (One Arrow, One Life),
68–69
Land as capital (agrarian age), 35
Language/translations, 188–190
Lawrence, Fred, 35
Learning:
areas important for evolving from narrow
specialist to deep generalist, 64–66
attitude (Merlin example), 153
journeys: client and self, 64–66
listening and, 27
personal, 16
Likability, factors in, 47–54
body language, 53
familiarity, 31, 49–50
honesty, 53

234
INDEX
Likability, factors in (continued)
openness, 52–53
positive association, 50
praising what’s good, 50–52
rapport, 53–54
similarity, 48–49
willingness to share, 53
Lillis, Charles, 38, 177
Lincoln, Abraham, 62–63
Listening/learning/observing, 15, 27,
126–127, 199
Lopez, Jose, 9–10
Loyalty, employee, 207–208
Loyola, Iñigo de Oñaz y, 85–89, 219
Luff, Carl, 51–52
MAC Group, 104
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 218
Da Vinci and, 63–64
Prince, The, 9, 18, 218
Maister, David, 136
Marcus, Bernie, 94
Marketing:
“elevator pitch,” 162
increasing your market share, 125, 181
permission vs. interruption, 144–145
stand-up presentations, 30
in uncertain times, 179–180, 181
Marshall, George, 18, 172, 221
Martin, Malachi (The Jesuits), 86
Maugham, W. Somerset (“The Verger”), 94
MCI, 206
McKinsey & Company, 99, 184, 200, 219
Merlin, 151–155, 218
Merrill, David, 72
Microsoft, 17
Migration strategy, 115
Milbank Tweed, 111–113, 126
Miller, Robert, 72
More, Thomas, 14, 18, 172, 174, 218–219
Morgan, John Pierpont, 18, 220
Mulica, Mike, 150
Multidivisional growth strategy, 129–130
Multiplying phase of relationship building,
40, 45, 148–150
asking clients to pass on your ideas, 149
asking for introductions, 149
asking for referrals, 149, 185–186
Needs. See Client needs, identifying
Network(s):
connection speed, 35
facilitating exponential growth, 149–150
nodes, 35
of relationships, 35
Networked age (relationship capital), 35
Novelty/new ideas (knowledge creation),
183–184, 199–201, 216
Ogilvy, David, 16, 201, 222
Openness (likability principle), 52–53
Openwave Systems, 150
Oracle at Delphi, 217
Palmisano, Sam, 183
Panas, Jerry, 120
Panel, client, 103–104, 207
Partnering opportunities, 125, 150
Payment/invoicing:
asking for 50 percent of fee up-front, 136
cutting prices to attract business in
uncertain times, 180
expecting on-time payment and agreed-
upon fee from client, 135–136
flexibility in structuring projects and,
185
profitability, 173–174
rapid resolution of questions, 26
Permission marketing, 144–145
Personal:
attributes (dimension of self assessment),
214
interests, 65
learning, 16
relationship (establishing emotional
connection), 25–26, 27
respect, 134–135
value, 6
Personality types, categorizing, 72
Pfeiffer, Steve, 8
Positive association (likability principle),
50, 159, 205
Prahalad, C. K., 83
Praise/positive feedback:
likability principle, 50–52
your expectations of, 137
Preparation, importance of:, 23–24
Problem(s):
causes of, vs. symptoms, 160
determining impact of fixing, 160–161
determining pain level, 160
identifying, 159–160
reframing, 21–22, 24
Professional development (company
dimension), 196–197, 215
Publicity, 186

Index
235
Quattrone, Frank, 23
Rackham, Neil, 164
Radar screen theory, 143–144
Rapport (likability principle), 53–54
Razan, Gregory, 146
Recency effect (decision bias), 144
Reciprocity principle, 8–9
Referrals, asking for, 149, 185–186
Reframing client’s issue, 21–22, 24
Relationship capital, 34–41. See also Client
relationships
assessing your development of, 41
barriers to building relationships, 36
five types of individuals with whom you
need to build relationships, 36–38,
40
catalysts, 37, 45, 88, 149
collaborators, 37, 45
companions, 38
counselors, 37, 88
customers/clients, 37
forces underscoring importance of, 35–36
business professionals as free agents, 36
commoditization of products/services,
36
job switching, 36
mergers/acquisitions, 36
networked age and, 35
phases (four) of relationship building,
39–40
adding value, 12–13, 38, 39, 56–59
affiliating, 39
multiplying, 40, 45, 148–150
sustaining, 39–40, 143–148, 156–165,
209
Relationship management (company
dimension), 197–199, 215
Relationship masters:
Franklin (Ben), 42–46
Jesuits, 85–89
Relationship orientation, factors
influencing client’s, 10
Relationship philosophy/attitudes/strategies
(dimensions of self assessment),
214–215
Relationship selling. See Selling,
relationship
Requests for proposal (RFPs), 119–121,
123
creating personal bond, 121
declining to submit, 119–120
defining terms in your favor, 120
offering options, 120–121
pitfalls, 123
Research and analysis, industry, 104–105
Research and development (R&D) budgets,
formal, 200–201
Responsiveness, 22
Richardson, Elliot, 14
Risk, reducing client’s, 31–33. See also
Guarantees
Rothschild banking family, 166–172, 220
innovative client solutions, 171
Jesuits, comparison to, 172
mission oriented to Jewish identity,
170–171
relationship-building emphasis, 168–169
trust; close-knit partnership based on
mutual, 169–170
unique sources of information, 170
Scale, economies of scale, 113
Scharre, Dan, 7, 11
Scheck, Barry, 97
Schroders, 91
Security Capital Corporation, 203
Selectivity in taking on clients/projects:
in uncertain times, 182–183
undertaking only business you can
successfully deliver, 205
Self-assessment checklists, 77, 139, 209
Self-assessment tool:
client behaviors, 215
personal attributes, 214
relationship philosophy and attitudes, 215
relationship strategies, 214–215
trust-building, 214
Self-awareness and self-control (enabler of
empathy), 15
Self-development (physical/mental), 177
Self-knowledge, 64–65, 76
Selfless independence, 14, 154, 174, 219
Selling, relationship, 156–165
building trust and credibility, 158–159
client motivation (beginning vs. later
stages of relationship), 164
close, 162–165
determining impact of fixing problem,
160–161
essential points in, 157
identifying real problem, 159–160
loyalty equation and, 157
vs. migration paths, 124
proposing a solution, 161–162
two schools of thought about, 156–157

236
INDEX
Share, willingness to, 53
Sheth, Jagdish, 13, 184
Siebel, Tom, 206
Siebel Systems, 203, 206
Similarity (likability principle), 48–49
Simpson (O. J.) trial, 96–97
Size. See Client relationships, large-scale
Smith, Ray, 12–13
Solution proposal, 161–162
Specialty, core (expert knowledge), 65
SPIN Selling, 164
Staff, support, 203–204
demonstrated knowledge of account, 26
ensuring consistent quality of, 204
recognition when client calls office, 26
Stand-up presentations, 30
Stereotyping, cultural, 193
Stern Stewart consulting firm, 97–98, 99
St. John’s College, 70–71
Surprise value, 6
Sustaining phase (in relationship building),
39–40, 143–148, 156–165, 209
checklist, 209
past client “call back program,” 147–148
selling (five steps to new business with
old clients), 156–165
building trust and credibility, 158–159
close, 162–165
determining impact of fixing problem,
160–161
identifying real problem, 159–160
loyalty equation and, 157
proposing a solution, 161–162
techniques for staying in touch, 143–148
having lunch/dinner with an old
friend, 146–147
publishing regular newsletter or
magazine, 145–146
sending something of interest
periodically, 146
writing articles/books, 146
Symptom vs. problem, 160
Synthesis, or big-picture thinking, 16–17
Taggart, Tom, 6
Time management matrix, 145
Traditionalist, 70
Trust:
building in existing relationships,
158–159
building in new clients (“first ten
minutes”), 28–33
company-level creation of, 204–205
assessment dimension, 215
cultivating positive associations, 205
ensuring consistent quality of staff, 204
offering service guarantees, 204–205
undertaking only business you can
successfully deliver, 205
competence and, 29–31
culture/background and, 192
example (Merlin), 153
extraordinary advisor vs. expert, 19
integrity and, 19, 29
intimacy/rapport and, 31
in loyalty equation, 5, 7
risk and, 31–33 (see also Guarantees)
self-assessment dimension, 214
Uncertain times. See Economic uncertainty
(myths about managing client
relationships during)
Value:
adding (phase of relationship building),
39
example (Steve Jobs), 12–13
four principles for, 56–59
in loyalty equation, 5–6
roles and, 38
types of:
core, 5
personal, 6
surprise, 6
Versatility, 165
Voice mail, 26, 203
Wallace, William, 52
Walton, Sam, 62
Wealth, cultivating attitude of independent,
173–177
Weiss, Alan, 10, 91–92, 121
Welch, Jack, 62, 183
White, Mallory, 51–52
Williams, Gary, 72
Zehnder, Egon, 202
Zen Buddhism, 68, 76, 94–95

237
About the
Author
Andrew Sobel is a leading authority on client relationships and the
skills and strategies required to earn long-term client loyalty. He has
spent 22 years as a business advisor to senior executives in over 30
countries around the world, helping leading companies create win-
ning strategies, renew their organizations, and develop client- and
customer-focused cultures. His clients range from established pub-
lic companies such as Citigroup, Cox Communications, and Tele-
com Italia to a broad variety of professional service firms including
Hewitt Associates, Fulbright & Jaworski, and Booz, Allen & Hamil-
ton. He spent 15 years with Gemini Consulting (now Cap Gemini
Ernst & Young), cofounding its international practice and serving as
a senior vice president and managing director.
Andrew is also coauthor of the acclaimed book, Clients for Life:
Evolving from an Expert for Hire to an Extraordinary Advisor. His
articles and work have appeared in a variety of national magazines
and media, including USA Today, Advertising Age, The HR Ex-
ecutive, Investors Business Daily, Consultants News, Business Law
Today, and The Dallas Morning News, and he has been a frequent
guest on national network news programs such as ABC’s World
News This Morning and CNN-fn’s For Entrepreneurs Only.
Andrew speaks frequently to corporate groups and conferences on
developing long-term client relationships, and he has worked with

