GO TO Project Gutenberg of Australia HOME PAGE
Title: The Sorcerer's Apprentice
Author: Malcolm Jameson
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0608371h.html
Language: English
Date first posted: November 2006
Date most recently updated: November 2006
This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott
Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.
Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.
This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html
To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au
GO TO Project Gutenberg of Australia HOME PAGE
The Sorcerer's Apprentice
by
Malcolm Jameson
Sometimes the simplest and most reasonable request brings astonishing results.
The fiasco at the big No. I Plant atop Pikes Peak began like this.
"Hoskins," said the man known the world over as  The Sorcerer,  turning from the empty water  cooler,
"will you pick up the phone please and call the storeroom down at the ten-thousand-foot level and  ask
them to send up a bottle of mineral water? This one is dry."
"Yes, Sir," said Hoskins, obediently, and began flicking the number. He clicked impatiently several times,
then announced, "The phone's dead."
"That's so," agreed The Sorcerer. "I forgot. They are having some trouble in No. 31 Distribution Station.
The phones may be out for another hour. But I'm thirsty as hell. Won't you hop  on the elevator,  like a
good boy, and drop down and bring up one yourself?"
"Y-yes,  Sir," acknowledged  Hoskins,  reluctantly.  He  was  the  junior  most  of  the  six  young  scientists

honored with the appointment of being understudies to the foremost scientist of all time. It griped him to
be asked to do what he regarded as menial things. It was not fitting to his august position. But he shoved
away the mass of formulas  he  was  working  on  and  got  grudgingly  to  his  feet.  With  just  a  show  of
sulkiness--enough to be unmistakable, yet discreet--he slouched toward the door.
"Dumb egg, that," whispered Bob Hallet to Freddie Palmer, next to him. "How in the name of Einstein
did he ever get this far?"
"Sh-h-h," cautioned Palmer. "Didn't you know? He's Sol Hoskins' nephew--"
"You mean the General Director of Production at Washington? Oh!"
And that is the end of that scene. Nearly an hour later The Sorcerer rose, stretched and yawned.
"Well, boys," be called, "let's call it half a day and drop down to the Quick-and-Dirty and snatch a bite of
chow. Looks as if the kid fell down the shaft or something."
The other five young men slid their papers together and rose, delighted at the invitation for a recess. Their
chief  was  a  difficult  man  in  many  respects.  He  was  a  hound  for  work  and  no  respecter  of  hours.
Moreover, he expected his whole staff to work with him, minute for minute. Often stretches of as long as
fifteen and twenty hours occurred. without the slightest break. Today  the chief seemed  unusually genial
and relaxed. They followed him respectfully down  the corridor  to  the western  bank  of elevators.  In a
moment they would be down at the six-thousand-foot level and would climb into a subway car bound for
the  officers'  restaurant  in  Manitou.  They  had  no  way  of  knowing  whether  they  would  be  there  five
minutes or three hours, for the chief might be in one of his rare talkative moods. Again, he might be seized
with a new idea even as he was ordering the meal, and drag them back again on the run to their desks.
Being understudy to The Sorcerer had its points, but not all of them were good.
That day, though, The Sorcerer was in an expansive mood and they had a good lunch and dawdled long
over it. He told his helpers many things about himself that they only partially knew from common rumor.
Christened Algernon Leroy Sillywood, he had never cared for the name. Instead, he let people call him
Bucky. It was not until he had unearthed and deciphered the cryptic formula left behind by Einstein that
he came to be known universally as The Sorcerer. He was a spare man, just turned forty, with a bronzed
skin and a manelike head of irongray hair. In his youth he had been a civil engineer, but he had the rare
quality  of  combining  both  practical  common  sense  and  the  most  ethereal  and  far-flung  imaginative
mathematical mind. That accounted for his double miracle. First he had comprehended that single line of
mystical symbols penned by Einstein in his declining years in which was stated the ultimate formula that
binds space, time, gravity and all the electrical phenomena together. On top of that, he had been able to
apply them to practical use.
He was called The Sorcerer for good reason, although he in no way resembled  the picture  favored  by
illustrators  of  weird  stories.  He  dealt  with  interstellar  and  interplanetary  forces.  He  dealt  with  the
marvelous alchemy of transmutation of the elements. The marriage of those  two  dealings was  perfectly
expressed in the great No. 1 Plant atop  Pikes  Peak.  There  it was  that  all the continent's--most  of the
world's,  for that matter--raw  materials  were  produced.  It  mattered  not  in  the  least  what  was  asked
for--gold, diamonds  of any size, hay, or  helium gas.  He  could  turn it out by the ton per  second.  The
beautiful thing about it was that it all came out of thin air, and those who have clawed their way up the
Peak on hand and foot know how exceedingly thin that air becomes just before the summit is reached.
But that day he sat late at the table and told his disciples how he had first thought of the analogy between
a rotating, revolving planet and the an-nature of a big electric generator. He explained briefly the field of
gravitic lines of force extending between all the heavenly bodies, and spoke of the terrific magnitude of

those forces, and of how they could be tapped to yield undreamed-of power and yet not be diminished
appreciably.
"They wasted time for years," he said, "with cyclotrons and such crude implements, trying to disintegrate
the atom. They succeeded, but the input of power  needed  was  so  much greater  than the value of the
results obtained that it simply didn't pay. I saw at once that we were  putting the cart  before  the horse.
What we wanted to do was integrate the atom--assemble it, working from fairly simple elements. That
needs power, too, but with the Einstein formula as a guide, we found scads of power. Up there on the hill
we drag down billions of horsepower per second and could have a thousand times that much if we chose
to utilize it. But we need no more than we take now--"
A frightened waiter ran into the room. He swirled to a pause in the center of the floor.
"Ladies and gen'lemen," he called, "keep calm, just a moment, please. There is a bad flood outside. You
had all better go up onto the roof. The management is taking what steps it can."
The Sorcerer  raised  his  eyebrows  and  looked  about  him  at  his  subordinates.  It  was  still  very  early
summer and the canyon streams had not begun to run very strong. Where would a flood be coming from
at this season?
"Let's go to the window and look," he suggested calmly, placing his napkin on the table and shoving back
his chair.
What they saw from the window was breath-taking. The street was filled with a rushing torrent of clear
mountain water, flooding out of the narrow canyon just above the town. Lamp-posts stood sturdily for a
moment, then leaned over like reeds and disappeared beneath the waves.  It  was  rising visibly, foot  by
foot, and flowing swiftly in the extreme. A small bungalow came by, turning slowly over  and  over.  The
heads of frantic swimmers could be glimpsed, battling the current.
"What the hell," said The Sorcerer, dryly, "do you suppose is going on up the hill?"
There was plenty going on up the hill, as he so disparagingly referred to the majestic peak above them.
To understand just what, perhaps it would be best to go back to Mr. Hoskins and his errand.
He went first to the eastern bank of elevators that led down into the bowels of the mountain. They were
as dead  as  the phones  and  he recalled  then that  their power  came  through the substation  that  was  in
trouble. He looked at the door leading to  the emergency stairs  and  sighed.  It  was  close  to  half a  mile
straight down to where he had to go--a fearful climb, especially coming back with a five-gallon bottle of
water on the shoulder. Yet when The Sorcerer sent a man for a thing, it was not wise for that man to go
back without it. The one thing the chief was not interested in was excuses.
Hoskins sighed again, but there seemed to be no way out for him. He drew the door open and began the
long descent. Two levels below, though, a happy idea seized him, and  with leaps  and  bounds  he went
back up the flights he had just descended. There were other ways of getting water.
He ran back along the corridor until he came to the set of elevators to the south--the ones that led to the
summit,  where  the  control  room  was  located  and  the  vast  intake  blowers.  Those,  he  found  to  his
immense delight, were  working.  A moment later  he stepped  out onto  the vast  gallery that  housed  the
gigantic atomic converters and walked down the aisle between  rows  of them, hearing the monotonous
drone of their humming as the indrawn nitrogen and oxygen atoms underwent their magical transformation
into a  myriad of more  complex  substances  more  urgently  wanted  by  man.  Before  tackling  the  short
circular staircase that led upward to The Sorcerer's private laboratory above, he paused for a moment to
get his breath, and leaned across the sill of the casemate cut through the face of the living rock.

The view from that point always possessed grandeur, but now that man had wholly preempted the rock,
its interest was even greater.  For  the upland valleys far below,  that  once  had  held nothing but useless
lakes  of icy water  and  a  few scraggy  pines,  now teemed  with industry. Everywhere  fabricating plants
sprawled, putting the finishing touches to the raw materials being constantly fed them by the plant above.
The mountain itself, viewed from afar, appeared as a pinnacle upon which a giant octopus had fastened.
In that conception the control house at the summit and the immense intakes formed the body, while the
seemingly clinging tentacles that straggled down the Peak's flanks in all directions were explained by the
fact that they were the tremendous penstocklike conveyors by which the newly created molecules were
delivered to the waiting factories below.
For  example,  to  Hoskins'  right was  a  throbbing tube  a  hundred  feet  in diameter  down  which  nascent
molecules of vanadium steel were being swirled. At a certain level below, these would condense into an
impalpable powder and fall eventually into a hopper in the steel mill beneath. There men would fuse the
powder in electric furnaces and then roll it to whatever shape was desired. The corresponding tube to the
left was palpitating with newborn cellulose particles which would fall into the bins of the textile mills as
long silky fibers of great strength, needing only to be spun into strong durable thread, and then woven.
Other tubes which he could not see  were  delivering other  products,  such as  the one  which continually
carried a stream of a rich mixture of hydrocarbons to the storage tanks far down the valley--aviation gas,
correct  to  the last tiny fraction.  There  was  the one  spouting gold dust,  which had  many  uses.  Roofs,
storage tanks and ships did not rust so readily when plated with the inert stuff. Hoskins knew all that, for
he had been in the plant for more than a year.
He got his breath, then clambered up to the next level, where the operating panels were set. Above each
converting element stood its own switchboard, studded with many tiny knobs and volume indicators. He
also knew  what those  were.  Each  knob  stood  for an element, and  where  desirable,  another  for each
isotope of that element. The verniers controlled the percentage, so that it was possible to set up on the
board the right combination of controls for the most complicated organic chemical. Rheostats  regulated
the volume, and automatic cut-offs were provided to stop production the moment the required  tonnage
had been run through.
He went past those, too, without stopping, until he came to the ladder that was the end of his short climb.
At its top was the little office used only by the chief and his six closest assistants. Hoskins, naturally, had
the key to it.
"Gee whiz!" he exclaimed, as he stepped into the door. The bottle which stood in the chief's sanctum and
which should have been full or nearly so, was as empty as the one  in the lower  office. The porter  had
fallen down on the job. Hoskins' hopes of swiping this one and carrying it down were dashed. And there
was no substitute that the chief would accept. He would have to go down to the storeroom after all.
Then his eye fell on the label. There it was stated in very exact percentages just what it was that gave the
water the particular tang that made  The Sorcerer  demand  it. It  had  iron, it had  sulphur, it had  several
bitter chlorides and a pair of obscure phosphates in it. But there it was, the whole formula.
Hoskins had another of his sudden and not too brilliant inspirations. He shifted his disgusted glance to the
little model machine that had been The Sorcerer's first successful converter. He had kept it installed in this
private study for sentimental reasons. Hoskins looked at it again, and  suddenly his face  cracked  into a
smile'.
"Why, sure," he told himself. "I'll make the stuff. Why not?"
He turned to the control board--the only one in the room. He studied its maze of dials and knobs. Then

be began setting them to match the formula derived from the chemical analysis of the spring water.  As
soon as they were all set, he upended the bottle and set it under the delivery end of the small machine.
Then he went back and threw the switch.
There was a flicker as the lights momentarily dimmed, and  the impassive board  began  to  groan  as  the
cosmic power  surged  through it. But not a  drop  of water  came  from the little converter  on the floor.
Hoskins doubled the power, then trebled it. Still nothing happened.
"Ah," he said,  comprehending at  last what he had  failed to  do.  Someone  had  broken  the  connection
between the machine and the board. He  pushed  the switch in and  went over  and  held his bottle.  In a
second now there would be water. He would not have to go to the storeroom after all.
Yes. He got water.
The reducer at the delivery end of the miniature machine blew off with a  cannonlike roar  and  Hoskins
knew vaguely that the bottle he had been holding an instant before had gone somewhere else. And as the
edge of the three-foot cylinder of gushing water caught him and shot him out the door, he knew he had
gone somewhere else, too. He was dizzily aware of going over Niagara and making a parabola in midair,
only to come up hard  on the floor plates  of the operating  deck  below.  Torrents  of clear  spring water
were  pouring out the door  above  him, and  but for their force,  he might have been  drowned.  But  the
volume and pressure were so great that the sideways push of it slid him out from under and tumbled him
across the floor. He staggered to his feet a  good  twenty yards  away,  and  found himself ankle-deep  in
fast-running water.
Hoskins was scared by then. He knew he had done something wrong. He wanted to get back there and
open that switch, or at least cut down the power. But he saw at a glance that that was out. A solid stream
of water against which no man could hope to stand was gushing from the laboratory door and splashing
to the control floor below.
"Oh, golly," moaned poor Hoskins, "I've played hell now. I guess I'd better tell the chief."
So he sloshed along and waded his way to the circular staircase, which was by then a spectacular spiral
cascade. But he clung to its handrail and got down to the level where the casemate was. The water was
not deep there, so far, and the going was better. He made the elevator, very wet and very shaken, but he
made it. He hoped devoutly, all the way down, that the stuff then raining down the shaft would not short
the motors at the bottom before he could get to his floor.
But there he was to be disappointed again. The Sorcerer had gone to lunch and taken all his associates
with him.  A  note  left  on  the  desk  told  him  so.  So  Hoskins  went  back  to  the  elevator  and  listened
miserably to the falling water a moment. Then he ran as  fast as  his legs could  carry  him to  the eastern
bank. He was panting like a dog when he emerged at the Manitou end of the tunnel. What he saw there
did not encourage him.
"Oh, golly," he reiterated, when he saw the raging flood that separated him from his chief.
"There's a freshet or something," remarked the doorman, looking out upon a town awash.
"Yeah, something," mumbled Hoskins, miserably. "Where's the nearest place I can get a boat?"
The doorman scratched his head. He had never been asked such a question before.
"Galveston, I reckon--this is the Rocky Mountains, you know. If you're figuring on getting down  to  the
club, I'd say the best way was to swim."

Hoskins sat  down  and  began  taking his shoes  off. It  was  going to  be  terrible,  but he had  to  face  the
music.
If Hoskins had known the whole of it, he might not have kept  up his swimming so  strenuously.  In his
mortification at realizing the full enormity of what he had done, he might have ducked his head and taken
one deep breath of the water he had  so  abundantly created  and  thereby  ended  it all as  far as  he was
concerned.  For  unbeknownst  to  him,  that  panel  that  stood  in  the  chief's  laboratory  controlled  every
converter  in the Peak.  When actuated,  its forces  jumped  the set-up  on other  boards,  and  put  all  the
machines to work on the same product. Once a raging forest fire had suggested the idea to The Sorcerer.
Should the mountainside burn again, instead of losing several plants as they had done the time before, it
would be easy to cut all production and flood the lower valley with CO2.
Consequently, when Hoskins set up the mineral-water  formula and  threw  in the switch,  the converters
just below were shunted over to a new schedule of production. They canceled whatever they were doing
and began to produce water. He did not know that, for he was looking at the small experimental machine
in the room with him, and that one formed no part in the general hookup. When he finally connected  it
with the others, he got his water, but more of it than he had bargained for, since in the meantime he had
sextupled the power. It flung him out of the room and started him on his long shoot-the-chutes to find his
boss, quite innocent of what was happening in the fabricating establishments below.
In the steel mill, for example, the superintendent of the watch happened to be standing near the outfall of
the great delivery tube at the time Hoskins closed the master switch. He was observing the operation of
the intricate system of conveyor belts that caught the downpour of silvery powder and distributed it to the
rows  of continuous electric  furnaces  that reached  down  the length of the bay,  when he was  suddenly
flabbergasted at being hurled from the platform by the avalanche of clear water that rushed out upon him.
Eventually he found his feet in the swirling torrent that spread out on the ingot-handling floor below, only
to see the furnaces flash blue flame to the tune of a thunderous crash as the short-circuiting liquid flowed
in between the points of their electrodes.
An astonished craneman, on the point of picking up a dazzling ingot mold, just filled to overflowing, was
aghast to  see  a  torrent  of water  pour  down  upon  it. Instantly he was  clawing for breath  as  clouds  of
upsurging steam filled all space, and for a long time after that he did not know what was happening. The
flood rushed on and tumbled down the incline to  the next level, where  the rolling mills were.  Traveling
lines of white-hot ingots reddened and disappeared from sight under the all-pervading steam. The lights
went out. After that, unadulterated pandemonium reigned.
The chief forelady in the great automatic textile mill had as rough an experience. She was standing by the
carders, seeing how they sorted and laid side by side the fluffy fibers being fed down from above. What
happened next she never knew, except that she found herself swimming frantically and  snatching at  the
wet, clingy, mosslike stuff that kept getting into her nostrils. She saw the endless rows of whirling spindles
flash by as she was borne through them by the irresistible torrent. She was hurled through a door into the
weaving  department,  where  the  flood  spread  out  so  that  she  battered  her  knees  against  the  hard
pavement each time it rolled her over. She grabbed at a clacking loom just as she was about to be swept
past it and managed to clamber to her feet. She did not look back, but splashed along through calf-deep
swift water until she reached the outer door. There she gave one thankful yelp and began clawing for high
ground.
Over at the gasoline plant the scene was slightly different. They were used to handling liquids there, and
the superficial differences  between  high-test gasoline and  spring water  are  not  startling.  Yet  the  head
gauger knew at once that something had gone screwy.
"Look, Joe," he called to his helper. "What do you make of this gravity reading? And the stuff don't smell.

What do you think?"
Joe looked and Joe sniffed.
"I think," he drawled, after long consideration, "that somebody up there  has  pulled a  boner.  The stuff's
water."
"Shut the main gate, then," snapped the gauger. "I'll give 'em a buzz and raise hell with 'em. I've  always
wanted to get something on 'em, and here it is."
Joe reached for the button that operated the motor that drove the huge gate valve that would shut off the
feeder. The motor groaned and did its work; the valve closed. But the huge penstock  was  designed  to
carry  running  gasoline,  not  water,  nor  had  its  builders  meant  it  to  be  used  as  a  standpipe.  A
six-thousand-foot head of water  develops  an appreciable  static  pressure.  As  more  and  more  was  fed
down into the same confined space the inevitable happened--the colossal pipe split from end to end with
a cracking boom that sounded like the roar of doom. Hundreds of thousands of tons  of water  squirted
out onto the Mountainside and  a  moment later  were  leaping down  the slope  carrying an avalanche  of
granite debris and boulders on every side.
"Scram!" warned the gauger, and the pair abandoned their posts without ceremony. Twenty minutes later
they were safe in the top of a tall spruce,  miles below,  staring down  at  the torrent  that  swept  beneath
them.
"Yeah," agreed the gauger, belatedly, shifting his hold on the swaying branch.  "You're  right. Somebody
pulled a boner. It's not only the wrong kind, but too much."
"Uh, huh," nodded Joe.
So it went elsewhere. The canyons flanking Pikes Peak spouted water and more water, and ever more
water. Borne on the tumultuous surface of it was the wreckage of the fabricating plants.
Those by-products of his efforts to refill a water bottle were unknown to Hoskins as the current  swept
him by the officers' club in Manitou. He only knew that what had formerly been a six-story building now
appeared to be but two, and that its flat roof was jammed with people,  all looking anxiously up at  the
Peak, from whose every casemate and orifice water was spouting. He summoned up his last reserve of
wind and struck out into the backwater eddying downstream from the building. A moment later he was
dragging his wet  and  bedraggled  form over  the  sill  of  a  fourth-floor  window.  It  happened  to  be  the
window of the manager's office. The Sorcerer was at the radiophone. Hoskins lay limp and panting for a
few minutes just where he fell.
"But, governor," The Sorcerer was saying, "you can't do that. It's all very well to say that our plant has
gone crazy. I know it. I'm thinking about the Arkansas River bridges, too, and the general sodden nature
of this part of your State, but if you go through with that idea of getting up long-range  railway batteries
and using army bombers, you won't have any State under you to worry  about.  All there'll be  will be  a
crater  extending from Salt  Lake  City over  into the middle of  Kansas.  There  is  power  undreamed  of
flowing into that mountain and all that is needed to set it off is to have one of your dumb bombers hit the
right spot--"
(Sputterings from the regional governor in Denver.)
"I know, I know," broke in The Sorcerer, "but hold your horses. Let me have a chance first. How about
sending me over one of those helicopters? There is no other way I can see to get up there. Yes? O. K.,
I'll wait for it."

The Sorcerer  broke  the connection  and  wheeled.  It  was  then he  saw  the  dripping  figure  of  his  sixth
assistant, sitting miserably by the window.
"Well," he snapped, "what's the story? I sent you for water. I see we have some. What did you do-step
by  step?"  Shamefaced  and  hangdog,  Hoskins  told  him,  with  much  stammering  and  attempts  at
self-excuse.
"Ah," said The Sorcerer, "so I suspected."
He glowered at the boy a moment, then turned and walked out. It was no time for recriminations. The
water was already over the dam, so to  speak.  He  went to  the roof,  his abject  and  repentant  assistant
following. Hoskins knew that sooner or later the lightning would strike--he might as well play the man as
best he could about it, for there was no escape. Meanwhile, The Sorcerer paced the roof, his jaws  set
grimly,  and  alternately  studying  the  gushing  heights  and  the  skies  to  the  northward.  Eventually,  the
helicopter came.
"Come on, you fellows," ordered The Sorcerer, "hop in with me."
Even the sniffling black sheep followed.
They got out on the topmost roof. The Sorcerer began barking orders.
"You, Palmer--take a couple of helpers and climb down the slope  there  and  break  that  cosmic-power
connection. Hallet! Take Wilson with you and shut off those air-intake motors. You will find the board in
that turret over there--the square one. I'll go down and try to get to the master switch."
He lifted a batch and stared down at the swirling flood that filled even the uppermost  levels of the vast
building. It was dark and forbidding down there, but the flood must stop. The Sorcerer shed his clothes,
then went down the ladder, rung by rung.
He fought his way through the raging, surging waters  until he found the door  to  his laboratory  whence
they came. There was a little space overhead, and  he managed  to  get through. He  swam to  where  he
knew the switchboard was. There he held his breath and dived. His hand found the master  switch and
pulled  it  open.  Intra-cosmic  gravitic  power  is  unlike  electric  current.  Immersion  in  water  does  not
shortcircuit it; it augments it.
He rose to the surface and waited, hanging on to the edge of the panel as the residual waters gurgled out
of the room. Being the highest spot on the Peak, it soon drained. The Sorcerer watched it go until there
was a bare few inches left. Then he waded back to the ladder, leaving the now barely dripping converter
behind him. With quick pulls of the arms and legs he mounted to the roof where his thoroughly terrified
disciple awaited him. He threw him one stony glance, then strode to the parapet, naked as he was, and
studied the terrain beneath. Water had already ceased to spurt from the upper casemates, and the flow
lower down was abating rapidly.  The Sorcerer  watched  the lessening flood a  moment, thinking all the
while about his assistant, Hoskins. After all, the fellow was hardly more than a kid, and the damage done
was irremediable. Moreover, The Sorcerer was an intensely practical man--Hoskins, whatever he was,
was the favorite nephew of the most powerful politician in the country,  the man who made  and  broke
chief engineers.  But it was  not cynical compromise  with practical  necessity  half as  much as  the  sheer
inadequacy of any effort at punishment or  at  securing retribution that  in the end  decided  The Sorcerer
upon his course.
He straightened up and turned, beckoning Hoskins to come to him. The boy  came  over,  expecting the
worst.

"By the way,  Hoskins,"  remarked  The Sorcerer,  most casually, "I suppose  that  after  this  you  will  be
wanting to get out of the molecular-conversion game, and go back to your folks at Washington?"
"Yes, sir," agreed Hoskins, with a readiness that was pathetic.
"So. Well, my boy, let me give you a rule to remember. The next time someone asks you to bring him five
gallons of water, bring him that--neither more nor less. Overdoing a thing is often as bad a fault as failing
to do it altogether. Do you understand?"
"Yes, sir," said Hoskins, meekly, "I think I can remember that."
THE END

