Title:      Train for Flushing
Author:     Malcolm Jameson
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0601851h.html
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          June 2006
Date most recently updated: June 2006
This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer
Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.
Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.
This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html
To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au
Train for Flushing
by
Malcolm Jameson
They ought never to have hired that man. Even the most stupid of personnel managers should have seen
at a glance that he was mad. Perhaps it is too much to expect such efficiency these days—in my time a
thing like this could not have happened. They would have known the fellow was under a  curse!  It  only
shows what the world has come to. But I can tell you that if we  ever  get off this crazy runaway car,  I
intend to turn the Interboro wrong-side out. They needn't think because I am an old man and retired that
I am a nobody they can push around. My son Henry, the lawyer one, will build a  fire under  them—he
knows people in this town.
"And I am not the only victim of the maniac. There is a pleasant, elderly woman here in the car with me.
She was much frightened at first, but she had recognized me for a solid man, and now she stays close to
me all the time. She is a Mrs. Herrick, and a quite nice woman. It was her idea that I write this down—it
will help us refresh our memories when we come to testify.
"Just  at  the  moment,  we  are  speeding  atrociously  downtown  along  the  Seventh  Avenue  line  of  the
subway—but we are on the uptown express track! The first few times we tore through those other trains
it was terrible—I thought we were sure to  be  killed—and  even if we  were  not,  I have to  think of my
heart. Dr. Steinback told me only last week how careful I should be. Mrs. Herrick has been very brave
about it, but it is a scandalous thing to subject anyone to, above all such a kindly little person.

"The  madman  who  seems  to  be  directing  us  (if  charging  wildly  up  and  down  these  tracks  implies
direction), is now looking out the front door, staring horribly at the gloom rushing at us. He is a big man
and heavy-set, very weathered and tough-looking. I am nearing eighty and slight.
"There is nothing I can do but wait for the final crash; for crash  we  must, sooner  or  later,  unless some
Interboro official has brains enough to shut off the current to stop us. If he escapes the crash, the police
will know him by his heavy red beard and tattooing on the backs of his hands. The beard is square-cut
and there cannot be another one like it in all New York.
"But I notice I have failed to put down how this insane ride began. My granddaughter, Mrs. Charles L.
Terneck, wanted me to see the World's Fair, and was to come in from Great Neck and meet me at the
subway station.  I will say  that she  insisted someone  come  with me, but I can  take  care  of  myself—I
always have—even if my eyes and ears are not what they used to be.
The train was crowded, but somebody gave me a seat in a corner. Just before we reached the stop, the
woman next to me, this Mrs. Herrick, had asked if I knew how to get to  Whitestone  from Flushing. It
was while I was telling her what I knew about the busses, that the train stopped and let everybody off the
car but us. I was somewhat irritated at missing the station, but knew that all I had to do was stay on the
car, go to Flushing and return. It was then that the maniac guard came in and behaved so queerly.
"This car  was  the  last  one  in  the  train,  and  the  guard  had  been  standing  where  he  belongs,  on  the
platform. But he came into the car, walking with a curious rolling walk (but  I do  not mean to  imply he
was drunk, for I do not think so) and his manner was what you might call masterful, almost overbearing.
He stopped at the middle door and looked very intensely out to the north, at the sound.
"'That  is not the Scheldt!'  he called out,  angrily, with a  thick,  foreign accent,  and  then he  said  'Bah!'
loudly, in a tone of disgusted disillusionment.
"He seemed of a sudden to fly into a great fury. The train was just making its stop at the end of the line, in
Flushing. He rushed to the forward platform and somehow broke the coupling. At the same moment, the
car began running backward along the track by which we had come. There was no chance for us to get
off, even if we had been young and active. The doors were not opened, it happened so quickly.
"Then he came into the car, muttering to himself. His eye  caught the sign of painted  tin they put in the
windows to show the destination of the trains. He snatched the plate lettered 'Flushing' and tore it to bits
with his rough hands, as if it had been cardboard, throwing the pieces down and stamping on them.
"'That is not Flushing. Not my Flushing—not Vlissingen! But I will find it. I will go there, and not all the
devils in Hell nor all the angels in Heaven shall stop me!'
"He glowered at us, beating his breast with his clenched fists, as  if angry and  resentful at  us for having
deceived him in some manner. It was then that Mrs. Herrick stooped over and took my hand. We had
gotten up close to the door to step out at the World's Fair station, but the car did not stop. It continued
its wild career straight on, at dizzy speed.
"'Rugwaartsch!' he shouted, or something equally unintelligible. 'Back I must go, like always, but yet will
find my Vlissingen!'
"Then followed the horror  of pitching headlong into those  trains! The first one  we  saw  coming,  Mrs.
Herrick screamed. I put my arm around her and braced myself as best I could with my cane. But there
was no crash, just a blinding succession of lights and colors, in quick winks. We seemed  to  go straight
through that train, from end to end, at lightning speed, but there was not even a jar. I do not understand

that, for I saw it coming, clearly. Since, there have been many others. I have lost count now, we meet so
many, and swing from one track to another so giddily at the end of runs.
"But we have learned, Mrs. Herrick and I, not to dread the collisions—or say, passage—so much. We
are more afraid of what the bearded ruffian who dominates this car will do next—surely we cannot go on
this way much longer, it has already been many, many hours. I cannot comprehend why the stupid people
who run the Interboro do not do something to stop us, so that the police could subdue this maniac and I
can have Henry take me to the District Attorney."
So read the first few pages of the notebook turned over to me by the Missing Persons Bureau. Neither
Mrs. Herrick, nor Mr. Dennison, whose handwriting it is, has been found yet, nor the guard he mentions.
In contradiction, the Interboro insists no guard employed by them is unaccounted  for,  and  further, that
they never had had a man of the above description on their payrolls.
On the other hand, they have as yet produced  no satisfactory  explanation of how the car  broke  loose
from the train at Flushing.
I  agree  with  the  police  that  this  notebook  contains  matter  that  may  have  some  bearing  on  the
disappearances of these two unfortunate citizens; yet here in the Psychiatric Clinic we are by no means
agreed as to the interpretation of this provocative and baffling diary.
The portion  I have just quoted  was  written  with  a  fountain  pen  in  a  crabbed,  tremulous  hand,  quite
exactly corresponding to the latest examples of old Mr. Dennison's writing. Then we find a score or more
of pages torn out, and a resumption of the record in indelible pencil. The handwriting here is considerably
stronger and more assured, yet unmistakably that of the same person. Farther on, there are other places
where pages have been torn from the book, and evidence that the journal was but intermittently kept. I
quote now all that is legible of the remainder of it.
Judging by the alternations of the cold and hot seasons, we have now been on this weird  and  pointless
journey for more than ten years.  Oddly  enough, we  do  not suffer physically, although the interminable
rushing up and down these caverns under the streets becomes boring. The ordinary  wants  of the body
are  strangely absent,  or  dulled. We  sense  heat  and  cold,  for example,  but do  not find  their  extremes
particularly uncomfortable, while food has become an item of far distant memory. I imagine, though, we
must sleep a good deal.
"The guard has very little to do with us, ignoring us most of the time as if we did not exist. He spends his
days sitting brooding at the far end of the car, staring at the floor, mumbling in his wild, red  beard.  On
other days he will get up and peer fixedly ahead, as if seeking something. Again, he will pace the aisle in
obvious anguish, flinging his outlandish curses over his shoulder as he goes. 'Verdoemd' and 'verwenscht
' are the commonest ones—we have learned to recognize them—and he tears his hair in frenzy whenever
he pronounces them. His name, he says, is Van Der Dechen, and we find it politic to call him 'Captain.'
"I have destroyed what I wrote during the early years (all but the account of the very first day); it seems
rather  querulous  and  hysterical  now.  I  was  not  in  good  health  then,  I  think,  but  I  have  improved
noticeably here, and that without medical care. Much of my stiffness, due to a recent arthritis, has left me,
and I seem to hear better.
"Mrs. Herrick and  I have long since become  accustomed  to  our  forced  companionship,  and  we  have
learned much about each other. At first, we both worried a good deal over our families' concern  about
our absence. But when this odd and purposeless kidnapping occurred, we were already so nearly to the

end of life (being of about the same age) that we finally concluded our children and grand-children must
have been prepared for our  going soon,  in any event.  It  left us only with the problem  of enduring the
tedium of the interminable rolling through the tubes of the Interboro.
"In the pages I have deleted, I made much of the annoyance we experienced during the early weeks due
to flickering through oncoming trains. That soon came to be so commonplace, occurring as it did every
few minutes, that it became as unnoticeable as our breathing. As we lost the fear of imminent disaster, our
riding became more and more burdensome through the deadly monotony of the tunnels.
"Mrs. Herrick  and  I diverted  ourselves  by talking (and  to  think  in  my  earlier  entries  in  this  journal  I
complained of her garrulousness!) or by trying to  guess  at  what was  going on in the city above  us by
watching the crowds on the station platforms. That is a difficult game, because we are running so swiftly,
and there are frequent intervening trains. A thing that has caused us much speculation  and  discussion is
the changing type of advertising on the bill-posters. Nowadays they are featuring the old favorites—many
of the newer toothpastes and medicines seem to have been withdrawn. Did they fail, or  has  a  wave  of
conservative reaction overwhelmed the country?
"Another marvel in the weird  life we  lead  is the juvenescence  of our  home,  the  runaway  car  we  are
confined to. In spite of its unremitting use,  always at  top  speed,  it has  become  steadily brighter,  more
new-looking. Today it has the appearance of having been recently delivered from the builders' shops.
I learned half a century ago that having nothing to do, and all the time in the world to do it in, is the surest
way to get nothing done. In looking in this book, I find it has been ten years since I made an entry! It is a
fair indication of the idle, routine life in this wandering car. The very invariableness of our  existence  has
discouraged keeping notes. But recent developments are beginning to  force  me to  face  a  situation that
has been growing ever more obvious. The cumulative evidence is by now almost overwhelming that this
state of ours has a meaning—has an explanation. Yet I dread to think the thing through—to call its name!
Because there will be two ways to interpret it. Either it is as I am driven to conclude, or else I ...
"I  must  talk  it  over  frankly  with  Nellie  Herrick.  She  is  remarkably  poised  and  level-headed,  and
understanding. She and I have matured a delightful friendship.
"What disturbs  me more  than anything is the trend  in advertising. They are  selling products  again that
were popular so long ago that I had actually forgotten them. And the appeals are made in the idiom of
years ago. Lately it has been hard to see the posters, the station platforms are so full. In the crowds are
many uniforms, soldiers and sailors. We infer from that there is another war—but the awful question  is,
'What war?'
"Those are some of the things we can observe in the world over there. In our  own little fleeting world,
things have developed even more inexplicably. My health and appearance, notably. My hair is no longer
white! It is turning dark again in the back, and on top. And the same is true of Nellie's. There are other
similar changes for the better. I see much more clearly and my hearing is practically perfect.
"The culmination of these disturbing signals of retrogression has come with the newest posters. It is their
appearance  that forces  me to  face  the facts.  Behind the crowds  we  glimpse  new  appeals,  many  and
insistent-'BUY VICTORY LOAN BONDS!' From the number of them to be seen, one would think we
were back in the happy days of 1919, when the soldiers were coming home from the World War.
My talk with Nellie has been most comforting and reassuring. It is hardly likely that we  should both  be
insane and have identical symptoms. The inescapable conclusion that I dreaded to put into words  is so

—it  must  be  so.  In  some  unaccountable  manner,  we  are  unliving  life!  Time  is  going  backward!  '
Rugwaartsch,' the mad Dutchman said  that first day  when he turned  back  from Flushing; 'we  will go
backward'—to  his  Flushing, the one  he knew.  Who  knows  what  Flushing  he  knew?  It  must  be  the
Flushing of another age, or else why should the deranged wizard (if it is he who has thus reversed time)
choose a path through time itself? Helpless, we can only wait and see how far he will take us.
"We are  not wholly satisfied with our  new theory.  Everything does  not go backward;  otherwise  how
could it be  possible  for me to  write these  lines? I think we  are  like flies  crawling  up  the  walls  of  an
elevator cab while it is in full descent.  Their own proper  movements, relative to  their environment, are
upward, but all the while they are being carried relentlessly downward. It is a sobering thought. Yet we
are both relieved that we should have been able to speak it. Nellie admits that she has been troubled for
some time, hesitating to voice the thought. She called my attention to the subtle way in which our clothing
has been changing, an almost imperceptible de-evolution in style.
We are now on the lookout for ways in which to date ourselves in this headlong plunging into the past.
Shortly after writing the above,  we  were  favored  with one  opportunity  not to  be  mistaken.  It  was  the
night of the Armistice. What a night in the subway! Then followed, in inverse order, the various issues of
the Liberty Bonds. Over forty years ago-counting time both ways, forward, then again backward—I was
up there,  a  dollar-a-year  man, selling them on the streets.  Now  we  suffer a  new  anguish,  imprisoned
down  here  in  this  racing  subway  car.  The  evidence  all  around  us  brings  a  nostalgia  that  is  almost
intolerable. None of us knows how perfect his memory is until it is thus prompted. But we cannot go up
there, we can only guess at what is going on above us.
"The realization of what is really happening to us has caused us to be less antagonistic to our conductor.
His sullen brooding  makes  us wonder  whether  he is not a  fellow victim, rather  than our  abductor,  he
seems so unaware of us usually. At other times, we regard him as the principal in this drama of the gods
and are bewildered at the curious twist of Fate that has entangled us with the destiny of the unhappy Van
Der Dechen, for unhappy he certainly is. Our anger at his arrogant behavior  has  long since died  away.
We can see that some secret sorrow gnaws continually at his heart.
"'There is een vloek over me,' he said gravely, one day, halting unexpectedly  before  us in the midst of
one of his agitated pacings of the aisle. He seemed to be trying to explain—apologize for, if you will—our
situation. 'Accursed I am, damned!' He drew a great  breath,  looking at  us appealingly. Then his black
mood came back on him with a rush, and he strode away growling mighty Dutch oaths. 'But I will best
them—God Himself shall not prevent me—not if it takes all eternity!'
Our orbit is growing more restricted. It is a long time now since we went to Brooklyn, and only the other
day  we  swerved  suddenly  at  Times  Square  and  cut  through  to  Grand  Central.  Considering  this
circumstance, the type of car we are in now, and our costumes, we must be in 1905 or thereabouts. That
is a year I remember with great vividness. It was the year I first came to New York. I keep speculating
on what will become of us. In another year we will have plummeted the full history of the subway. What
then? Will that be the end?
"Nellie is the soul of patience. It is a piece of great fortune, a blessing, that since we were doomed to this
wild ride, we happened in it together. Our friendship has ripened into a warm affection that  lightens the
gloom of this tedious wandering.
It must have been last night that we emerged from the caves of Manhattan. Thirty-four years of darkness
is ended. We are now out in the country, going west. Our vehicle is not the same, it is an old-fashioned

day coach, and ahead is a small locomotive. We cannot see engineer or fireman, but Van Der  Dechen
frequently ventures across the swaying, open platform and mounts the tender, where he stands firmly with
wide-spread  legs,  scanning  the  country  ahead  through  an  old  brass  long-glass.  His  uniform  is  more
nautical than railroadish—it took  the sunlight to  show  that  to  us.  There  was  always the hint of salt air
about him. We should have known who he was from his insistence on being addressed as Captain.
"The outside world is moving backward! When we look closely at the wagons and buggies in the muddy
trails alongside the  right  of  way  fence,  we  can  see  that  the  horses  or  mules  are  walking  or  running
backward. But we pass them so quickly, as a rule, that their real motion is inconspicuous.  We  are  too
grateful for the sunshine and the trees  after  so  many years  of gloom, to  quibble about  this topsy-turvy
condition.
Five years in the open has taught us much about Nature in reverse. There is not so  much difference as
one would suppose. It took us a long time to notice that the sun rose in the west  and  sank  in the east.
Summer follows winter, as it always has. It was our first spring, or rather, the season that we have come
to regard as spring, that we  were  really disconcerted.  The trees  were  bare,  the skies  cloudy,  and  the
weather cool. We could not know, at first sight, whether we had emerged into spring or fall.
"The ground was  wet,  and  gradually white  patches  of  snow  were  forming.  Soon,  the  snow  covered
everything. The sky darkened and the snow  began  to  flurry, drifting and  swirling upward,  out of sight.
Later we saw the ground covered with dead leaves, so we thought it must be fall. Then a few of the trees
were  seen  to  have leaves,  then all. Soon  the forests  were  in the full  glory  of  red  and  brown  autumn
leaves, but in a few weeks those colors turned gradually through oranges and yellows to dark greens, and
we were in full summer. Our 'fall,' which succeeded the summer, was almost normal, except toward the
end,  when  the  leaves  brightened  into  paler  greens,  dwindled  little  by  little  to  mere  buds  and  then
disappeared within the trees.
"The passage of a troop train, its windows crowded with campaign-hatted heads and waving arms tells
us another war has begun (or more properly, ended). The soldiers are returning from Cuba. Our wars, in
this backward way by which we approach and end in anxiety! More nostalgia—I finished that war as a
major. I keep looking eagerly at the throngs on the platforms of the railroad  stations  as  we  sweep  by
them, hoping to sight a familiar face among the yellow-legged cavalry. More than eighty years ago it was,
as I reckon it, forty years of it spent on the road to senility and another forty back to the prime of life.
"Somewhere among those blue-uniformed veterans am I, in my original phase, I cannot know just where,
because my memory is vague as to the dates. I have caught myself entertaining the idea of stopping this
giddy flight into the past, of getting out and finding my way to my former home. Only, if I could, I would
be creating tremendous problems—there would have to be some sort of mutual accommodation between
my alter ego and me. It looks impossible, and there are no precedents to guide us.
"Then, all my affairs have become complicated by the existence of Nell. She and I have had many talks
about this strange state of affairs, but they are rarely conclusive. I think I must have over-estimated  her
judgment a little in the beginning. But it really doesn't matter. She has developed into a stunning woman
and her quick, ready sympathy makes  up for her lack  in that  direction.  I glory particularly in her hair,
which she lets down some days. It is thick and long and beautifully wavy, as hair should be. We often sit
on the back platform and she allows it to blow free in the breeze, all the time laughing at me because  I
adore it so.
"Captain Van Der Dechen notices us not at all, unless in scorn. His mind, his whole being, is centered on
getting back to Flushing—his Flushing, that he calls Vlissingen—wherever that may be in time or space.
Well, it appears that he is taking us back, too, but it is backward in time for us. As for him, time seems

meaningless. He is unchangeable. Not a single hair of that piratical beard has altered since that far-future
day of long ago when he broke our car away from the Interboro train in Queens. Perhaps he suffers from
the  same  sort  of  unpleasant  immortality  the  mythical  Wandering  Jew  is  said  to  be  afflicted
with—otherwise why should he complain so bitterly of the curse he says is upon him?
"Nowadays he talks to himself much of the time, mainly about his ship. It is that which he hopes to find
since the Flushing beyond New York proved not to be the one he strove for. He says he left it cruising
along a rocky coast. He has either forgotten where he left it or it is no longer there, for we have gone to
all the coastal points touched by the railroads. Each failure brings fresh storms  of rage  and  blasphemy;
not even perpetual frustration seems to abate the man's determination or capacity for fury.
That Dutchman has switched trains on us again! This one hasn't even Pintsch gas, nothing but coal oil. It
is smoky and it stinks. The engine is a woodburner with a balloon stack. The sparks are very bad and we
cough a lot.
"I went last night when the Dutchman wasn't looking and took a look into the cab of the engine. There is
no crew and I found the throttle closed. A few years back that would have struck me as odd, but now I
have to accept it. I did mean to stop the train so I could take Nell off, but there is no way to stop it. It
just goes along, I don't know how.
"On the way back I met the Dutchman, shouting and swearing the way he does, on the forward platform.
I tried to throw him off the train. I am as big and strong as he is and I don't see why I should put up with
his overbearing ways. But when I went to grab him, my hands closed right through. The man is not real!
It is strange I never noticed that before. Maybe that is why there is no way to  stop  the train, and  why
nobody  ever  seems  to  notice  us.  Maybe  the train is  not  real,  either.  I  must  look  tomorrow  and  see
whether it casts a shadow. Perhaps even we are not ...
"But Nell is real. I know that.
The other night we passed a depot platform where there was a political rally—a torchlight parade. They
were carrying banners. 'Garfield for President.' If we are ever to get off this train, we must do it soon.
"Nell says no, it would be embarrassing. I try to talk seriously to her about  us,  but she  just laughs and
kisses me and says let well enough alone. I wouldn't mind starting life over again, even if these towns do
look pretty rough. But Nell says that she was brought up on a Kansas  farm by a  step-mother  and  she
would rather go on to the end and vanish, if need be, than go back to it.
"That thing about the end troubles me a lot, and I wish she wouldn't keep mentioning it. It was only lately
that I thought about it much, and it worries me more than death ever did in the old days. We know when
it will be! 1860 for me—on the third day of August. The last ten years will be terrible—getting smaller,
weaker, more helpless all the time, and winding up as  a  messy,  squally baby.  Why, that  means I have
only about ten more years that are fit to live; when I was this young before, I had a lifetime ahead. It's not
right! And now she has made a silly little vow—'Until birth do us part!'—and made me say it with her!
It is too crowded in here, and it jolts awfully. Nell and I are cooped up in the front seats and the Captain
stays in the back part—the quarterdeck, he calls it. Sometimes he opens the door and climbs up into the
driver's seat. There is no driver,  but we  have a  four-horse  team and  they gallop all the time, day  and
night. The Captain says we must use a stagecoach, because he has tried all the railroad tracks and none
of them is right. He wants to get back to the sea he came from and to his ship. He is not afraid that it has

been stolen, for he says most men are afraid of it—it is a haunted ship, it appears, and brings bad luck.
"We passed two men on horses this morning. One was going our  way and  met the other  coming. The
other fellow stopped him and I heard him holler, 'They killed Custer and all his men!' and  the man that
was going the same way we were said, 'The bloodthirsty heathens! I'm a-going to jine!'
Nellie cries a lot. She's afraid of Indians. I'm not afraid of Indians. I would like to see one.
"I wish it was a boy with me, instead of this little girl. Then we could do something. All she wants to do is
play with that fool dolly. We could make some bows and arrows and shoot at the buffaloes, but she says
that is wicked.
"I tried to get the Captain to talk to me, but he won't. He just laughed and laughed, and said,
"'Een tijd kiezan voor—op schip!'
"That made me mad, talking crazy talk like that, and I told him so.
"'Time!' he bellows, laughing like everything.' 'Twill all be right in time!' And he looks hard at me, showing
his big teeth in his beard. 'Four—five—six hundred years—more—it is nothing. I have all eternity! But
one more  on my ship, I will get there.  I have sworn  it! You come  with me and  I  will  show  you  the
sea—the  great  Indian Sea  behind the Cape  of Good  Hope.  Then some  day,  if  those  accursed  head
winds abate, I will take you home with me to Flushing. That I will, though the Devil himself, or all the—'
And then he went off to cursing and swearing the way he always does in his crazy Dutchman's talk.
Nellie is mean to me. She is too bossy. She says she will not play unless I write in the book. She says I
am supposed to write something in the book every day. There is not anything to put in the book. Same
old stagecoach. Same old Captain. Same old everything. I do not like the Captain.  He  is crazy.  In the
night-time he points at the stars shining through the roof of the coach and laughs and laughs. Then he gets
mad, and swears and curses something awful. When I get big again, I am going to kill him—I wish we
could get away—I am afraid—it would be nice if we could find mamma—"
This terminates the legible part of the notebook. All of the writing purporting  to  have been  done  in the
stagecoach is shaky, and the letters are much larger than earlier in the script. The rest of the contents is
infantile scribblings, or grotesque childish drawings. Some of them show feathered Indians drawing bows
and shooting arrows. The very last one seems to represent a straight up and down cliff with wiggly lines
at the bottom to suggest waves, and off a little way is a crude drawing of a galleon or other antique ship.
This notebook, together with Mr. Dennison's hat and cane and Mrs. Herrick's  handbag,  were  found in
the derailed car that broke away from the Flushing train and plunged off the track into the Meadows. The
police are still maintaining a perfunctory hunt for the two missing persons, but I think the fact they brought
this journal to us clearly indicates they consider  the search  hopeless.  Personally,  I really do  not see  of
what help these notes can be. I fear that by now Mr. Dennison and Mrs. Herrick are quite inaccessible.
THE END

