GO TO Project Gutenberg of Australia HOME PAGE
Title: Children of the Betsy B
Author: Malcolm Jameson
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0608361h.html
Language: English
Date first posted: November 2006
Date most recently updated: November 2006
This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott
Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.
Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.
This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html
To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au
GO TO Project Gutenberg of Australia HOME PAGE
Children of the Betsy B
by
Malcolm Jameson
I MIGHT never  have heard  of Sol  Abernathy,  if it hadn't  been  that  my cousin,  George,  summered in
Dockport, year before last. The moment George told me about him and his trick launch, I had the feeling
that it all had something to do with the "Wild Ships" or "B-Boats," as some called them. Like everyone
else, I had been speculating over  the origin of the mysterious, unmanned vessels  that  had  played  such
havoc with the Gulf Stream traffic. The suggestion that Abernathy's queer boat might shed some light on
their baffling behavior prodded my curiosity to the highest pitch.
We  all  know,  of  course,  of  the  thoroughgoing  manner  in  which  Commodore  Elkins  and  his  cruiser
division recently rid the seas of that strange menace. Yet I cannot but feel regret, that he could not have
captured at least one of the Wild Ships, if only a little boat, rather than sink them all ruthlessly, as he did.
Who knows? Perhaps an examination of one of them might have revealed that  Dr.  Horatio  Dilbiss had
wrought a greater miracle than he ever dreamed of.
At any rate, I lost no time in getting up to  the Maine coast.  At Dockport,  finding Sol  Abernathy  was
simplicity itself. The first person asked pointed him out to me. He was sitting carelessly on a bollard near
the end of the pier, basking in the sunshine, doing nothing in particular. It was clear at first glance that he

was one of the type generally referred to as "local character." He must have been well past sixty, a lean,
weathered  little  man,  with  a  quizzical  eye  and  a  droll  manner  of  speech  that,  under  any  other
circumstances, might have led me to suspect he was spoofing--yet remembering the strange sequel to the
Dockport happenings, the elements of his yarn have a tremendous significance. I could not judge from his
language where he came from originally, but he was clearly not a Down Easter. The villagers could  not
remember the time, though, when he had not been in Dockport. To them he was no enigma, but simply a
local fisherman, boatman, and general utility man about the harbor there.
I  introduced  myself--told  him  about  my  cousin,  and  my  interest  in  his  boat,  the  Betsy  B.  He  was
tight-mouthed at first, said he was sick and tired of being kidded about the boat.  But my twenty-dollar
bill must have convinced him I was no idle josher.
"We-e-e-ll," he drawled, squinting at me appraisingly through a myriad of fine wrinkles, "it's about  time
that somebody that really wants to know got around to astin' me about the Betsy  B.  She  was  a  darlin'
little craft, before she growed up and ran away to sea. I ain't sure, myself, whether I ought to be thankful
or sore at that perfesser feller over on Quiquimoc. Anyhow, it was a great experience, even if it did cost
a heap. Like Kiplin' says, I learned about shippin' from her."
"Do I understand you to say," I asked, "that you no longer have the launch?"
"Yep! She went--a year it'll be, next Thursday--takin' 'er Susan with W."
This answered my question, but shed little light. Susan? I saw I would do better if I let him ramble along
in his own peculiar style.
"Well, tell me," I asked, "what was she like--at first--how big? How powered?"
>"The  Betsy  B was  a  forty-foot  steam  launch, and  I got 'er  secondhand.  She  wasn't  young,  by  any
means--condemned navy craft, she was--from off the old Georgia. But she was handy, and I used 'er to
ferry folks from the islands hereabouts into Dockport, and for deep-sea fishin'.
"She was a dutiful craft--" he started, but broke off with a dry chuckle, darting a shrewd sideways look
at me, sizing me up. I was listening intently. "Ye'll have to get used to me talkin' of 'er like a human," he
explained, apparently  satisfied I was  not a  scoffer,  "'cause  if ever  a  boat  had  a  soul,  she  had.  Well,
anyhow, as I said, she was a dutiful craft--did what she was s'posed to do and never made no fuss about
it. She never wanted more'n the rightful amount of oil--I changed 'er from a coal-burner to an oil-burner,
soon as I got 'er--and she'd obey 'er helm just like you'd expect a boat to.
"Then I got a call one day over to Quiquimoc. That perfesser feller, Doc Dilbiss, they call him, wanted to
have his mail brought, and when I got there, he ast me to take some things ashore for 'im, to the express
office. The widder Simpkins' boy was over there helpin' him, and  they don't  come  any more  wuthless.
The Doc has some kind of labertory over there--crazy place. One time he mixed up a settin' of eggs, and
hatched 'em! Made 'em himself, think of that! If you want to see a funny-lookin' lot of chickens, go over
there some day."
"I shall," I said. I wanted him to stay with the Betsy B account, not digress. His Doc Dilbiss is no other
than  Dr.  Horatio  Dilbiss,  the  great  pioneer  in  vitalizing  synthetic  organisms.  I  understand  a  heated
controversy is still raging in the scientific world over his book, "The Secret of Life," but there is no doubt
he  has  performed  some  extraordinary  feats  in  animating  his  creations  of  the  test  tube.  But  to  keep
Abernathy to his theme, I asked, "What did the Simpkins boy do?"
"This here boy comes skippin' down the dock, carryin' a gallon bottle  of some  green-lookin'  stuff, and
then what does he do but trip over a cleat on the stringer and fall head over heels into the Betsy B. That

bottle banged up against the boiler and just busted plumb to pieces. The green stuff in it was sorta oil and
stunk like all forty. It spread out all over the insides before you could say Jack Robinson, and no matter
how hard I scoured and mopped, I couldn't get up more'n a couple of rags full of it.
"You orter seen the Doc. He jumped up and down and pawed the air--said the work of a lifetime was all
shot--I never knew a mild little feller like him could cuss so. The only thing I could see to do was to get
outa there and take the Simpkins boy with me--it looked sure like the Doc was a-goin' to kill him.
"Naturally, I was pretty disgusted myself. Anybody can tell you I keep  clean boats--I  was  a  deep-sea
sailor once upon a time, was brought up right, and it made me durned mad to have that green oil stickin'
to everything. I took  'er  over  to  my place,  that  other  little island you see  there--"  pointing outside  the
harbor to a small island with a couple of houses and an oil tank on it--"and tried to clean 'er up. I didn't
have much luck, so knocked off, and  for two--three  days  I used  some  other  boats  I had,  thinkin' the
stink would blow away.
"When I got time to get back to the Betsy B, you coulda knocked me down with a feather when I saw
she was full of vines--leastways, I call 'em vines. I don't mean she was full of vines, but they was all over
'er insides, clingin' close to the hull, like ivy, and runnin' up under the thwarts, and all over the cylinders
and the boiler. In the cockpit for'ard, where the wheel was, I had a boat compass in a little binnacle. Up
on top of it was a lumpy thing--made me think of a gourd--all connected up with the vines.
"I grabbed that thing and tried to pull it off. I tugged and I hauled, but it wouldn't come. But what do you
think happened?"
"I haven't the faintest idea," I said, seeing that he expected an answer.
"She rared up and down, like we was outside in a force-six gale, and  whistled!"  Abernathy  broke  off
and glared at me belligerently, as if he half expected me to laugh at him. Of course, I did no such thing. It
was not a laughing matter, as the world was to find out a little later.
"And that was stranger than ever," he continued, after a pause, "cause I'd let 'er fires die out when I tied
'er up. Somehow she had steam up. I called to Joe Binks, my fireman, and bawled him out for havin' lit
'er off without me tellin' him to. But he swore up and down that he hadn't touched 'er. But to get back to
the gourd thing--as soon as I let it go, she quieted down. I underran those vines to see where they come
from. I keep callin' 'em vines, but maybe you'd call 'em wires. They were hard and shiny, like wires, and
tough--only they branched every whichaway like vines, or the veins in a maple leaf. There was two sets
of 'em, one set runnin' out of the gourd thing on the binnacle was all mixed up with the other set comin'
out of the bottom between the boiler and the engine.
"She  didn't  mind  my  foolin'  with  the  vines,  and  didn't  cut  up  except  whenever  I'd  touch  the  gourd
arrangement up for'ard.  The  vines  stuck  too  close  to  whatever  they  lay  on  to  pick  up,  but  I  got  a
pinch-bar and pried. I got some of 'em up about a inch and slipped a wedge under. I worked on 'em with
a chisel, and then a hacksaw.  I cut a  couple  of 'em and  by the Lord  Harry--if  they didn't  grow  back
together again whilst I was cuttin' on the third one. I gave up! I just let it go, I was that dogtired.
"Before I left, I took a look into the firebox and saw she had the burner on slow. I turned it off, and saw
the water was out of the glass. I secured the boiler, thinkin' how I'd like to get my hands on whoever lit it
off.
"Next day,  I had  a  fishin' party  to  take  out in my schooner,  and  altogether,  what with  one  thing  and
another,  it was  a  week  before  I got back  to  look  at  the Betsy  B.  Now,  over  at  my  place,  I  have  a
boathouse and a dock, and behind the boathouse is a fuel oil tank, as you can see. This day, when I went
down to the dock, what should I see but a  pair  of those  durned  vines runnin' up the dock  like 'lectric

cables. And the smoke was pourin' out of 'er funnel like everything. I ran on down to 'er and tried to shut
off the oil, 'cause I knew the water  was  low,  but the valve was  all jammed with the vine wires,  and  I
couldn't do a thing with it.
"I found out those vines led out of 'er bunkers, and mister, believe it or not, but she was a-suckin' oil right
out of my big storage tank! Those vines on the dock led straight from the Betsy B into the oil tank. When
I found out I couldn't shut off the oil, I jumped quick to have a squint at the water gauge, and my eyes
nearly run out on stems when I saw it smack at the right level. Do you know, that dog-gone steam launch
had thrown a  bunch of them vines around  the injector  and  was  a-feedin'  herself? Fact!  And sproutin'
from the gun'le was another bunch of 'em, suckin' water from overside.
"But wouldn't she salt herself?" I asked of him, knowing that salt water is not helpful to marine boilers.
"No, sir-ree! That just goes  to  show  you how smart  she  was  gettin' to  be.  Between  the tank  and  the
injector, durned if she hadn't grown another  fruity thing, kinda  like a  watermelon.  It  had  a  hole in one
side, and there was a pile of salt by it and more spillin' out. She had rigged 'erself  some  sorta  filter--or
distiller. I drew off a little water from a gauge cock, and let it cool down and tasted it. Sweet  as  you'd
want!
"I was kinda up against it. If she was dead set and determined to keep steam up all the time, and had dug
right into the big tank, I knew it'd run into money. I might as well be usin' 'er. These vines I've been tellin'
you about weren't in the way to speak of; they hung close to the planks like the veins on the back of your
hand. Seein' 'er bunkers was full to  the brim, I got out the hacksaw  and  cut the vines to  the oil tank,
watchin' 'er close all the time to see whether she'd buck again.
"From what I saw of 'er afterward, I think she had a hunch she was gettin' ready to get under way, and
she was r'arin' to go. I heard a churnin' commotion in the water, and durned if she wasn't already kicking
her screw over! just as I got the second vine cut away, she snaps her lines, and if I hadn't made a flyin'
leap, she'd a gone off without me.
"I'm tellin' you, mister, that first ride  was  a  whole lot like gettin' aboard  a  unbroken  colt.  At  first  she
wouldn't answer her helm. I mean, I just couldn't  put the rudder  over,  hardly, without lyin' down  and
pushin' with everything I had  on the  wheel.  And  Joe  Binks,  my  fireman,  couldn't  do  nuthin'  with  'er
neither--said the throttled fly wide open every time he let go of it.
"Comin' outa my place takes careful doin'--there's a lot of sunken ledges and  one  sandbar  to  dodge.  I
says to myself, I've been humorin' this baby too much. I remembered she was  tender  about  that  gourd
thing, so the next time I puts the wheel over and she resists, I cracks down on the gourd with a big fid I'd
been splicin' some five-inch line with. She blurted 'er whistle, and nearly stuck her nose under, but she let
go the rudder. Seein' that I was in for something not much diffrunt from bronco bustin', I cruised 'er  up
and down outside the island, puttin' 'er through all sorts a turns and at various speeds. I only had to hit 'er
four or five times. After that, all I had to do was to raise the fid like I was a-goin' to, and she'd behave.
She musta had eyes or something in that gourd contraption. I still think that's where her brains  were.  It
had got some bigger, too.
"I didn't have much trouble after that, for a while. I strung some live wires across the dock--I found she
wouldn't cross that with 'er feelers--and managed to put 'er on some sort of rations about the oil. But I
went down one night, 'round two in the mornin', and found 'er with a full head of steam. I shut everything
down, leavin' just enough to keep 'er warm, and went for'ard and whacked 'er on the head, just for luck.
It worked, and as soon as we had come to some sorta understanding, as you might say, I was glad she
had got the way she was.

"What I mean is, after she was broke, she was a joy. She learned her way over to Dockport, and, after a
coupla, trips, I never had to touch wheel or throttle. She'd go back  and  forth,  never  makin' a  mistake.
When you think of the fogs we get around here, that's something. And, o' course, she learned the Rules
of the Road in no time. She knew which side of a buoy to take--and when it came to passin' other boats,
she had a lot better judgment than I have.
"Keepin' 'er warm all the time took some oil, but it didn't really cost me any more, 'cause I was able to let
Joe go. She didn't need a regular engineer, nohow--in fact, her and Joe fought so, I figured it'd be better
without him. Then I took 'er out and taught 'er how to use charts."
Abernathy stopped and looked at me cautiously. I think this must be  the place  that  some  of his other
auditors walked out on him, or started joshing, because he had the slightly embarrassed  look  of a  man
who feels that perhaps  he had  gone a  little too  far.  Remembering the uncanny way in which the Wild
Ships had stalked the world's main steamer lanes, my mood was one of intense interest.
"Yes," I said, "go on."
"I'd mark the courses in pencil on the chart, without any figures, and prop it up in front of the binnacle.
Well, that's all there was to it. She'd shove off, and follow them courses, rain, fog, or shine. In a week or
so, it got so I'd just stick a chart  up there  and  go on back  and  loll in the stern  sheets,  like any payin'
passenger.
"If that'd been all, I'd a felt pretty well off, havin' a trained steam launch that'd fetch and carry like a dog. I
didn't trust 'er enough to send 'er off anywhere by herself, but she  coulda  done  it. All my real  troubles
started  when  I  figured  I'd  paint  'er.  She  was  pretty  rusty--lookin',  still  had  the  old  navy-gray  paint
on--what was left of it.
"I dragged 'er up on the marine railway I got over there, scraped 'er down and got ready to doll 'er up.
The first jolt I got was when I found she was steel, 'stead of wood. And it was brand, spankin' new plate,
not a pit or a rust spot anywhere. She'd been pumpin' sea water through those vines, eatin' away the old
rotten plankin' and extractin' steel from the water. Somebody--I've fergotten who 'twas--told me there's
every element in sea water if you can get it out.  Leastways,  that's  how I account  for it-she  was  wood
when I bought 'er. Later on you'll understand better why I say that-she could do some funny things.
"The  next  thing  that  made  me  sit  up  and  take  notice  was  the  amount  of  paint  it  took.  I've  painted
hundreds of boats in my time, and know to the pint what's needed. Well I had to send to town for more;
I was shy about five gallons. Come to think about it, she did look big for a fortyfooter, so I got out a tape
and laid it on 'er. She was fifty-eight feet over all! And she'd done it so gradual I never even noticed!
"But--to get along. I painted 'er nice and white, with a red bottom and a catchy green trim, along the rail
and canopy. We polished 'er bright--work and titivated 'er generally. She did look nice, and new as you
please--and in a sense she was, with the bottom I was tellin' you about. You'd a died a-laughin' though, if
you'd been with me the next day, when we come over here to Dockport. The weather was fine and the
pier was full of summer people. As soon as we come up close, they began cheerin' and callin' out to me
how swell the Betsy B looked in 'er new colors. Well, there was nothin' out of the way about that. I went
on uptown and 'tended to my business, came back after a while, and we shoved off.
"But do you think that blamed boat would leave there right away? No, sir! Like I said, lately I'd taken to
climbin' in the stern sheets and givin' 'er her head. But that day, we hadn't got much over a hundred yards
beyond the end of the pier, when what does she do but put 'er rudder over hard and come around in an
admiral's sweep with wide-open throttle, and run back the length of the pier. She traipsed up and down a
coupla times before I tumbled to what was goin' on. It was them admirin' people  on the dock  and  the

summer tourists cheerin' that went to 'er head.
"All the time, people was yellin' to me to get my wild boat  outa  there,  and  the constable  threatenin'  to
arrest me 'cause I must be drunk to charge up and down the harbor thataway. You see, she'd gotten so
big and fast she was settin' up plenty of waves with 'er gallivantin', and all the small craft in the place was
tearin' at their lines, and bangin' into each other something terrible. I jumped up for'ard and thumped 'er
on the skull once or twice, 'fore I could pull 'er away from there.
"From then on, I kept havin' more'n more to  worry  about.  There  was  two  things, mainly--her growin',
and the bad habits she took up. When she got to be seventy feet, I come down one mornin' and found a
new bulkhead across the stern section. It was paper-thin, but it was steel, and held up by a mesh of vines
an each side. In two days more it was as thick, and looked as natural, as any other part of the boat. The
funniest part of that bulkhead, though, was that it put out rivet heads--for appearance, I reckon, because
it was as solid as solid could be before that.
"Then, as  she  got to  drawin'  more  water,  she  begun lengthenin' her ladders.  They was  a  coupla  little
two-tread  ladders--made  it  easier  for  the  womenfolks  gettin'  in  and  out.  I  noticed  the  treads  gettin'
thicker V thicker. Then, one day, they just split. Later  on,  she  separated  them, evened  'em up.  Those
was the kind of little tricks she was up to all the time she was growin'.
"I coulda put up with 'er growin' and all--most any feller would be tickled to death to have a launch that'd
grow into a steam yacht--only she took to runnin' away.  One  mornin' I went down,  and  the lines was
hangin' off the dock, parted like they'd been  chafed  in two.  I cranked  my motor  dory  and  started  out
looking for the Betsy B. I sighted 'er after a while, way out to sea, almost to the horizon.
"Didja ever have to go down in the pasture  and  bridle a  wild colt?  Well, it was  like that.  She  waited,
foxylike, lyin' to,  until I got almost alongside,  and  then,  doggone  if  she  didn't  take  out,  hell  bent  for
Halifax, and run until she lost 'er steam! I never woulda caught 'er if she hadn't run out of oil. At that,  I
had to tow 'er back, and a mean job it was, with her throwing 'er rudder first this way and that. I finally
got plumb mad and went alongside and whanged the livin' daylights outa that noodle of hers.
"She was docile enough after that, but sulky, if you can imagine how a sulky steam launch does. I think
she was sore over the beatin' I gave 'er. She'd pilot 'erself, all right, but she made some awful bad landin's
when we'd come in here, bumpin' into the pier at full speed and throwin' me off my feet  when I wasn't
lookin' for it. It surprised me a lot, 'cause I knew how proud she was--but I guess she was that anxious
to get back at me, she didn't care what the folks on the dock thought.
"After  that  first  time,  she  ran  away  again  two  or  three  times,  but  she  allus  come  back  of  'er  own
accord--gettin' in to the dock dead tired, with nothing but a smell of oil in her bunkers. The fuel bill was
gettin' to be a pain.
"The next thing that come  to  plague me was  a  fool government inspector.  Said  he'd  heard  some  bad
reports and had come to investigate! Well, he had the Betsy B's pedigree in a little book, and if you ever
saw  a  worried  look  on  a  man,  you  shoulda  seen  him  while  he  was  comparin'  'er  dimensions  and
specifications with what they was s'posed  to  be.  I tried  to  explain the thing to  him--told  him he could
come any week and find something new. He was short and snappy--kept writin' in his little book--and
said that I was a-goin' to hear from this."
>"You can see I couldn't help the way the Betsy B was growin'. But what got my goat was that  I told
him  she  had  only  one  boiler,  and  when  we  went  to  look,  there  was  two,  side  by  side,  neatly
cross-connected, with a stop on each one, and another valve in the main line. I felt sorta  hacked  over
that--it was something I didn't know, even. She'd done it overnight.

"The inspector feller said I'd better watch my step, and went off, shakin' his head. He as much as  gave
me to understand that he thought my Betsy B papers was faked and this here vessel stole. The tough part
of that idea, for him, was that there never had been anything like 'er built. I forgot to tell you that before
he got there, she'd grown a steel deck over everything, and was startin' out in a big way to be a regular
ship.
"I was gettin' to the point when I wished she'd run away and stay. She kept on growin', splittin' herself up
inside into more and more compartments. That woulda been all right, if there'd been any arrangement  I
could use, but no human would design such a ship. No doors, or ports, or anything. But the last straw
was the lifeboat. That just up and took the cake.
"Don't get me wrong. It's only right and proper for a yacht, or anyway, a vessel as big as a yacht, to have
a lifeboat. She was a hundred and thirty feet long then, and rated one. But any sailor man would naturally
expect it to be a wherry, or a cutter at one outside. But, no, she had to have a steam launch, no less!
"It was a tiny little thing, only about ten feet long, when she let me see it first. She had built a contraption
of steel  plates  on 'er  upper  deck  that  I  took  to  be  a  spud-locker,  only  I  mighta  known  she  wasn't
interested in spuds. It didn't have no door, but it did have some louvers for ventilation, looked like. Tell
you the truth, I didn't notice the thing much, 'cept  to  see  it was  there.  Then one  night, she  rips  off the
platin', and there, in its skids, was this little steam launch!
"It was all rigged out with the same vine layout that the Betsy B had runnin' all over 'er, and had a name
on it--the  Susan  B.  It  was  a  dead  ringer for the big one,  if you think  back  and  remember  what  she
looked like when she come outa the navy yard. Well, when the little un was about three weeks old--and
close  to  twenty feet  long, I judge--the  Betsy  B shoved  off one  mornin', in broad  daylight, without  so
much as by-your-leave, and goes around on the outside of my island. She'd tore up so much line gettin'
away for 'er night jamborees, I'd quit moorin' 'er. I knew she'd come back, 'count o' my oil tank. She'd
hang onto the dock by her own vines.
"I run up to the house and put a  glass on 'er.  She  was  steamin' along slow,  back  and  forth.  Then she
reached down with a sorta crane she'd growed and picked that Susan B up, like you'd lift a kitten by the
scruff o' the neck, and sets it in the water. Even where I was, I could hear the Susan B pipin', shrill-like.
Made me think of a peanut-wagon whistle. I could see the steam jumpin' out of 'er little whistle. I s'pose
it was scary for 'er, gettin' 'er bottom wet, the first time. But the Betsy B kept goin' along, towin' the little
one by one of 'er vines.
"She'd do something like that two or three  times a  week,  and  if I wasn't  too  busy,  I'd  watch  'em,  the
Betsy B steamin' along, and the little un cavortin' around 'er, cuttin' across 'er bows or a-chasin' 'er. One
day, the Susan B was chargin' around my little cove, by itself, the Betsy B quiet at the dock. I think she
was watchin' with another gourd thing she'd sprouted in the crow's nest. Anyhow, the Susan  B hit that
sandbar pretty hard, and stuck there, whistlin' like all get out. The Betsy B cast off and went over there.
And, boy, did she whang that little un on the koko!
"I'm gettin' near to the end--now, and it all come about 'count of this Susan B. She was awful wild, and
no use that I could see as a lifeboat, 'cause she'd roll like hell the minute any human'd try to get in 'er--it'd
throw 'em right out into the water! I was gettin' more fed up every day, what with havin' to buy more oil
all the time, and not gettin' much use outa my boats.
"One day, I was takin' out a picnic party in my other motorboat, and I put in to my cove to pick up some
bait. Just as I was goin' in, that durned Susan B began friskin' around  in the cove,  and  comes  chargin'
over and collides with me, hard. It threw my passengers all down, and the women got their dresses wet
and all dirty. I was good and mad. I grabbed the Susan B with a boat hook and  hauled her alongside,

then went to work on her binnacle with a steerin' oar. You never heard such a commotion. I said a while
ago she sounded like a peanut whistle--well, this time it was more like a calliope. And to make it worse,
the Betsy B, over at the dock sounds off with her whistle--a big chimed one, them days. And when I see
'er shove off and start over to us, I knew friendship had ceased!
"That night she ups and leaves me. I was  a-sleepin'  when the phone  rings, 'bout  two  A.M.  It  was  the
night watchman over't the oil company's dock. Said my Betsy B was alongside and had hoses into their
tanks,  but  nobody  was  on  board,  and  how  much  should  he  give  'er.  I  yelled  at  him  to  give  'er
nuthin'--told him to take an ax and cut 'er durned hoses. I jumped outa my bunk and tore down  to  the
dock. Soon as I could get the danged motor started I was  on my way over  there.  But it didn't  do  no
good. Halfway between here and there, I meets 'er, comin' out, makin' knots. She had 'er  runnin' lights
on, legal and proper,  and  sweeps  right by me--haughty  as  you please--headin'  straight out,  Yarmouth
way. If she saw me, she didn't give no sign.
"Next  day  I  got  a  bill  for  eight  hundred  tons  of  oil--she  musta  filled  up  every  one  of  'er
compartments--and it mighty near broke me to pay it. I was so  relieved to  find 'er  gone,  I didn't  even
report it. That little launch was what did it--I figured if they was one, they was bound to be more. I never
did know where she got the idea; nothin' that floats around here's big enough to carry lifeboats."
"Did Dr. Dilbiss ever look at her," I asked, "after she started to grow?"
"That Doc  was  so  hoppin'  mad over  the Simpkins brat  spillin' his 'Oil of Life' as  he called it, that  he
packed up and went away right after. Some o' the summer people do say he went to  Europe--made  a
crack about some dictator where he was, and got put in jail over there. I don't know about that, but he's
never been back."
"And you've never seen or heard of the Betsy B since?" I queried, purposely making it a leading question.
"Seen 'er, no, but heard of 'er plenty. First time was about three months after she left. That was when the
Norwegian freighter claimed he passed a big ship and a smaller one with a whale between 'em. Said the
whale was half cut up, and held by a lot of cables. They come up close, but the ships didn't answer hails,
or put up their numbers. I think that was my Betsy B, and the Susan B, growed up halfway. That Betsy B
could make anything she wanted outa  sea  water,  'cept  oil. But she  was  smart  enough, I bet,  to  make
whale oil, if she was hungry enough.
"The next thing I heard was the time the Ruritania met 'er. No question about that--they read 'er name.
The Ruritania was a-goin' along, in the mid-watch it was, and the helmsman kept sayin' it was takin' a lot
of starboard  helm  to  hold  'er  up.  'Bout  that  time,  somebody  down  on  deck  calls  up  there's  a  ship
alongside, hangin' to the starboard quarter. They kept hollerin' down to the ship, wantin' to  know  what
ship, and all that, and gettin' no answer. You oughta read about that. Then she shoved off in the dark and
ran away. The Ruritania threw a spot on 'er stern and wrote down the name.
"That mightn't prove it--anybody can paint a name--but after she'd gone, they checked up and found four
holes in the side, and more'n a thousand tons of bunker oil gone. That Betsy B had doped out these other
ships must have oil, and  bein'  a  ship herself, she  knew  right where  they stored  it.  She  just  snuck  up
alongside in the middle of the night, and worked 'er vines in to where the oil was.
"Things like that kept happenin', and the papers began talkin' about the Wild Ships. They sighted dozens
of 'em,  later,  all named 'Something W--Lucy  B,  Anna  B,  Trixie  B,  oh,  any number--which  in itself is
another mystery. Where would a poor dumb steam launch learn all them names?"
"You said she was ex-navy," I reminded him.

"That may be  it," he admitted.  "Well, that's  what  started  the  newspapers  to  callin'  lern  the  B-Boats.
'Course, I can't deny that when they ganged up in the Gulf Stream and started in robbin' tankers of their
whole cargo, and in broad daylight, too, it was goin' too far. They was all too fast to catch. Commodore
What's-his-name just had to sink 'er, I reckon. The papers was ridin' him hard.  But I can  tell you that
there  wasn't  any real  meanness  in my Betsy  B--spoiled  maybe--but  not mean. That stuff they printed
'bout the octopuses on the bridges, with long danglin' tentacles  wasn't  nothin' but that  gourd  brain and
vines growed up."
He sighed a deep, reminiscent sigh, and made a gesture indicating he had told all there was to tell.
"You are confident, then," I asked, "that the so-called B-Boats were the children of your Betsy B?"
"Must be," he answered, looking down ruefully at his patched overalls and shabby shoes. "'Course, all I
know is what I read in the papers, 'bout raidin' them tankers. But that'd be  just like their mammy. She
sure was a hog for oil!"
THE END

