GO TO Project Gutenberg of Australia HOME PAGE
Title: Tricky Tonnage
Author: Malcolm Jameson
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0608381h.html
Language: English
Date first posted: November 2006
Date most recently updated: November 2006
This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott
Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.
Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.
This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html
To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au
GO TO Project Gutenberg of Australia HOME PAGE
Tricky Tonnage
by
Malcolm Jameson
WHEN YOU'VE lived across the fence from an amateur inventor, you come to expect anything. When
the wind was right we used to get some of the awfullest chemical stinks from the Nicklheim barn, and we
got so used to hearing explosions that they didn't bother us any more than automobile backfires. We just
took it for granted when we'd see Elmer, the boy next door, walking around with his eyebrows singed off
and the rest of him wrapped up in bandages.
When Elmer was  a  little tad,  he was  a  great  enthusiast for scientific fiction. You hardly ever  saw  him
unless he was lugging some Jules Vernian opus around, and he ate up all he read with dead earnestness.
With that yen for science it might have been expected that he would shine at school, but it did not work
out that way. He wouldn't go along in the rut laid out for the run-of-the-mine student. The physics prof
finally had him kicked out for some crazy stunt he pulled with the school's equipment. Elmer hooked it all
together in a very unorthodox way, and the resulting fireworks was quite a show.
Being barred from school did not faze Elmer. He rigged up his own lab in the barn, buying the stuff from
mail-order houses with money he made doing odd jobs. Some of the people in the town thought the boy
might go places;  most simply thought he was  a  nut.  I  belonged  to  the  former  group,  and  sometimes

helped the kid with small loans. Not many of his inventions panned out, but he did sell one gadget useful
in television to a big company. In a way it proved to be a bad thing he did. The company bought the idea
outright and paid promptly, but afterwards for reasons of its own, it suppressed the invention--an act that
irked Elmer exceedingly. It prejudiced him violently against big corporations as such and the whole patent
set-up in general. He swore that after that he, would keep all his discoveries secret.
About that time his father died, and it looked as if Elmer had finished with his scientific dabbling phase.
Overnight he seemed to mature, and after that he was seldom seen  pottering  around  his barn.  He  was
busy about town, carrying on the little one-horse trucking business bequeathed him by the old man. His
truck was one of those vintage rattletraps that appear to be always threatening to make the legend of the
one-hoss shay come true, but Elmer was a  fair mechanic and  somehow  kept  the old crate  going. Not
only that, but to the astonishment of the citizenry, he seemed to be making money at it, and that at a time
when rate competition was keen and  gas  expensive  and  hard  to  get.  I was  beginning to  think we  had
witnessed the end of a budding scientist and the birth of an up and coming young business man. It  was
Elmer himself who disabused me of that notion.
One morning he stopped his truck at my gate and came up onto the porch. He pulled out a wad of bills
and peeled off a couple of twenties.
"Thanks," he said. "It was a big help, but I'm O.K. now."
"Oh, that's all right," I said. "There was no hurry about paying it back. But I'm glad to see you're doing
well in the hauling game. It may not be as distinguished as getting to be known as a big-shot scientist, but
at least you eat."
He gave me a funny look and sort of smiled.
"Hauling game, huh?" he sniffed. "I'd never thought of it that way. I don't cart stuff around for the fun of it,
or the money either. That's incidental. What I'm doing is testing out a theory I thought up."
"What's that one, Elmer?" I asked. I had heard a lot of his theories, first and last, and seen most of them
go flop. Elmer had a very screwy approach to the mysteries of nature.
"It's about gravity. I've found out what it is, which is more than anybody else since Newton has done. It's
really very simple once you know what makes it."
"Yes," I agreed. "That is what Einstein says, except that he hasn't finished his universal field formula. So
you've beat him to it?"
"Yes. I've been running my truck by gravity for the last three months."
That didn't quite make sense to me. The country road about was hilly and a lot of coasting was possible.
But still a vehicle couldn't coast up hill. Elmer was studying me uncertainly, and I realized he wanted  to
talk to somebody, but he was always so cagy about his projects that I hesitated to  come  right out and
ask.
"I've discovered something big," he said,  soberly.  "So big I don't  know  what to  do  with it. I'd  like to
show it to somebody, only--"
"Only what?"
"Oh, a lot of reasons. I don't mind being laughed at, but I'd like to keep this secret for awhile. If the other
truckers found out how I'm doing what I do, they might gang up on me, smash the truck,  and  all that.
Then again there's no telling what somebody else might do with my idea if they got hold of it before all the

theory is worked out."
"I can keep a secret," I told him.
"All right," he said. "Come along and I'll show you something."
I got in the truck with him. He stepped on the starter and the cranky old engine finally got going, though I
thought it would shake us to pieces before it made up its mind whether to run or not. Then we lurched off
down the road, rattling and banging like a string of cans tied to a mongrel's tail.
"Where does the gravity come in?" I asked.
"I don't use it in town," he said. "People might get wise to me."
We went on down to the oil company's bulk station. It had been raining off and on all week  and  there
was a good deal of mud, but Elmer skirted the worst puddles and we got up to the loading platform all
right. It was there I got my first surprise. A couple of huskies started loading up that truck, and when they
were through I would have bet my last simoleon Elmer would not get two miles with it. There  were  six
big barrels of grease, weighing four hundred pounds each, a half dozen drums of oil, and some package
goods. The truck kept creaking and  groaning, and  by the time the last piece  was  on,  its springs were
mashed out flat as pancakes. It was bad enough to have that overload, but the stuff was for Peavy's store
out at Breedville-forty miles away over as sketchy a bit of so-called highway as can be found anywhere
in America.
"You'll never get over Five Mile Hill with that," I warned  Elmer, but he just grinned and  pocketed  the
invoices. The oil company  agent was  looking on in a  kind  of  puzzled  wonder.  He  had  used  Elmer's
delivery service before, but it was clear that he didn't believe his eyes. Meanwhile Elmer got the motor
going and we backed out of the yard. There was a good deal of bucking and backfiring and shimmying,
but pretty soon we were rolling toward the edge of town.
Just beyond the last house the Breedville road turns sharp to the right into some trees, and Elmer stopped
at a secluded place where there was an outcropping of bedrock alongside the road proper. He killed the
engine and got a cable-like affair out of his tool box.
"The first step," he said, "is to tighten the load."
He hooked  one  end  of the cable  against the side  of a  grease  barrel  and  the other  he led to  the bare
bedrock  and  attached  it there.  The cable  terminated  in what  appeared  to  be  rubber-suction  cups.  It
looked as  if it were  made  of braided  asbestos  rope,  threaded  with copper  wire,  and  near  one  end  it
spread out in a flattened place like the hood of a cobra. There was a small dial and some buttons set in
that. Elmer set  the dial and  punched  a  button.  Instantly there  was  a  popping  sound  as  the  truck  bed
stirred, and I saw that it jumped up about a quarter or half an inch.
"Now heft that barrel," said Elmer.
I did. If there hadn't been another one right behind me, I would have gone overboard  backward.  I got
hold of the top of the cask and gave it a tug, not dreaming I could budge four hundred pounds of heavy
grease.
But it came away with about the same resistance that an empty cardboard carton would have had.
"What  makes  weight,"  explained  Elmer,  "is  gravitons.  All  molecular  matter  contains  them  in  various
degree. Up to now nobody knew how to extract them. You could only manipulate weight by moving the
matter itself. I simply drain most of the gravitons off into the bedrock where it will be out of the way. It's

easy because there is a gravitic gradient in that direction."
As an explanation it was a long way from being satisfactory. But there was the barrel,  plainly stencilled
with  its  gross  weight,  and  it  was  now  practically  weightless.  The  weight  had  left  as  abruptly  as  a
short-circuited electric charge. Moreover, Elmer was shifting his cable from one drum to another, and as
he touched each one the truck rose another notch. By the time he was through it rode as high as if there
was no load at all.
"I'll use the last one of these drums for power," said Elmer, coiling up his cable and putting it away. Then
I saw that he was making a short jumper connection between it and another cable running down  under
the cab to the hood. He lifted that up and showed me an attachment on the shaft behind the motor. It was
a bulbous affair of metal and there were two leads to it. One was the connection to the drum, the other
was a short piece of cable that dangled to the ground.
"I call that my Kineticizer," said Elmer. "It is really a gravity motor. It works on exactly the same principle
as a water turbine except that it doesn't require the actual presence  of the water.  The upper  cable  has
more gravitic resistance than the one I use to dump the load. It feeds a slow stream of gravitons to  the
upper vanes of a steel rotor. They become heavy and start to  fall, exerting torque.  At the bottom  they
wipe the ground cable and the moving gravitons simply waste away into the road. Four hundred pounds
falling four feet gives a lot of power-especially when you use it all. See?"
Did I? I don't know. It sounded plausible, and anyway Elmer banged  down  the hood  and  we  climbed
back into the cab. That time we started off like a zephyr. There was smooth, silent, resistless power, and
the truck being lightened of its load,  leaped  like a  jack  rabbit.  The gasoline motor  was  idle. The only
noise was the rattling of the fenders and the swish of the air. Breedville began to look more attainable.
After we straightened out on the road, Elmer began to tell me about gravities.
"It was Ebrenhaft's  work  with magnetics that  got me to  thinking about  it. Since  he was  already  doing
magnetalysis I didn't bother to go along that line. What interested me was the evident kinship on the one
hand between electric and magnetic phenomena in general, and between the strong magnetism of electric
fields and iron and the relatively weak magnetism of all other substances."
I kept on listening. Elmer's whole theory of gravities was pretty involved, and  in some  spots  downright
screwy. But on the whole it hung together, and there I was riding along on a stream of moving gravitons
to prove  it. According  to  the Elmerian doctrine,  in the beginning there  was  chaos  and  all  matter  was
highly magnetic. It therefore tended to coalesce into nebulae, and thence into stars.
There the fierce pressures  and  temperatures  tended  to  strip  the basic  matter  of its more  volatile outer
shells and hurl them outward in the form of radiant energy. Atomic stresses yielded enormous quantities
of light and heat and great streams of magnetons and electrons. In the end there is only ash--the cold inert
rocks of the planetary bodies. With the exception of the ferric metals none of that ash retains more than a
bare fragment of its original magnetic power. Yet  even rock  when in massive concentration  has  strong
attractive power. The earth is such a concentration, and its pull on the apple was what woke Newton up.
From that concept Elmer dug into the apple itself and into the atoms that compose it. Mass, he claimed,
in so far as what we call weight is concerned, is simply a matter of gravitonic coefficient, a graviton being
the lowest unit--one more aspect of the atom. It is the nucleus of a magneton, what is left after the outer
shells have been  stripped  away.  The graviton is utterly inert and  heretofore  locked  inseparably  in  the
atoms of the substance  to  which it originally belonged.  If  only  they  could  be  induced  to  move,  their
departure  would rob  the parent  substance  of nothing except  weight,  and  by  moving  pure  essence  of
weight potential energy could be turned into kinetic with the minimum of loss.

"It was finding a suitable conductor that stumped me longest," Elmer confessed, "and I'm not telling yet
what that is. But as soon as I found it I built this motor. You see for yourself how beautifully it works."
I did, and I saw a myriad of rosy dreams as well. We took Five Mile Hill like a breeze, almost floating
over, thanks not only to the silent drive but to the weightlessness of the cargo. I thought of all the massive
mountain ranges just sitting in their grandeur  with billions and  billions of foot-tons  of locked-up  energy
awaiting  release.  I  could  envisage  hundreds  of  kineticizer  plants  around  their  slopes  sending  out  an
abundance of free power. What it did not occur to me to think of was what would happen when those
mountains eventually became weightless. What worried me most just then was, how the other properties
of materials would be affected with alteration of its natural weight.
"Oh, not much," said Elmer. "The relative weights of duraluminum, steel and lead have nothing whatever
to do with their tensile strength. I drained off most of the weight of a pan of mercury and tested it. I found
that it got a lot, more viscous when it was light, a characteristic that is overcome by its normal heaviness.
But otherwise it was still mercury. There is an anvil in my barn that weighs less than a  toy balloon.  If it
wasn't kept clamped to the block it sits on, it would soar and bump against the rafters, but as long as I
keep it from doing that I can still hammer iron out on it."
We were nearly to Breedville when it began to rain again. Elmer put up the storm curtains, and I asked
him about how Mr. Peavy was going to react at getting barrels of grease that were lighter than whipped
cream.
"I'm going to take care of that before we get there," said Elmer.
I found out what he meant when he pulled up under a railroad underpass about a mile this side of Peavy's
store. He got out and produced his cable again. This time he attached it to the face of one of the concrete
abutments that held up the girders carrying the track. One by one he reloaded the barrels by dead weight
sucked out of the abutment and let it run into the containers on the truck. Again the truck  body  settled
groaning on its springs.
"I'm working on a way to meter this flow more accurately," said Elmer with a grin. "The last load out here
Peavy  squawked  like  everything  because  the  stuff  was  light.  This  time  I'll  give  him  good  measure.
Nobody ever kicks at getting more pounds than he paid for."
Well, there it was--Elmer's  stunt full cycle.  No  wonder  his gas  and  tire costs  were  less  than anybody
else's in the business,  or  that he could  set  out on a  long trip with an impossible load.  He  had  only to
reduce the load to zero, using part of it for power, and replenish it at the other end of the line.
We went on to Peavy's, using the wheezy gasoline motor again. No one at the store saw anything amiss
when we drove up, and though Peavy was careful to roll each box and drum onto the scale, he made no
comment when he found them markedly overweight.  He  probably  figured it was  only justice  from the
short-changing he had had on the delivery before, and on which the oil company had been adamant as to
adjustment. Elmer then picked up some empty drums and we started back.
The rain was coming down hard by then, and when we got to the underpass there were several inches of
water in it. Elmer stopped long enough to draw off a few more hundred pounds of avoirdupois into one
of the empty drums so as to have power for the trip home. He said it was the best place along his route
to get needed weight in a hurry. We started up, but had not gone more than about a hundred yards when
we heard a terrific swoosh behind us, and on the heels of it a resounding metallic crash and the scream of
shearing metal. The ground shook, and a wave of muddy water swept along the road  from behind and
passed us, gurgling among the wheel spokes.
"What on earth?" yelled Elmer, and stopped the car.

What was  behind us was  not pretty  to  see.  The concrete  abutment we  had  just left had  slid from  its
foundation straight across the road until it almost impinged on its opposite mate. What had been the earth
fill behind it was a mass of sprawling semi-liquid mud. Sodden by days of rain and heavy with water, the
fill had come to act like water behind a dam and simply pushed along the line of least resistance. The now
practically weightless retaining wall gave way, since there was only friction to hold it where it should be.
The two  great  black  steel  girders  that it supported  lay at  an awkward  angle half in the pit where  the
underpass had been, half sticking up into the air.
"Gosh," said Elmer, gazing at the spectacle. "Do you suppose I did that?"
"I'm afraid you did," I said. "Maybe concrete don't need weight for strength, but it has to have something
to hold it down."
Well, the damage was done, and Elmer was scared. A train was due soon and something had to be done
about it. So we drove on to the first farmhouse that had a phone and sent in word about a washout. After
that we went on home, Elmer being pretty chastened.
The days that followed were quite hectic. The more the railroad and public utility commission engineers
studied the retaining wall's failure, the more baffled they became. The abutment itself was unmarred in the
least degree. There was not a crack in it, and  only a  few chipped  places  where  the falling girders  had
knocked corners off. Experts chiseled chunks out of it and took them to dozens of engineering labs. The
records of the contracting firm that built it were overhauled. The wall was  up to  specifications  and  had
been thoroughly inspected at  the time of construction.  The fragments subjected  to  strains  and  stresses
reacted as they should, having exactly the tensile and compression strength it should have. The mix was
right, the ingredients without flaw. The hitch was  that  the stuff under  examination had  about  the same
weight as an equal volume of balsa wood!
Learned treatises began to appear in the engineering journals under such titles as, "Weight Loss in Mature
Concretes," "Extraordinary Deterioration Noted in Failure of Concrete  Railway Abutment," and  so  on.
Throughout the whole strange controversy Elmer never peeped, and neither did I. I kept silent for several
reasons, and only one of them was the fact that I had given Elmer my pledge not to divulge his invention
before he gave the word. Mainly I felt that whatever I might tell them would be received as too ridiculous
to be believed. After all, people just don't go around sapping idle weight from stationary objects.
The sequel to the incident has to remain obscure. The very ride that let me into the secret proved also to
be the cause of my being excluded from it thereafter. I caught a cold that day, and before long it turned
into pneumonia. Complications followed, and there were some months when I was confined to a hospital
bed. When I was out again and  around,  my neighbor Elmer had  gone,  presumably in search  of wider
fields.
It is a pity that Elmer's unfortunate experience with his earlier invention soured him on the usual channels
of development, for I think what happened to him later was that he got into the hands  of unscrupulous
promoters.  For  quite a  long time after  the collapse  of the  railroad  crossing  I  heard  nothing  of  Elmer
himself or his world-shaking discovery. But little bits of news kept cropping up that indicated to me that
while Elmer's secret was being kept, it was not getting rusty from disuse, though he lacked the necessary
business imagination ever to put it to its best uses.
There was the phenomenal success of Trans-America Trucking, for example. It was significant to me that
the Eastern terminus of its main haul was  laid out in the bottom  of an abandoned  rock  quarry  and  its
Pacific end  in a  deep  canyon.  I thought I knew  where  the power  came  from,  especially  when  an  oil
salesman told me he had tried hard to  get the Trans-American  contract.  They not only refused  to  buy
from  him,  but  he  could  not  find  out  what  company,  if  any,  was  supplying  them.  I  also  noted  that

Trans-America was continually embroiled in lawsuits arising from discrepancies in weights. I knew from
that that Elmer had not yet solved the problem of metering his weight siphons.
There were other straws that pointed to Elmer's fine hand. Highway engineers along the routes traversed
chiefly by his trucks discovered after a time that even the dirt roads  over  which the trucks  ran needed
little or no binder. The surface soil was found to be incredibly heavy, like powdered lead, and therefore
did not dust away under high-speed traffic. In the course of time it became as hard and compact as the
floor of a machine shop where iron chips form the soil.
But eventually there  was  trouble.  Disloyal  employees  must  have  stolen  lengths  of  Elmer's  mysterious
graviton conductor, for there was a story told in some glee of a policeman giving chase to a fleeing man
who had  a  big  iron  safe  on  his  shoulders!  The  burglar  got  away,  so  for  a  time  Elmer's  secret  was
comparatively safe. And then there was the exposure of what was later known as the spud racket.
One  of  Trans-America's  ex-truckmen,  being  aware  that  potatoes  were  sold  by  the  pound,  saw
opportunity. He absconded with a length of Elmer's cable and set himself up in the potato business. He
was modest at first. The spuds he handled were overweight, but not too much too heavy when he resold
them. The dietitians in the big institutions were the first to notice something wrong, for they had analysts to
interpret the figures. But greed got the best of the gangster truckman. Not content with his initial ten or
twenty  percent  boosts  in  weight,  he  poured  on  the  avoirdupois  thicker  and  thicker.  The  average
housewife began to complain that big potatoes required all her strength to lift.
The day the market inspectors raided the man's storehouse the cat was out of the bag. They uncovered
an endless stream of potatoes on a conveyor belt that ran by a bin filled with scrap iron. As each  spud
passed  a  certain  point it was  wiped  by a  wisp of  mineral  wool,  whereupon  the  belt  beneath  sagged
deeply and spilled the potatoes onto the floor. Cranes scooped them up and carried them to the packing
department.
The subsequent prosecution ran into myriad legal difficulties. There was ample precedent for dealing with
short weights, but none for artificially added surplus weight. Chemists sought to prove, once they tumbled
to  the  concept  of  movable  gravitons,  that  the  introduction  of  ferrous  gravitons  into  a  food  product
constituted a willful adulteration. They failed. The composition of the potatoes was no more altered than
is that of iron when temporarily magnetized. In the end the case  was  thrown out of court,  much to  the
anger of some theologians who had also developed an interest in the case.
That there was at once a spate of laws forbidding the alteration of natural weights was inevitable. State
after  state  enacted  them,  and  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  began  an  investigation  of
Trans-America Trucking, damaging admissions having been  made  by the potato  racketeer.  It  was  the
collapse  of one  of the cliffs at  the western  terminus of that  company  that  was  the straw  to  break  the
camel's back. Weight shifting became a federal offense with drastic penalties.
Perhaps collapse is a badly chosen word. The cliff disintegrated, but it did not fall. It soared.
It happened late one afternoon shortly after a heavy convoy arrived from the east. Thousands of tons of
weight had to be made up, and the power units of the incoming trucks recharged with still more weight.
The already lightened cliff yielded up its last pounds, for it had been drawn upon heavily for a long time.
Its stone, being loosely stratified,  lacked  cohesion,  so  with sound  effects  rivaling those  of the siege of
Stalingrad, it fell apart--upward--in a cloud of dust and boulders. The fragments, though stone, weighed
virtually nothing, rose like balloons and were soon dispersed by the winds.
Unfortunately the canyon was not far from the most traveled  transcontinental  air route.  Within an hour
pilots were reporting seeing what they described as inert bodies floating in the upper air. One of them ran

into a stone no bigger than his fist, but since he was making several hundred miles an hour at the time, it
neatly demolished one  of his wings. That night two  stratoliners  were  brought  down,  both  riddled  with
imponderable  gravel. The debris  while lighter than  air,  still  had  some  residual  weight  and  unimpaired
tensile strength.
Congress intervened. Trans-America's charter was voided and its equipment confiscated and destroyed.
Elmer was  forbidden  to  resume business  except  on orthodox  lines. There  was  no place  in the United
States for his invention.
That should have been the end of the Theory of Gravitics and its unhappy applications.  But it was  not.
For Elmer had associates by that time who had tasted the luxury of sure and easy profits, and they were
not to  be  denied.  Rumor had  it  that  it  was  his  shady  partners  who  took  over  the  financial  end  and
relegated him to his lab again to hunt for other means of utilizing his kineticizer. However that may be, the
next stage was several years in incubation. For a time gravitons ceased  to  be  news  except  in scientific
circles where controversies pro and con still raged. People had already begun to forget when Caribbean
Power announced itself to the world.
It started operating from a tiny island republic known as Cangrejo Key. Through oversight, or because it
was a  worthless  patch  of coral  sand  frequently swept  by hurricanes,  mention of it was  omitted in the
treaty between the United States and Spain at the end of the war of 1998. It was still Spanish  until the
graviton syndicate bought it from an impoverished Franco for a few millions in real gold. Whereupon the
Cangrejo Commonwealth was set up as an independent state and a law to itself.
By then they had  one  valuable addition to  their bag  of tricks--Elmer's  third  great  invention.  It  was  a
transmitter of beamed radio electric power, and they promptly entered into contracts with large industries
in nearby America for the sale of unlimited broadcast power at ridiculously low rates.  At first the great
maritime powers protested, suspecting what was afoot and fearing the incalculable effects on shipping if
Caribbean  Power  meant to  rob  the sea  of its weight. But the storm  subsided  when the  new  republic
assured them sea water would not be touched. They pledged themselves to draw only from the potential
energy  of  the  island  they  owned.  So  the  world  settled  down  and  forgot  its  fears.  No  matter  what
happened to Cangrejo Key, there was the promise of abundant cheap power, and at the worst one coral
islet more or less did not matter. Even if its sands did float off into the sky as had the canyon wall on the
Pacific Coast they could do little harm, the Key being well off the air lanes.
It was a premature hope, for they reckoned without the ingenuity of the men behind the scheme.  Soon
great derricks reared themselves on the Key and drills began biting their way into the earth. By the time
the holes reached eight miles depth the transmission towers were built and ready. Then came the flow of
power, immense and  seemingly inexhaustible. A battery  of kineticizer-dynamos  commenced  operating,
suspended by cables deep into the bowels of the planet,  converting the weight that  was  overhead  into
kilowatts which were  sent  up to  the surface  through copper  wires.  There  it was  converted  into  radio
power waves and broadcast out to the customers. It was good, clean power. Industry was grateful.
How deep the syndicate eventually sunk its shafts no one ever knew. Nor how many millions of tons of
earth weight were converted into electric energy and spewed out to the factories of the world. But it took
only a few years for the project to revolutionize modern economics. With power literally as cheap as air,
coal holdings became worthless and petroleum nearly so.  In the heyday of the power  boom  cities like
New York went so far as to install outdoor heating units so that in the coldest of cold waves its citizens
could still stroll about without overcoats. There was no point in conservation any more. Old Terra Firma
had gravitons; to burn.
The  beginning  of  the  payoff  came  with  the  Nassau  disaster.  The  town  was  flattened  by  a  mighty
earthquake, and the attendant tidal wave  left little of the Florida  coastal  cities.  When the tremors  died

down the British Empire found it had  added  another  island of  near  continental  size  to  its  realm.  The
Bahama Bank had risen above water and then stood from ten to fifty feet above sea level throughout. But
there  was  a  rider  attached  to  that  dubious  blessing.  The  bed  of  the  Florida  Straits  had  risen
correspondingly  and  the current  of the Gulf Stream  diminished. Europeans  began  to  worry  about  the
effect of that upon their climate.
Isostatic adjustment  was  responsible,  sober  geologists warned  darkly.  Let  the Caribbean  Power  gang
continue  to  rob  that  region  of  its  proper  weight  there  would  be  nothing  to  hold  it  down.  Adjacent
geographical masses would push in to fill the vacuum, just as  the underlying, restless,  semifluid magma
would push up.  The time would soon  come  when mountains rivaling the Himalayas  would  rear  loftily
where the Bahama Bank had been  and  when that  day  came  the other  islands about  it and  the nearby
continental areas might well be only shoal spots in a shallowing sea. The Republic of Cangrejo had to go.
It was a matter for the new United Nations Court to decide.
Well, that's the story of Elmer Nicklheim's kineticizer as I know it. I am still wondering whether he was
with the gang the day the bombers came over and blasted Caribbean Power  off the map.  If he was,  I
think he must have been a prisoner, for the gang he at last teamed up with turned out to be an arrogant,
greedy lot.
THE END

