GO TO Project Gutenberg of Australia HOME PAGE
Title: Wreckers of the Star Patrol
Author: Malcolm Jameson
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0608391h.html
Language: English
Date first posted: November 2006
Date most recently updated: November 2006
This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott
Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.
Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.
This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html
To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au
GO TO Project Gutenberg of Australia HOME PAGE
Wreckers of the Star Patrol
by
Malcolm Jameson
Chapter One VENUS--WORLD OF SLAVERY!
"WHY should I hire you?" bellowed Captain Fennery, bunching his shaggy eyebrows into a heavy scowl.
"We want no namby-pamby  sissies in the Hyperion!"  Bob  Hartwell merely flushed and  stood  a  little
straighter. If his need had not been so great, his answer to that would have been  a  straight right to  the
jaw. Moreover, he had just told the man why he was there--of his having been in command of the neat
packet,  Mary  Sue,  of  the  Venus-Tellurian  Line,  and  how  that  company  had  blown  up  and  left  him
stranded on Venus.
But he restrained himself. Distasteful as working for Stellar Transport was, it was preferable to remaining
in Venusport, broke and on the beach. An epidemic of paludal fever was sweeping the planet, and the
crimps who supplied the swamp plantations with cheap labor were taking a heavy nightly toll. He  must
get off Venus at any cost.
There was an unexpected diversion, The Hyperion's second mate, a cadaverous individual of sour  and
spiteful mien, chose the moment to pluck his skipper's sleeve. Then he leaned over and whispered slyly in

his ear. The captain shrugged his shoulders, but the mate kept  on talking, smiling crookedly  as  he did.
Presently Fennery lifted his eyes and fixed them on the young man before him with some glint of growing
interest.
"Umph,  may  be  so,"  he  grunted,  pushing  the  mate  away.  "I'll  think  on  the  matter."  Then,  regarding
Hartwell with a curiously disturbing air of hard  appraisal,  he said  to  him, "Come back  tomorrow  with
your duds and papers. I may be able to use you as a first after all."
"Thanks," said Hartwell briefly, and strode out of the ship.
The Stellar outfit had a bad reputation, but it was his only means of escaping the plague or  slavery.  He
would gladly have shipped as quartermaster--or even an ALB--to get to another  planet.  To  go as  first
mate was something he had not had the optimism to hope for.
So he walked with a lighter heart away from the rusty and battered old tub that lay in her launching skids,
and crossed the saggy sky port to the portmaster's office where he had left his master's certificate and his
dunnage.
"You're  crazy--stark,  raving  crazy,"  snorted  that  official,  a  grizzled  veteran  of  the  spaceways  whom
Hartwell had known for a long time. "The Stellar is a gyp gang and always will be. You'd better chance
the fever and the swamp crimps and wait for something safer.  I never  knew  'em to  hire a  decent  man
except to use him as a goat. You may come out of it with your life, but you can bet your last button that
you won't come out of it with your reputation."
"I can take care of myself," said Bob Hartwell a little stiffly. He knew that every word his old friend had
said was gospel, but then...
"Have you looked over that Hyperion?" stormed the portmaster. "She's hung together with paper clips,
sealing wax and baling wire! The underwriters' inspector just certified her for the voyage to Mars, but I'm
thinking he's the richer man today on that account--not that his employers know it."
"I've looked at her," said Hartwell, still defensive.  "Sure,  she's  no yacht.  But if she  stays  together  long
enough for me to get to Mars, that's good enough for me.'
"But the chow, man!" exploded the other. "It's condemned Patrol stores. Even the officers have to pick
the weevils out.  And speaking  of officers,  that  Fennery  and  his mate Quorquel  are  a  disgrace  to  the
skylanes. Fennery is a bulldozing old sundowner  and  Quorquel's  a  slimy, conniving trickster.  The only
officer on the tub worth a tinker's damn is the first--hey! Didn't you say you were going as first? They've
got a first mate!"
"I dunno," replied Hartwell, uncertainly. "All he said was 'maybe'."
"Watch  it,  son,"  was  the  portmaster's  last  warning.  Then  he  shut  up  and  put  his  endorsement  on
Hartwell's papers.  Fools  came  and  fools went.  If  a  man  ignored  good  advice,  there  was  nothing  an
oldtimer could do.
When Bob Hartwell reached the Hyperion's berth the next day, after a night of hectic dreams, he noted
that her tubes were hot and that her cargo ports  were  shut and  sealed.  The ground crew  were  getting
clear of the searing blasts to come, but before the entry port stood Captain Fennery and beside him the
portmaster with a sheaf of papers.
"Glad  to  see  you,  Hartwell,"  said  Captain  Fennery  with  surprising  cordiality.  "We're  being  withheld
clearance for the lack of a first mate. Our Mr. Owsley indiscreetly got into a brawl with some natives in a

tavern last night. The gendarmes picked him up this morning with a cut throat. Will you sign the articles
quickly, please, so this gentleman will let us clear?"
The shocking news of the demise of his predecessor gave Hartwell pause, for it was confirmation of the
gloomy predictions made the day before by the friendly portmaster.  It  matched  the foreboding  dreams
that had kept him tossing throughout the hot, dank night. The most ominous aspect of it was that Fennery
himself--perhaps Quorquel--had  foreknowledge  of it. Or  else  what did,  "Come back  tomorrow--may
need a first mean otherwise?"
Had Owsley's death been arranged?
But Hartwell was reluctant to back out now. He had scoffed away good advice and disregarded his own
better  judgment. It  was  also  not his habit to  back  out  of  commitments.  So  he  lost  but  a  moment  in
darkling consideration, then reached for the articles and signed.
A miserable specimen of the dock-rats that the Stellar Transport hired for crews was already carrying his
belongings  on  board,  and  the  klaxons  for  the  take-off  were  screaming.  He  hurriedly  shook  the
portmaster's hand, then ran into the entry port.
Once the ship was up and away, and the fleecy ball that was Venus began fading to a small bright disk
astern, his misgivings began to leave him. Captain Fennery, though gruff and taciturn, made no attempt to
ride him, and  the odious  Quorquel  took  out his quite obvious  personal  dislike in half-hidden,  taunting
sneers. The only other officer was the engineer--one Larsen--who kept surlily to himself, as if making the
best  of a  dirty job  that could  not be  evaded,  wanting neither blame  nor  sympathy.  As  for  the  crew,
Hartwell ignored them--they were the scum of the skyports of a score of planetoids. He did pick up the
trick of accompanying his orders with a slug to the jaw or a pointed thrust of a booted foot; that was the
way the sullen slaves of Stellar expected to be handled.
The tubes of the Hyperion were worn. At intervals one of the super-chargers would choice up and die,
requiring cleaning out and repriming, but the old tub plodded on. He was amazed to see the ancient Mark
I geodesic  integrator  still in use,  but on trying it  found  its  clumsy  machinery  workable  and  amazingly
accurate.  That uncouth sky-dog  Fennery  was  a  good  astragator,  too,  he  learned,  as  he  checked  the
trajectory when shiny blue Tellus was abeam. They would reach Mars, all right, with their cheap freight
load of Venusian teak  and  kegs  of Attar  of Loridol.  And should they not,  there  was  a  well-equipped
lifeboat with places for all the officers and men stowed in a blister-like compartment on the roof plate.
The Hyperion was not so hard to take.
At that, Bob Hartwell did not like the ship or anyone in her. He had already made up his mind to jump
her as soon as cargo was discharged. Surely Fennery would not object, for in the dives of Ares City he
could find scores of jobless mates more congenial to his ship's way of life. But object or not, his newest
officer's  mind  was  made  up.  Despite  his  frequent  self-assurances  to  the  contrary,  he  could  not
permanently down the presentment that something sinister was in the brewing.
Hartwell's mind was made up--yes.
But the plans of men do not always come to fruition; the Fates take a hand.
Thirty hours  before  they  were  due  to  land  on  Mars,  Captain  Fennery  came  bursting  into  his  room,
glowing with pleasure. He had an ethergram in his hand.  Hartwell was  off watch,  since it was  he who
would have to dock her, but he sat up to hear the news. It was good news for him as well as Fennery.
Stellar Transport was dropping him from its service--there would be no trouble about it after all!

"It's this way," explained the captain, showing extraordinary excitement for a  man so  blunt and  cynical.
"The company has decided this ship is not worth refitting, so they are disposing of her. They have their
eye on one now lying at Mars and mean to buy it if my report of her condition is satisfactory. I'm to have
command of her and I intend to take Quorquel and this crew with me as a unit. I'm sorry to have to leave
you out, but the higher-ups have already promised the new first's job to one of their old hands. But never
fear--I'll see that you have a berth in due time."
Hartwell  could  only  blink.  Had  Stellar's  vile  reputation  all  this  time  been  nothing  but  rumor?  And
Fennery's? Why, he couldn't have planned better himself!
The Hyperion was going to the junkpile, where she belonged--would probably be towed to one of the
Scrappo asteroids where derelicts and other tough old bulks were dumped. And he was getting put out
of the company with a commendation instead of the usual kick and curse. He grinned as he thought of the
letter he was going to write that portmaster on Venus.
But the skipper hadn't finished with his news.
"I've got to  keep  you on the rolls for a  week  or  so,  though," Fennery  was  saying. "They want me to
inspect that new ship, but I've got too much else to do. You know ships, so I'm sending you. She's lying
at Moloch--that's about two hundred miles from Ares, in the Western Desert. You'll have to go by camel
train, as there is a strike on among the 'coptor pilots, but you can telegraph back what you think. By the
time you get back I'll have disposed of this ship and cargo and have a berth waiting for you."
"Thanks," said Bob Hartwell, wondering if miracles would ever cease.
The  captain's  apparent  personal  interest  and  the  line's  generosity  were  so  out  of  keeping  with  the
standard practice of even the well-run lines, that he could not help a twinge of suspicion as to what it was
all about. It was strange that the Stellar people would buy, sight unseen, an old ship on the say-so of a
one-voyage mate. It was stranger that a thug like Fennery would lift a hand to help any man.
And what of Quorquel, always flitting about in the background with his contemptuous sneer and crooked
smile?
But try as he might, Hartwell could not dope out how they could hook him. So, once on Mars, he made
the hard overland journey to Moloch and went over the Wanderer  carefully. She  was  sound  and  well
found. He reported so, taking great care to include her minor defects.  She  was  far from new,  but she
would be a vast improvement over the sluggish Hyperion. Thus, he reported her, and recommended her
purchase. Then he took the windy, sandy trail back to Ares.
It was at the skyport that the utmost in miracles occurred. Once more he approached the Hyperion  as
she lay in a launching cradle, and again her tubes glowed  and  smoke  curled  idly from them. Again her
cargo-ports  were  closed  and  sealed  for a  voyage,  and  again Captain  Fennery  stood  anxiously  at  her
entry port alongside the local portmaster with clearance papers in his hand.  Obviously she  was  waiting
for some final matter  to  be  cleared  up and  then she  would soar.  Then he quickened  his pace.  All his
belongings but the clothes he wore were aboard!
"Figured you'd  arrive about  now," drawled  Fennery,  sticking out  the  glad  hand  that  Hartwell  heartily
distrusted, "so everything's ready."
"What do you mean, ready?" Hartwell asked, puzzled. He had understood the Hyperion  was  to  go to
the junk pile.
"Loaded, provisioned, fueled, cargo and crew on board, certified and itching to go," answered Fennery.

"She's been sold to the Trans-Asteroid Haulage Corporation. All she's waiting for is her skipper."
"So what?" demanded Hartwell. "I want my clothes! He'll have to hold off until I get them out."
"Hey,  don't  you  understand?"  laughed  Fennery,  with  a  bluff  slap  on  the  back.  "She's  had  an
overhaul--she's staying in service--they wanted a skipper that knew her. I recommended you. You're the
captain of the Hyperion!"
"I'm damned," said Bob Hartwell, softly.
Chapter Two PROMOTION TO--SABOTAGE!
HE WAS damned, but not in the way he meant. All the alarm bells in his nervous system began jangling,
warning as Fennery held out a paper for him to sign. It was a receipt for the Hyperion, in good repair,
fully loaded and cleared for the void. Fennery insisted it was but a formality.
"Sure," said Hartwell shortly, and brushed by into the port. He wanted to have a look around before he
signed anything. Things might be all right. Or they might not.
He hurried first to the tube room. It had been repaired, as Fennery had said. Three of the main driving
tubes had new liners and  injectors.  The brightwork  had  been  shined and  there  was  fresh paint on the
bulkheads.
It was the same way in the control room, where fresh star  charts  took  the place  of the dog-eared  old
ones. Hartwell examined the log, saw that there were two thousand tons of scrondium pentaluminate in
the holds and provisions and fuel had been brought aboard. The invoice for the cargo hung on a hook, as
did the receipts for the provisions. Everything was regular.
"I even did this for you," said Fennery, who had followed him in and  was  watching his inspection with
satisfaction. He held out a paper. "Here's your trajectory, worked out as of five o'clock today. Callisto is
your destination, and this course skips all the asteroids in between--providing you leave on the hour."
"Uh-huh," mumbled Hartwell, taking the figures. His head was swirling.
On the face of it everything was  all right. His quick  eye  had  checked  it in many ways  during his swift
inspection. When he saw that scrondium pentaluminate was the cargo,  he had  glanced  automatically at
the holds' pressure gauges.  They stood  at  two  atmospheres--adequate  to  keep  the volatile compound
from evaporating. That was added evidence that the pentaluminate was actually in the sealed  holds,  for
no one would have built up such a pressure for ordinary cargo.
Yet seals could be faked and invoices forged. He wondered.
"What's the tearing hurry?" he demanded, facing Fennery suddenly.
"Bonus--bonus and penalties, that's all," said he. "The Callisto refinery wants this stuff now. If it's there by
the fourteenth, swell. If it's there  before  the fourteenth,  you get a  bonus  of so  much a  day.  If it's  late,
there'll be hell to pay, because there is a penalty for everyday lost over schedule. Trans-Asteroid had the
chance and snapped it up.  All they lacked  was  a  captain  familiar with the handling of the ship. That's
you."
Hartwell was  still regarding him dubiously. It  lacked  but  a  few  minutes  of  five  o'clock  and  he  knew
standard running times to Callisto well enough to know that if he didn't start then they'd never be there on
time.

"Suit  yourself,"  said  Fennery,  indifferently,  half-turning,  as  if  to  go.  "I  thought  I  was  doing  you  a
favor--now you can go to hell. Trans-Asteroid isn't going to be tickled at being let down like this, and it
isn't going to keep mum about it. You can pack your bag and get out of here and hunt your own job. As
for me, I'm through--through with this bucket and through with you!"
"Wait," called Hartwell, as the stocky captain strode toward the port, "I'll take it and--well, thanks."
Fennery grunted, shook hands limply and went out. In his pocket he had Hartwell's signed receipt for the
ship and contents.
Hartwell stared at his retreating back in a daze. He couldn't be sure whether he had been befriended, or
high-pressured into making a sucker of himself. All the lurid stories  of Stellar's  practices  and  Fennery's
slipperiness again flashed before his mind. Yet he had no personal grievance against company or man.
Moreover, he had signed the papers.
He snapped out of it. If there was deviltry afoot, he would have time to sniff it out before he entered the
danger zone of the little planetoids. His new mates, all strangers, stood by, awaiting orders. They looked
reasonably competent, and the Crew was at least no worse than the hands Fennery had taken with him.
"Take the void!" yelled Hartwell, really glad to have a command under his feet again, even if it was only
the lowly, painted-up Hyperion.
The port clanged shut, the rockets swelled and roared and then came the savage lurch as the ship began
to climb. Hartwell clung to the acceleration resistorstraps and watched his gauges with a critical eye. She
was going up very smartly, faster than he had thought she would. She handled  as  daintily as  if she  had
been in ballast.
He frowned at that thought, but then remembered the three new tubes and accessories. Of course! She
would feel light.
The moment they were clear of Mars, Hartwell hastened to check the course handed him by Fennery, for
the responsibility for safe navigation was his, not the former captain's. He checked it both  by integrator
and by hand.  It  was  a  good  trajectory.  Any fears  he might have had  that  it was  a  trick  to  crash  him
against an asteroid vanished. Moreover, it was  the shortest  possible  curve  on which to  reach  Callisto,
and would hit its destination smack on the nose two days before the deadline.
A more  minute inspection of the ship itself uncovered  nothing to  give  concern.  As  he  suspected,  the
so-called repairs were  largely superficial, but there  was  no evidence  of sabotage,  or  anywhere  a  time
bomb could be planted and not be discovered. The better things looked, the more he was mystified. He
would  have  actually  felt  relieved  if  he  could  have  found  some  deviltry  that  would  explain  Fennery's
geniality.
However, he soon found other grounds for suspicion and worry--his officers and crew.
They were a disgruntled, grousing lot, all former employees of the Stellar Company, and they whispered
much among themselves. He also observed that when he looked at one unexpectedly, he was quite likely
to find the man regarding him with a sneer--a sneer  that  was  always instantly erased.  It  was  as  if they
regarded Hartwell as the fall-guy for some  trick  so  obvious  that  no capable  man would fall for it. He
learned,  too,  that  all  had  excellent  and  imperative  reasons  for  wanting  to  get  out  of  Mars--mostly
concerning the police.
THEY were  well past  the asteroid  belt when the first overt  act  of the crew  came  to  his  attention.  In

prowling about  looking for trouble,  Hartwell  happened  into  the  compartment  where  the  lifeboat  was
stowed. To his surprise, he found his second mate and a working party of four men busily stocking it with
extra water, air-flasks, and provisions. It was not a thing he had ordered.
"What's going on here?" he demanded.
"Seeing the boat's ready, that's all," answered the mate, sullenly.
"For what?" asked Hartwell, angrily, choosing for the moment to overlook the omission of the "sir." He
had discovered days before that Fennery had either left him no blaster, or else the crew had concealed it
before he came on board.
"For anything," answered the mate.
"It's an old Stellar custom."
"Knock it off," said Hartwell, hotly. "You're working for Trans-Asteroid now."
The mate laughed. "Hear that?" he said to the men, who were standing by, grinning. "We're working for
Trans-Asteroid! Well, well, what a difference!"
A crunching blow to the jaw sent him sprawling, and the first of the three  men who leaped  at  Hartwell
was promptly jarred up against the far bulkhead and promptly went to sleep. The others decided to leave
things as they were. "Pick 'em up and carry 'em down to their bunks," said  Hartwell harshly, and  went
below.
There was no aftermath to that incident, but Hartwell was all on edge again.
He took down his almanacs and planetary tables and began checking the terminal spiral segment of his
trajectory, with utmost attention to the time factor. Again everything seemed perfect--all but one item.
He discovered that their course would intersect the orbit of Hebe--the outermost of Jupiter's satellites--at
exactly the moment when the little forty-mile lump of iron would arrive at the same spot.
He might have changed course then and  there,  but he refrained.  A footnote  regarding Hebe  remarked
that the planetoid was erratic in its motions due to the perturbations caused by its bigger sisters, and that
the values given in the tables must be used with discretion. That bit of information made the advisability of
changing course too soon a risky business, for he had no idea whether Hebe would be late, early, or on
time at the rendezvous. And since she was so small, the change of course could be made long after she
had been sighted.
Hebe came into plain view the very next day, and Hartwell began  an intense study of her.  After about
four  hours  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  she  was  slightly  behind  her  schedule  and  that  he  would
probably pass the point of collision before she arrived. He could have made certain of it by going ahead
then on his main driving tubes, but since he was far into his deceleration for the planetfall on Callisto, he
wanted to avoid adding momentum if he could. It would be better to wait until they were closer. Then a
touch of a steering jet would throw the ship one way or the other, as needed.
He slept for four hours, for after entering the Jovian System he would dare sleep no longer, cluttered up
as  it  was  with  minor  moons  so  insignificant  as  not  to  be  charted.  When  he  woke,  he  saw  that  his
predictions as to the position of Hebe were correct. Or almost, for she was  on his port  bow  and  very
slowly drawing aft. He computed that the only collision danger was with her forward edge. A brief blast
ahead, accompanied by a brief blast to port, would kick him ahead and to the right. The resulting delay
would be insignificant.

"Blow main tubes--full speed forward!" he ordered.
They were cold and took longer than they should. But at length they sputtered into full blast and the ship
began to gather more way. But the delay meant more of a turn to the right, so he yelled:
"Turn right--full power!"
"Aye," grumbled the mate at the control board. He pressed a stud. For a moment there was no response;
then  the  shudder  of  the  ship  told  that  a  wing  tube  had  fired.  Hartwell  was  watching  the  on  rolling
planetoid closely, waiting for the ship's inertia to be overcome  and  to  see  the image drop  away  as  the
ship's nose veered off to the right.
Hartwell sucked in his breath  with a  horrified gasp.  The ship was  beginning to  swing all right, but the
wrong way. Her bow was crawling slowly to port. Hebe was dead ahead!
The onrolling lump of iron would be  at  the intersection  just when the Hyperion  would.  The ship was
diving straight for her middle at full throttle!
"Right, I said, damn you!" shouted Hartwell.
"Right she is--right deflector jetting full," echoed the mate, half rising and staring at the visiscreen. Then he
screamed and jabbed  the general alarm, and  before  Hartwell could  grab  him, he ran out of the room
yelling, "Abandon ship--collision!"
Hartwell sprang to the board, for there was still ample time to reverse the error. But jab as he would at
the control buttons, there was no response. The crew had fled their stations as one man.
He muttered a curse and ran after the last of the echoing footsteps. He could not possibly handle the ship
alone, and since she was doomed, he did not mean to  die with her.  He  wanted  very earnestly  to  stay
alive and find out why this thing had been done to him.
By the time he reached the lifeboat its tubes were glowing and the panel that closed the compartment was
beginning to open to the outside. He just had time to squeeze in behind the last man and get into the boat.
He thrust the intervening men aside, yanked the first mate from the controls, hurled him behind him. Then
he seated himself and launched the boat with a grim face.
It shot clear, and that first lashing blast blew it ten miles before he managed to set it into a rough orbit of
comparative safety. It was  not until then that  he had  time to  glance at  the vessel  he had  just left. The
Hyperion was in a screaming full-power dive--or what would have been a  screaming one  if Hebe  had
had air to shrill the scream. She struck, and on the instant disappeared as a puff of vivid green flame.
He despairingly circled the tiny planet once, passing over the spot where the ship had died.
All  that  was  to  be  seen  were  acres  of  glittering  metal  fragments.  Of  the  two  thousand  tons  of
pentaluminate there  was  not a  trace.  There  could  not have been  for the crystals  would have flown to
powder at the impact, and being under zero pressure, would have volatilized into nothingness in seconds.
Chapter Three COLD-WORLD CONQUEST
BOB HARTWELL languished for three bleak months in Ionopolis' jail. He was fettered with chains, such
being the barbarous custom of the harsh Ionians--descendants of Terrestrial adventurers and  deportees
of three centuries before.
A roving Ionian patrol vessel had witnessed the premature abandonment of the Hyperion and her crash.

Within the hour they had picked up the boat, questioned its crew, and brought them all to  Io.  Hartwell
could learn nothing more except that he was being held on the charge of barratry.
In due time the day of the trial came. It would be unfair to  call the trial a  farce,  since the judges  were
upright men who conducted the proceedings  with dignity. But Hartwell knew  before  it started  that  the
cards were stacked against him. All parties to it were hostile to him, and he learned, to his dismay, that
the one chance he might have had--cross-examination of the witnesses--had been lost. The members of
the crew,  pleading that they were  under  the necessity  of making  a  living,  had  been  allowed  to  leave
depositions and  depart.  Their stories  had  agreed  in every  detail.  By now they were  scattered  far and
wide.
The further things proceeded, the more apparent was the deadly dilemma Hartwell found himself facing.
For the prosecution was aimed not at him, but over him. A battle of giants was raging, in which he was
but a  miserable pawn.  Counsel  for the Interplanetary  Underwriters  tried  vigorously  to  prove  that  the
destruction of the Hyperion had  been  planned  and  ordered  by Stellar--who,  it developed,  owned  the
dummy company which was the beneficiary of vast sums of insurance on the wreck.
Stellar, on the contrary, claimed they were lily white. Their error, if any, was  in hiring a  man who later
proved to be incompetent.
Fennery  and  Quorquel,  who  had  just  a  second  load  of  scrondium  pentaluminate  to  Callisto  in  their
Wanderer, testified to Hartwell's "passably good" performance on the trip from Venus,  but added  that
they recommended  him to  replace  them solely because  the ship had  to  leave  and  they  could  find  no
better. They regretted it now, but that was the way it was.
That was it. Hartwell had the hard choice of being declared incompetent or criminal. If the former, Stellar
collected--if the latter, I.U. won.
Stellar won, for the I.U. man was unable to produce a scintilla of testimony showing collusion or unlawful
intent. The statements left by the crew were unanimous that Hartwell got rattled when he saw Hebe loom
up before him; gave conflicting orders, and then precipitately fled the ship.
In the end,  Hartwell was  allowed  to  tell his  own  story.  The  judges  heard  him  out  and,  after  a  brief
retirement, rendered the decision. They must have been impressed by his bearing, for they did not order
his license cancelled.  The ship was  lost,  they said,  through "bad  judgment in delaying too  late to  take
appropriate action in the face of an emergency." That was all. The case was closed, and there could be
no  appeal.  The  damning  sentence  was  endorsed  on  Hartwell's  ticket  in  red  ink.  Then  he  was
dismissed--a free man.
A free man! He walked down the marble stairs of the Tellurian Building in Ionopolis in a daze.
Free to do what--starve? Red ink on a  ticket  never  got a  man a  job.  He  walked  past  the sumptuous
office suites of the Tellurian Legation without noticing them, out into the dim-lit street  of  the  city.  He
walked to the jail and retrieved the small amount of money that happened to be in his pockets when the
crash occurred. It was all he had. After that he found a cheap lodging house near the skyport and slept
on a bed of sorts for the first time in many nights.
The events of the next day confirmed his worst fears. It was the same story everywhere. No vacancies
... sorry, we don't hire strangers. We have  men  of  our  own  waiting  on  the  bench  ...  will  let  you
know. Always a turndown, but never the real reason. It was not a command he had been asking for, or
even a first's berth, but anything. He would have gone as a quartermaster or a tubeman, and  he knew
the traffic about the Jovian planets was heavy.

Late in the afternoon,  when Io  turned  away  from great,  glowing Jupiter  and  was  lit only by the pallid
beams of the sun, he was told why he could not get a job on Io--or anywhere else, ever. It was a tough
old skydog who; told him--a man who ran an obscure hiring hall near the skyport.
"Naw," he said, "'tain't only because you did a hitch with Stellar. Er lost a ship. Both them things hev been
done before 'thout ruinin' a man. It's the I.U.'s new policy. You might ez well git wise to yourself. You're
done!"
"But once I'm back home, where people know me," protested Hartwell, "I can--"
"Nope," said the old man, "'twouldn't make not a mite of difference. I just told you I can't give you a job
as a groundcrew hand. I doubt if you could even get aboard  a  ship as  a  passenger,  if they knew  you.
You're on I.U.'s secret new blacklist. They been stuck so often and so hard they're puttin' a new clause
in all their policies. Clause 88. Says the insurance is null and void if the insured company employs a man
that has  ever  caused  the I.U.  loss-in  any  capacity.  Even if one  of your old companies  believed  your
story, you'd still be too expensive for 'em."
Hartwell stared back at the old skydog in blank astonishment, but he knew he had heard the truth. The
companies that had refused him as a tubeman in the morning had hired other tubemen in the afternoon.
All he could do was mumble his thanks and crawl back home.
The next day a cop picked him up.
Later in the day another, and another. They wanted to know what he did for a living. All  right.  Get  a
job within three days, or else. Io, it appeared, was as tough a place as Venus.
By the third day he had the job. He signed on with an agency to be a cowhand, the Ionian version of a
cattle puncher.  He  would be  taken  to  the Simpson ranch,  shown how to  ride  a  tame ochtosaur,  then
turned loose on the range to ride herd on the wild ones. At slaughtering time he would be  expected  to
help with the rendering of the smelly dragon fat and the tanning of the tough hides. The pay was nominal,
but grub and outfit were furnished. He took it in preference to the chain gang. But it was  not to  be  for
long, for his soul burned now with but a single desire--to find Fennery and strangle the truth out of him,
then go for the Stellar Transport Company.
It was for longer than he thought, for old man Simpson also  ran a  store  and  managed  to  keep  all his
employees in debt to him. But one day, as Hartwell was riding range, plodding along on the cumbersome,
eight-footed,  plated  beast  that looked  like a  drunk's  delirious dream  of  a  double-rhinoceros  with  bat
wings, he became aware of something uncanny happening overhead. He looked skyward and saw them
coming, at first by ones and  twos,  then in scores.  Strange  little craft  of the skies  that  had  no business
being there. And they were all trying frantically to get to Ionopolis, judging from the ruinous flare of their
exhausts.
Some were small inter-satellite ships and ferries, but most were tiny sky-port craft, such as tugs, yachts
and tenders.
More  amazing,  there  were  planes--planes  designed  only  for  atmosphereborne  flight,  yet  bearing  the
characteristic  markings of Callisto and  Ganymede.  He  saw  that  they had  boat  rockets  lashed  to  their
struts and guessed it was by means of those that they had spanned the void between the Jovian planets.
One flew low enough for him to see the terror in the faces of its occupants. It was a panic! What were
they fleeing from?
Presently a Callistan stratoliner got into difficulties. Its narrow wings, good enough for Callisto's  heavier

air, would not hold it up over Io. It staggered a moment, then fell fluttering groundward at  a  dangerous
speed. It struck not a mile from where he sat on his steed, cradled in the natural saddle between the och's
two wings and astride the dorsal hump. It flung its passengers  right and  left and  immediately burst  into
flames.
Hartwell flicked on his electric  goad  and  applied  the  heat  to  his  clumsy  mount's  shoulder  plate.  The
animal squalled, then flapped its bat-like wings and slowly got off the ground. In a few minutes Hartwell
had dismounted and was bending over the sole survivor of the smash. He was badly hurt and  had  little
time to live.
"Urans," the dying man gasped,  trying to  point back  to  where  they  had  come  from.  "The  Urans  are
raiding...burning, slaying, looting...warn."
That was all. The man's eyes glazed and he tried to roll over on his face. But it was enough. The Urans
had not raided in two generations, but there was  not a  man, woman or  child that  did not know  about
them. They were a non-human race, living on dark Uranus--and they were irresistible.
They were quasi-anthropoid, resembling gorillas, except that they were covered with short feathers and
had highly redeveloped brains. They had science  enough to  build spaceships  and  weapons  superior  to
man's, but they were  savages  nevertheless.  They never  attempted  to  conquer  or  colonize.  They  only
made  forays.  Two  three  times  a  century  they  would  descend  on  the  outposts  of  Saturn  or  Jupiter,
harrying and burning, carrying away  heads,  loot  and  women.  Why they took  the women alive no one
could explain, though perhaps it was for sacrificial purposes. What men they encountered they invariably
slew, and carried away their heads and skins as trophies.
Hartwell remounted with a bound. He jerked his steed about and forced it into ungainly flight. He cared
little for the Simpsons, but they were human, and there was Adele, the schoolteacher at the ranch.  She
had been  very kind to  him on the few occasions  he had  been  there.  It  was  unthinkable  that  she  fall
captive to the fiends from the outer planet. He must get there quickly.
The och he rode flew with exasperating slowness, and when he topped  the last rise,  his heart  sank.  A
stumpy black ship was just taking off, leaving behind it huge billows of smoke mushrooming up out of the
Simpson house and the hide warehouse. But there was still another on the ground, a much smaller one of
reddish color. That meant that a Uran chieftain had stayed behind for some bit of last minute loot.
Then Hartwell saw what that "loot" was. Smoke began to curl from the eaves of the schoolhouse, and out
of it stepped the huge Uran, bearing lightly in his arms the form of an unconscious woman. Adele! That
time the och jumped, for the hot goad was applied full force.
As the och fluttered panting to the ground inside the body-strewn  compound,  Bob  Hartwell was  off in
one bound, jerking his blaster out as he leaped. He knew the weapon was useless against the monster's
thick hide, but it might draw his attention.  The Uran  was  on the threshold  of his ship; in a  moment he
would be gone.
Hartwell took careful aim and  fired. The ray struck  the creature  squarely  in the back,  searing away  a
patch of feathers.
The Uran vented a howl of rage and threw his burden down, then whirled and glared about to see where
the attack had come from. He spotted Hartwell and charged, roaring, flailing his great arms. There were
weird and lethal weapons hanging to the belt he wore about his middle, but Hartwell did not expect him
to use them. The Urans gloried in their fierce strength, and preferred to clasp  their victims to  them and
with one twist of their gigantic hands wring the head from the body. So Hartwell awaited the onslaught,
armed only with a cast-off och-shoe he picked up from the ground beside him. He had tossed the useless

blaster away, since no man-devised ray could pierce the Uran hide.
The och-shoe was an iron affair, shaped much like a giant thumb-tack, only the pointed part was a spiral
screw which worked up into the animal's horny leg. The shoe proper was a disc of iron, roughly a foot in
diameter. Hartwell held it loosely behind his back until the charging foe was almost upon him. The Uran
leaped, grimacing and screaming, with outstretched arms to grasp his prey.
In that brief instant, while the monster was in mid-air, Hartwell flicked the shoe to the front and planted it
squarely on his own middle, set his stomach muscles, and tensed for the creature's  bone-cracking  grip.
He ducked just as the heavy, feathered chest hit his, and felt the wind knocked  out of him as  he went
over backward  with the steel  bands  of arms encircling him and  squeezing. For  a  moment things went
black,  and  then the Uran  ululated horribly and  Hartwell felt the icy orange  body  juice of the  monster
oozing out upon him. He had tricked the creature into doing something he had not the strength himself to
do--puncture his softest part with a shaft of twisted steel. It had been a desperate gamble--but it won!
As they rolled apart, Hartwell snatched  a  weapon  from the Uran's  belt.  The chieftain staggered  to  his
feet, clutching at his torn belly and screaming. By then Hartwell had found out how to operate the gun in
his hand, and let drive with it. There was a hissing sound, a sharp kick, and the Uran's upper half silently
disappeared. Hartwell left the still kicking legs on the ground behind him and darted toward the grounded
ship.
Another Uran poked his snout out, only to receive the fire from his dead chieftain's gun. Hartwell blasted
two more before he reached the prostrate form of Adele, but though he sprang past her and on into the
ship, he saw no more. He stood for a moment in the entry port, alert for a rush. None came. He took a
hasty look at the interior of the craft.
Uran science had developed on peculiar lines. Hartwell understood nothing he saw, except the nauseous
bin filled with human hides and heads lately torn from their owners. He saw also the piles of booty, and
selected from one of them a double handful of Saturn stones, each worth a fortune. In the emergency that
lay ahead it would be well to have at hand some instantly negotiable assets. Then he opened the spigot of
what seemed to be a drum of lubricant and let its contents flow out. He set the gummy liquid on fire, then
ran out,  caught  up  the  unconscious  Adele,  and  staggered  through  the  smoke  to  where  his  och  was
waiting. Now to get to Ionopolis--if it could be done.
It took them four days to reach the city. The clumsy och, despite all goading, stubbornly  refused  to  fly
carrying double, so the journey was at a plodding walk.
For the first two  days  of the trek,  the sky  was  full of refugee ships hurrying to  what they hoped  was
safety. Only a few Uran ships were to be seen, only the vanguard of the horde that was sure to come as
soon as they had done their vileness elsewhere. Io, it appeared, was the last place on their list.
The gates of Ionopolis were closed, and hard-faced Ionian guards turned back all but native Ionians. A
clamorous mob of Tellurians, Venusians, and Martians were begging for admission within the walls, but
the guards were obdurate. The city was jammed already. Io could look out only for her own.
Hartwell shouldered his way through the crowd, dragging Adele behind him. At last he got to the brutish
officer in charge and whispered something to him. At first he got an angry shake of the head,  but there
was a flash from hand to  hand,  and  the guard  officer became  more  civil. The exchange of the Saturn
stone had been so quickly and discreetly done that none standing by saw it. But there was a wild clamor
of indignation raised by those left behind when they saw the guard summon a subordinate and have the
lately arrived pair ushered through a small postern gate.
"Safety--for awhile, at least," breathed Hartwell, as they emerged inside.

Adele shuddered. She could not forget the horrible scene at the ranch.
They walked on, noticing that the city was  crowded.  Almost every  house  was  shuttered  up,  and  most
had signs on them saying there was no lodging or food to be had inside. Then Hartwell spied  a  soldier
tacking up a bulletin, and saw the crowd surge up behind him to read what the latest bad news was. He
left Adele at the fringe and bucked his way in until he could see for himself. As he read it, the lines of his
face tightened grimly. They had fallen out of the frying pan into the fire!
It was a proclamation by the viceroy. "Owing to the impending siege, the overcrowded condition of the
city, and the shortage of food, it was  imperative, the order  said,  for the city to  rid itself at  once  of all
non-citizens. Those  foreigners  who  could  manage  to  find  room  on  board  ships  bound  for  the  Inner
Planets were advised to  leave,  but no one  could  be  allowed  into the skyport  without an exit visa. All
other foreigners found in the city after noon tomorrow would be given their choice of the lethal chamber
or being thrust outside  to  take  their chances  with the Urans.  It  was  a  harsh  measure,  concluded  His
Excellency, but necessary. He had, however, arranged for a few 'mercy ships.'"
Hartwell backed  away.  Again he seized  Adele  by the hand,  and  hastened  forward.  The  streets  were
packed and the going hard, but they made some progress. They had to detour four blocks to get by the
Martian Embassy, for the frantic Martians were equally affected by the order, and all the ten thousand of
them were trying to get passports at once. It was a foretaste of what to expect at their own legation.
There, an even larger crowd were frantically besieging the guards to let them in, and among them many
aristocrats in their purple tunics, and bankers with their white and gold robes. Immense sums of money
were being openly offered as bribes.
It looked like a hard nut to crack, but Hartwell cracked it. He found a back door--the one he had been
taken through as a prisoner--where the crowd was small and relatively poor,  and  after  a  good  deal  of
hushed dickering was admitted. The cost was four of the precious Saturn stones.
Two  hours  later  he  and  Adele  were  ushered  into  the  office  of  the  Third  Secretary.  That  exquisite
gentleman looked  Hartwell over  insolently and  favored  Adele  with  a  similar  disdainful  look.  Hartwell
returned the look with interest. It had been this very secretary who had committed him on the day of his
arrival.
"How did you get in, you scum?" asked the secretary, in a silky voice.
"I walked in," said Hartwell, restraining himself. It was no time to display temperament. "We want visas
to Tellus. Here are our passports."
The secretary did not so much as glance at them. He lay back dreamily in his chair.
"My dear fellow, don't you know there are only three ships going out tomorrow and that they are already
booked to two hundred per cent capacity? There may be a third, but there are many ahead of you. Fine
people, powerful people, wealthy people..."
Hartwell suppressed his craving to  commit murder and  drew  out his remaining store  of Saturn  stones.
There were six left. He selected a good  one  and  held it out.  The rest  had  to  be  saved  for the greedy
"mercy ship" people.  The secretary  displayed  his interest  by the gleam in his  eyes,  but,  "You  do  not
understand my friend," he said weakly. "Visas are not to  be  purchased."  He  paused  and  scratched  his
head thoughtfully. "However, I might use my influence for, shall we say, five more?"
The secretary never knew what hit him. He slithered down into his well-cushioned chair until his weight
rested on the nape of his neck. And there he slept gently while the grim-faced ex-astragator  rummaged

his desk until he found his stamps and seals.
A moment later the passports were in order.
"Come," he said to the wide-eyed Adele, "let's go."
But he paused a moment to select the least valuable of the stones--a pale amber one of low grade,  yet
worth ten years' salary to its recipient. He stooped and placed it in the sleeper's hands and gently folded
the fingers to encompass it.
"Appeasement," whispered Hartwell to Adele, as they tiptoed out the back door of the room. Four hours
later they were on the skyfield, camped  with the other  lucky ones,  about  the fires lit near  the cradles.
There was one more hurdle to be jumped, but that would have to wait until the ships came in.
Chapter Four FUGITIVE FROM THE SLAVE-WORLD
WHEN dawn came the Ionian soldiers routed out the half-frozen sleepers and herded them to one side
of the field. The three "mercy ships" were  about  to  land.  They were  three  good-sized  liners sent  from
Mars at the urgent request of the Jovian viceroy. It took them about an hour to get settled and the slag to
cool enough for the people to approach. Then the grand rush began. The first ship open was immediately
engulfed by a throng of frenzied refugees, each fighting to be the first in.
Two  thousand  of  them  must  have  been  taken  in  when  its  great  port  clanged  shut.  The  same  thing
occurred at the second,  but by the time the third's  turn for loading came,  the soldiers  had  established
some semblance of order. The crowd had thinned to manageable proportions, though it was evident that
the remaining ship could not possibly hold more  than half of them. With clubs and  drawn  blasters,  the
soldiers forced the frightened crowd to form orderly lines. Then the final loading began.
Hartwell  and  Adele  were  within  a  hundred  places  of  the  head  of  the  line  when  the  last  refugee
disappeared within the ship. Hartwell entertained the thought of trying to strong-arm his way forward, but
a glance about at the determined military told him that that was out. It looked very much as  if he were
beaten again. The same thought must have occurred to  many others,  for the crowd  began  to  melt and
drift back toward the city. The idea of many was to secure breakfast, if food was to be had.
"Stick around," said Hartwell to Adele, as she, too, suggested  they had  better  think of something else.
"That skunk  said  at  least  three  ships.  There  may  be  others."  He  lied  when  he  said  it,  for  what  the
secretary  had  said  was  that  there  would  be  only  three  ships  and  that  they  were  booked  to  double
capacity. But he hoped against hope that there might be another. If so, they would be on the ground. At
any rate, only death lay behind them.
All the eager crowd had gone but a scant four or five hundred when the flare of breaking  rockets  was
seen overhead. There was a scampering to get clear of the incoming ship, then a brief anxious wait, and
the surge forward.
"But it's blistering my feet," wailed Adele, as they hurried across the still smoking ground.
"Damn the feet!" muttered  Hartwell,  picking her up and  carrying her.  "I can  do  without  feet,  but  not
without a  head."  They were  among the first to  approach  the newcomer,  and  already  the soldiers  had
taken charge and formed a line. This time there were only a few dozen ahead, and Hartwell knew  they
would get in. He saw the name of the vessel painted in fresh white letters over the entry port. It was the
White Swan of Juno. It  was  not a  liner, but an old scow  of a  freighter, very similar in its lines to  the
Wanderer he had inspected at Moloch, on Mars. As the line crawled closer, he could see a man sitting
at a desk beside the port, another standing beside him with a drawn blaster, and still another armed man

at the port itself.
At last Hartwell and Adele reached third place.  By then he had  taken  in the situation. The man at  the
desk was Fennery, with a box before him and a large basket on the ground beside him. The box was half
filled with gems and uranium briquettes, the basket  with Tellurian gold-backed  radium certificates.  The
man on guard over him was Larsen, the quartermaster; the man at the port was Quorquel. The ship was
the  Wanderer,  as  closer  scrutiny  of  the  false  name  showed.  Underneath  the  paint  the  embossed
permanent name could still be read by an inquisitive eye.
Another dilemma. Behind lay the choice of lethal chamber  or  sacrifice to  the Urans.  Ahead  lay certain
treachery, though the nature of it was unpredictable. But ahead also were the very men Hartwell wanted
to come  to  grips with, and  this time he was  forewarned.  He  could  not hope  to  cope  with  the  forces
behind him, but he might attempt once more to match wits with these  crooks.  He  resolved  to  take  the
chance, though he realized he was involving the innocent Adele in his gamble.
"This is hay!" he heard Fennery bellow out contemptuously to  a  sputtering,  indignant banker,  who had
offered a bale of countless Jovian talents. "First-water jewels, or good Tellurian cash ... no junk goes. "
"B-b-but stammered the banker, despair in the face.
"G'wan," ordered Larsen, twirling his blaster. The Ionian soldier at the head of the line pushed the banker
roughly out onto the field. It took real money to get aboard the merciful White Swan.
The next man up had  good  collateral.  A pint of good  Martian  super-diamonds  and  a  couple  hundred
thousand sols of Earth-guaranteed currency. Fennery took it all, then demanded more.
"That's all I've got," protested the man. "It's a fortune."
"Okay," said Fennery, indifferently, "but you'll be searched at the entry. What they find on you'll be extra
fare for lying."
Hartwell knew that was so, for he had noticed Quorquel frisking each one as he went in, and there was
another box and basket by his side.  So  when he confronted  Fennery,  he held all five of his remaining
Saturn stones in his hand.
"Don't waste my time, you bum," snorted Fennery, recognizing him. He made a gesture to the soldier.
"Wait," said Hartwell, and displayed the stones.  "For  two,  me and  the young lady." He  shoved  Adele
past him and in front.
"Not enough," grunted Fennery.
"It's twice as much per head as the guy ahead just gave you." Hartwell shot a knowing look at the Ionian
soldier and delivered a friendly wink. The soldier grinned. That was enough for Hartwell. He tossed the
five stones into Fennery's box and started to walk on in.
"Hey," shouted  Fennery,  "it's not enough, I said." But his bluster  began  to  fade  as  the  Ionian  soldier
moved forward with a threatening look. Even an Ionian can stand just so much. "But," Fennery finished
lamely, "I happen to be short a mate. The stones go for her; you can work your way. Okay?"
"Okay," said Hartwell. Fennery had saved face, but at the cost of his insurance, if that was the racket this
time. Also it would enable Hartwell to have access to the operating parts of the ship, a  privilege which
would be denied him as a paying passenger.

Hartwell underwent the loathsome Quorquel's search without batting an eye. Then he took Adele by the
arm  and  stepped  into  the  dark  lock  of  the  old  Wanderer.  Anything  connected  with  Fennery  and
Quorquel was smelly; but why had they changed the old tub's name? Something most definitely stank.
"Watch your step  every  instant from now on," he  whispered  to  Adele,  as  he  led  her  into  the  musty
interior. "This ship's dynamite and the personnel's poison."
Mars was the supposed destination, but the course Fennery set led far afield from the usual one.
He explained it by saying the normal course was badly cluttered with some  of the tiniest of the cosmic
gravel, which was very hard to predict and avoid. They would straighten up after  they had  pierced  the
Belt.
Conditions on board could only be described as awful. There was food enough, thanks to the forehold
being crammed with Callistan frajiman, a sort of copra made from cactus plants. It had a vile taste and
odor, but was rich in food value and vitamins. But the air was bad, and from the outset  the water  was
rationed in driblets. Knowing Stellar's parsimonious policy in general, and that this trip was an impromptu
one,  Hartwell  had  serious  doubts  that  many  of  those  on  board  would  reach  the  destination  alive,
whatever it was.
It was the living quarters that were the worst. In order to accommodate  as  many refugees  as  possible,
Fennery had  evidently jettisoned  part  of his  cargo  in  space  so  that  he  could  use  the  afterhold  for  a
barracks.  Hartwell recognized  the odor  the moment he stepped  into  the  place.  It  was  ochtosaur  oil,
which not only has a nauseous odor, but is gummy and sticky, and the drums it is transported in invariably
leak. In that hold, which was always insufferably hot, due to  its proximity to  the driving tubes,  standee
bunks  four  tiers  high  had  been  erected.  The  narrow  aisles  that  ran  between  could  not  hold  all  the
passengers at once, so that they were compelled to lie abed. The place was almost a second Black Hole
of Calcutta.
Hartwell had  been  given the second  mate's  room,  which he promptly turned  over  to  Adele  and  three
other  women.  The room  was  designed  for  one  occupant,  but  crowded  as  it  was,  it  was  palatial  as
compared with the after hold. He himself slept, when off duty, in the deck of the passage just outside the
control room. He was put to work immediately, standing control  watches  with Larsen  as  helper,  while
Fennery and Quorquel took the other trick.
He took pains to make friends with Larsen, for he judged the fellow to have a decent streak, for all his
sullen obedience to every order given him.
"There's dirty work going on here," observed Hartwell, the second night out. "It's going to  be  tough on
that pack of suckers back aft."
Larsen grinned sourly.
"There's always dirty work afoot on a Stellar ship," he said sourly. Then added with disgust, "But this is
too dirty. I'm sick of it already."
"What's the payoff?"
"I--don't--know," said  Larsen,  dragging thewords  out worriedly.  "We were  three  days  out of Callisto
with barely enough fuel to reach Mars, short of water, and short of air, what with keeping those holds up
to pressure on the trip out. Then Fennery gets the S.O.S., sees dough in it, dumps the och oil over  the
side, and high-tails it back for Io. We couldn't get to Mars if we wanted to."

"Why did they change the name of the ship?"
"I don't know that, either."
Hartwell puckered his brow. He was going to have to do some detective work and do it fast. He did not
mean to be too late, like last time.
"You going to string along?" he asked.
"Guess so. I'll have to. It's a dog's life, but they always take care of you. If you play with 'em, they cover
you. If you don't--well, it's just too bad."
"I found that out."
"Yeah. There wasn't any pentaluminate on that ship you crashed. Stellar bought it, all right, and paid for
it. But you went out empty. Then he loaded it and came on after. Good clean up that--my share was a
grand."
"How do they split?"
"Stellar takes half; Fennery splits a third with Quorquel; we get the rest. That crew that double-crossed
you got a grand apiece, too. Fennery figured you to be a good captain and that you would do just what
you did. He knows Hebe like a sister, and just where she would be. It was as easy as that."
Hartwell laughed mirthlessly. Yes, it was as easy as that!
When he went off watch, Hartwell turned in after a bite to eat and pretended to be asleep. But not for
long. He had previously abstracted the key  to  the lifeboat compartment  long enough to  make  a  copy.
With that in his hand, he stole up a ladder, crossed the ship, and climbed another  ladder.  He  unlocked
the door, flicked on the light, and went in.
He was prepared for a well-stocked lifeboat--wasn't it an old Stellar custom?--but nothing like what he
found. The seats for the fourteen crew members had been torn out and stacked at one side. Where they
had been, there was, instead, an assemblage of packing cases and gas containers. Food, food, and more
food. Spare space suits. Bottles of air at high pressures. Plenty of extra fuel. A field radio set. And seats
left for only two men!
He searched further. He found a fat envelope, sealed. He weighed it in his hand, then remembered that
there were plenty of such envelopes he could get at to replace it with. He tore it open and squinted at the
contents. There were the insurance policies--the ship's copy of them. But more  amazing, there  was  the
Wanderer's original log worked out for five days to come!  He  had  no time to  examine it, but thrust it
back into the envelope and laid it away. He hunted for the jewels and money, but those evidently had not
been  brought  up yet.  Nor  the blasters  or  ammunition. But among the tanks  and  boxes  were  the  sky
chests of both Fennery and Quorquel. It was to be a two-man take-off, and devil take those left behind!
For  one  brief  moment  a  great  and  almost  overpowering  temptation  came  to  him.  The  ship  was
doomed--it  had  inadequate  air  and  fuel,  and  the  water  was  perilously  low.  Those  in  it  were  either
wastrels or scoundrels for the most part. Why shouldn't he slip down and quietly call Adele, and the two
of them escape now while the chance was at hand?
But another  thought pushed  the evil one  out of his head.  It  was  not the way he wanted  to  deal  with
Fennery,  nor  would it exonerate  him.  It  was  easy  to  run,  but  he  preferred  to  stay  and  fight.  So  he
stopped and stood in thought for a  moment. Then he resolved  on his course  of action.  The first steps
were clear, the end clouded with doubt; but it did not involve running away.

He lost no time in getting back  down  below.  He  found  Larsen  and  shook  him  awake.  He  told  him
hastily--while  between  them  they  made  up  a  dummy  package  to  replace  the  stolen  log  and
policies--roughly what was afoot.
"They take care of you, huh?" he finished. "Come, I want to show you something."
Larsen gritted his teeth when he saw, then cursed his captain and first mate fluently and at length.
"They're wary as foxes, damn 'em," he said finally, "and they've got the blasters. What can we do?"
"Plenty," said Hartwell, grimly. He had had a peep at the log he'd found and he knew he had a few days.
He also was not unfamiliar with the Belt. "Gimme a hand."
That was  the beginning. While Fennery  and  Quorquel  stood  their  own  watch  together,  Hartwell  and
Larsen were working like beavers, shuttling up and down ladders. The provision cases were broached,
one  by  one,  emptied  and  resealed.  Their  contents  were  stacked  in  Hartwell's  room,  much  to  the
discomfort of the four women living there. But they were told to help themselves. Fennery's choice chow
beat frajiman forty ways.
The  same  with  water.  The  two  stealthy  rectifiers  of  wrong  brought  down  all  the  full  breakers  and
replaced them with others that were also full--but not of water. Ditto the air flasks. They bled several into
the polluted air of the ship at large, and took them back empty. The others  they switched  for the ones
emptied on the voyage out. They also stole most of the boat's fuel and hid it in appropriate places. The
radio they did not dare remove, for there was no replacement for it, and the theft would be noticed. They
contented themselves with disabling it.
"They won't enjoy their cruise, I'm thinking," remarked Larsen gleefully. He was doing something he had
yearned to do for years.
"You ain't seen nothin' yet," said Hartwell, and produced a small welder. He put the deflector fins of the
boat hard over and welded them that way. Then he took a wrench and cast loose the control lever, set it
as if midships, and tightened it up.
That was the end of the fourth night's work. Hartwell checked over his elaborate piece of sabotage and
found it good. There was one item left undone--to recover the money and jewels. It might be  done,  or
might not.
It was the twentieth hour of the next day that Hartwell and Larsen relieved their superiors for what they
knew was to be the final watch. They took  over  the controls  as  stolidly as  if they had  really been  the
dupes Fennery thought them to be. But the echoes of the steps down the corridor had hardly faded away
when Hartwell jumped up.
"Remember," he warned, "if they come back and  ask  for me, tell 'em I got sick  and  had  to  go to  the
head."
Then Hartwell was off. Fennery had gone, he knew, to his room where the stuff was in the safe. Where
Quorquel had gone, he could not guess. But he hurried up to the boat compartment, went in and locked
the door behind him, and hid on the far side of the boat.
Presently he heard  the  grating  of  a  key  in  the  lock.  Then  Fennery  came  in.  Hartwell  crouched  and
listened. He heard the gems clink in their carrying bags as Fennery carefully stowed them underneath the
seat that was to be his. After doing that, he went out.
"The money, of course," thought Hartwell, realizing that there was so much of the booty that it could not

all be carried on one trip. Well, let the money go--a dozen of the best stones was worth all of it. And, he
thought with sardonic  satisfaction,  possessing  a  few millions in money would add  a  little  fillip  to  their
discomfort while starving in the void. Moreover, he did not want to be in the boat compartment when the
boat's blast was fired. He scrabbled up the jewel bags and hurried out.
He had to squeeze into the shadow of a stanchion as he heard both  men coming. Both were  wheezing
and heavy laden, and so intent on placing their feet that they did not see him. Hartwell let them pass, then
scurried  on below.  He  had  just reached  the control  deck  when he heard  the dull boom  of the boat's
kickoff and felt the faint tremor that shook the ship. They were on their way!
And at that moment, also, the Wanderer's own tubes sputtered, misfired, and died  out.  In that  last ten
minutes, Quorquel  had  been  attending to  a  small job  of sabotage  of his own.  Well, he was  fiendishly
thorough, so there was no use in hurrying about it. A minute or so would make no difference.
Hartwell dropped the jewel bags into the hands of the expectant girls.
"Stick 'em under the mattress," he directed, "and one of you be lying on it all the time. Hope it don't put
kinks in your backs." And with that he was gone.
He hurriedly gave Larsen the high spots. There was no point in keeping  up the watch  now.  If the ship
was going to hit something, she would hit it, and that was that. Together they combed the vessel for what
Quorquel had done.
It was plenty. The radio was smashed beyond repair, even in a sky yard. The last message that had come
in was  one  telling  of  the  fall  of  Io.  The  injectors  and  superheaters  of  the  main  driving  tubes  were
hopelessly damaged. The momentum they had was what they would always have, neither more nor less,
until they locked horns with some  wandering hunk, of cosmic debris.  But no,  not necessarily,  for they
found the antiquated bow tubes still in working condition. Quorquel had not thought it necessary to spend
time on them. They were smaller than the main drive and of a different model. Their injectors could not
be modified to fit the rear tubes.
Hartwell learned  some  other  discouraging facts.  The  retrieved  water  supply  was  so  small  as  to  help
hardly at all, though there was plenty of everything else except air. The best that could be said about that
was  that  it  would  support  life--a  headachey,  listless  sort  of  life.  If  he  had  water  enough,  he  could
electrolyze some and make air; but he hadn't. So, beyond issuing a slightly better food ration, he could do
nothing to help the passengers. He did not even tell them of their predicament.
He did select six of the ablest men and call them forward. Two were engineers and one a chemist; two
were  in  the  mercantile  business,  but  they  had  been  enthusiastic  sky-yachtsmen.  The  other  was
superintendent  of a  scrondium refinery. Hartwell told  them something about  the  situation  and  berthed
them, three in Quorquel's room, and three in Larsen's. He and Larsen, since they would be on opposite
watches thereafter, moved into the skipper's cabin. That relieved the congestion aft a trifle, and gave him
some helpers--if he could find any way to utilize their help.
Then he began a feverish study of the Ephemerides  of the Asteroids.  The more  he searched  the more
dejected he got. There was not a single inhabited asteroid they could reach in their present condition. In
ten days more the water would be gone. After that? Well, he'd have to think up something else.
Chapter Five TWO MUST DIE!
IRONICALLY enough, he found an asteroid to lie dead ahead. They would crash on it inevitably unless
he could work some miracle--and his fagged brain had ran out of what it takes  to  make  miracles. The
planetoid was one of the Scrappos-Scrappo IV,  to  be  precise.  It  was  a  graveyard  for ships,  a  handy

junk pile for the disposition of derelicts so obsolete as to be not worth the cost of breaking up. From his
calculations, it looked to Hartwell very much as if the weary Wanderer was about to add her rusty bones
to the pile.
He scratched his head, then sent for his newly appointed civilian staff.
"In exactly seven days," he told them, "we smash on Scrappo IV. I don't think we'll actually crack up, but
these freighters are cranky to handle under bow tubes alone. Then what? Any ideas?"
There was a long silence. After a bit, one of the engineers spoke up.
"I visited one of the Scrappos once. We could do worse. A great many derelicts have been dumped on
them without much done in the way of stripping. Of course, space tramps visit the dumps every now and
then and pick about, but we might find something worthwhile--a tube fitting here, another there, and  so
on. I vote we go on."
"We are going on," said Hartwell,  with a  grimness that  was  more  telling than a  flood of oratory  could
have been, "but let's not deceive ourselves. There may be spare parts enough, if we can find them. But
our water will give out a day or so after our arrival. I'm not hopeful of finding that. In the meantime, you
fellows circulate among the other passengers and dig out some men for working parties, if you can  find
any real ones among that batch of pampered  aristocrats.  If they talk  back  and  tell you how much this
voyage has already cost 'em, just tell 'em that from here out it'll be 'root hog, or die!' There'll be no more
water for shirkers."
Hartwell resumed his anxious study of the skies ahead.
Ultimately the hour came  when he had  to  begin  deceleration.  His  new  aides  proved  good  men,  and
handled the tubes well. All in all, it was a trying maneuver, for the Scrappo was a dazzling white object,
despite its heavy freckling of wreckage,  and  there  were  moments when Hartwell thought he would go
blind.
But he grounded the ship in what appeared to be a blinding fog--but turned out to be particles of white
dust kicked up by the blast. It stayed up for a long time, but eventually settled back  to  the ground,  for
there was no air to sustain it. But Scrappo's gravity was not so great, either, and the white dust was in no
hurry to come down.
Hartwell mustered two work parties. That was all he could send out at one time, for there were  only a
dozen space suits on board. The engineer, Ellison, led one, and Larsen the other. Hartwell watched them
leave, but without optimism. There was less than ten gallons of water  left, and  more  than two  hundred
persons to divide it among. He  had  won,  but he had  lost.  It  looked  like the end  of the road,  for this
desolate white planetoid was the driest of deserts--soft, snowy powder.
Larsen  sent  two  men back  after  a  bit.  They carried  a  strange  burden.  Each  had  a  huge bag  of  dried
clumps  of  rootlets  with  dead  stems  hanging  limply  from  them.  They  were  air  plants  of  the  genus
Carnivore Veneris, insatiable consumers of carbon dioxide, formerly used on ships as air conditioners.
They never died--all these needed was soaking in water and placing in foul air. Then they would burgeon
gloriously until whatever hold they were placed in would look like a glen in a Venusian valley. Hartwell
looked  at  them dubiously. It  would take  a  quarter  of  the  water  store  to  revive  them.  Much  as  they
needed fresh air, he told the men to dump them in the control room.
Then  Ellison  returned,  delighted.  The  third  ship  he  had  visited  was  of  the  Wanderer's  type,  badly
smashed forward, but with rear tubes intact. The fittings on at least four of them might be  used,  though
they were somewhat larger. He thought that by interposing reducers--which could  be  made  from other

casual junk--they might be made to work.
In the meantime the chemist had been prowling around in the near vicinity. He came back looking as if he
had been in a snow storm, but there was a gleam of delight in his eyes. He held out a handful of the white
surface stuff of Scrappo IV.
"Here's water," he said, "enough to drown ourselves in. This stuff is gypsum. All you've got to do is heat it
and rig a retort to catch the water in."
The statement galvanized his listeners to action. Ellison knew at once what to do. They would construct a
huge oven under the stern of the wrecked ship with the serviceable tubes, using a tube to furnish the heat.
Collector hoods, which could be made from old bulkheads, would lead the vapor to an old water tank.
The  passengers  could  turn  to  with  improvised  shovels,  providing  the  ovens  with  raw  gypsum,  and
cleaning the dehydrated stuff out at times. He thought he could do it in not more than two days.
He did. Four days later the Wanderer's tanks were overflowing. Everyone had bathed and had drunk his
fill. The airplants cluttered the overhead of the ship throughout, and were spreading their tendrils farther.
Now they had air and water, as well as food. They could not find a radio that could be made to work,
but they did find a great quantity of rocket fuel. A half-drum here, a quarter-drum there, but the sum of
them was more than enough to fill the ship's bunkers.
It was exactly a week after their landing that Hartwell lifted the Wanderer  and  pointed  her Earthward.
That was the ultimate destination of most on board, and he saw no point in going on to Mars. It was  a
longer voyage, but, aside from overcrowding, all on board were happy. The flabby men that had  come
aboard whimpering with terror were now transformed. All hands looked on the last leg of the trip as  a
great lark.
Hartwell spent the last day bringing his log up to date--the true log of the Wanderer. That log had been
signed every day by Fennery until his desertion, and it began the day he turned back to Io. In it he had
put the truth, excepting a fairy tale involving the change of name.
The other log, the one Fennery meant to take with him in the boat, was a mass of clever falsification. It
made no mention of turning back after they had left Callisto. On the contrary, it was full of the details of
the voyage to Mars until the very date of the desertion. As of that date there was a lurid account of an
explosion in the tube room and the killing of most of the crew. A fierce fire instantly swept the ship and
the officers were forced to abandon it.
Hartwell smiled a hard smile of joy. Here he had incontrovertible  evidence,  written in his enemy's  own
hand, of the vile scheme. Fennery had planned not only to double-cross the I.U. again, at the sacrifice of
his crew and passengers, but his crooked company as well.
What Hartwell and Larsen had taken out of the boat was proof of that. Fennery and Quorquel had meant
to go to some chosen asteroid, cache their gems and money. Then they would take the void again with
only the false log and the insurance papers,  and  thereby  give the impression of being the shipwrecked
mariners they pretended to be. The company would collect the insurance, give them their cut; then they
could come back and pick up their hoard.
But Hartwell had the hoard, and those who had contributed it as witnesses. Moreover, there was Larsen,
now a changed man.
Luna was astern now, and the ship well down into the Earth's stratosphere. Hartwell put her into a glide
until he was over the great skyport of New New York.

He landed her at quarantine, and promptly went to the office of the Director  of Astronautics.  In a  few
words he gave the outline of his story, then waited until the president of the Interplanetary Underwriters
could come.
He laid the two logs on the table  and  told  his story--both  stories,  that  of the Hyperion  as  well as  the
Wanderer. He produced the bags of jewels.
The Director of Astronautics leaned forward and pressed a button.
"Cancel the charter  of Stellar  Transport,"  he barked  into  the  transmitter.  "Ground  all  ships,  arrest  all
employees from the president down. Report back."
He turned to Hartwell.
"What else do you want?"
"I want a full exoneration in the Hyperion affair and removal from I.U.'s blacklist."
"Done," said the president of the I.U. It was his turn to grab the transmitter.
"Now to pick up Fennery and Quorquel," continued the Director.  "What was  their point of departure,
course and speed? How much supplies did they have?"
Hartwell calmly gave the coordinates of the place of desertion.  "The course?"  he said,  screwing up his
nose. "Why, a tight, incurring spiral, with a tendency to drift in our wake. Speed? Just enough to get well
clear. There was fuel enough for the initial blast, no food, no water, and what air they happened to have
in their helmets."
"Why, man," exclaimed the Director, aghast, "they must be dead by now!"
"Quite probably," said Hartwell.
THE END

