Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
 
1
Male Reproductive System 
Mimi Jakoi, PhD 
Jennifer Carbrey, PhD 
 
The underlined headings correspond to the 2 Male Reproductive System videos. 
 
1. Hypothalamus-Pituitary-Gonad Axis 
 
Sexual Differentiation 
The chromosomal determinants of genetic sex are 
the XX or XY chromosome combination. 
Expression of the SRY gene on the Y chromosome 
results in testes being formed instead of ovaries. 
Whether or not an individual has testes or ovaries 
determines their gonadal sex. The gonads (either 
testes or ovaries) are the source of gametes 
(sperm or ova) as well as sex hormones which 
determine the external and internal genitalia 
(phenotypic sex). The SRY gene is necessary for 
maleness but not sufficient. For example, the 
testosterone receptor gene on the X chromosome 
is also required. 
 
The Common Axis 
There are many similarities between the 
hypothalamus-pituitary-gonad axis in males and 
females. The process of producing sperm or ova 
is coordinated by the hypothalamus which 
secretes GnRH (gonadotropin-releasing hormone) 
in a pulsatile manner. In turn, GnRH stimulates the 
pituitary to secrete FSH (follicle-stimulating 
hormone) and LH (luteinizing hormone) (Fig. 1). In 
both males and females, androgens (like 
testosterone) produced in the gonad is needed for 
development of the ovum or sperm. Production of inhibin B by cells in the testis or ovary 
decreases FSH secretion while sex hormones like testosterone and estrogen regulate GnRH, 
LH, and FSH secretion. 
 
Maturation of the H-P-Gonad Axis 
In humans, the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonad axis differentiates in a sex-specific manner. In the 
adult male, GnRH secretion has a continuous (24-hr) pulsatile pattern and in the adult female, a 
cyclic (28 day) pulsatile pattern.  
 
How does this maturation occur? The hypothalamus functions like a thermostat which responds 
negatively or positively to the levels of circulating gonadal steroids (testosterone or estrogen). 
During development, it is initially very sensitive to the negative feedback of these steroids and 
becomes progressively less so as puberty approaches. By puberty, its sensitivity to circulating 
gonadal steroids has changed from a super-sensitive state to a lower state of sensitivity. This 
Figure 1. The hypothalamus-pituitary-
gonad axis shows local secretion of 
testosterone within the testes and 
negative feedback by inhibin B to 
pituitary. Testosterone (androgen) 
inhibits the secretion of LH, and FSH 
directly and of GnRH indirectly via 
kisspeptin. 
image by Uwe Gille (modified), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hypot
halamus-Hypophysis-Testicle-Hormone-
Axis_%28engl.%29.svg, Creative Commons 
Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
 
2
continues until the feedback actions characteristic of the adult are established (Fig. 1). This 
maturation is now understood to involve another hypothalamic factor, kisspeptin, and its 
receptor GPR54. In the absence of either kisspeptin activity or its receptor (GPR54) activity, the 
individual (male or female) fails to enter puberty and is infertile.   
 
During fetal life, testosterone is secreted by the testes independent of GnRH control. This early 
rise in testosterone imprints the hypothalamus as male. Later, at birth, a second surge in 
testosterone results in permanent virilization of the hypothalamus which imprints the GnRH 
secretion pattern as 24-hour and pulsatile. Throughout childhood until puberty, testosterone 
remains low. At puberty the plasma level increases to adult levels, remains elevated until middle 
age, and then declines somewhat later in life.  
 
2. Sperm and Hormone Production 
 
Sperm Production 
In the adult male, in response to GnRH, the pituitary secretes FSH and LH (Fig 1). These 
hormones act on the testes to regulate sperm production (spermatogenesis) and sex hormone 
synthesis. Spermatogenesis occurs in the testes. Unlike the female, the stem cell population, 
spermatogonia, of the male can undergo continuous division renewing the developing sperm 
population throughout the life of the male. FSH acts on the Sertoli cells of the seminiferous 
tubules of the testis (Fig. 2). Sertoli cells surround the stem cells and developing sperm, 
isolating them from the rest of the body (blood-testes barrier). FSH initiates spermatogenesis by 
promoting the germ cells to undergo division (Fig. 2). Cohorts of functional sperm take 90 days 
to fully mature. A fertile sperm count is 200-400 million sperm/5 mL of semen. 
 
In addition, FSH induces the expression of androgen binding protein (ABP) on the cell surfaces 
of the Sertoli cells. ABP binds testosterone (androgen). The testosterone-ABP complex provides 
a local supply of testosterone in high concentration near the developing sperm which is critical 
for the maturation of the sperm.  
 
FSH also increases the secretion of inhibin B by the Sertoli cells which acts to negatively 
regulate FSH release by the pituitary.  
 
The target cell for LH is the Leydig cell of the testes. Leydig cells secrete testosterone for use as 
a paracrine within the testes and as a hormone by the peripheral target tissues (Fig. 2). Leydig 
cells also produce dihydrotestosterone (DHT).    
 
Role of Testosterone in Sperm Production 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone. As with all steroid hormones, it binds to nuclear receptors to 
initiate transcription. Locally, within the testes, testosterone binds to androgen receptors in 
sertoli cells leading to increased transcription, synthesis, and secretion of androgen binding 
protein (ABP) and maturation of sperm in spermatogenesis.  
 
Testosterone alone cannot initiate spermatogenesis. FSH is required. But once initiated, FSH is 
no longer required and testosterone alone can maintain sperm maturation. 
 
Testosterone also circulates in the plasma bound to a carrier protein. In the peripheral target 
tissues, it acts as an anabolic hormone responsible for the growth and function of accessory sex 
structures (penis, seminal vesicle, prostate) and to increase lean muscle mass. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
         ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey & Emma Jakoi 
 
 
3
Testosterone 
Conversion 
In many target tissues, 
testosterone acts as a 
prohormone. It is 
converted to a more 
potent androgen called 
dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT) by the enzyme, 5-
alpha reductase. DHT is 
responsible for 
development and 
maintenance of the male 
secondary sex 
characteristics including 
beard growth, deep 
voice, and growth of the 
prostate. In the ovary 
and breast (of males and 
females), testosterone is 
converted to estrogen by 
the enzyme aromatase.  
 
 
 
 
Sex Steroids and the Male Skeleton 
Both testosterone and estrogen are required for optimal bone deposition and skeletal growth in 
men and women.  Gender differences in bone mineral density are established during puberty, 
resulting in a higher peak bone mass in men compared to women. In addition, men lose less 
bone mass during aging. It is now established that bone expresses aromatase activity and that 
estrogen and testosterone have separate roles in bone homeostasis. In males and females, 
estrogen and estrogen receptor activity stimulate longitudinal growth and induce epiphyseal 
growth plate closure at the end of puberty. In contrast, androgen and androgen receptor 
activation play little role in epiphyseal growth plate closure, but are involved in elongation of the 
skeleton and maintenance of bone mass. 
 
Two different types of mutations reported in human males reveal the role of estrogen in bone 
homeostasis. Receptor resistance in which the estrogen receptor is inactivated results in 
continual longitudinal growth of the skeleton. Insufficiency of estrogen in which the aromatase 
gene is inactivated results in undetectable plasma estrogen levels, but normal plasma 
testosterone levels, low bone density, and continual longitudinal growth of the skeleton. 
Administration of estrogen to these individuals induces epiphyseal closure limiting the 
elongation of the skeleton.        
 
Figure 2. Schematic depicting a seminiferous tubule, Sertoli 
cells, Leydig cells and sperm of the testis. Image by Uwe Gille 
(modified), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Germinal_epithelium_testi
cle.svg, Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license 

