
Understanding Architecture
Through Drawing
Second Edition
This new edition is fully revised and updated and includes new chapters on sustainability, history
and archaeology, designing through drawing and drawing in architectural practice. The book
introduces design and graphic techniques aimed to help designers increase their understanding of
buildings and places through drawing. For many, the camera has replaced the sketchbook, but here
the author argues that freehand drawing as a means of analysing and understanding buildings
develops visual sensitivity and awareness of design.
By combining design theory with practical lessons in drawing, Understanding Architecture Through
Drawing encourages the use of the sketchbook as a creative and critical tool. The book is highly
illustrated and is an essential manual on freehand drawing techniques for students of architecture,
landscape architecture, town and country planning and urban design.
Brian Edwards is an architect, town planner, writer, teacher and artist. He has taught in various
schools and has been Professor of Architecture at Huddersfield and Heriot Watt universities and
the Edinburgh School of Art. He has written over 16 books, seven of which published by Spon
Press/Taylor & Francis.

First published 2008 by Taylor & Francis
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada by
Taylor & Francis
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY10016
Taylor & Francis is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group,
an informa business
First edition © 1994 Brian Edwards
This second edition © 2008 Brian Edwards
Designed by Gavin Ambrose
Printed and bound in Great Britain by The Cromwell Press,
Trowbridge, Wiltshire
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging- in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN10 0-415-44413-6 (hbk)
ISBN 10 0-415-44414-4 (pbk)
ISBN13 978-0-415-44413-2 (hbk)
ISBN13 978-0-415-44414-9 (pbk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2008.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-88243-1 Master e-book ISBN

Brian Edwards 
Edinburgh School of Art
Understanding Architecture
Through Drawing
Second Edition

Chapter 19
History and archaeology 
160
Chapter 20 
Interiors
170
Chapter 21
Using drawing to analyse an
urban area
178
Case study 1
The Merchant City,
Glasgow
178
Case study 2
The Bastide towns, France
187
Case study 3
Japanese urbanism 
192
Part Four
The Way Forward
Chapter 22
Exploration through the sketchbook
– some suitable subjects
198
Chapter 23
From sketch to design
214
Chapter 24
Designing through drawing 
226
Chapter 25
Drawing in architectural
practice 
238
Bibliography 
260
Index 
262
Acknowledgements
v
Introduction 
vi
Chapter 1
The benefits of drawing
1
Part One
Guiding Principles
Chapter 2
Why draw?
16
Chapter 3
Choosing the subject
30
Part Two
Techniques
Chapter 4
Perspective
38
Chapter 5
Line and shade
46
Chapter 6
Composition
50
Chapter 7
The importance of practice
60
Chapter 8
From sketch to plan making
and documentary
investigation
64
Chapter 9
Sequential sketches
72
Chapter 10
Drawing and photography 
80
(with Susan Fahy)
Part Three
Case Studies in Drawing
Chapter 11
Towns, townscapes and squares 90
Chapter 12
Streets, lanes and footpaths
100
Chapter 13
Landmarks, skyline and
city image
108
Chapter 14
Gateways, entrances and
doorways
114
Chapter 15
The façades of buildings
122
Chapter 16
Machinery, function and
modernism 
132
Chapter 17
Landscape 
142
Chapter 18
Sustainability 
152
Contents

Acknowledgements
The author wishes first to thank those bodies that
awarded research grants to undertake the work outlined
in this book, namely the Arts and Humanities Research
Council and Edinburgh College of Art. In addition, the
book has drawn upon material from the Sir Basil Spence
Research Project funded by the Heritage Lottery Fund.
Various chapters use material abridged from the author’s
article ‘The use of drawing in architectural design: some
recent experiences from UK practice’ published in
Architecture Research Quarterly (ARQ) in 2005.
The author is also indebted to a number of architects
and designers who have provided time for interviews and
given consent for the use of drawings in the book. These
include Lord Foster of Riverside, Sir Terry Farrell, Sir
Nicholas Grimshaw, Edward Cullinan, Bob Allies, Will
Alsop, Richard Murphy, Allan Murray, Gordon Murray and
Malcolm Fraser. In addition, the following architects have
kindly provided drawings to augment those of the author,
namely Santiago Calatrava, David Prichard, Francis
Tibbalds, Derek Fraser, Richard Reid and Arup Associates.
The author is particularly indebted to Nick Hirst for
allowing drawings prepared as a result of his Philip Webb
Travelling Scholarship to be used in the publication.
The author also wishes to thank the RIBA Library,
RCAHMS and the Hunterian Museum for making
available images of sketchbook practice from earlier
periods.
Finally, the author wishes to thank the many
students of architecture from Edinburgh, Glasgow and
Huddersfield who kept him company with their sketch-
books on study visits to places far and wide over a
twenty-five year period.
Unless stated otherwise all subsequent drawings are
by the author. 
Acknowledgements v

Introduction
The aim of this book is to explore how freehand drawing
can increase the level of understanding of the
complexities of modern architecture. In particular it seeks
to provide the means whereby there can be a marriage of
art and architecture by establishing shared values
and understandings. The sketchbook is a useful tool to
help counter the dominance of science in architectural
education, or at least to ensure that technology is
employed with judgement and aesthetic discrimination.
The aim is to encourage the creation of a more humane
environment by developing visual and artistic sensibilities
through the practice of drawing. 
A number of themes are presented, each as a case
study of issues facing students or practising architects.
Since the first edition of this book was published in 1994,
fresh concerns have emerged and these form the basis
of much of the new material presented in this edition.
There is also greater discussion of the role of sketching
vis-à-vis other design development tools such as model-
making, computer-aided design (CAD) and photography.
As a result there are a number of more theoretical
chapters than in the first edition, as well as interviews
with a number of the UK’s leading architects such as
Lord Foster, Sir Nicholas Grimshaw, Will Alsop and
Edward Cullinan. 
The central aim of the book is to encourage the use of
the sketchbook as a vehicle for learning about arch-
itecture. There is currently a revival of interest in the
pedagogic role of drawing, particularly its place in the
generation of architectural forms. This book looks forward
to design practice by examining past examples using
freehand drawing as the main analytical tool. The book is
arranged thematically into four parts: the first part
presents guiding principles, the second introduces the
student to the main graphic tools and drawing techniques
used by the architect; the third part explains how
common design issues can be better understood through
drawing with a number of case studies of sketching
practice; the final part focuses upon examples from
contemporary architectural practice with the emphasis
upon current trends in drawing technique. 
A characteristic of the book is the division of study
material into themes. The aim of sketching is not to
undertake drawings of subjects that randomly catch
the eye but to explore architecture in a more systematic
fashion. The comparative analysis of material through
sketching entails a more rigorous questioning than
is possible by many other means. Once sketched, the
subject under investigation can be explored further –
vi Understanding architecture through drawing

perhaps by resort to archival sources or textbooks on
construction. Thematic exploration through drawing aids
learning about the built environment – it helps you to see,
to think and to design. 
The book presents a general overview of drawing
practice in the twenty-first century and the principles that
underpin it. The benefits of designing through drawing are
discussed, particularly the way sketching allows options
to be explored conceptually and in detail – this interaction
across the scales is an important characteristic of
drawing. Inevitably in the digital age, there is a great
deal of interplay between freehand drawing and CAD,
especially at the genesis of a project. Different architects
use drawing in different ways but for many, if not most,
architects freehand drawing is the first tool or medium
used in designing a building. 
The professional bodies which underpin standards in
architectural education in the UK, namely the Architects
Registration Board (ARB) and the Royal Institute of British
Architects (RIBA), recognise the importance of the facility
to draw to that of becoming an architecture. Under the
criteria for the prescription of architectural courses the
term ‘communication’ is employed. It is used in the
context of evolving and representing architectural design
proposals, and embraces freehand drawing as well as
CAD. Sketching remains an important aspect of being an
architect, even in an age where information technology
(IT) has to an increasing degree displaced traditional
notions of architectural representation. Sketching remains
important to designing and, equally, to understanding the
physical, environmental and cultural context for arch-
itectural practice today.
In presenting new material in this edition, the author
hopes to encourage greater use of the sketchbook and
freehand drawing within architecture and design schools.
The potential of investigating, learning and practising
design through drawing is considerable. However, it is
easy for students to overlook drawing when other more
fashionable or accessible tools, such as CAD and
photographic digitisation, are presented during the
courses of study at undergraduate level. As this
book argues, the power of drawing to get beneath the
surface encourages those who use the sketchbook to
confront the deeper forces at work in shaping
contemporary architecture. Architects were once noted
for their ability to visualise through drawing and this set
them apart from engineers or technicians. In writing this
book the author seeks to revive the tradition of drawing –
not as mere draughtsmanship or documentation, but as a
powerful tool in generating the built forms of the twenty-
first century.  
Introduction vii


Chapter 1
The benefits of drawing
The act of drawing is an important starting point for the
intellectual process we call ‘design’. To be able to draw
a chair or a building is a prerequisite for anyone wishing
to design such things. Drawing has two functions for
the designer – it allows him or her to record and to
analyse existing examples, and the sketch provides the
medium with which to test the appearance of some
imagined object. 
Before the advent of photography most architects
kept a sketchbook in which they recorded the details of
buildings, which they could refer to when designing. The
fruits of the Grand Tour or more local wanderings
consisted of drawn material supported, perhaps, by
written information or surveyed dimensions. 
The sketchbook provided a form of research and a
library of plans and details to crib at a later stage. Because
the architect is not necessarily aiming only at
documentary representation, the sketches were often
searching and analytical. Many of the drawings prepared
found their way into later designs. The English architect
C.R. Cockerell used pocket-sized sketchbooks and filled
them with drawings not only of sites in Italy and Greece,
but also of cities in Britain. His sketchbooks, which
survive at the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA),
show that a direct link existed between Cockerell’s field
studies and his commissions as an architect. Later
architects such as Alvar Aalto, Le Corbusier and Louis
Kahn employed the sketchbook in a similar fashion,
though to different ends. Lord Foster (opposite) continues
with this tradition.
Drawings have been used by architects in many
different ways. Ranging between the opposite poles of
the freehand drawing as a record and as a design tool
exist many different applications for the designer. Some
architects use the sketch as the main means of
communicating a design idea to clients. Such sketches
relay the thinking behind a proposal as well as suggesting
a tangible form. Other architects use the sketch to
analyse townscape and to indicate how their design will
fit into the street. Others use the sketch as a method of
studying building typology, using the analysis as a way of
placing their design into known precedents. However the
sketch is employed, the main point is to use the freehand
drawing as a design tool, as a method of giving form and
expression to one’s thoughts. One may finish the design
process with a formal perspective, but that end product
should not be where sketching begins. Design analysis
through the freehand drawing should be at the start of the
creative process, not at the end, and preferably before the
design commission arrives in the first place. The
The benefits of drawing 1

1.1
This sketch (dated 1862) by
Richard Norman Shaw of
Bidborough in Kent shows his
interest in vernacular buildings.
It is no surprise to find Shaw
designing new buildings in
similar spirit at the time. (RIBA
Drawings Collection) 
1.2
This drawing of a new circular
tenement built in Glasgow in
1990 highlights the pattern of
windows and shows how the
stairways have been used to
articulate the design. The sketch
seeks to explain the basic
geometry of the circular
tenement. By eliminating all
detail the proportions have
become clearer, and what is not
evident in the sketch has been
highlighted in the notes. 
2 Understanding architecture through drawing

sketchbook is a personal library; it needs to be built up so
that it can become a basis for later, undreamt of, designs. 
Many architects’ drawings leave out a great deal of
detail. Whether a sketch is of a design proposal or an
existing reality, the element of removal or abstraction is
one of the characteristics of such drawings. It is better to
capture the essence rather than seek an exhaustive
realism. Designers need to know what to leave
suggested rather than explicitly recorded. The principles
and truth that such drawings seek to communicate can be
hidden by too much detail or graphic bombardment. A
good drawing is one that leaves room for imaginative
interpretation. These principles apply equally to a page in
the sketchbook or a drawing prepared to highlight a
design proposal.
Sketching and freehand drawing have for too long
been seen as the point of entry into painting, as against
the essential starting point for design. Art colleges have,
of course, always maintained a sketchbook tradition
among artists and designers alike, but in sixth-form
colleges, and even schools of architecture, the
sketchbook has been usurped by the computer simulation
or verbal description.
What this book seeks to revive is the sketch and
analytical drawing as means of understanding form and
construction. Only through the study of existing examples
– not laboriously drawn but critically examined – can we
cultivate a nation of people sensitive to design and its
application to our everyday environment. This willingness
to learn from past examples should apply across the
1.3
The sculptural massing is
evident in this disused colliery
at Chislet in Kent. 
The benefits of drawing 3

1.4 (above)
Glazing details are not always as expressive as here
at the Financial Times printing works (designed by
Nicholas Grimshaw and Partners) in East London. Notice
how the sketch is supplemented by a freehand section. 
1.5 (left)
The windows of the Pump Room in Bath make an attractive
pattern from both the inside and outside. As with much
Georgian architecture, elements such as shop fronts and
sash windows are framed with margins and mouldings. 
4 Understanding architecture through drawing

board, from an appreciation of townscapes to the design
of children’s furniture. 
Questions of scale are hardly relevant – we live in a
designed environment, whether we as consumers are
aware of it or not. Every lamp standard and traffic sign has
been ‘designed’, the layout of motorway junctions has
been shaped by an engineer with an eye to beauty as well
as safety. On a smaller scale, our cutlery and crockery are
designed, as are the disposable wrappings at the fast-
food restaurant. 
The sketchbook allows us to be aware of this reality as
long as students are encouraged to explore through
drawing. The welcome changes to the national curriculum
to enhance the status of design and craft teaching, and
the broadening of appeal of courses in architecture,
landscape design and town planning, have created
an unprecedented interest in the environment and design.
To turn this interest into a better-designed world requires
the development of graphic and visual skills. 
In a sense we are all designers, even if we do
not make our living through the medium of design.
As designers we modify our immediate environment
through changing the decor of our houses, or designing
our own clothes, to choosing consumer objects on
the basis of how they look as well as how they work.
We are sold products and services partly by design – you
have only to watch television advertising to realise that
our aesthetic sensibilities are being appealed to even
when the product being promoted is as unglamorous
as double glazing. 
1.6
Charles Rennie Mackintosh possessed a
unique vision which embraced not only his
freehand drawings and watercolours, but
also his designs as an architect. This sketch
(dated 1901) by him of the castle at Holy
Island in Northumberland is similar in spirit to
his more adventurous designs, especially in
the three-dimensional treatment of gables.
(Glasgow University: Mackintosh Collection) 
The benefits of drawing 5

6 Understanding architecture through drawing

Prince Charles has awakened the national con-
sciousness over questions of urban quality and
architectural design. He uses the sketchbook as a means
of describing and understanding the places he likes. The
sketch is employed as a learning tool rather than as mere
description.
The untrained eye can learn a great deal through
drawing. It teaches an important visual discipline – an
awareness of shape, line and perspective. The sketch
also engenders respect for the environment and the
designed objects within it. To have sat for an hour and
drawn an old panelled door is to create a respect for the
object that may discourage the tendency to daub it with
graffiti, or to relegate it to firewood. Such doors could be
recycled if their qualities or beauty were respected, and
1.7 (opposite)
The Daily Express Building,
Glasgow, built in 1936,
expresses the material
sleekness of International
Modernism.
1.8 (right)
This sketch by the architect
Richard Reid sets his design
proposals for Gravesend in
Kent into the streetscape.
This type of exploratory sketch
is part of the process most
architects employ to test the
apperance of their ideas. 
The benefits of drawing 7

1.9
At the level of house design,
sketches by the architect Sir
Basil Spence explore options for
the general arrangement of the
plan. Spence relates the plan
to how the house will look from
afar. The design is for Gribloch
near Glasgow, built in 1938.
(NMRS: Spence Collection) 
8 Understanding architecture through drawing

the sketch rather than the instantly obtained photograph
is the means to this awareness. 
It is said that in our modern world we now produce
more photographs than bricks. For the first time in history
the visual image has become more prevalent than the
means of making houses. The lesson concerns the
importance of design and appearance in contemporary
society. But photographs are not always the most
appropriate medium for expressing this visual concern.
There are times, and subjects, which lend themselves to
graphic analysis, rather than pictorial description. This
book has the aim of reviving the sketchbook tradition, in
order to create a visually literate society. The objective of
education is to achieve not just literacy and numeracy, but
graphic, visual and spatial skills. Our success as an
industrial society requires this; and so do we, whether as
designers or as individuals. 
If this book encourages people – professional
designers or otherwise – to explore the environment
round about them with sketchbook and pencil (as against
camera) in hand, then a useful beginning would have
been made. There are always subjects to learn from,
whether we choose to live in city, suburb or countryside.
This book takes themes based upon everyday experience,
and seeks to draw design lessons from them. Once we
have learnt the language of drawing and graphic analysis,
we are then in a position to engage in the complex
business of design. For the first time in history design
involves us all and has permeated through to every aspect
of our lives. If we ignore the language of design, we will
be as disadvantaged as those who finish school without
the basic skills of literacy and numeracy. No single book
can teach us how to learn through drawing, but it can
point us in the right direction and open our eyes to the
benefit of good design. 
TYPES OF DRAWING 
To the architect and urban designer there are three main
types of freehand drawing. The first is the elaborate
perspective drawing used to communicate design ideas
to clients or planning authorities. Increasingly this type of
drawing is produced by computer. The second type
concerns the production of sketch perspectives and
views used to communicate design ideas to specialists
such as engineers, and sometimes to help clarify points
for the designer’s own benefit. This type of drawing can
be split into: 
•
the investigation of an early design; 
• exploring methods of construction; 
• testing the visual effect of details; 
• setting the design in its physical context. 
The third type of freehand drawing concerns the
exploration of the existing world, its buildings, details and
landscapes. The use of drawing in this regard does not
just provide a repertoire of forms and designs to use in
developing new structures, but helps cultivate a
sensitivity towards the existing context in which
architects, planners and landscape architects are
increasingly required to work.
Of these three broad categories of drawing, this book
focuses upon the latter. With a growing awareness of the
cultural and aesthetic values of cities, and with the
European Community requiring ever-higher standards of
urban design, those in the environmental professions face
new challenges.
The general public, too, are better informed and
through local amenity societies and bodies like the
National Trust make their views known on an
unprecedented scale. The widening of education to
embrace design and technology (under the national
curriculum reforms of 1990) promises to focus yet more
The benefits of drawing 9

attention upon design in public fields such as architecture.
Hence the world of the professions has been opened to
challenge by an informed public, with design no longer
the monopoly of people with letters after their names. 
Before the modern design professions were
established, students and practitioners employed the
sketchbook as a matter of course. They were not
topographical artists but people in search of creative
material. The Arts and Crafts architect George Devey
studied under John Sell Cotman in Norwich in the 1830s,
thereby absorbing not just Cotman’s approach to
freehand drawing, but a whole collection of details of
windmills, barns, country houses, castles and cottages
which later proved invaluable to Devey the architect.
Similarly, Richard Norman Shaw, Ernest George, John
Keppie and, later, Edwin Lutyens continued to use the
sketchbook to record the towns and buildings not just of
Britain, but of Europe and the Middle East. One can trace
the origins of the architectural sketchbook back to the
Renaissance, but its blossoming as a creative force in its
own right owes much to the nineteenth century. 
The sketchbook is a personal record – a dialogue
between artist and subject. The nature of the dialogue
determines the quality or use of the finished drawing. By
engaging in the subject, the artist, architect or student
develops a sensitivity and understanding difficult to obtain
by other means. The blind copying of subject is not
necessarily useful – a critical stance is required. One may
never use the sketch produced of the town or landscape –
at least not directly – but, like reading a good book, the
insights gained may prove invaluable later on. 
The designer needs to be accomplished in the three
main areas of drawing mentioned earlier. To be able to
render a convincing perspective is an essential skill; to
explore the detailing of an unbuilt structure through
sketches avoids pitfalls in the final design; and to use
freehand drawing to learn from past examples helps the
architect or urban designer to give better shape to
townscapes of the future. The environmental awareness
that is a feature of our post-industrial society has
encouraged a return to questions of firmness, commodity
and delight. These are the qualities the Arts and Crafts
architects sought to discover through their sketchbook
investigations. This book seeks to pick up the threads of a
drawing tradition, and to use them to teach us lessons
about the contemporary city, its buildings and landscapes. 
DRAWING TODAY
Drawing is a technique that allows the visual world to be
understood. It is a convention, based upon a degree of
abstraction and analysis, which focuses the mind upon
aesthetic values. Whereas numbers are useful to
economists, words to politicians and poets, lines are what
artists and designers employ. Visual literacy is developed
through the medium of drawing.
A distinction needs to be made between drawing as a
tool for designers and drawing as a technique employed
by artists. Although both artists and designers use
drawing to help develop ideas, they do so in quite
different ways. Artists are concerned with mark making,
rather than descriptive drawing, and such marks are
usually the genesis of later inspirational work. Their
drawings are invariably abstract and experimental even
when based upon observation. Even when fine art
conventions are followed, the drawings made by artists
tend to be fairly free form, employing mixed media and
integrated with other visual material such as photography
or collage. Fine art drawings, as against the drawings
designers make, are likely to employ scraffitto (texture),
impasto (surface), and shade (light and dark to give the
effect of modelling). Designer drawings, on the other
hand, employ a more mechanistic response based upon
disciplined observation of what is before the observer.
This is not to suggest that architects’ drawings are
10 Understanding architecture through drawing

1.10
This design sketch by Lord
Foster of the Maison Carrée in
Nîmes shows drawing being
used to explore the relationship
between new and existing
buildings in a historic context.
(Lord Foster of Riverside)
The benefits of drawing 11

without abstraction or inspiration (although it is often
sadly the case), rather it serves to remind society that
designers solve both visual and functional problems
through the medium of drawing. Their drawings contain
the genes that allow future objects to be designed, made
or built. In this sense the freehand drawings of architects
and designers are not only anchored in the context of the
present but contain the fertile possibility of the future.
To help architects understand form certain con-
ventions have been developed. These include ortho-
graphic projection and perspective drawing, both of which
have had their potential greatly amplified by computer-
aided design (CAD) graphics. The combination of two- and
three-dimensional drawing techniques means that a
typical architect or product designer employs a mixture of
plan, section, elevation, axonometric and perspective
drawings to communicate their intentions. Increasingly
these are all packaged into a CAD programme using
AutoCAD, ArchiCAD or similar graphics software. What
this book is mainly concerned with, however, is the stage
before formal drawing begins – those preliminary
sketches often made in the field or studio that help to
develop visual awareness. These early sketches, placed
for convenience in a sketchbook, allow precedent to be
understood, methods of construction to be analysed,
relationships in space or time to be assessed, and much
more. For the designer the sketch is less an experimental
beginning based upon abstract concepts (although this
may be the case in the work of Zaha Hadid and Frank
Gehry), and more the critical examination of a building,
place, landscape or programme.
The architect generally builds his or her designs upon
precedent. Even the best architects learn from the
example of other architects’ buildings, and often from
their own. Many cultivate an awareness not just of
contemporary precedent but historic examples too.
Certain architects also seek to understand and exploit
types of precedent drawn from outside the world of the
built environment. For example, Norman Foster admits
to being influenced by the design of airport hangars and
the aircraft themselves, whilst Santiago Calatrava is
inspired by structures and designs found in nature,
especially the shape and construction of bones. In both
examples, sketches are used to learn about physical,
material and visual properties – ideas that then migrate
into their architecture.
Design is ultimately about solving problems. The
future exists as an imaginative idea within the mind of the
architect. Translating this concept into a building requires
drawings. The problems to be solved are functional,
technological, environmental and social. How sketches
and more formal drawings are employed by architects
varies but generally speaking sketching occurs at the
beginning of the process, with two-dimensional drawings
(such as plans) being utilised more towards the end. The
first sketch made is instrumental and tells us a great deal
about how a designer thinks. If the early design sketch
takes the form of a section, the final building will be quite
different had it been a plan. Likewise, had the first sketch
been of a historic building of similar type, or of the
structure of the landscape, or of some abstract but
related concept, the final design again would have
proceeded in a quite different fashion. For example, the
architect Will Alsop often begins his design process with
a painting that embodies some of the abstract ideas that
more formal drawing may eliminate. His paintings are
colourful, joyful and rich in design potential. Another
architect, Edward Cullinan, carefully draws the visual
relationship between his site and the wider city or
landscape. In the process he discovers new ways of
solving the design problem – ways that subtly stitch the
new building into the wider scene. With Cullinan, as with
Foster, the focus and tension in these early sketches
informs the whole design process.
12 Understanding architecture through drawing

The type of drawing employed reflects well the
intellectual inquiries undertaken by the architect. The plan
is often the primary generator but sometimes the section
or orthogonal projection takes priority. Sketches are
explorations of spatial or formal possibilities. However,
ideas are not only worked out in drawings, models and
increasingly paintings are also employed, especially by
those architects who are under the influence of art
practices. More adventurous architects, from Rem
Koolhaas to Zaha Hadid, use diagonal rather than
orthogonal projection, creating dynamics in section as
well as plan. When the lines are then stretched and
twisted, the resulting buildings have a richness that the
obsessive use of the right angle tends to deny.
Architects uniquely have invested in them the
shaping of the future of cities. They shape this visually,
functionally and socially (the latter in collaboration with
town planners). Architects are essentially artists working
at the scale of the city and with the material of building.
Like other artists, they engage in shape, colour, light and
space – manipulating all four to solve technical and
aesthetic problems. Although architectural design is
anchored by function to the reality of everyday life,
architects are responsible for the evolution of buildings as
cultural icons. They shape cities by looking sim-
ultaneously at precedent (with the sketchbook) and
forwards to some unknown future (with CAD). As such,
the freehand drawing is not part of a dead tradition but of
a lively and inventive future. In this sense also the sketch
is not made redundant by CAD but complements it. The
two together provide architects with powerful tools to
design the future. However, to ignore the act of drawing
and to over-rely upon mechanical aids is to undermine any
shared values between artists and architects. 
The benefits of drawing 13


Part One
Guiding Principles 

Chapter 2
Why draw? 
There is an undisguised air of evangelism running through
this book, for it seeks to encourage students of
architecture, craft and design to forsake their cameras
and learn the art of freehand sketching. Drawing is not
only more enjoyable and far more educational, but the
end product is more likely to remain a cherished object
than would an anonymous slide or photographic print.
Drawing an object, building or townscape forces you to
engage more directly in the subject than as a mere
photographer; the search to record shape, proportion,
detail and colour requires greater effort and more skilled
observation than that needed to press the shutter of a
camera. The discriminatory eye encouraged through
sketching has value to the potential designer and tourist
alike for it engages the observer in an important dialogue
with his or her subject. 
Until fairly recently the sketchbook was the accepted
accompaniment of all students of architecture or
landscape, and of many interested tourists. In many ways
Prince Charles maintains this honourable tradition. Before
photography became more affordable and part of our
visual culture, the sketch remained the means to record
and analyse an interesting town, building or piece of
furniture. You have only to look at the sketchbooks of
famous architects – from Robert Adam to Charles Rennie
Mackintosh – to see how valued was the freehand
sketch. Its use was often beyond that of mere record or
pretty picture: invariably the sketch was the means of
noting down a particular detail or type of composition that
could be used when the right design commission came
along. For instance, Adam’s sketches of the fortifications
of the Dalmation coast were transformed in less than a
decade into the eighteenth-century Scottish castles
occupying a more northern coastline. 
Many students of architecture and design today spend
a great deal of time making photographs rather than
sketches. They could, of course, buy postcards or tourist
guides, which often contain better and more accurate
pictures at only a fraction of the cost, thereby
concentrating their efforts instead on the harder but more
valuable process of drawing. What the sketchbook
provides is a means of delving deeper into the subject
than merely recording it, in order to begin to understand
why and how the scene was shaped. The main barrier to
using the sketchbook in this way appears to be the lack of
basic graphic skills, together with the hectic pace of
modern life. As with all endeavours of value, you have to
practise a great deal to cultivate the craft of freehand
drawing, in order to fulfil the potential offered by the
sketchbook.
16 Understanding architecture through drawing

The drawing skills are outlined in this book under
simple headings such as shade, line weight, composition
and rules of perspective. As with learning to play a
musical instrument, you have to spend time practising
and training eye-to-hand coordination The rules of drawing
are, like the rules of grammar or numeracy, based upon a
language we all share and understand. By combining
elements of the ‘craft of drawing’ with ‘graphic rules’,
you will quickly develop a technique suitable to your
particular needs – whether as a student of architecture,
design or landscape, or simply as an inquisitive tourist on
holiday abroad. 
The process of sketching is not presented in these
pages as an end in itself, but as a means of raising the
student’s awareness of design by cultivating careful, well-
directed skills of observation. The sketch is both a record
and a statement of visual inquiry. The act of drawing from
life, be it of a town or a building, is to engage the artist in
the subject in a unique and rewarding fashion. If the
sketch is undertaken in the spirit of formal investigation
then the results can be considerable in terms of the
development of personal design skills. The linear
progression from sketchbook analysis to design proposal
is one that many architects have experienced. The
2.1
This elegant sketch (of 1880)
by William Lethaby of the
High Street, Exeter, displays
a concern for construction
and structural expression.
(RIBA Drawings Collection) 
Why draw? 17

2.2
Richard Reid’s analytical
drawings of farm buildings
led, at least indirectly, to the
design of his visitor centre at
Chartwell for the National Trust. 
2.3
The exploration of modern
architecture can be as
rewarding as that of historic
buildings. This swimming pool
in Sheringham, Norfolk, by
architects Alsop and Lyall,
makes expressive use of
exposed beams, guttering and
angled glazing. Shadows on
the sketch help bring out the
structural arrangements. 
18 Understanding architecture through drawing

2.4
Decorative railings can be
taxing to draw but the effort is
worth while if it leads to the
preservation of attractive
features. This sketch was
prepared as a measured survey
prior to re-erection at the Royal
Victoria Hospital, Newcastle
upon Tyne. 
Why draw? 19

detailed study of a subject through the freehand drawing
leads naturally to creative design by opening up different
possibilities. Analysing existing buildings through the
pages of the sketchbook provides a useful springboard for
progressing into design. The precedents explored are of
value in themselves, but, more importantly, the formal,
spatial and decorative language employed in examples
that have been sketched may prove applicable to the
design of new buildings. 
To take advantage of the progression from freehand
drawing to creative design, the artist must approach the
subject in a considered fashion. The outline is important
and so are the proportions, and often a relationship exists
between the building in plan and how it works in section
and elevation. As we tend to draw the outsides of build-
ings, the potential designer should not focus upon the
façades at the expense of the often critical relationship
between elevation and plan. These ‘invisible’ relationships
may be the most instructive when drawing certain
buildings, and provide a source of ideas for the designer. 
A good sketch is not necessarily a faithful likeness; it
may in a pedagogic sense be better to analyse and
decipher the subject. Sketches that consist of probings
around specific themes may prove particularly useful to
designers since they provide fruitful avenues for further
exploration. Charles Rennie Mackintosh was a particular
master of this type of sketch, and drawings from his
Italian Tour of 1891 demonstrate a concern for form and
decoration that are obvious precursors of his later
designs. In his sketchbook drawings Mackintosh explores
the volumetric nature of Italian churches, the simple,
almost abstract forms of farmhouses, and the black and
white decoration of Romanesque chapels. These images,
and the facility Mackintosh developed for representing
them, find expression, either directly or indirectly, in his
later designs for schools and houses. Similar sketchbook
studies of Celtic art and architecture, and of wild flowers
sketched whilst living in Suffolk, proved a parallel path
into creative design for Mackintosh. 
2.5 (far left)
The 19th-century lighthouse at Dovercourt in Essex has an undisguised
steel frame and expressive bracing. The subject lends itself to pen and
ink drawing with shading used to enhance the spacing of the columns
and beams. 
2.6 (left)
At a more detailed level the steelwork of the lighthouse at Dovercourt
continues to give expression to how the structure is supported and
braced against the coastal winds. 
20 Understanding architecture through drawing

2.7
This sketch made at a street
café in Andraixt in Majorca is
drawn in pencil on smooth
cartridge paper. The shading is
intended to reflect the patina of
ageing on old rendered façades. 
2.8 a and b
Drawn with a black felt pen,
these buoys in Harwich harbour
make an attractive assembly
of strange shapes. Shadow
has been employed to highlight
the patterns and to distinguish
between the buoyancy
chambers and the protective
grilles around the warning
lights.
Why draw? 21

2.9 (left)
This study of Hill House,
Helensburgh, by the architect
Nick Hirst captures the essence
of the building as a collage of
elevations and details. The
analysis implicit in the drawing
is difficult to capture via
photography or photoshop.
(Nick Hirst)
2.10 a, b and c  (opposite)
This sequence of sketches of
New York in 1962 by Sir Terry
Farrell uses black felt line with
power and authority. The style
of drawing suits well the subject
matter and hints at the
architect’s subsequent design
approach. (Sir Terry Farrell)
22 Understanding architecture through drawing

The architect Richard Reid uses the sketchbook in a
similar fashion today. His studies of oasthouses in Kent
were the inspiration for his design for a National Trust
visitor centre at Chartwell. The freehand drawings
provided a source of references that Reid selectively
exploited for his new design. The skill Reid demonstrates
in his sketching has enriched his experience as a
designer. The same is true of Zaha Hadid whose three
decades of sketchbooks sit by her desk and provide much
of the DNA of her architecture (Zaha Hadid 2006 p28).
There is a further advantage for the designer in
developing sketchbook skills. The graphic facility
cultivated in freehand drawing aids the representation of
design proposals. The means of recording an existing
subject are much the same as those employed in
depicting an unbuilt vision of the future. The graphic
language is the same whether the building exists in reality
or simply in one’s imagination: the use of line and
shadow, of weighted and feint lines, of exaggerated
silhouette, and so on, are employed with equal meaning.
The skills needed for drawing, once learnt, are far
speedier and more responsive than those required for
model-making or computer graphics. Drawing also
conveys a sense of spirit, of creative passion, which other
forms of representation often lack.
Just as the sketchbook can be used to dissect
graphically an existing building, the technique of
unravelling and abstracting different architectural features
can be employed in the reverse – to represent the
different elements of a design proposal. The explanation
of form, structure and decoration can help in the
development of design especially where complex matters
of building services and space management are involved.
A line of continuity therefore links the analysis of existing
buildings to the development of new ones, with a similar
range of drawing techniques being employed. This is one
of the lessons that may be learnt by studying the
drawings of architects of the calibre of Mackintosh. 
Why draw? 23

2.11 a, b, c and d
This sequence of four comparisons of sketches and photographs of central
Glasgow shows the benefits of freehand drawing. In each case unnecessary
information has been edited out in order to focus upon the architectural qualities.
Whilst the photographs include all the detail, the sketches interpret their
subject and highlight specific topics relevant to the designer.
24 Understanding architecture through drawing

MATERIALS 
The artist of today has never been so fortunate with
regard to drawing equipment. Modern waterproof felt-tip
pens, clutch pencils and a wide range of drawing papers
mean that every situation, type of subject and sketching
style is catered for. The decision nowadays tends to be
what to leave behind, since the range of materials is so
wide and their reliability so good.
When choosing sketchbook paper, you should have
already decided upon your sketching medium. Generally
speaking, smooth cartridge sketchbooks (of the Daler
type) are best for line work in pen; coarser paper for line
work in pencil; and strong watercolour paper for paints or
colour markers. Ideally, of course, you will have prepared
for working in different materials and have corresponding
sketchbooks to suit.
I prefer to use modern felt-tip pens (such as a
waterproof Pilot or Staedtler) with smooth, fairly thin
paper (such as a Daler 3404 sketchbook). Drawing pens
with Indian ink tend to clog up or flow too slowly for my
style of drawing. Alternatively, you can use a steel-nibbed
pen (such as a post office nib) which is simply pushed into
a pen holder and dipped as required into a pot of ink. The
great advantage of old-fashioned steel nibs is that the
thickness of line varies with the pressure exerted, so that
sketches have a lot more character and points of
emphasis. The architect and town planner Raymond
Unwin used various thicknesses of line from a single nib
to good effect in his sketches. The disadvantage of the
open steel nibs is the length of time it takes for the ink to
dry and their tendency to cast ink blots in all directions.
However, with patience, good sunlight and a box of
tissues, the problems can be overcome, and should you
make an ink blot, this can either be worked into the
drawing, or left to dry and scraped away with a sharp
blade and ink rubber. 
I try to encourage my students not to become
weighed down with too many drawing materials – it is
best to travel light and learn to improvise. It is no good for
the artist to become like a photographer impeded by an
assortment of lenses and light meters. All you really need
is an A4 or A5 sketchbook, one or two pens or pencils
and a good rubber. 
The size of sketchbook depends upon the type of
drawing you intend to do, and the medium you are
working with. Large-format sketchbooks (A3–A2 in size)
suit pastel drawing or watercolours rather than line
drawing. As a rule, the finer the line, the smaller the
sketchbook required. If you wish to mix line with paint
then the effect is rather more of a painting than
of a drawing, and consequently a large format is
generally preferred.
I tend not to use sketching stools these days, partly
because pavements are so busy, and partly because
stools are rather cumbersome. You can, however, buy
sketching stools with pockets for carrying pens, etc., and
with a large flap for holding an A4 sketchbook, but I still
prefer to find a café to sit outside. Often the places you
wish to draw are the very spots where people want to sit
and enjoy the view, and hence seats will have been
provided by a friendly town council. In old towns there are
generally lots of steps and walls to sit on, and inside
cathedrals you will find comfortable pews or quiet
cloisters with stone benches in which to enjoy a couple of
hours of sketching. The one advantage of the sketching
stool, however, is that you can choose the exact
viewpoint for the drawing, and this can be important for
certain subjects. 
If you are drawing in pencil make sure you have a
range of pencils of varying softness (6B–B), a soft rubber,
fixative and a sharpener. Some people prefer clutch
pencils, but many others prefer the weight and feel of the
traditional pencil for field work. Pencil is a good starting
Why draw? 25

point for people learning to draw since corrections are
easily made and the graphite or lead pencil has a
‘graininess’ suitable for many building subjects. Pencil
also lends itself to depicting shade, light and shadow and
this may be important in canyon-like street scenes. Pencil
drawings have one other advantage: they can be
photocopied to highlight or darken the tentative lines of a
timid artist. Indeed, modern photocopiers can be a useful
adjunct: not only can they encourage confidence in
beginners, but in addition, several copies of a drawing
may be taken (if, for instance, the sketch is the beginning
for further analysis or the starting point for other artistic
endeavours), while the original drawing is preserved.
Armed with a soft rubber, drawing with graphite pencil
is the best way to start freehand sketching, being flexible,
responsive and easily altered. Whether your sketches are
spontaneous and primitive, or intricate and spatially
accurate compositions reflecting a trained eye, pencil will
probably serve your needs well. It should be
remembered, however, that graphite pencils quickly
smudge, especially if you are using a coarse drawing
paper. It is imperative, therefore, that you spray lightly and
frequently with fixative. Having mastered the technique
of pencil drawing, the artist can then graduate to
sketching in charcoal or pen and ink, or using colour
washes.
Watercolour washes can be used to support pen or
pencil drawings in order to give the appearance of three-
dimensional form. Many people like to use grey wash
along with line work to produce rather classical sketches
of the type favoured in the eighteenth century. You can
mix your own grey wash, or do as I prefer and make a
grey by blending cobalt blue with sepia. The resulting
wash is less ‘dead’ than a grey watercolour straight from
the tube since hints of blue and brown appear as the
wash dries. Sometimes a pre-mixed wash can be
employed, especially if the sketch has to be produced in a
hurry, but often the wash varies in density, to the
detriment of the finished drawing. Watercolour can, of
course, be employed to produce illustration in its own
right. For watercolour sketches use a box of twelve
colours that come with a mixing box (Windsor and
Newton, for instance) and two or three sable brushes. Try
to use largish brushes to avoid the sketches becoming
overworked, and if you like you can take a crayon or
candle to experiment with wax relief to produce the sort
of lively architectural sketches made famous by John
Piper. For mood and character, dark-toned watercolour
sketches can hardly be bettered, but you will find paint a
difficult medium for analytical drawing.
Coloured felt-tip pens can be difficult to master since
their hues are often rather strong and do not mix well
together. But some subjects lend themselves to these
pens (especially modern architectural subjects and
industrial or automobile design). By mixing the bright,
almost luminous quality of felt-tip pens with more neutral
paints or pencil lines, the sketch can assume a sparkle or
resonance appropriate to certain subjects. Felt-tip pens
and magic markers are difficult to control but they have a
place in both the modern design studio and amongst the
sketching tools of an adventurous street artist.
Although I was taught never to use a ruler when
sketching, I do not now subscribe to this view. So many
of our landscapes and buildings are rectilinear in nature
that the use of a ruler to help establish the basic outline
and structure can no longer be considered a lazy short-
cut. The straight-edge is, however, no substitute for the
trained eye. If the sketch is as much learning process as
end product, the ruler may help the latter but does not
assist the former. Hence use the straight-edge if you will,
but do not expect to learn much from the assistance it
gives.
26 Understanding architecture through drawing

LOOKING AND SEEING THROUGH DRAWING:
MODERN SKETCHBOOK PRACTICE
The practice of looking is as important as the practice of
designing. The sketchbook allows the looking to become
more critical – the image produced by drawing heightens
awareness of the subject and offers a greater range of
potential to the designer. Freehand sketching is a way of
recording subjects in a more rigorous way than simply
photographing them, thereby helping to cultivate visual
memory and critical judgement. Looking is a precondition
to exploring subjects beneath the surface, and this is
further developed by sketching. Hence, there is a linear
progression between looking, sketching, drawing and
designing. A distinction is made here between sketching
in the field, drawing in the studio, and rationalising one’s
thoughts through design.
In architecture and design schools drawing studies
form the core of the curriculum. However, drawing tuition
is expensive and demanding of studio space with the
result that much of the teaching of drawing is
concentrated in the early (often foundation) years. As a
result many students fail to carry on exploring through
freehand drawing, preferring to use CAD or technical
drawing in their senior college years. The need to equip
students with the tools necessary for industry and
professional design practice adds to the pressure to
abandon freehand drawing. Computer-assisted drawing
does not necessarily undermine the craft of traditional
drawing as long as creativity and presentation skills have
previously been learnt by more orthodox methods.
Sketchbooks are seen by many students as a form of
visual diary. They tend to resemble notebooks with their
collections of images rather more than traditional hand-
drawn sketchbooks. Modern sketchbook drawings are
both the construction of images and the recording of
objects. Construction suggests a deeper level of inquiry
than mere record-making. Modern sketchbooks tend,
therefore, to contain four main types of visual material –
the sketch as record, the sketch as re-construction,
sketches augmented by photographs or digital images,
and finally, abstract or analytical drawings. The
combination of drawing types makes the sketchbook an
important pedagogic tool, whilst also enhancing the level
of critical viewing. In this sense there is a direct
relationship between the sketch and looking, and by
extension with the development of visual and design
skills.
The trend in art, design and architectural education is
to ‘integrate’ drawing with projects. Stand-alone drawing
classes tend not to occur beyond the foundation years.
The main difficulty with the concept of integration is how
to develop drawing skills in parallel with project ones. The
task of design tends to become dominant over that of
drawing and increasingly, to fill the gap, students and
design professionals rely upon computer-based drawing
packages (Schenk 1998). This further distances the
student from learning through drawing or matching the
complexity of design projects with equally complex
modes of traditional drawing techniques. Also, since
drawing is the means whereby there can be a marriage of
art and architecture, to neglect freehand sketching is to
undermine the alliance of art, sculpture and architecture
upon which the twenty-first century seems increasingly
reliant.
DRAWING AS COMMUNICATION 
Drawings are a designer’s way of writing: they are a
means both of communication and of problem solving.
For many architects there is not a clear distinction
between drawings, words and symbols (Lawson 1980
p173). All contribute towards the evolution of a design
whether in plan, section or elevation. The shapes on
Why draw? 27

2.12
Sketch for unrealised Samsung
Headquarters Building in
London by Sir Terry Farrell.
Notice the similarity in the use
of line and shade to Figure 2.10.
(Sir Terry Farrell)
28 Understanding architecture through drawing

paper, often developed in parallel with model-making, are
the beginnings of a story of design development. Drawing
is essentially a form of language and, like all languages,
there are recognised codes and conventions. It has been
suggested that architectural drawing evolved for
description rather than as a guide to new construction
(Rattenbury 2002 pxxii). In this sense, the primary role of
drawing was to record or analyse an existing building as
opposed to anticipating the form of a new one. The
drawing was a record of culture: human activity was
recorded through drawing not, in the earliest examples
at least, projected by them. Drawing, like language,
was an account of things seen, not a blueprint or
instruction to others. 
One can, however, take the parallels between drawing
and language too far: drawing does not offer the
complexity of a spoken language but what it lacks in
complexity it makes up for in power and communication.
Drawing, like the language of words and mathematics,
seeks to give meaning and order to very complicated
worlds. It is a tool that is both representational and,
looking forward, allows for the ‘meaningful ordering of
things in the environment’ (Lawson 1980 pp173–4). Since
drawing is a type of language, it is used in different ways
by different architects. Some employ drawing as an
analytical tool, others as a form of intuition. Inspirational
drawing, which may be just a few lines and referential
marks, varies from the type of drawing Frank Gehry
makes to those of Norman Foster. Foster’s design
drawings quickly bring order, particularly spatial and
constructional order, to the early chaos of a typical brief.
Gehry’s drawings, on the other hand, display a search for
meaningful randomness, translating the functional
demands of a design brief into a graphic form of non-
linear logic. Both types of design drawing have their own
logical processes and inner fluency, yet they instil
architectural order in different ways. Hence, the resulting
buildings that start from these sketches end up looking
quite different even if they share similarities in function.
One has only to compare Gehry’s Guggenheim Museum
in Bilbao with Foster’s museum in Nimes to see how
powerful is the vehicle of drawing.
Freehand drawings tell us a great deal about the way
individual architects think. They tell us, too, that architects
think quite differently from engineers and artists. Their
sketches lack the engineers’ striving for mathematical
exactitude or the artists’ freedom from graphic
convention. It is often said that you can measure whether
an architect thinks like an architect from his or her
drawings and this is one reason why sketches are often
preferred at crits or job interviews to CAD images. The
sketch contains the message that an architect is a
designer and not just a draughtsman or technician. 
The drawing is also the means by which the arch-
itect visualises, tests and orders imagined relationships
(Lambert 1998 pp8–9). The drawing is a construct that
starts in the mind of the architect and becomes manifest
on paper, where it can be shared with others and further
developed. To become a building there is the participation
with two other key figures – the builder and client. As
such, the drawing presents the artistic and intellectual
ideals behind the design to those whose tasks are
necessarily rather more mundane. However, as Forty
notes, the drawing was the prime means by which
the genius of the architect was set apart from the building
trades (Forty 2004 p30). Sketching and visualising
through drawing is what defines an architect and,
arguably, should be the first skill to be developed in
schools of architecture. 
Why draw? 29

Chapter 3
Choosing the subject 
It is no good dashing off a sketch on your first visit to
a new city or to an interesting building. Such hurried
sketches are generally poorly composed or suffer from
having the light in the wrong direction. It is worth taking
your time and planning the drawing carefully. The chief
points to consider are: 
•
what drawing materials are best for the sketch in
question;
• from where you should draw; 
• what time of day is best for the sketch, bearing in
mind the angle of light, especially sunlight; 
• what position is best to bring out the character of
the subject and produce an attractive compostion. 
Taking the first point about materials, you will probably
find that certain subjects suit a particular sketching
medium. For example, a highly decorative subject such as
the west front of a cathedral would suit a line drawing in
pen and ink, perhaps with depth being created by a sepia
or grey wash to indicate shadows. The interior of the
cathedral, on the other hand, may suit a charcoal drawing
since the darkness and solidity of the columns, vaulting
and arches could be brought out in thick, grainy lines and
smudged tones. An Italian hill town may be best rendered
in watercolour as this may suit the delineation of the pink,
brown and orange walls and roofs. A classical terrace by
John Nash may look its best in pencil with a soft wash of
cream added. A modern ‘high tech’ building such as the
Lloyds Insurance offices in London or the Pompidou
Centre in Paris could be tackled in pen and wash with
brightly coloured felt-tip pens being used to pick out the
externally placed lifts and services. Whatever materials
are employed, the artist should try to establish a
relationship between the qualities of the subject and the
drawing medium.
Deciding where you should sit to draw on location
raises both aesthetic and practical issues. You will often
find that your subject is near the town centre and hence
very busy, or so frequented by tourists that you can hardly
obtain an unobstructed view. Hence you will need to plan
your sketch to fit in with siesta times (if in Europe), or to
take place in the early morning or late evening if in the city
centre. Sometimes you can find a quiet corner even in the
busiest town, but often it will be dirty or the odours will
not be conducive to good sketching. If you have a
sketching stool then your options may be greatly
increased, but try to avoid positions where crowds of
curious children can peer over your shoulder (and maybe
steal your spare pencils!). If you have to find public seats,
30 Understanding architecture through drawing

low walls or steps to sit on, then planning in advance is
doubly necessary. You might well find that the best angles
for drawing are also those preferred by tourists, and
sometimes the best sketching position places you in the
shade or in a draughty corner. Drawing a Mediterranean
town in the warm sunshine of a June afternoon is a rare
pleasure, and with good planning you may be able to find
a street café where for the price of a cup of coffee you
will have an uninterrupted hour for drawing.
You are likely to produce a better sketch if you are
warm and have a little privacy. Besides crowds, try to
avoid sitting in areas full of traffic fumes since this is not
only unhealthy, but the dust and dirt will mark your paper
and discolour your washes. Traffic is usually unavoidable,
but if you study which way the breeze is blowing you may
be able to find an area less troubled by fumes even in
congested cities like Rome or Athens. Often it is only a
case of deciding which side of a square or street to sit in
order to avoid the traffic fumes and enjoy the sunshine on
you and on the subject. 
The angle of light, and particularly of sunlight, can
make the difference between a good and a bad sketch,
and hence affect your ability to learn from the process of
drawing. You will generally need the sunshine to be on
3.1
A drawing of this complexity can only be undertaken with
the façades bathed in sunlight. The level of detail and degree
of patterning requires bright, preferably diagonal, light to pick
out the extraordinary detail. Known as Templeton’s Factory
and situated in Glasgow’s east end, this handsome Victorian
building looks across an extensive park. 
Choosing the subject 31

3.2 (left)
Kinlochmoidart House, designed
in 1884 by William Leiper and
drawn here in 1999 by Nick
Hirst as part of his Philip Webb
Travelling Scholarship. The
drawing is a collection of
sketches and plans aimed at
documentary analysis. Leiper
also designed the building in
Figure 3.1. (Nick Hirst)
3.3 (above right)
The complicated façade of the
Pompidou Centre in Paris is set
against a dark sky to draw
attention to the building’s
expressive silhouette. The
exposed ducting and pipework
make an attractive substitute
for columns and walls. 
3.4 (far right)
Street scenes like this are best
attempted when the traffic has
died down. This 19th-century
‘flat iron’ building in Vancouver
shares a busy road junction with
lamp-posts, telegraph wires and
the occasional delivery bicycle. 
32 Understanding architecture through drawing

your subject and preferably at an angle rather than straight
on. This brings out any sculptural modelling or surface
relief, allowing the artist to understand the nuances of the
building or the intentions of its designer. Certainly it is
useful to highlight or exaggerate effects of light, especially
in older buildings where time has worn away the
sharpness of the detail. Try to avoid having the source of
light behind the subject, unless you are deliberately
attempting to draw its silhouette. Cathedrals lend them-
selves to dramatic silhouette and it is quite permissible to
exaggerate the effects of light on the city skyline. The
Manhattan skyline or a castle such as that at Edinburgh,
perched on a dramatic hilltop, lend themselves to sil-
houette drawing, but the sketch may benefit from having
detail shown at ground level drawn as open line rather
than dark, craggy shapes. Such drawings can tell us about
the role of the ‘monuments’ in the city and their prominent
position in the skyline. The role of lesser buildings and
foreground detail is merely supportive – a point not always
recognised by modern architects or town planners.
Sunlight also casts shadows, which can provide tonal
relief to a line drawing. A collection of lines can appear
rather abstract, while shadow or shading gives the
drawing a feeling of solidity and three-dimensional form.
Shadows can also give an indication of buildings behind or
to one side of the artist, but not in his or her field of view.
It is worth bearing this in mind if you are drawing in the
street or in a square. Shadows give an indication, too, of
deep, canyon-like streets as against open suburban roads.
Sketching should aim to capture the character of places,
and the play of sunlight with its consequent casting of
shadows is part of the visual repertoire to be exploited. 
The depth of shadow is important. Northern subjects
illuminated with soft light suit the faintest of shadows, but
a southern Baroque church or Moorish temple is best
rendered in deep shadow. It has been suggested that the
extent of modelling of a building’s façade directly reflects
the anticipated level of sunlight, a south- or west-facing
frontage being designed with plenty of deep relief whilst
a north-facing façade has a more subdued quality. These
Choosing the subject 33

Sketching should be both enjoyable and educational;
and both may be helped by a little contemplative peace.
As such you are likely to be happier in a quiet leafy
courtyard than a busy high street, and in the side chapel
of a cathedral as against the nave.
Search out quiet corners and try to have a wall behind
you if strangers looking over your shoulder make you feel
uneasy. One other tip about selecting your spot for
sketching: choose somewhere that feels safe (street
crime is unfortunately on the increase in most European
cities) and keep an eye on your wallet or handbag. 
subtleties are often only made manifest to the observer
through the act of drawing. 
One of the professional tricks of the contemporary
architect is to draw a bland office façade with plenty of
deep shadows, thereby suggesting a building of greater
visual richness than the one to be finally built. In this way
the designer may ‘persuade’ a planning committee or
amenity society to accept the proposals. The normal
method of showing shadows is to assume a sun at 45°
over your left shoulder – hence the window sills and
eaves can then be picked out with a dark-blue or even
black shadow. Designers have long realised that they can
enhance the appearance of their proposals by using
shadows based upon an abstract and decidedly flexible
view of reality. In many ways the artist drawing a street
scene or building can adopt this device and in the process
make a dull northern scene look quite lively. Even if the
sun is not shining, the assumption is that it can enhance a
subject and make its visual qualities more accessible to
you as artist, and to those who look at your sketch. 
Choosing the position to draw from is also largely an
aesthetic matter. The relationship between the parts of a
sketch is important and you should seek to achieve a
measure of harmony or balance in the drawing. The
elements to consider are those features in shadow and
those picked out by the sun, those that can be rendered in
line as against tone, and the parts in elevation as against
perspective. All these factors dictate where you choose
to sit, what time of day you select to draw, and what
materials you employ.
Taking time to consider these elements saves you
from frustrations later when the drawing does not work
out in spite of all your efforts. The sketch is really a piece
of design, and hence a great deal of thought and planning
is required. It is unusual to find that you can race into a
drawing and be pleased with the results, or feel you have
learnt from the experience. 
3.5
This drawing of the swimming pool by Alsop and Lyatt in Sheringham, Norfolk,
was drawn from inside a car in order to provide shelter and privacy, and the
best angle for the sketch. 
34 Understanding architecture through drawing

3.6 (below)
Façade study of National Museum of Western Art, Tokyo, designed in
1958 by Le Corbusier.
3.7 (bottom)
Façade study of Metropolitan Festival Hall, Tokyo, designed in 1960 by Kenzo Tange.
Both Figures 3.6 and 3.7 sought to compare the compositional principles of
modernism by two leading exponents.
Choosing the subject 35


Part Two
Techniques 

Chapter 4
Perspective 
An understanding of perspective is essential in order to
gain a full appreciation of the aesthetic quality of towns,
and is necessary in order to be able to draw them well.
Many cities, especially those based upon classical
principles of town planning, exploit perspective in their
arrangement of streets and squares, and if you do not
understand the principles of perspective you can hardly
be expected to draw them adequately. Likewise, many
building interiors are so arranged that a grasp of
perspective is essential not only if you are going to
attempt to sketch them, but in order to understand their
spatial qualities. 
Designers are able to visualise the volumetric
arrangement of their buildings simply by conceiving them
in terms of true perspective. Sir Christopher Wren was
one of the first architects to admit that an understanding
of perspective was vital for the design of a building.
Perspective allows the architect or designer to anticipate
the relationship of the parts of the design without making
a model or drawing a line. As we see towns in terms of
the routes and streets we take, and buildings in terms of
room and corridors, a grasp of linear perspective is a
fundamental starting point for spatial comprehension.
The discovery of true perspective was one of the high
points of Renaissance art. A handful of artists working in
Florence in the fifteenth century stumbled upon the rules
of perspective, and quickly exploited it in their paintings.
Soon afterwards it was adopted by architects, who
arranged their buildings and squares with mathematical
precision. The resulting environment seems almost to
have the expression of perspective as the central point of
the design. Proportional harmony and repeating bay sizes
lent themselves to presentation through perspective
either in the form of paintings or architectural sketches.
Later, in the Baroque period, town planning exploited
perspective by creating long vistas of streets or tree-lined
avenues ending almost at infinity or terminating with a
public building. Without the discovery of geometrically
correct perspective, grand designs such as Versailles or
the Nash terraces in London would have been
unthinkable.
To draw such towns one must understand per-
spective, but sketching in the street does not require
the production of drawing-board perspectives based
upon rotating picture planes and mathematical precision.
In fact, these elaborate perspective drawings can
become so complicated that they discourage you from
drawing on location at all. It is a case of the science of
perspective becoming an obstacle to learning the simple
principles of perspective. 
38 Understanding architecture through drawing

4.1
The axis of this garden in
Siena exploits single-point
perspective. The garden walk
is terminated at one end by
a gateway and at the other
by a formal flowerbed. 
4.2
An understanding of perspective
allows complex subjects such
as this double bow-fronted
Georgian house in Ayr to be
drawn with confidence. Notice
how windows in the distance
are rendered as mere vertical
lines, and the use of hatching
focuses the eye on the critical
parts of the design. 
Perspective 39

Indeed, for most subjects it is only necessary to
understand the basic rules of perspective – that parallel
lines focus upon vanishing points, which are spaced along
your eye level. This simple principle applies irrespective of
the angles of the object (in plan) or changes in the level of
the ground. Of course, if there are slopes or ramps to
draw, these are not level and hence have their own
vanishing point above or below those for horizontal lines,
depending upon whether the slope or ramp is angled up
or down.
Single-point perspective is the easiest to employ in the
field and the most useful for townscape and landscape
drawing. It focuses attention upon the space rather than
the object, and for this reason is a great aid when drawing
squares, streets and interiors. The buildings or walls at
right angles to the observer are simply elevations drawn
without angle to left or right. Single-point perspective
suits the sketching of towns laid out on axial planning
principles, or interiors with parallel corridors and plenty of
right-angled spaces. Hence it is very useful for drawing
classical compositions, whether in terms of buildings or
whole towns. Since the streets are normally straight and
often have terminating features at the vanishing point,
perspective allows the artist to quickly construct the
parameters of the drawing. 
Two-point perspective tends to concentrate the eye
upon objects rather than on the space between them.
Both vanishing points must be on the eye level and are
usually so widely spaced that they are off the sheet they
are drawn on. There are no parallel horizontal lines with
4.3
These three reconstructed
timber houses at the Black
Creek pioneer village in
Ontario show how perspective
enhances the spatial pattern.
Notice how unnecessary detail
has been left out to allow the
observer to focus upon the
buildings.
4.4
This diagram shows how
Figure 4.3 is composed in terms
of eye level and vanishing point. 
40 Understanding architecture through drawing

4.5
The widely set vanishing points
of this sketch of Charles Rennie
Mackintosh’s Hill House near
Glasgow allow the rambling
composition to be included
on a single sheet. 
4.6
Two-point perspective focuses
attention upon objects in space
rather than on the space around
buildings. Here in Blythswood
Square in central Glasgow the
composition retains its original
arrangement.
4.7
The use of diagonals and
repeating bays allows the
complex façade of Blythswood
Square to be set down fairly
accurately. The left- and right-
hand vanishing points are off
the page. Notice how the angle
X° remains the same for the
house’s subdivisions. 
Perspective 41

two-point perspective (unlike single-point) and hence the
artist has to concentrate a little harder on the drawing. A
drawing with a landscape layout (i.e. horizontal) normally
lends itself to two-point perspective, and a portrait layout
(i.e. vertical) to single-point.
With complex towns or groups of buildings, several
vanishing points have to be constructed, at least in one’s
mind’s eye, because the differently angled buildings will
all require their own vanishing point. Since constructing
the vanishing points is time consuming, it is better to
visualise where they are and check the angles in the field
by using your pen or pencil as a guide. By holding the pen
at the angle of the wall or roof and bringing it down to the
paper via an arc rotated about your elbow, you should be
able to check the logic of lines in perspective against how
they appear in reality.
Although perspective deals primarily in angled lines, it
is useful to remember that the weight of line, darkness of
shadow and strength of colour also convey the
appearance of distance. As a rule, objects in the fore-
ground should have the thickest lines, the darkest
shadow and the brightest colour, while those in the
distance should have the reverse – that is, faint lines, soft
shadows and subdued colour. Attention to such detail not
4.8
The sense of perspective in this
sketch has been enhanced by
exaggerating the texture of the
foreground steps. The telegraph
lines also help with handling the
sense of distance and chang
of direction at the top of the
steps. The drawing is of
Andraixt in Majorca. 
42 Understanding architecture through drawing

4.9
These high office blocks in
Chicago exploit perspective in
a vertical rather than horizontal
direction.
Perspective 43

only gives the townscape sketch a certain subtlety, but
helps reinforce the sense of perspective established by
the angled lines. 
There are some further useful tips to add to the
lessons of perspective drawing. One concerns windows:
those disappearing some distance down the street need
not be drawn as compressed rectangles; a simple vertical
line will suffice. Likewise, if the detail of, say, paving is
shown in the foreground, it is quite unnecessary to
attempt to show it in the background, and a mere hint will
be enough in the middle ground. 
If you are going to depart from full scientific per-
spective drawing with its complicated rotating picture
planes (not only cumbersome to put into practice, but
unrealistic in the field), then you will have to use your eye
to fix the depth of elements within the picture. The
well-trained eye will in time prove as reliable as is
necessary but you can assist it by using a pencil to
establish the angle or proportion of height to width
(in perspective). By holding the pencil and using
the thumb as a sliding measure you should achieve
accuracy to within 10 per cent, which is good enough for
location sketching. However, once you have est–
ablished the bay width or the depth of the building and
are happy with it visually (your measurements should
always be checked against how it looks), then you will
discover that the angle of the diagonal will remain
constant. This will allow you to tackle complex subjects
such as street arcades or the column spacings in the aisle
of a church. 
4.10
A grasp of perspective is
necessary to achieve drawings
of this difficulty. Notice how
shade provides an essential
three-dimensionality. The
subject is central Birmingham
as drawn by Francis Tibbalds.
(Francis Tibbalds)
44 Understanding architecture through drawing

Diagonals can also be used to establish the centre of a
wall or building in perspective. By striking both diagonals
lightly in pencil (or just fixing them in one’s mind), the
centre is quickly obtained and hence other information
such as the spacing of windows or location of a door can
be added, knowing that the basic layout is correct. 
The choice of eye level is important in perspective
drawing. If you are interested, say, in the skyline of a tall
building, then it pays to take as low an eye level as
possible and render the silhouette of the top dark against
a light sky. This is how the perspective artists of the
1930s presented their brash new skyscraper designs.
Alternatively, if you wish to look ‘into’ the subject, try to
use a high eye level so that you can delve down into the
streets and spaces and show how they relate to each
other from this angle. When portraying a very tall building
or lofty interior from a viewpoint where you are gazing
upwards, remember that there is a vertical vanishing point
pulling the lines together high over your head. Such a
drawing is really in single-point perspective, with you
turned through 90°. 
An understanding of perspective is a great aid to those
intent upon drawing architecture and towns. However, try
not to allow the rules to dictate your every move, for
spontaneity and flair can be driven away by too slavishly
following the academic conventions of perspective. Some
recent graphic artists such as Paul Hogarth have
deliberately broken such rules in order to arrest the eye
and encourage it to dwell upon the subject longer. They
have developed a system of superimposing objects in
space, which accords, to some extent, with Oriental
concepts of perspective. However, be aware that if you
break the rules of perspective a naivety creeps in that
may undermine the overall appearance of the finished
sketch, no matter how finely the details are rendered. 
4.11
This drawing of the Piazza
Duomo in San Gimignano shows
the attention to detail common
to Renaissance Italy.
Perspective 45

Chapter 5
Line and shade 
Sketching the outline of objects can lead to rather
featureless and abstract drawing. Although one may
recognise the shape of a house, its value to us as an
object is determined by issues of form, texture and
arrangement. These qualities are best represented not by
line alone, but through line and shade. 
Shade gives a sense of three-dimensional reality to
two-dimensional shapes. The convention is simple:
select a direction for a source of light (often imagined) and
shade the sides of the object pointing away from the light
source, drawing the shadow cast on to the ground
and other surfaces. Your simple outline will then become
alive with form, structure and surface richness. The more
the building or object is modelled in plan or section, the
greater will be the complexity of shade and shadows. 
This convention becomes a reality when you draw
on sunny days (mornings or afternoons are the best
times to take advantage of angled light), but you can
invent a source of strong light if it is not present. Ideally
choose sunlight coming over your shoulder (preferably
your left one) at an angle of 45°. This will make the dullest
power station or comprehensive school suddenly dance
off the page. 
5.1
A simple line drawing is a good starting point for architectural
exploration. Here a sketch plan is used to supplement the drawn
view of Aylsham Church in Norfolk. 
46 Understanding architecture through drawing

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
5.2 a, b, c and d
These four sketches of
a Victorian terrace of seaside
flats in Dovercourt, Essex,
show how a line drawing
(a) can be enhanced by
stippled shading (b), hatched
shading (c), and dark pencil
tone shading (d). In each case
the formal composition is
enhanced by shading. 
Line and shade 47

Many eighteenth- or nineteenth-century buildings
employ cornices, string courses and window margins in
order to create panels of walls and frames to highlight key
architectural elements. The presence of these features
can be emphasised in the sketch by exaggerating the play
of light and shade on the façade. Similarly, modern
buildings with their exposed structure and service runs
also benefit from the use of this graphic technique. When
drawing urban space or landscape design, shade and
shadows create a necessary sense of substance to things
such as dwarf walls, hedges, trees and sculpture. 
By placing elements in front of each other, shadows
can be cast from one object on to another. The layering of
objects in the picture not only enlivens the composition,
but adds spatial complexity to the subject. Elements
placed in front of a building such as lamp-posts, telephone
boxes or trees give a sense of depth to the sketch and
allow shadows to pass along the horizontal surfaces and
up the vertical ones. By such means the distances in plan
between object and observer can be expressed and
exploited graphically. 
The function of shadows is, therefore, to make you
aware of the depth within the view: they give flat
two-dimensional subjects a semblance of reality. The
rendition of shadows follows similar conventions to
those of perspective. As a rule, darker shade and
stronger shadows should be in the foreground of the
sketch, becoming progressively lighter as they move into
the distance. This has the effect of reinforcing the illusion
of perspective. 
5.3
This pen drawing of the pioneer village of New
Lanark, Scotland, uses shade to express the
pedimented gable and to focus the eye upon
the cupola. 
5.5
Simple pencil shading brings alive the three-dimensional
qualities of the urban spaces in central Prague (near
the top of Wenceslas Square in this instance). Here a
distinction is made graphically between object buildings
and the background architecture of the city. 
5.4
Shade, shadow and perspective have been used to
exploit the dramatic composition of this church
square in Gaeta in Italy. Notice how the columns
impose an enormous scale on the space, and how
cafés enliven the perimeter of the town square. 
48 Understanding architecture through drawing

5.6
The use of shade and shadow
enhances the sculptural
qualities of this coal mine
at the Snowdown Colliery
in Kent. 
5.8 (left)
Shadow and shade are used
here to highlight the sculptural
quality of this large courtyard
house in Baghdad, Iraq.
5.7 (above)
Line and shade are used to
distinguish between dressed
stone, rough stone, render
and slate of the Royal Mil
in Edinburgh. 
Line and shade 49

Chapter 6
Composition
An appreciation of composition is particularly important
when drawing buildings and cities. The abstract nature of
architecture means that sketches have to be well
composed, otherwise the finished drawing may lack
appeal, or fail to communicate the qualities that attracted
you to the subject in the first place. 
Generally speaking, the subject of the drawing should
occupy the middle third of the sheet, not centrally placed,
but perhaps positioned on the basis of the golden section.
The proportional harmony of the golden section can
enhance the drawing and give the subject a feeling of
repose on the sheet. The subject can, of course, be in
the foreground, middle ground or distance. It often
helps, however, if the main object of the sketch is in the
middle ground with foreground detail such as paving
and background silhouette used to establish layers in
the drawing. 
Since buildings are made of materials of known size
(bricks, blocks of stone, curtain walling, etc.), the
opportunity often exists to exploit the rhythmic patterns
they create. By considering the position of elements in
the drawing it is often possible to create interesting
arrangements that take advantage of the relative scale of
the different building materials. Moreover, as we are all
familiar with the dimensions of a standard brick, the use
of patterns of brick courses quickly establishes a sense
of scale within the sketch. 
Often it is possible to fill an area of the drawing with
brickwork or tiling, and this can provide a texture to set
against more detailed line work of, say, a Georgian
window or doorcase. The justaposition of line, shadow
and texture can make an attractive drawing, and it is
worth taking time before starting the sketch to find a
good combination of these elements. A little licence may
also be permitted in rearranging the parts or extending (or
exaggerating) the area of brickwork in order to produce a
more satisfactory final drawing. Remember that good
composition may also have been the architect’s or town
planner’s objective, and that your sketch is simply
bringing out elements of the town scene that already
exist, though perhaps looking slightly different in reality. 
A good sketch should have layers of information and
meaning. By setting elements into the foreground,
especially those that give local character, you can convey
the atmosphere of a street or urban area. Such details as
post boxes, seats or advertising signs can be placed in the
foreground, and this not only improves the composition of
the sketch but can also give it extra complexity and
richness. Remember, too, that knowing what to leave out
is also important. Unlike the literal documentation of the
6.1 (opposite)
This street scene in London
benefits from details such as
market stalls and a stripey
canopy. This fine drawing
(dated 1992) by Francis Tibbalds
has layers of interest which
help inform the subject. 
(Francis Tibbalds)
50 Understanding architecture through drawing

Composition 51

photographer, a drawing permits the artist to exercise a
discerning eye, adding or subtracting detail to the benefit
of the sketch. 
Building designers play with various ingredients to
produce a satisfactory piece of architecture. They have
proportion, colour, outline, texture, harmony, shadow and
framing at their disposal. Likewise, artists should seek out
these qualities within the object or subject they are
tackling, and exploit them in the drawing. After all, there is
no better way of getting to know a subject than drawing
it, and no better way of remembering what it is really like
beneath the surface appearance. 
Some modern buildings are highly abstract in
appearance and often rather minimal in detail. These
buildings derive from the legacy of the International Style,
which began in the 1920s and put machine production
and functional logic before craftmanship or individual
human needs. Such buildings require a different approach
to being rendered through architectural drawing than do
more traditional townscapes. Here you will find a ruler
useful and perhaps a circle template, and the use of dark
shade and dramatic highlighting may also be helpful.
Similarly, small areas of bright colour may enliven the
drawing, and give a dull building a focus of interest.
Whatever drawing technique is employed, it is important
to think hard about composition before starting to draw,
and to try to enter into the spirit of the period of the
subject before putting pencil to paper. An abstract
modernist building may well suit a cool, almost cerebral,
style of drawing. On the other hand, a Brutalist building of
6.2
This sketch of a street in
Florence focuses upon the
walling elements and surface
textures. The use of shade and
shadow helps enhance the
appearance of three dimensions,
thereby better expressing the
main architectural components.
Unnecessary detail has been
left out. 
52 Understanding architecture through drawing

6.3
By placing the ‘subject’ of
the sketch (which here depicts
the Merchant City, Glasgow)
near the top of the drawing,
the spaces which form the
context and public realm are
also described. 
6.4
This drawing of the semicircular
portico to Bramante’s S. Maria
della Pace in Rome leaves much
detail out in order to express the
framing of the doorway and the
clash between curved and
straight lines. 
Composition 53

the 1960s, with a rough-textured concrete façade (as on
the South Bank in London), would lend itself to a charcoal
or a pencil drawing using a 6B to bring out the graininess
of the surface. Architecture of whatever period has
always attracted the artist, and modern buildings are
no exception. 
It is useful to try to relate the compositional arrange-
ment of the sketch to the theme of the subject. Should
you be drawing a city church faced by a square, then both
church and square should feature in the sketch since both
are probably there in support of each other. In Europe
most cathedrals and many town churches are fronted at
their west end by a square, and it would be foolish to
draw the church without at least hinting at the presence
of the square. Consequently, your composition should
6.5
The cliff-like structure of the
ferry Norland is broken up by the
angled lines of mooring ropes
and access gangway. Placing
the bollard in the foreground
adds to the layers of interest,
which reinforce the nautical
theme of the sketch. 
provide space for both, perhaps with church and square
linked by single-point perspective. As the square
will probably be paved over and perhaps edged with
clipped hedges or statues, the artist has elements
around which to build up an attractive and well-
constructed picture. 
The relative positioning of the different elements, the
weight of line and tonal value of each, are all important
considerations and should be planned in advance of
starting to draw. There is nothing worse than spending a
great deal of time carefully drawing an ornate Baroque
church to find that you have not captured the spirit of the
place through not considering the composition of the
picture with due care. Remember that a degree of
abstraction or restraint is important – you cannot draw
54 Understanding architecture through drawing

6.6
The Beacon Hill area of Boston,
Massachusetts, contains
fine 19th-century houses and
squares. Here railings and a fire
hydrant add foreground interest
and give the sketch a complexity
which a study of building
façades alone would lack. 
6.7
This sketch of an advertising
gable in Ukiah, California, uses
the telegraph pole wires and
parked cars to add further
layers of meaning or character.
The nature of American urban
design was the starting point
for this descriptive drawing. 
Composition 55

everything, and to select the focus of attention at the
outset is vital. This should prevent you from over-working
the subject and ending up producing what amounts to a
second-rate photograph. 
Since the most prominent features of a building are
those that form a frame (doors, windows, trusses,
gateways), you should incorporate these into your picture.
As we move through a building, we have an impression of
prospects opening out of bigger rooms viewed through
narrow spaces. The transition between rooms is often
marked by a doorway that is deliberately framed. Since
we experience architecture by passing through these
framing elements, they are very much part of the scene
and therefore cannot be ignored. Indeed, successful
sketches frequently tantalise the observer with a glimpse
of a distant, and sometimes mysterious, world through
such ‘frames’ – the view through the solid gateway of a
medieval town being a good example. 
As with all great buildings or fine cities and
landscapes, there needs to be an element of complexity
and richness in the freehand drawing. Such complexity
can be set against the plainness of unadorned surfaces to
heighten the drama of the sketch. Alternatively, any
repeated surface decoration can establish a rhythm or
beat as in music. Searching out such compositions can
result in well-informed drawing that not only sustains our
attention but also teaches us something about the nature
of the place. 
As mentioned already, the positioning on the page of
the main subject of the sketch is important. A sketch can
6.8
Modernist buildings often
express their design ambition
with great vigour.
56 Understanding architecture through drawing

6.9 a and b
These studies of a medieval townhouse in Gloucester by Nick Hirst are
finely composed on the page. Notice how the section to the right provides
a perfect balance to the façade study on the left. (Nick Hirst)
Composition 57

be either landscape (horizontal) or portrait (vertical) in
layout, depending upon whether a panorama or, for
instance, a street scene is preferred. Panoramas of cities
can be dull affairs – just a collection of roofs and towers –
though vertical elements such as columnar cypress trees,
factory chimneys or masts can be used to offset the
stretching horizontality of the subject. Likewise, street
scenes may require some horizontality or shallow-angled
lines to counter the tendency towards the vertical. In both
cases you should search out shapes and lines to balance
the dominant ‘direction’ of subject or layout. 
To return to the subject of the town church; if you wish
to draw the square in any detail then it is necessary to
place the church towards the top of the sheet. This will
allow you to pull the lines of the square and its paving
towards you, thereby giving the impression that you are
looking both ‘into’ the space and ‘at’ the church. This type
of drawing establishes a dialogue between object and
space, and allows you to consider how the square is used
and decorated. 
Often a good sketch consists of leaving large areas of
the sheet relatively unrendered. A mere hint of lines is
usually sufficient and the openness of approach on one
part of the page can enhance the level of detail
elsewhere. A common mistake is to draw to the same
level of intensity right across the sheet, thereby removing
the opportunity for tensional conflicts. Since traditional
architecture plays on such tensions (for example, the
contrast between a decorated entrance doorway and a
plain area of wall) and modern architecture often ignores
them, a perceptive drawing should seek to exploit these
differences.
Try, if you can, to compose your drawing around
powerful lines of force within the sketch. These may be
the vertical ribs of an office block, the diagonal grid of a
steel-framed bridge, or the flowing lines of forestry
planting. The structure of a drawing should consist of
these dominating linear forces being mediated by
secondary lines or areas of shadow. If possible, seek a
balance between the primary and secondary elements, or
at least soften the harsh linearity of most architectural
subjects by drawing in surface pattern or texture. 
The inclusion of such elements as people, cars or
vegetation helps to counteract the rectangular or linear
forms of buildings. The degree to which these secondary
elements soften the sharp outlines of architecture
depends upon the subject and the effect sought. You may
wish to add complexity and contradiction to the subject,
or simply accept the realities of a highly engineered
environment.
The play between horizontal and vertical lines, and
between hard and soft elements, can be developed into
triangular groupings on the sheet. By having three points
of interest the picture is more easily composed. Instead
of, say, the unresolved dominance of the towering lines of
a skyscraper, the drawing will have a repose, which may
suit certain subjects. Triangular framing does require
rather more than a simple sketch; the artist is now
moving towards a more detailed drawing, perhaps as a
prelude to easel painting. 
As so much urban drawing deals with the façades of
buildings, the artist should try to add interest to the
drawing by giving the observer a sense of looking both
into the spaces of the city and at its buildings. The effect
can be achieved by pulling the lines of a street or square
towards the observer, thereby creating space that is
‘entered into’. The tension that results from the city as
‘elevation’ and the street as ‘stage’ can lead to a sketch
rich in ideas about the nature of urban design. 
58 Understanding architecture through drawing

6.10
Landscape often provides a better opportunity to compose a
drawing than townscape. The patterns in this Tuscan landscape
are all man-made and could be turned to architectural effect.
Composition 59

Chapter 7
The importance of practice 
The co-ordination of hand and eye is a necessary starting
point for freehand drawing. It is only through frequent
practice and by following sound principles that the
facility to draw without hesitation or uncertainty can be
attained. The fluid, confident lines of an accomplished
draughtsman are achieved as the result of much practice.
This book does not pretend to teach drawing, only to
encourage its use as part of the design process. Like the
acquisition of all skills, training and self-discipline are as
important as the possession of natural talent. 
Practice does not require that you spend your time
entirely on location drawing. The home and the design
studio or workshop provide ample opportunity to develop
eye-to-hand co-ordination or to test the rules of
perspective drawing. By looking at the outline of the
subject and infilling part or all of the detail – whether it be
a drawing of a chair or cup and saucer – you will quickly
develop the basic skills necessary for sketching in the
street. The importance of spontaneous, relaxed drawing
cannot be overemphasised. While you might be
concentrating on organising the angled lines of a scene
into a sound perspective framework, the fact that you are
sketching at all is of the greatest importance. Unlike the
first notes on a piano or trumpet, the artist’s scribbles are
largely a private affair and should not disturb the
household. It is remarkable how quickly most people
graduate from producing primitive, inhibited sketches to
lifelike representations. 
It is important that you approach drawing from both
ends – from the personal, idiosyncratic angle, and from
the point of view of academic skill. The latter concerns
questions of perspective, composition, shade and
shadow. By developing both a personal style and a good
grasp of basic principles, it should be possible to produce
drawings that are lively and informative. Architectural
sketching benefits from both a strong individual approach
to the subject and the necessary graphic techniques to
relay the private vision satisfactorily. 
7.1
Small subjects can be a useful
starting point in learning to
explore through freehand
drawing. Here a fragment of
structure from the lighthouse
at Dovercourt forms the basis
of the sketch. 
60 Understanding architecture through drawing

7.2
Edward May’s sketch of
candleholders is the type of
subject which lends itself to
a practice exercise. May’s
facility for drawing was, no
doubt, acquired as the result
of many such sketches.
(RIBA Drawings Collection) 
7.3
Sketch by the author of a
column capital at Dumma Goulia
in Homs, Syria. The decoration
is based upon the palm leaf.
The importance of practice 61

7.4
This sketch (dated 1905) by
Mackintosh of a hall at Cley in
Norfolk edits out features in an
attempt to interpret rather than
merely describe the scene.
The artist’s facility is achieved
as the result of practice and a
critical approach. (Glasgow
University: Mackintosh
Collection)
62 Understanding architecture through drawing

7.5
A degree of abstraction
helps when rendering difficult
subjects, as in this sketch
made near Dubrovnik. 
7.6
Derelict industrial areas
(in this case on the edge of
Birmingham) provide much
material upon which to practise
different drawing techniques. 
The importance of practice 63

Chapter 8
From sketch to plan making and documentary
investigation 
Sketching may on occasion be supplemented by drawing
quick plans or sections. The sketch is a useful and
enjoyable tool, but there are occasions when more
analytical drawings are required. Although a sketch can
indicate the position of a doorway relative to the rest of
the façade, it cannot show the importance of the door
with regard to the plan of the building. Here you will have
to resort to preparing drawings of a more technical
nature.
As with sketching, there are a few useful tips to bear
in mind. If you are going to measure the subject, get
someone else to hold the end of the tape measure, and
preferably a third person to read out the dimensions. Your
task will then be that of drawing and recording the
measurements. Any plan prepared in this way should
have the sketch plan, section or elevation drawn at the
same time as the measurements are taken, and ideally at
the same scale. 
Height often poses a problem, but you can triangulate
the subject or alternatively use a staircase (if you have
access to the interior) to take a vertical measure.
Sometimes you can count the number of brick courses,
assuming they are laid at four courses per foot. If these
fail, then it is possible to take an informed guess on the
basis of 9 feet (2.7m) per storey for an ordinary house
(allowing for the type of construction) and 15 feet (4.4m)
for a grander building. 
The sketch plan does not have to be dimensionally
accurate to contain useful information. The fact that the
building is square in plan, or that a city street is the same
width as the height of houses enclosing it, is more
important than mere dimensions. You may be able to
pace out the dimensions of the building, on the
assumption that your step is about 3 feet (0.9m), or
determine the height of doors by your reach. 
Approximate plans are used to supplement the
sketched information and to help bring some aspect of
the design into clearer focus. After all, you are sketching
to learn about the built environment, and learning does
require a disciplined approach. With townscape sketches,
a quickly drawn plan of the figure-ground (the relationship
between the solids of buildings and the voids of streets
and spaces) helps explain the geometry or pattern evident
in your view. It may also encourage you to draw from
another point in the street, thereby helping you to reach a
real understanding of the often complex spatial
interactions in an urban scene. 
Assuming you have prepared a sketch and
supplemented this with a plan or section, then you may
decide to take your investigation further. 
64 Understanding architecture through drawing

8.1
Flockerton Mill, Douglas, in
Scotland, is typical of early
industrial architecture. The
sketch shows the general
arrangement but other drawings,
such as the section, are required
to explain how the various
buildings work. 
8.2
The sketch of the Royal Crescent
in Bath is supplemented by a
plan drawn at the time from
memory. The exploration of the
geometry of the volumes at an
urban level was the reason for
the drawing. 
From sketch to plan making 65

8.3
This sketch, based upon field
notes and town plans, shows
the proportional system
employed at the Baroque
Piazza San Carlo in Turin.
Plan, section and elevation have
all been employed to highlight
the relationship between the
detail and the whole. 
66 Understanding architecture through drawing

8.4
Figure-ground drawings
prepared from a good map can
show the relationship between
the solids (buildings) and voids
(spaces) of the city. Here an
area of London Docklands is
shown with the lack of
connections between old and
new communities manifested
through the drawing technique. 
From sketch to plan making 67

8.5
This plan sketch by Sir Nicholas
Grimshaw for the Berlin Stock
Exchange seeks to show how
the rhythms of construction and
the urban context are
reconciled. Notice how the
rotunda forms a public space
at the entrance.
(Sir Nicholas Grimshaw)
68 Understanding architecture through drawing

8.6 a, b and c
These studies of Gravesend in
Kent by Richard Reid move from
sketchbook drawings to more
analytical explorations and
broad design proposals. 
From sketch to plan making 69

Local libraries will probably contain documentary
records about the date of the subject, or other information
that can enhance your understanding of the area you have
studied through the sketch. Inquiry through graphic
analysis is a useful means of cultivating an appreciation of
an area or subject, particularly if it then leads to a search
through archival records or historic plans. This may not
suit everybody’s needs, but for a school or college project
the bringing together of graphic and written sources is a
useful educational tool. 
Just as in your freehand drawing, the weight of line
must be used to help explain aspects of the plan. The
sketch plans are meant to communicate and thus should
abide by accepted norms of technical drawing. Hence the
most important information (such as the position of the
walls of a house) should be rendered in the thickest lines
and deepest tones. If the garden fence and structural
walls have the same weight of line, then their relative
importance is obscured. Likewise, the presence of
mouldings on the front façade may be important to
understanding the proportional rules that the original
architect employed (as with a Georgian house), and this
fact can be drawn to the attention of the viewer by your
selection of an appropriate weight of line. The presence
or absence of lines and their relative weight are as
important as the presence or absence of words in a
report.
Your sketches and plans are really records of facts or
your interpretation of them – they are not mere
speculations or whimsical invention. If you wish to move
into design changes, then your inventions should be
clearly indicated. The progression from sketch as record,
plan as description, and design drawing as proposed
change is an accepted method of proceeding. But it is
important that should you mix all three together on a
single sheet, then this fact should be communicated to
those who look at the drawing. Similarly, records of fact
and matters of interpretation should be clearly marked as
such and not combined in the same graphic language. 
The intention is to supplement the sketch with other
relevant information. Your need for additional material will
in all probability stem from a practical consideration such
as curiosity about how the building is constructed, how
the landscape is formed, or the design put together.
Hence, the initial sketch – itself probably the result of a
need to admire or record – leads to further inquiry that
takes you from the sketchbook to the notepad and
perhaps to the local archive office, planning department or
library. Seen in this way, the sketch is part of the process
of understanding, not an end in itself 
Through the sketchbook we may learn to appreciate
objects and places for what they are, and as designers
intervene in a more informed and sensitive fashion.
Because the sketchbook requires our concentrated
involvement and can lead outwards into the further
investigations mentioned above, it is a great deal more
useful than the camera. The camera can only record – it
cannot edit, select or interpret. A trained photographer
may use the camera creatively, but its educational
benefits are limited. By encouraging us to become more
visually literate through the countless photographs
produced each year, the camera can have the adverse
effect of focusing our attention upon the superficialities of
subject and form, rather than upon their underlying
structure and meaning. 
70 Understanding architecture through drawing

8.7
The investigation of urban
landmarks in Manchester forms
a starting point for Sir Terry
Farrell’s Green Building (see
Chapter 18).
(Sir Terry Farrell)
From sketch to plan making 71

Chapter 9
Sequential sketches 
Sketching is about exploration, about learning to see
places and architecture through the graphic experience.
As such, the architectural illustrator is concerned with
interpretation rather than mere description, and that
interpretation must contain elements of critical
judgement. A common mistake is to draw too literally and
to seek representation from one viewpoint alone. 
To reach a real understanding of ‘place’, you need to
walk through it, thereby experiencing the changing
geometries of the urban scene. Sketching can be a useful
aid to urban analysis as long as the viewpoints are chosen
with some thought. The most rewarding urban spaces
often revolve around a public monument where a mixture
of squares, streets and lanes provide a range of spatial
patterns. As you move through the different volumes, you
become aware of large and small spaces, enclosed and
partially enclosed ones, connected and unconnected
ones. The beauty of many towns, particularly historic
ones, lies in this variety and in the unexpected delights
that unfold. 
You can attempt to record such experiences through a
single sketch, but usually a collection of sketches is more
informative. The mystery of old towns, which derives in
no small part from the irregular street layout, and the
marvellous contrast between large public buildings and
small domestic ones, can be captured in a well-planned
sequence of analytical sketches. The complexity of such
places and the subtle interplay between the parts means
that three or four sketches are required to capture the
essence of the place and its changing geometries. Such
sequential sketches (or ‘serial vision’, as Gordon Cullen
put it) should be based upon well-selected viewpoints.
For the drawing of a historic town with a major public
monument as focus you should sketch: 
•
the approach from afar, or at least just outside the
immediate sphere of influence of the monument; 
•
a view glimpsed of the monument above roof tops
or along streets (the monument should not yet be
fully in view); 
•
a view showing much or all of the monument within
its setting; 
•
a close-up view of the monument, with steps,
railings and human activity round about. 
Whatever sequence you follow (and many different vistas
are normally available), it is important to keep the feeling
of mystery and suspense alive. Therefore the story should
unfold like a good play, with each drawing an act that
develops a particular theme. It often helps if the views
72 Understanding architecture through drawing

9.1
This sequence of four views
along a route in Siena seeks
to explore the landmarking of
a street by major and minor
architectural ‘events’. 
Sequential sketches 73

9.2 a, b, c and d
These four drawings take
the theme of exploring bridge
crossings over the canals of
Venice. Each sketch relates
the bridges to the adjoining
palace façades. 
selected are of, or appear alongside, ‘hinge’ buildings
that act as key ‘events’ in the unfolding of the urban
experience. Gateways provide an obvious example, but
often steps or a café are equally useful to aid the
observer. Few major towns are without such a sequence
of spaces and key buildings, and to search them out
through the sketchbook is a valuable and enjoyable
experience. Sadly many modern places are without these
qualities and the designer’s challenge today is how to
introduce greater spatial variety into an otherwise dull
network of streets. 
If you are seeking to analyse urban space through
such means, you may find sketch plans useful. They can
help relate your sketches to key factors in the structure of
the town, and explain dynamic or spatial relationships that
were only hinted at in the street view. 
By using sequential sketches to analyse urban scenes,
you will quickly become aware of the complex
geometries present. Slight deviations in routes or
changes in level can in reality be quite marked, though
they seem hardly discernable in plan or section. Likewise,
abrupt changes of direction can break the line of
continuity that is so important in the enjoyment of place.
Contrast can be employed deliberately and should be
reserved for siting significant public buildings such as the
sudden termination of a vista by a town hall or the set-
back on a street to reveal a church. Often, however, the
use of contrast is abused by private buildings such as a
supermarket or an office block seeking to draw attention
to itself. 
74 Understanding architecture through drawing

Sequential sketches 75

9.3 a, b, c and d
This sequence of sketches
presents the village of Easdale
in Scotland. The views selected
describe critical point – from
the sea edge to inner spaces.
The emphasis is upon entry,
harbour-side, procession and
termination – all studied against
a Highland backcloth. 
76 Understanding architecture through drawing

Sequential sketches 77

You can, of course, record contrast through a
discerning sketch. If your sketches are concerned with
contrast and discontinuity, then do not hesitate to
underline the point with a well-selected viewpoint. For
example, if you find that the scale of the town changes at
a particular point, then this is where to draw. By placing
the large and small buildings side by side their full impact
may be felt, and if the change of scale occurs at a change
of direction (which is often the case), then the sketch
has additional value. Sequential sketches should
therefore seek out differences and contrasts in order to
enliven the drawings and increase your own awareness of
design issues. 
Sequential sketches can also be employed to explore
the line of continuity referred to above and found in many
urban situations. Such lines often unite a row of
warehouses facing a harbourside or the frontage of
buildings along a high street. It is often important to
maintain such continuity (for reasons of civic design) in
order to provide a firm edge to the urban scene. A straight
line tends to be visually less satisfactory than one that
curves slightly or absorbs some irregularity with ease. A
sketch of such a line, whether straight or curving, can be
quite delightful and informative, especially if it is part of a
sequence of related views that deal also with questions
of punctuation – in other words, how the line is stopped
and defined along its route. 
It is important for the observer to ‘read’ the line and its
punctuation, otherwise the point of the sketch may be
lost. Therefore try to highlight the elements that make up
the line of continuity, and draw attention to the elements
that define points along its length. You are trying to make
‘informed’ sketches – sketches that tell you about the
nature of urban design – so a measure of selectivity and
focus in your drawing is important. 
If the line of continuity links together the façades of a
group of buildings facing a river, then use a particular tone
or wash to unite them in your sketch. Add contrast or
complexity by drawing attention to certain ingredients
within the view, such as decorated doorways, special
9.4
This sequence of sketches
of the Guggenheim Museum in
Bilbao designed by Frank
Gehry explores the relationship
between art, space and
architecture.
78 Understanding architecture through drawing

9.5
This sequence of sketches
from Kyoto begins with the
Zen garden at the Ryoanji
Temple and ends with the Open
Air Art Museum designed by
Tadao Ando. The route traces a
journey through gravel gardens,
standing stones, minimalist
planes of concrete and art
installations.
shopfronts or town churches. Your sequence of sketches
should explore progress along the line, noting where and
how it is broken, deflected or punctuated. 
Mention has already been made of the geometry of
urban spaces. Most places of interest contain a mixture of
cubes, rectangles and spheres. Such complex geometries
are the essence of attractive townscape. These spaces
and their interrelationships can only be discovered by
walking about the town and recording one’s impressions
in the sketchbook. The volumetric geometry often
extends to the interiors of buildings where a circular
space inside, say, a church is complemented by a
rectangle of urban space outside. In his design for the
Sheldonian Theatre in Oxford, Sir Christopher Wren
played upon such interrelationships, as did the designers
of many Baroque churches in Rome, and more recently
Frank Gehry at the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao. 
You can train your eye to recognise and appreciate this
architectural interplay, and through the sketchbook record
and analyse your experiences. Of course, if you are an
architect, town planner or developer, you may be in a
position to bring this sensibility to bear upon current civic
design. Europe once had a splendid tradition of related
interior and exterior spaces, but the car and the
dominance of street traffic have together eroded our
perception of this rich urban heritage. 
Sequential sketches 79

Chapter 10
Drawing and photography
with Susan Fahy
To freehand drawing, photography is a double-edged
sword. The lens can make an exact copy of a building
façade or city scene, allowing the designer to save time
on the arduous task of rendering. Once a design has
begun to take shape, photography can also allow the
imagined object to be further explored with the help of
digitisation. Hence, photography adds a useful dimension
to the trilogy of freehand sketching, model-making and
CAD simulation.
Photography is, however, an ambivalent tool because
its ability to make quick accurate images can engender a
certain lack of critical engagement by the student or
practitioner. The photographic image is so superficially
compelling that the deeper inquiries that accompany
freehand drawing are discouraged. In fact, the better the
photograph the less likely it is that other modes of visual
media will be employed. The lens produces a mind set of
replication and exactitude that can thwart visual
discrimination unless the student seeks to combine
photography with other tools of design analysis. If the
camera is employed simply for recording it has many
advantages as long as freehand drawing is used to
scratch beneath the surface. By combining the use of
photography and drawing, the architect can record all the
details and at the same time explore the fundamentals of
rhythm, structure, proportion, skyline and texture. It is the
latter that are needed as a stimulus to design intervention
in the city or landscape.
It is clear that the photograph can anticipate the
freehand drawing or, conversely, it can follow the sketch
by recording and digitising the drawn image. Either way,
there is a dynamic relationship between what is drawn,
what is photographed, and the evolving design
intervention. The latter can be developed using other
tools such as the sketch design model and CAD. As such,
the photographic image can play an important role in the
testing and resolution of architectural design problems,
particularly when there is a physical context to take into
account. Here one can use collage or cut and paste to
combine design options with the photographic realities of
the site.
Photography has insinuated itself into nearly all
aspects of visual culture and this has inevitably impacted
upon architecture. In architecture, photographs can also
be used in a variety of ways both documentary and
creative. Used with a critical eye, the photographic image
can be employed, for instance, to study an existing
building in order to understand design qualities such as
the use of light, structural arrangements or the colour or
texture of materials. Light in particular is well explored via
80 Understanding architecture through drawing

the camera lens, particularly the atmospheric effects of
natural light found in much contemporary architecture.
How light changes the quality of rugged modern materials
such as concrete or cast glass, and how this alters the
perception of interior space, are subjects that photo-
graphic images can reveal more readily than line in the
sketchbook. Similarly the analysis of light and shade,
particularly the patterns of shadows, lends itself to lens-
based investigation. However, when the camera is used
in this fashion it is often advantageous to supplement the
photographic images with sketched notes – the two
mediums being used in a complementary way, taking
advantage of the graphic properties of each. Buildings
such as the Jewish Memorial Museum in Berlin by Daniel
Libeskind lend themselves to combining lens and
traditional drawing techniques. 
Used with discrimination, photography can encourage
the type of critical observation required of designers. The
lens, whether in the eye or the camera, is the tool that
communicates the properties of the visual world. The lens
is both the medium of visual communication and the
instrument that models light and form. In this regard how
the lens is employed influences how the designer thinks.
The raw material of sight is communication – what the
lens and sketchbook help to develop is visual judgement,
which in turn is the source of a personal style of drawing
and architectural form making. As such the photographic
lens can help reveal truths in architecture, particularly in
areas like the modelling of light, which can then be
employed in design.
10.1a and b 
These photographs by Susan Fahy of the Jewish Memorial Museum in Berlin capture the
atmospheric effects of light and space sought by its architect Daniel Libeskind. (Susan Fahy)
Drawing and photography 81

Photography is also a useful tool in undertaking
documentation of architecture, perhaps in the context of
comparative analysis of typology variations. The ability of
the photograph to record from a consistent perspective
removes some of the subjective qualities of drawing.
Such documentation can help inform a designer whose
subsequent drawings are influenced by what is revealed
through the lens. For instance, if an architect was
commissioned to design a radio mast (as Lord Foster was
in Barcelona in 1996) the documentation of existing masts
could provide a useful archive of photographic images
that sketching can compare, analyse and take forward as
ideas for new design solutions. So there are benefits in
combining the lens and sketchbook, just as there are later
in the design process in synthesising ideas developed
through drawing, model-making and CAD.
A great deal of interest was shown in the ‘city’ by
photographers of the modern movement. The aim was to
document the rich, diverse and often horrific imagery of
the twentieth century urban scene. The exploration of the
‘city’ by photographers influenced architects of the period
such as Le Corbusier, whose visionary plans for Paris and
Algiers sought to embrace the whole urban world in one
clean sweep of reform. The squalor and chaos recorded
by the photo-journalists of the period became an
inspiration for large-scale reconstruction. Having recorded
the city, architects felt motivated to use fresh approaches
to urban design to create a new, ordered utopia. Le
Corbusier’s urban remodelling and, to a lesser degree,
that of Walter Gropius were a response to the horrors that
the documentary photographers had revealed. The
stretched image of the wide-angled photographic
10.2a and b (left)
These studies of patterns of
magnetized iron dust by James
Bingham from his ‘Dead Reckoning’
series can readily be turned into
formal compositions applicable to
building design. The sequence of
images captures the fluidity and
movement in modern architecture
(James Bingham)
10.3a and b (opposite)
Comparison between documentary
photography (a) and documentary
drawing (b) using grain silos in
Montreal as an example. (Susan
Fahy and Brian Edwards)
82 Understanding architecture through drawing

portraits of European urbanism encouraged architects to
think on a grand and ultimately damaging scale. What
photographic artists revealed through their work became
an inspiration to a generation of modernist architects.
Creating a record of the site for later investigation is
common practice, whether by sketchbook or camera. The
idea of photo-documentation led to the practice of
repetition and the exploration of various architectural
typologies. As early as 1947 Lazio-Moholy Nagy was
presenting exhibitions of photographs based on industrial
and architectural sequences that exposed the language of
abstraction related to the built environment. Replication
and prefabrication, which featured largely in architectural
practice in the 1950s and 1960s, owed something to
these photographic sequences. The lens had frozen a
moment in time, allowing serial fragmentation of
movement and subtle changes in cities to be expressed
with inherent design potential. As artists moved
increasingly from the body to the urban scene for
inspiration they exposed the limitations of the thinking
methods used by architects. In time the fractals and
abstractions of the photo-documentary artists, coupled
with ideas from land-art and map-making, led to the
opening up of fresh design possibilities. With new forms
of digitised representation (including video) the limitations
of the straight line and right angle were exposed. Just as
the discovery of perspective had liberated architecture in
the late fifteenth century, so too documentary
photography and video opened up new lines of design
potential late in the twentieth century. 
Drawing and photography 83

10.4a and b 
This photograph by Susan Fahy
of the British Embassy in Rome
designed in 1968 by Sir Basil
Spence is set alongside the
sketch made by Spence. Both
the drawing and the photograph
explore the different effects of
light and shade. (Susan Fahy
and Sir Basil Spence)
84 Understanding architecture through drawing

The photograph of a building, like the formal per-
spective drawing, suffers, however, from one perennial
weakness: it so alters the representation of the object
that the image takes over from the intellectual content of
the architecture. However, new modes of lens-based
representation when mixed with CAD allow evolving
design ideas to be explored in fresh ways using
photographs as the starting context. For example, ideas
can be developed away from the studio using laptops,
which allows design possibilities to be shared with others
in an interactive fashion whilst retaining the original
photographs as reference. In this world of photo-
manipulation, the student and practitioner should,
however, remember that it is the design that matters, not
the images of it, which can be manipulated with ever
greater finesse. Although the photography/CAD interface
can amplify the architectural imagination, the process of
design remains a difficult probing activity. 
In architecture, the photograph, like the perspective
drawing, can be responsible for a great deal of false
imagery, which leads to poor design. The problem with
modern photography is the ease with which the image
can be modified and glamorised, moving architecture into
the realm of fashion on the one hand, or fine art on the
other. One has only to look at architecture journals and
certain book publishers to see the consequences of the
surface image superseding the plan and section as the
basis for architectural thought. 
The lens has impacted on the main arena of
architectural discourse in an ambiguous fashion and in the
10.5
This photograph of Blakeney Point
in Norfolk has been modified to
test the design of a visitor centre
(left) for the National Trust. The
use of white correction fluid
contrasts well with black pen in
this speculative design proposal.
Drawing and photography 85

process it has altered modern sketchbook practice.
Photography has its uses but only if the architect
exercises critical judgement in its employment relative to
freehand drawing. The camera lens is no substitute for
the eye and the critical exchanges that occur in designing
between the eye, hand and paper. The freehand drawing
needs to remain at the centre of creative practice, with
the camera operating at an important but essentially
secondary level.
A potential weakness of the photographic image is the
neglect of line. In architecture, the line is a powerful force
of demarcation and the representation of architectural
order. The line is the basis for judgement and intellectual
discourse. No such comparable discipline exists in
photography until the designer imposes linear patterns
onto the image. However, the photograph is a useful tool
for exploring atmospheric effects in architecture, such as
the impact of light on an interior or the texture of
surfaces. This more spiritual dimension to design lends
itself to lens-based analysis, either as static or moving
images. Bringing together the architectural diagram
expressed in plan or section with the atmospheric
qualities of photography offers the potential to explore
design in fresh ways. The photograph provides a
subjective depth to the objectivity of the plan, allowing
design ideas to be tested beyond their intellectual
properties. In this way the combination of various
thicknesses of line used to reflect the hierarchies of
space or structure when combined with photomontage
reveals the greater whole of the embryonic design. But a
word of warning – since architecture is a discipline where
spatial ideas rather than images are the basis for plan
generation, the use of photography must take a
secondary role to that of freehand drawing. If it does not
then new designs are merely cloned versions of old ones.
With an intervention in an existing building the picture
is somewhat different. Photography allows a subject to
be examined in all its detail. The images produced form
the basis for the kind of examination denied of sketching
(unless one is highly accomplished and willing to spend
many hours in painstaking drawing). Using computer
digitisation such as photogrammetry and software
programmes like Photoshop, the images produced via the
lens can be enlarged, collaged and altered in a variety of
ways. As a result, photography can reveal what is easily
overlooked by the casual eye.
When presenting to a client or studio instructor, a
photographic presentation can evoke the spirit of a design
and cite appropriate precedent. Used in conjunction with
a sketch design drawn in plan and section, the
supplementary photographs can help complete the
picture of what the resulting building may look like. In this
way freehand drawing, mechanical rendering and
photography, when combined into a single presentation,
may provide a useful character sketch of a design project
during its evolution. Where existing buildings are
employed in this type of storyboard presentation it is
important to name the building being referred to and to
cite the architect. Students who fail to do this may be
accused of plagiarism, since visual references are as
important as literary ones.
The type of hybrid drawing where freehand sketches,
key words, formal technical renderings, CAD and
photography are combined is an increasingly common
sight in the design studio. It is the basis for most student
‘crits’ in UK schools of architecture. The hybridisation of
rendering styles reflects the growing complexity of
architectural practice and the relative decline of the plan
as the major generator of built form. The latter mirrors the
rise of postmodernism, with its emphasis upon the
section and external image. It also mirrors the
democratisation of architecture and the expanding role of
amenity groups and external stakeholders in design. For
these people new forms of representation are needed
86 Understanding architecture through drawing

and this has encouraged the rise in the architectural
photograph. Often the architectural photograph is, in fact,
a set of multiple images, collage or photomontage. When
combined with drawing and perhaps physical models
these achieve an experience of architectural possibilities
that any single medium fails to deliver.
The hybrid drawing is also commonly used in the
adaptation of existing buildings. Photography can save a
great deal of time in rendering existing structures and in
making records of changes during the course of
construction. The ‘before’ and ‘after’ images need to be
factually accurate, and hence the lens is preferred to the
sketchbook, particularly for conservation projects.
But often too many details are recorded on the
photograph for the architect’s purpose and hence there is
a tendency to trace over the image in order to focus
on important points. Where existing buildings are
extended, the combination of drawn and photographic
material can narrate a project, drawing attention to the
changes by the different representation media employed.
There commonly emerges therefore a dynamic
relationship between drawn and photographic material,
especially where small-scale interventions are involved.
At its simplest level this could consist of a photograph
over which is drawn a representation of some future
change – perhaps a new building or a design for re-paving
a city square.
Since photographs record everything (in sometimes
excessive detail), many contemporary photographers
choose to abstract their images in an attempt to turn
photography into art. This does not concern us here but
since the photographic image provides a record of reality,
it has encouraged architectural drawing to go beyond
recording the existing world. Modern drawing practice is
concerned with searching for the truths beneath the
surface. In design terms, the drawing is an intellectual
statement of spatial intent expressed through weight of
line, colour, texture, etc. The mental map or diagram of a
project is often the first drawing produced once the brief
has been established, and forms a kind of genetic code
for subsequent design development. Drawings that are
too literal may thwart subsequent design possibilities
although they may be examples of fine draughtsmanship.
It is better to use the diagram with photographic
references at this stage.
Looking back over the past 100 years, it is evident that
the use of freehand drawing has changed under the
impact of photography. Drawing, like painting, has
become more concerned with abstraction on the one
hand, and capturing the spirit of a subject on the other. In
turn the line (once the dominant element of architectural
thought) has become augmented by mark making and a
galaxy of CAD-based graphic effects, as well as the ideas
stemming from photographic artists. Freehand drawing
has begun to take on the mathematical and intellectual
qualities of mechanical drawing in the hands of some
architects. With others, the graphic practices of artists
have been turned towards the subject of architecture with
surprisingly rich results. The symbiotic relationship
between a mechanical architecture and machine-like
drawing evident in the work of Mies van der Rohe
finds its updated version in the graphic language of
architects such as Zaha Hadid. In the latter case the
photorealism of some of the drawn architectural projects
is witness to the power of photography to alter our
understanding of architecture. 
Drawing and photography 87


Part Three
Case Studies in Drawing 

Chapter 11
Towns, townscapes and squares 
An appreciation of landscape – the aesthetic quality of the
countryside – has been part of our culture for at least two
hundred years, but its urban equivalent – townscape – is a
relative newcomer. The urban theorist and graphic
delineator of towns Gordon Cullen drew our attention to
‘townscape’ in a series of articles in the Architectural
Review about thirty years ago. His subsequent book, The
Concise Townscape, remains a valuable introduction to
the subject. What Cullen and others have sought to
show is that towns have aesthetic qualities just as rich
as the countryside, and that the recording and preserving
the poetry of the urban scene is as important as
protecting the beauties of the landscape. 
What, then, makes up the beauty of towns, both
ancient and modern? Different theories prevail, especially
between urban theorists of a European as against
American bent. On the whole, we are dealing with the
following key qualities, each worthy of exploration
through the sketchbook: 
• squares, enclosed places and centres of activity; 
• routes through the town such as streets, alleyways,
lanes and footpaths; 
• landmarks of varying types such as church spires,
high office buildings and transmitter masts. 
These important elements of urban character are
supported by a secondary layer of features that provide
rhythm, patterning and changes of scale or punctuation.
Hence we may find that a pattern running through the
glazing of an office building is echoed in the paving of a
square at its base: façade and space are thus united by a
commonality of line. 
The sketchbook is a useful tool for understanding
towns and cultivating an awareness of the complex visual
language of the city. Unlike the countryside, many cities,
especially big modern ones, are very complicated; their
spatial structure may be disjointed and the skyline a
battleground for different styles. In spite of this, the
freehand sketch is a useful starting point for analysis. As
when drawing a landscape, one has to be selective, and it
is best to avoid a too literal representation of the urban
scene. A good townscape drawing focuses upon
relationships and highlights the crucial elements such as
the street line, silhouette and entry point. 
Whether one is drawing countryside or a town,
establishing the structure of the view is of great
importance. The relationship of hedges and trees to a
field in the landscape sketch is analogous to that of
buildings and towers to a street in the townscape
drawing. To focus upon the windows and doors of the
90 Understanding architecture through drawing

buildings is akin to a precise rendition of the leaves and
branches of a hedge – such detail may not be necessary
to your analysis. 
Rather than seek to sketch the full complexity of a
town, it is best to concentrate on the key elements listed
earlier. In this way the artist or student will better
understand the main factors that shape our perception of
cities, and, as an urban designer, will be better informed
as to how and when to change their form or structure. Let
us begin by looking at the first of the key elements:
squares, enclosed spaces and centres of activity. 
Cities do not contain an even distribution of social or
commercial activity. Most towns have squares where
people meet, civic functions are held and where railway
and bus stations often make their presence felt. As focal
points, ‘squares’ come in many forms and sizes; some
are regular, others charmingly irregular and uneven. As
our perception of cities is shaped by our memory of
squares (such as Trafalgar Square in London, Times
Square in New York or George Square in Glasgow), they
perform a vital function in making one place feel different
from another. 
Squares are essentially enclosed spaces, though they
can be partly open at the edges and partly filled by
buildings. The degree of enclosure is important, however,
for a real civic focus requires a space that is ‘contained’ by
the surrounding buildings. Containment places a
responsibility on the enclosing structures to be of
sufficient size to prevent the space spilling out. If the
square is very large then the surrounding buildings need
11.1 (far left)
The relationship between public
building, public square and gathering
space is the basis of this drawing of
Rome in Italy. 
11.2 (left)
The deliberate landmarking of the street
junction is a common feature of 19th-
century urban design. Here in a
tenement neighbourhood of Glasgow
the architect for the church placed a
Gothic spire as near to the pavement
edge as he could. The coherence of the
scene is the result of four-storey height
limits placed on the builders of the
tenements by the Victorian city council. 
Towns, townscapes and squares 91

to be fairly high, and any breaks in the continuity of the
façades filled, unless the breaks lead to further events of
interest such as a secondary square or a public building
set back from the main square. 
It is important when drawing squares and courtyards
to allow some of the character of the place to invade the
sketch. For example, if it is a residential square then to
incorporate such details as washing lines or children
playing would not only enliven the sketch, but inform its
content as well. Alternatively, if the subject is a public
square then elements of a civic nature such as statues or
trees planted in formal lines should be included. You may
wish to add people since this gives life to the square, but
be careful to draw people appropriate to the location and
select such details as local costume to bring a touch of
genius loci. 
Whatever type of square or courtyard you decide to
draw, ensure that the sketch has a focus. Drawings of
squares tend to be sketches of spaces (not objects) and
hence can have a vacuous quality. The reality may be that
the square itself lacks a focal point, but often you can
overcome the problem by drawing a length of building
façade to provide a point of interest around which to
compose the sketch of the square. The building façade
will probably be the principal frontage facing the square –
perhaps a town church, market building or railway station.
A great deal of effort will have to be devoted to sketching
this properly as it is likely to be the major event within the
space.
Once the focal point has been fixed, the rest of the
sketch should fall into place with railings, fountains,
statues, steps and walls providing useful articulation of
11.3
The relationship between
densely packed private houses,
the castle and topography is the
subject of this study of an Italian
hill town. Here ‘townscape’ is
analogous to ‘landscape’. 
92 Understanding architecture through drawing

11.4
The Placa Reial in Barcelona is an
even-shaped square surrounded by
buildings of consistent style and
filled with splendid palm trees.
Openings into the square at regular
intervals allow it to connect with the
older pattern of streets outside. By
selecting certain elements, this
elaborate civic space becomes
manageable to draw. 
Towns, townscapes and squares 93

11.5
Shops and pubs are traditionally
grouped around market squares,
as in this sketch of North
Walsham in Norfolk. 
11.6
Cloisters are often peaceful
and well-shaded places to draw.
Here in Barcelona Cathedral
the central space is filled with
luxurious planting overlooked
by grotesque gargoyles. 
94 Understanding architecture through drawing

11.7
This sketch shows the main
elements that make traditional
city form. Notice how the
different typologies provide
different levels of townscape
enclosure and scale.
(Derek Fraser)
Towns, townscapes and squares 95

11.8
This sketch plan by Robert
Camlin shows the application of
different patterns of urbanism
for a project in Dublin. Here
existing buildings and landscape
are stitched into a masterplan
for university expansion. (Camlin
Lonsdale)
96 Understanding architecture through drawing

11.9 (left)
The courtyard formed at the rear of ancient tenements in the Old Town
of Edinburgh offers a quiet space to experiment with sketching. 
11.10 (below left)
The fountain at this monastery in Dubrovnik provides the path with a sense
of focus and deflects movement to either side. 
11.11 (below right)
Deep shadows are used to help explain the structure of this small
square in Florence. 
Towns, townscapes and squares 97

the space. Often squares have more interesting paving
details than do the surrounding roads, and these should
be included in the sketch. Such details bring the
foreground towards the viewer, and help establish the
shape and configuration of the square. Equally, squares
are frequently planted with interesting trees and shrubs
whose foliage can provide much fascinating detail to set
against the hard-edged buildings. Your sketch should
demonstrate how good urban design consists of
considering the buildings, spaces and landscape of the
city as one, rather than as separate entities. 
Squares that are distorted or uneven in shape can be
more taxing to draw than regular ones. Remember that
although the walls are not parallel, they have vanishing
points along the same eye level. You may find, however,
that one side of the square is strictly geometric in layout
and often has buildings of fine proportion. You should
exploit the differences in your sketch – contrasting the
regular with the unplanned, thereby capturing the charm
of the place. 
Squares come in all sizes, from small domestic
courtyards to broad civic spaces. The latter are the
hardest to draw since they contain much complex detail
and are often so wide that the sketches become
panoramas. Beginners should start with small spaces and
only attempt scenes such as London’s Parliament Square
after much practice. 
If you do attempt a big public square then a grasp of
perspective is essential. However, scientific perspective
may not provide all the answers in terms of composition
or for capturing the action within the square. Here you
may choose to adopt a more personal system of
representing space, not unlike the Oriental system of
perspective, which sets images (represented with no
regard for geometric accuracy) layered in front of each
other so that they become larger the nearer they are to
the observer. With large squares, no matter which
technique of perspective is employed, it is often
instructive to try to enter into the space through the
medium of drawing. If the artist chooses a position, not
so much on the edge of the square looking in, but within
the square and surrounded by its action, then something
of the character will come through. Photomontage can
also be employed to represent the background
architecture, thereby allowing you to focus upon the
activity in the square. 
The most interesting urban spaces are those
surrounded by buildings such as shops, cafés or bars. If
the activities of these places are encouraged to spill out
on to the square, so much the better. In addition, the
square will frequently be edged by an arcade containing
shops and restaurants. Hence it is surrounded by
buildings that respond in form to the activities that it
encloses, providing a richness of visual and social detail at
the perimeter of the space. It is unfortunate that these
traditional qualities have been eroded by the ubiquitous
presence of the car, which in many European cities has
usurped the city dweller from many areas. 
Squares with much activity around the edge often
have a focus of attention in the centre. Fountains, seats,
an area for gossip under a few trees form the centre of
many European civic spaces. In Britain it is more common
to find a group of large plane trees growing within a railed-
off enclosure. The relationship between the geometry of
the space, its activities and planting are excellent subjects
for a sketchbook analysis. Often there is room within the
square for the internal activities of the enclosing buildings
to spread well into the space. If a railway or underground
station is located on the edge of the square then its
influence will be felt more directly than in the case of a
café. Now there will be bustle and bursts of movement –
at rush hours and when trains arrive. A similar situation
can occur if a theatre faces a square; the times of the
performance will be reflected in an increase of activity. 
98 Understanding architecture through drawing

One lesson to be drawn from this exploration is
the need to allow perimeter functions to influence
the design and layout of the square. A circulating system
of roads prevents the peripheral traffic from spreading
into the centre, leaving the space free for, and enriched
by, social interaction. Those who design public
buildings and railway stations have a responsibility to
provide related urban space for this essential human
need. It is a daunting task to try to draw a busy square,
but to demonstrate the relationship between physical
form and civilised values through the carefully drawn
sketch is useful, even if the drawing itself is a failure
artistically. 
Since squares are generally enclosed on all sides, the
artist should employ shade and shadow to create the
impression of spatial containment. You can use your
imagination when portraying the direction of light in order
to express the quality of the square in the most
favourable way. A deep shadow to left or right allows
figures, statues or trees to be set against it, thereby
standing out and creating a real feeling of occupying the
space. Shading should not generally be drawn upon the
focal building – the intention is to direct the eye towards it
by masking out surrounding buildings. The focal building
(say, a theatre or church) can have broken shadow or
shade beneath lintels and cornices, but the principal
structure in the square is best bathed in sunshine (even if
this is not present in reality) and framed by other buildings
and trees in shadow. 
Sometimes a mixture of wash or Conté crayon and
fine line are the best materials to delineate such
spaces. The wash or crayon depicts the shadows, while
the line work can be employed for portraying decorative
or principal elements. With complex urban spaces it pays
to simplify the subject as far as possible, and to build up
the sketch gradually, aiming to stop before the subject
becomes overworked. 
As squares are one of the chief attractions of towns, it
is worth spending more time in them than elsewhere.
The culture of cities often resides in the squares – a
culture not just of architecture but of people and public
functions. Lesser squares and domestic spaces are also
valuable and provide important social centres for smaller
districts. These secondary spaces may be a useful
starting point for those intent upon understanding urban
design, as drawing skills can be learnt in them unimpeded
by the bustle or embarrassment that can arise in more
central locations. For the lessons provided by urban
spaces – those of entry, containment and perimeter
activity – are to be gained equally well in small squares as
in large ones. 
These lesser squares show that a hierarchy of urban
spaces exists in most towns. The civic square is a truly
public space, while domestic squares set back from the
street edge are more intimate in character, though often
different again from semi-private squares landlocked
within the middle of a city block. Hence the different
types of enclosed urban spaces have distinctive qualities
that relate to their levels of privacy and need for security.
A design sketch should communicate some of these
differences in character, as in the proposal for a new
university campus in Dublin by Metropolitan Workshop
Architects.
Towns, townscapes and squares 99

Chapter 12
Streets, lanes and footpaths 
Our movement through towns is normally along streets
and roads, and hence our perception of the quality of
place is shaped by what we see from them. Anybody
intent upon exploring cities through the freehand sketch
should, therefore, concentrate upon the routes people
normally take. These vary from grand streets to alleyways
and pedestrian footpaths, and each has its distinctive
character. The different types of city route can be
categorised as follows: 
• street: a relatively formal route lined by continuous
frontages of buildings; 
• boulevard: a grander version of the street, often
containing trees planted in parallel rows, and
sometimes with a central reservation; 
• road: an informal car-dominated route generally of
a suburban nature; 
• lane: an access route often serving the rear of
properties and frequently running parallel to a street;
• alleyway: a narrow route, often a service corridor
originally constructed for the movement of carts; 
• footpath: a pedestrian-scale route between buildings,
often an ancient right of way and known by a variety
of local names such as a ‘loke’ in Norfolk or ‘pend’
in Edinburgh. 
12.1
This formal street in Glasgow enclosed by late-nineteenth-century
tenements has a regimented character that extends through architecture,
urban layout and planting design. 
100 Understanding architecture through drawing

The mixture of different types of route within a town, and
the way they connect up with each other and to the public
squares, expresses the very essence of urban character.
Not only is the spatial experience of using them enhanced
by their variety and complexity (explore, for example, the
Rows in Brighton), but you will often find that key routes
have landmarks such as important buildings. These points
of punctuation help city dwellers to find their way around
and to relate one set of routes to another. 
Landmarks along routes come in many forms, from
a distinctive ‘event’ such as a decorated pub jutting
into the space, to an oriel window overlooking a change of
direction, or a lofty church spire. One can search out
these ‘highlighting’ features and describe them through
the sketchbook. Many major routes through a town
are deliberately punctuated by a well-placed statue or
public building, but the lesser routes are often
accidentally landmarked. Hence a hierarchy of landmarks
may exist, each tailored to the scale of the route and its
civic status. 
If you are intent upon sketching a route, it is important
to allow the drawing to focus upon or acknowledge a
point of punctuation. Although the sketch may be
concerned with the nature of a street or road, the fact that
it has a landmark along it that provides local interest
should not be overlooked. With long routes the points of
punctuation allow us not only to measure how far we
have travelled, but to experience the process of
movement. On an urban motorway tall or distinctive
structures may provide distance markers, and the same is
true on a pedestrian-scale alleyway. 
Our route along a street can be intentionally
punctuated by such features as a clock mounted on a
bracket above our heads, or by a colonnaded entrance
jutting into the pavement. Such manipulation of our
perception by well-placed markers was normally reserved
for public architecture, but today it is common to find
12.2
Access lanes (as here in Siena) are often tortuous routes that have grown up
from ancient cart tracks. In this sketch the buildings overshadow the lane, which
provides no space for gatherings of any description. 
Streets, lanes and footpaths 101

12.3
This sketch of San Gimignano in Tuscany shows the importance of
enclosure in city making.
12.4
The bracket-mounted clock at the Guildhall in Guildford provides an obvious
point of punctuation along the main street. Notice also how the cupola is
pushed to the edge of the roof to provide another landmark. 
102 Understanding architecture through drawing

12.5 (far left)
This attractive scene in
Sperlonga in Italy shows how
changes of level can be handled
along a pedestrian route. Clues
to where the pathway leads are
marked by archways with
doorways providing a secondary
focus.
12.6 (left)
The archway above this street
in Siena signifies where a
territorial edge occurs and the
steps further on are designed
as private, not public, space. 
illuminated advertisements or supermarket frontages
exploiting these qualities. 
Whether your sketch seeks to analyse a traditional
route and its landmarks or a modern one, the same rules
apply. Select a good vantage point, compose the drawing
in your mind before you begin, ensure the perspective is
correctly handled, and make sure the marker on the route
is prominently displayed. 
Routes are not only deliberately landmarked, but
undergo pleasant changes of direction or level. Frequently
a curve in a street is the place to find a distinctive house
or shopfront, and at changes of level there may be an old
pub or group of ancient trees. Where steps occur they
can enliven the scene, especially if there are decorative
handrails or lamps to light the way. Search out these
incidental events, for they are part of the character of
towns and are frequently being swept away or
standardised by insensitive municipal authorities. 
Towns with spatial richness consist of a mixture of the
different sorts of streets listed earlier. Generally it is only
the bigger cities and those with distinct historical layers,
such as Edinburgh, York or Chester, that offer the full
repertoire of types of routes situated close together.
Other countries are more fortunate – around the
Mediterranean it is commonplace to find in quite small
places a network of fascinating streets and lanes leading
to and from a town square. Here the spatial tensions
experienced by the pedestrian are enhanced not only by
many changes of level, but also by abrupt alterations of
scale as, for instance, a grand central square suddenly
Streets, lanes and footpaths 103

opens into view. Added to this, the remnants of
fortifications (as in Dubrovnik) provide a perimeter route
around the town as well as attractive terminations to
many of the alleyways. 
Grand cities such as Paris, Washington or Turin contain
wide tree-lined boulevards that are rather like linear
squares. Here many different types of activity can be
accommodated within the broad space of the street –
pavement cafés, room for parking, tram routes, through-
traffic, central promenades and shaded areas for gossip.
Largely the result of nineteenth-century highway
engineering, the boulevard sought to bring beauty and
ventilation to the heart of congested cities. Today they are
worthy subjects for sketching as long as they are treated
fairly broadly (attempts to include too much of their detail
would defeat the average artist). 
For routes to uphold their civic responsibilities they
should be legible places: streets need to be landmarked
along their route and perhaps terminated at their ends.
Yet the enjoyment of towns depends upon a balance
between legibility and mystery. The narrow spaces of
lanes and alleyways provide mystery and spatial
complexity to set against the right angles and open
spaces of the major streets and squares. How the parts
are put together is largely the result of history – towns
normally represent their economic or cultural origins in
the present layout of their streets. For the artist, a good
street map, a willingness to explore on foot, and the use
of the sketchbook as a tool for urban investigation are all
equally important. Urban design is best taught in the field,
by employing the freehand drawing to record and analyse.
Our towns are a shared responsibility – their well-being is
momentarily in our hands when we draw and plan them.
The much-overlooked visual language of cities resides not
only in what we can see and experience from the routes
we take, but in how we elect to represent it and thereby
protect it. 
12.7
The network of lanes, steps and footpaths in this stretch of an
Italian hill town provide the basic urban structure around which
more recent houses are grouped. Walls are an important element
where abrupt changes of level occur. 
104 Understanding architecture through drawing

12.8
Handsome streets like this one in Pimlico, London, are often spoilt by parked cars.
Streets and squares cease to be attractive or legible when filled with vehicles. 
12.9
The relationship between streets and squares is often important. This composition
of Baroque buildings in Rome contains narrow streets that open dramatically into a
well-lit square. 
Streets, lanes and footpaths 105

12.10
The curve of the main street in
Holt, Norfolk, heightens the
drama of entry to the town
centre. The Georgian house to
the right provides a welcome
‘book-end’ to the older houses
and landmarks the end of the
formal street. 
12.11
The market square in Holt,
Norfolk, has been partly invaded
by subsequent building. The
effect is to create an attractive
sequence of spaces around the
various buildings. 
106 Understanding architecture through drawing

12.12
This drawing of a mountain
village in Oman shows how
permeable historic towns are
compared to their modern
equivalents. The routes also
provide the main means by
which we experience places.
Streets, lanes and footpaths 107

Chapter 13
Landmarks, skyline and city image 
Tall buildings, church spires and vertical features such as
chimneys or pylons provide reference points to aid our
navigation through towns. They are normally external
landmarks in that we do not usually enter into them. In
the city tall buildings rise above a basecourse of lower
structures that comprise the everyday buildings – houses,
warehouses, offices, and so on. For the landmarks to be
read clearly they need to have background contrast so
that they stand out from their neighbours. This means
that landmarks are best set in an envelope of free space,
and have a distinctive profile. Many towers in historic
cities are so treated, especially the spires of churches or
domes of town halls. The modern city poses a difficulty
since the tall buildings are normally office blocks and they
can look much like each other. So in many contemporary
cities such as London or Birmingham one cannot navigate
by the tall structures. Instead, one must search out the
lower but more profiled and distinctive towers of earlier
times to aid one’s navigation. 
Generally speaking, the basecourse of lower buildings
is about four to six storeys high, and structures that rise
significantly above this become ‘landmarks’. Tall buildings
can be ‘dominant’ structures – that is, they assert
themselves through bulk – or ‘prominent’ structures that
establish their presence through a distinctive profile or
use of colour. Many modern office or residential blocks
are ‘dumb boxes’ in visual terms since they fail to
communicate a civic presence. A new generation of tall
buildings that recognise their urban responsibilities is
currently appearing on our city skylines (for instance, the
SwissRe Building in central London or Canary Wharf in
London Docklands). These structures are more profiled
than their predecessors, especially at their tops. 
If the success of a landmark depends upon its
distinctiveness or uniqueness from its neighbours, then
the designer can either manipulate the shape of the
whole tower or (and this is cheaper) simply profile the top.
Either way, uniqueness can be achieved and the skyline
of the city enhanced. As we tend to view landmarks from
within the city, the lower buildings obscure the bulk of the
tower, thereby focusing our attention upon its top. Hence
it may be legitimate only to shape the cap of the tower.
Yet it should be also be borne in mind that from outside
the city the whole landmark is visible, so that
concentrating on the profile of the whole tower, and not
just the top, becomes important (Manhattan viewed from
across the water is a good example). 
As landmarks compete for attention, there is some
argument for treating skyscrapers as an ensemble.
Skyline competition can enliven the urban scene, but it
108 Understanding architecture through drawing

13.1(far left)
This street in Chicago is
landmarked by towers of
different generations (1930s
and 1960s). The street becomes
a showcase of architecture
through the ages, each building
vying for attention. With broad
streets the skyline is particularly
important.
13.2 (left)
This early 20th-century office
tower in Vancouver rises above
a basecourse of more ordinary
buildings. The curved roof
provides a distinctive profile
to the block. 
13.3 (far left)
This tower in Volterra, Italy,
benefits from the framing
provided by an adjacent
building.
13.4 (left)
At Siena Cathedral two forms of
landmark have been employed –
the tower and the dome. Each is
set sufficiently apart to avoid
competition. Here the tower acts
as a useful marker to the square,
alongside the cathedral. 
Landmarks, skyline and city image 109

13.5
Old and new landmarks are here
(in central Glasgow) set rather
more in competition than
cooperation with each other.
Although a space has been
formed to allow Alexander
Thomson’s church tower to rise
unobscured, it remains bullied
by the new neighbour. 
13.6
The Seine in Paris is edged
by handsome cliffs of apartment
blocks and offices. The
occasional church or university
tower provide a useful point of
reference to tourists and
residents alike. Notice how
the river has become a corridor
for public display. 
110 Understanding architecture through drawing

can also be beneficial to treat towers as a collection of
related but different parts. When Sir Christopher Wren
designed his 50 or so London churches after the Great
Fire of 1666, he saw them as complementary elements
both between themselves and with regard to the
dominating presence of the dome of St Paul’s. Each
tower or spire was different, but taken together they had
a certain unity. 
The relationship between old and new city landmarks
is a valuable subject for the sketchbook. It is best to draw
the landmarks from within the street scene, showing their
relationship to the urban context. Hence the sketch will
probably contain streets as well as the tall buildings. By
setting the landmarks into context, their importance as an
aid to navigation becomes clearer. A sketch exploring the
impact of one landmark upon another may dwell upon the
need for singularity of form or the formal relationship of
one skyscraper to another. 
By understanding the relationship of different parts of
the townscape – squares, streets, landmarks, etc. – one
can begin to appreciate the interconnected nature of
urban design. Many modern cities are hard to find our
way around because the routes are not landmarked, or
because the tall buildings all look the same. Pedestrians
experience abrupt changes of direction and level without
13.7
Our appreciation of towns is
usually derived from the public
streets. Here in Carrington,
Midlothian, the barn on the left
deflects our view into the main
street with the trees framing the
entrance. The church tower acts
as a useful landmark. 
Landmarks, skyline and city image 111

13.8
The skyline of Damascus makes
a clear distinction between
public monuments and private
buildings. There are lessons
here for other historic cities
such as Rome and Edinburgh.
112 Understanding architecture through drawing

any visual clues to guide them. Even motorists find
themselves bewildered by a series of urban roads that
sweep between near-identical buildings and across
roundabouts, each detailed in the same fashion as the
one before. Tall buildings help us find our way around as
long as each stands out from its neighbours. This is
another reason why we should be cultivating architectural
distinctiveness, not conformity, in tall buildings, and
placing these ‘unique’ buildings at key points in the city. 
As in much townscape analysis, the sketchbook is the
best vehicle for cultivating an appreciation of the issues
outlined above. The sketch does not have to be too literal,
but it should seek to understand the language of the city.
As towns are very complicated subjects to draw, one
must be selective and edit out the unnecessary detail. If a
drawing focuses upon skyline, then other elements in the
view can be played down. And if a skyline feature is
treated as an icon of the city (for example, Big Ben in
London or the Eiffel Tower in Paris), then celebrate its
presence with a bold rendition of it. There is a hierarchy in
the skyline of most cities: representing the contrast
between a central dominant structure and the supporting
towers nearby can produce a sketch that is not only
instructive but dramatic. 
13.9
The church spire not only
landmarks the Bastide town
of Eymet, but provides a local
reference point from the market
square. The offset side street is
terminated by the church. 
Landmarks, skyline and city image 113

Chapter 14
Gateways, entrances and doorways 
The sense of arrival at places is important, and in
recognition of this many cities and the buildings within
them have elaborate gateways or doorways. Entry points
are usually celebrated in this way except in the most
utilitarian structures. At the other end of the scale, entry
may consist only of a roundabout on a ring road or a
collection of petrol stations marking an approach into a
modern town. Historic towns, on the other hand, are
normally well defined in terms of entry points, often
because of the need for fortification in the past. 
Entry points given celebration through architectural
display are a common feature of urban design in Europe
and beyond. The grand gateways of Paris, Rome or Kyoto
serve to define arrival at the city centre or the entry point
into a special neighbourhood. Gateways into the city, into
districts of the city and then into public buildings establish
a legible hierarchy. In similar fashion entrance doorways
into private houses often lead to lesser doorways within
the interior. A sense of hierarchy between outside and
hallway, then between hallway and living rooms, and
living rooms and kitchens is part of the everyday language
of domestic design. The same should apply to the city. 
Modern gateways are rare, though the need for crime
prevention through territorial definition and surveillance of
entrances has led to their revival of late. Such gateways
into private housing estates or industrial parks serve both
functional and decorative needs. They define entrances
into distinctive domains in much the same way that
gateways in historic towns give expression to the privacy
or security needs of different groups or classes of people. 
Gateways and doorways are rewarding subjects to
draw. As they define routes into and out of places, they
provide a visual tension, which derives from a well-
engineered constriction at a certain point. Often a
narrowing of the route is supplemented by a change of
direction or level. The materials of the road surface might
also change at critical points, and there may be windows or
arrow slots overlooking the space. Such gateways do not
only occur at the edges of towns but at the entrance to
distinctive neighbourhoods within them. In Oxford, for
instance, the gateways to many of the colleges are so
treated, as are the palace grounds in princely cities such as
St Petersburg or Prague. A modern trend is to define
neighbourhoods of the city by such means, for example the
Chinese gateway in London’s Soho. Here the urban
designer has the challenge of selecting an appropriate
entrance, and giving it definition through symbolic
structures at the edge (as in Piazza Del Popolo in Rome)
or in the centre of the space (as in the former Euston
Arch in London). 
114 Understanding architecture through drawing

Most gateways derive their justification from
questions of security, but they also perform a useful
function in terms of legibility. Big cities are perceived as
collections of villages or neighbourhoods. Each should
have its own community focus, public buildings and
entrances. The edge of the ‘village’ is often defined by a
major road or railway line with entrances marked by
significant buildings. Often, as in the approaches into
Hampstead Garden Suburb, London, the entrance
buildings look like gateways and suggest an element of
celebration. Hence to draw them is not only enjoyable but
instructive of the nature of cities. 
The modern movement in architecture and town
planning played down the question of entrances. The
wish to depict an air of democracy and freedom led to
openness, not enclosure, in urban design. As a
consequence, the twentieth-century city became
windswept in appearance, with spaces between buildings
lacking territorial definition and used mainly for low-grade
activities such as car parking. The re-creation of boundary,
edge and gateway is one of the challenges faced by
current urban designers. Modern cities are undergoing a
crisis of legibility that the introduction of gateways, using
perhaps the roundabouts on the inner ring roads as a
starting point, would help to solve. 
14.1
The gateway into the old town
of San Felice Circeo, Italy, is
marked by an abrupt change
of direction. Once a fortified
entrance, the gateway has only
symbolic value today. 
14.2
This residential courtyard
alongside a busy road in Holt,
Norfolk, is marked by a pair of
gatepiers and screen wall. The
area is clearly identified as
private territory, not public. 
Gateways, entrances and doorways 115

The perception and definition of ‘place’, from the
regional scale to the domestic, is of crucial importance to
design. A regional identity bred of cultural, geographic and
social factors will lead to a Europe of variety and
pluralism, as against monotony and standardisation. In
this, gateways and boundaries are important. Between
England and Scotland on the M74 there is no customs
point, but a stone wall and piers on either side of the
motorway proclaim the entrance to Scotland. This
gateway is purely symbolic – it makes manifest a desire
for national identity. One could argue that Dover is a
gateway to Britain, with the white cliffs performing a
similar iconographic function as the walls and piers across
the motorway north of Carlisle. Seen in this way, Dover is
an entry point establishing the first taste of Englishness
for many people. The town is, therefore, setting
standards of culture and design for the whole country and
should be designed as an entrance way rather than simply
as a seaside town. 
Many engineering structures serve secondary
functions as gateways into cities. The Humber Bridge is a
gateway into Hull, as is Robert Adam’s Pulteney Bridge
into the centre of Bath. Gateways, therefore, come in
many forms and not all are conventionally designed as
entrance porticoes. Bridge engineers increasingly see
their structures as entrance points and design them in a
fashion that celebrates arrival. 
A gateway is best regarded as a deliberate break
within a city wall or the careful marking of a boundary of
territory. It is important to draw both the boundary and the
break, for each is supporting the same purpose.
Sometimes the boundary is clear, as with medieval
fortifications, but often the territorial edge is not so well
defined, and you may have to use your imagination to see
the architecture as gateway markers. For instance, an
urban fringe may be marked by a line of bungalows and
the point of entry by a pair of car showrooms facing each
14.3
This passageway through
Sperlonga in Italy is divided
into zones of territory by the
presence of big overhead
arches. The route becomes
progressively private as one
ascends.
116 Understanding architecture through drawing

14.4
Robert Adam’s Pulteney
Bridge provides an elegant river
crossing and a gateway into the
centre of Bath. Here the bridge
is lined with shops which look
outwards over the river. 
14.5
The Ponte Vecchio in Florence
also acts as a gateway into the
city and a shopping street.
Space is provided for stall
holders beneath the arches
of this handsome structure. 
Gateways, entrances and doorways 117

other across a main road. 
Within the town, entry points exist though they may
not be immediately apparent. A roundabout or exit ramp
from a motorway may serve as an entrance gateway
with, perhaps, a tall building marking its presence. Again,
the artist must employ some insight and imagination to
see these as modern gateways. Having sketched such a
scene, it is easier to imagine a cluster of buildings making
an urban gateway – you can move from description of the
present situation to proposing some future change. 
Lesser gateways in a town are quite common. Many
modern shopping centres employ expressive portals in
order to announce the position of entrances to malls or
car parks. The language of entrance and advertising is
often skilfully exploited in such areas. In historic towns
14.6
The Doric porticoes to this imposing crescent of houses
in Glasgow define entrances and provide a rhythm to the
wider composition. By linking together entrances the
porticoes have a scale in keeping with the crescent. 
14.7 a and b
Gatepiers are often part of the decorative tradition of older areas. These splendid
gatepiers from a middle-class suburb in Glasgow both define the edge of private
territory and enrich the public realm. 
118 Understanding architecture through drawing

the gateways into cathedral closes or market squares are
sometimes given civic expression, and deserve
sketchbook analysis. In much the same fashion large
buildings have imposing entrances that tell you
immediately where the main doors are located. Town
halls, Victorian railway stations and court houses all
employ a simple language of entrance definition usually
incorporating columns and pediments. By way of
contrast, modern buildings (especially those of the 1960s
and 1970s) often fail to mark their entrance, so that, for
example, to find the doors to the Sainsbury Centre at the
University of East Anglia is an unwelcome trial. 
Expressed entrances frequently open on to interesting
interior hallways, which lead the visitor to secondary
doorways and corridors. The progression through from
street, to entrance, to interior is periodically marked by
elaborate doorways. The sketchbook study could focus
upon the processional route and its punctuation, or upon
the details of the portals or doorways. If the latter path is
followed, the door furniture and aspects of craftsmanship
could be highlighted. 
Doors and doorcases are difficult subjects to draw. It is
worth spending time on them as they often represent a
greater amount of architectural investment than much of
the remainder of the building. Georgian doorways are
particularly complex subjects, but at least ensure, when
you are sketching them, that the proportions are correct,
for this is what probably most concerned the original
14.8
These studies of doorways
and gables at Horyu-Ji Temple,
Kyoto, show the benefit of
articulating construction for
aesthetic effect. The building is
reputed to be the oldest timber
structure in the world.
Gateways, entrances and doorways 119

designer. In your drawing you can simplify the decorative
carvings or simply record one section of detail, but the
proportions of width to height of the door and of any
panels should be depicted as accurately as possible. 
Many doorways or portals contain the coats of arms or
inscriptions of their benefactors. The presence of such
embellishment simply highlights the symbolic importance
of doorways or gateways. Much recent design has sought
to resurrect the language of the doorway and to revive its
spiritual importance. In terms of building design, much
has been achieved in the past ten years, but in the
context of the town or countryside as a whole, the idea of
gateways has not received as much attention. 
If the culture of Europe resides in her distinctive cities
as against countries, then doorways, gateways and
entrances are very much part of local and regional
character. In Barcelona, for instance, the approach to the
design of entrances is quite different to that employed in
Glasgow – the Catalan tradition is far removed from the
Celtic one. To maintain these differences, not just
between cities but within them, the freehand sketch is a
vital means of recording, understanding and cultivating a
climate for preserving local idiosyncrasies. 
A good exercise is to search out entrances at the
various scales – urban, district, neighbourhood, building,
interior, etc. Each can be recorded and related to the other
in the form of a network or in terms of spatial hierarchy.
By relating the scale of the doorway to its sphere of
perceptual influence, one can begin to understand the
language of cities and where the visual clues become
disjointed. Cities encompass patterns of behaviour and
networks of design, with doorways providing the links
between one system and another. Hence, of all the
architectural elements, few have more symbolic value
than the doorway or portal. 
14.9
Detail of a door latch at
Goddard’s, designed by Edwin
Lutyens. Such handles are often
the first point of contact with
buildings and deserve particular
attention. (Nick Hirst)
120 Understanding architecture through drawing

14.10
Study of entrance sequence
at Goddards as analysed by
Nick Hirst. (Nick Hirst)
Gateways, entrances and doorways 121

Chapter 15
The façades of buildings 
Like an honest face, the elevations of a building should
tell you something about what function it serves, how it is
built and when it was constructed. In addition, the degree
of embellishment or grandeur probably provides clues to
the civic importance of the building. By drawing the
façade of a building, you will gain insights into the
intentions of the architect and his or her aspirations as an
urban designer. Additionally, you will probably understand
better the role of the building within the social or
economic structure of the area, the reason for employing
a distinctive style or pattern of architecture, or the
justification for adopting a particular mode of technology. 
Your freehand sketch is, therefore, both graphic
description and historical analysis. Generally speaking,
historic buildings are more complex structures than
modern ones, partly as a result of layers of change that
have left their mark on the elevations, but mainly because
they do not subscribe to the simplified abstraction of
contemporary buildings. In the past the role of a building
may have been to decorate a street, terminate a vista or
provide a supporting role to a public monument. Today
buildings are more likely to express their structural
prowess, or their use of a sophisticated cladding system.
Whichever expression is sought by the modern architect,
it is unlikely to relate directly to wider civic ambitions. 
15.1
This Edwardian office building in central Glasgow tells you that the publi
functions are to be found on the ground floor with the entrance well marked.
Above is found repetitive office space. 
122 Understanding architecture through drawing

Drawing the architectural façade may highlight some
aspect of current or historical theory of design, or the
sketch may simply tell you about the social pattern of
living at a particular place or time. The main point is to get
beyond the surface of the drawing into an analysis of
social and technological factors or of design theory.
Whether you choose to sketch a city or country building, a
private house or public monument, a modern structure or
ancient one, the same general rules should apply. By
drawing the façade of a building, you are focusing your
attention upon the principal area for expression exploited
by architect and engineer alike. The method of expression
may be obvious – perhaps by the use of exposed columns
– or more subtly – perhaps by the skilful adoption of
proportional harmonies. Remember that, though the
designer of a building may seek to link the exterior
expression to the interior pattern of spaces and functions,
he or she is mainly concerned with how the building looks
from the outside. The yardstick by which to judge
architectural quality is primarily that of the elevations. 
CLUES TO INTERNAL FUNCTION 
Many buildings employ a visual code based upon making
manifest the function of the building through elevational
expression. The clues are both direct and indirect. With
old industrial buildings, and some modern ones, cranes,
lifting hoists and large door openings announce the
presence of a warehouse. The office block may betray its
function through the use of repeating grids of windows,
strip lighting visible through large sheets of glass, and the
lack of curtains or blinds. Likewise a modern block of flats
will perhaps have expressed balconies, which provide
‘gardens in the air’, different window sizes and security
systems around the main entrance. Designers wishing to
exploit the functional clues may link the balconies into
bands 20 or so storeys high, or raise the block of flats on
stilts to provide space at the ground level for common
facilities such as laundries or shops. In the case of office
blocks, the architect may allow the entrance to project
forwards with a canopy for signage, or change the grid of
windows where conference facilities or staff refreshment
areas are located. In this way there are clues to both the
function of the building and to that of its various parts. 
Many people interpret these visual codes when
deciding what the functions are within a particular
building. We are all familiar with the traditional use of
columns to mark an entrance to a public building, the use
of a rotunda to denote a space of importance inside or an
atrium marking a gathering space within the building. This
simple language of expression can be found in provincial
court houses as well as in many modern office buildings
in business parks. On a more mundane level, a single-
storey structure with high-level bands of windows
denotes accommodation for utility companies or perhaps
public toilets. These buildings do not necessarily require
signs: their appearance tells most people what goes on
inside.
A recent trend in architecture has been to enliven the
façades of dull buildings such as offices by exaggerating
on the outside the differences in internal function. Many
15.2
The designer of this small
cinema in Ukiah, California,
gives expression to the tower
and canopy in a fashion typical
of the 1930s. The tower acts as
a hinge around which the rest of
the design pivots. The bottle-cap
shape of the top of the tower
alludes perhaps to the café
found inside. 
The façades of buildings 123

modern office blocks contain atria both to help with the
control of the internal environment and to provide space
for informal staff meetings. By bringing the atrium to the
outside, the elevations offer a play of solid against void. In
addition, as the atrium often contains an abundance of
trees and shrubs, it can appear as if an area of garden had
been trapped inside the building ‘envelope’. Assuming
clear glass has been employed, the outside observer can
see into the office building, so that not only the elevations
are enlivened, but internal activities are also relayed to the
street outside. Moreover, if the building entrance leads
through the atrium, a lightweight canopy may project
forward, thereby enriching further the building’s façade.
By such means, dull architectural subjects can be made
interesting, and monotonous façades more lively. 
The more that internal functions are allowed to
express themselves externally, the richer become the
elevations. The classical language of entrance portico,
colonnade, rotunda and dome gave expression not just to
different structural members or constructional systems,
but also to the internal activities or functions of a
particular building. The façade of a classical or neo-
classical building is not a flat plane, but instead a series of
layers of connected structural or decorative parts. Added
to this, the interest in pure geometry of the neoclassicists
led to an architecture consisting of cubes, circles,
semicircles and triangles. Hence an abstract language of
shapes forming the structure of a building was counter-
balanced by surface decoration, which often denoted the
functions housed. A typical building of the period was
broken down into parts, with each serving a different
function and given a separate form of expression. In
addition, the public was in many cases allowed to
penetrate part of the edge of the building before reaching
the main entrance. A transition space for meeting friends
or colleagues was therefore provided, often within the
thickness of the wall or within the depth of a projecting
porch or recessed entrance. Elevational richness thus
derived from a consideration of how people behaved
when moving from the outside to the inside of a building. 
15.3
Hill House by Mackintosh does not have a
principal front. The design grows naturally from
the plan with living rooms, master bedroom and
staircase clearly expressed on the outside. 
124 Understanding architecture through drawing

The cinema is one of the more interesting building
types of the twentieth century. It gives expression to its
function as a building for public gatherings – it makes its
presence felt by a dramatic tower or exterior sign, the
roof of the auditorium rises above the surrounding
rooftops and the entrance, foyer and bars are often
separately expressed. As buildings, cinemas are easily
recognised and rarely confused with their sister building –
the theatre. Since cinemas require few windows,
designers have traditionally concentrated instead on the
manipulation of mass and surface decoration. Brickwork
is often arranged in panels, allowing a tension to be
created between the juxtaposition of horizontal and
vertical lines. Entrances are light and airy and contrast
pleasantly with the solid auditoria. In sketching such
buildings the artist should dwell upon these points in
order to learn about the design of cinemas through the
process of drawing. 
CLUES TO STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS 
It is a modernist maxim that buildings should give
expression to their means of construction. A search for
authenticity in architecture marks much of the twentieth
century. The trouble is that to express nothing but the
structure or construction of a building can lead to rather
dull architecture. Freehand drawing is, however, a handy
means of understanding structural arrangements.
Victorian architects such as Richard Norman Shaw used
the sketch to record the skills of medieval carpenters or
the methods employed in framing church roofs. Today
you can use the freehand drawing to analyse the
steelwork of modern structures such as Lord Foster’s
tree-like roof trusses at Stansted Airport, or the concrete
framing of a modern grain silo. 
Many modern architects are more at home giving
expression to the structure, construction and servicing of
a building than to function. This is partly because the use
of a building changes fairly quickly over time and hence to
make functional expression the main aim of the design
15.4 (right)
The façade of this Renaissance
church in Gaeta, Italy, creates a
grand impression to a city square.
The architect has concentrated on
the front rather than on the whole
building.
15.5 (far right)
The Barcelona Pavilion by Mies van
der Rohe seeks to occupy the space
around its edge by wings of structure
and overhanging roofs. The building,
pool and paving area are united by a
consistency of approach. 
The façades of buildings 125

can make a nonsense of a building in the longer term. But
the main reason is that modern technology has made
twentieth-century buildings more exciting structurally
than in any other way. Hence designers such as Renzo
Piano, Sir Nicholas Grimshaw and Sir Michael Hopkins
concentrate on structural and material daring in
preference to proportional harmony or the expression of a
building’s programme. It is often a case of constructional
invention being linked to new ways of servicing buildings,
with the result that our current ‘green’ awareness finds
expression in buildings with solar panels, stepped
sections and ventilating chimneys. 
There are three broad ways of constructing a building:
by frame, by load-bearing wall, and by self-supporting
panel. Framed structures probably pre-date the others
simply because of the wide availability of building timber
in the ancient forests of the temperate world. Load-
bearing brickwork was introduced into Britain by the
Romans and began to become commonplace as timber
became scarce in the late Middle Ages. Large panel
construction is chiefly a twentieth-century invention and
has the benefit that it can be prefabricated and speedily
erected. As the panels are load bearing, the walls provide
both enclosure and structure within the same unit and
this leads to obvious economies, though often at the cost
of aesthetics. 
This simple classification of constructional systems
can be enlarged to include suspended structures where
the tensile rather than compressive strength of materials
is exploited. A mixture of structural systems is frequently
15.6a, b, c, and d 
These studies of the façades of
1930s buildings on Faro Island in
southern Portugal show the
influence of international
modernism on seaside
architecture.
126 Understanding architecture through drawing

represented on the same elevation of a building, thereby
adding to the complexity of the façade. For example, the
Mound Stand by Hopkins at the Lord’s Cricket Ground
uses load-bearing brickwork and stretched lightweight
fabric canopies to good effect. 
The degree to which the structural system employed
is made visible determines the appearance of the
building. A concrete-framed office can have its basic
structure disguised by a glass cladding system that
gives no expression at all to the framing members.
Alternatively, the structure can be expressed, giving an
otherwise bland façade a sense of interest or organisation
in visual terms. A well-expressed series of columns and
beams can absorb the visual chaos of the modern
apartment block, as exemplified by some of the poorer
areas of downtown Hong Kong. Your sketch can draw
attention to the frame by highlighting its presence
through shadows, or play it down in order to express
some other aspect of the building. Frequently the use of
an exposed frame gives expression to both the structural
and functional logic of a building. Sir Giles Gilbert Scott’s
London power stations make manifest both the method
of construction and the internal arrangements of complex,
yet publicly visible, buildings. Although your sketch may
focus upon the main structures alone, it is hard to
overlook the architectural drama given by Scott to the
generators or chimneys. 
Load-bearing walls can be treated so that every brick,
or block of masonry, is expressed, or designed so that the
wall reads as a single panel of construction. From afar,
15.7 (left)
In this drawing of a section of the west façade of St Mark’s in Venice, the structural
logic of arches and columns is not obscured by lavish decoration. Embellishment
here consists of reinforcing the logic of the structure by sculpture and friezes. 
15.8 (below left)
The varied activities in this harbourside development in Gaeta, Italy, are expressed in
extensions to the main building and in the form of cheerful signs. 
15.9 (below)
The brute force of shuttered concrete is well expressed in these buildings on
London’s South Bank. The style known as Brutalism sought to exaggerate the scale
of construction and the visual possibilities of concrete left in its natural state. 
The façades of buildings 127

large areas of brickwork can appear to be seamless wall
planes rather than composed of individual units, but
different colours of brick are often employed to create
patterns on a larger scale. Where bricks are mixed with
stone, the relative scale of the parts of the wall can
establish lines of tension, which eighteenth-century
designers used to define edges and create visual frames.
In many cases you will find that the whole façade of a
brick building is trimmed in stone in order to create a
‘picture frame’ around the house. 
The wall and its framing members are essential to the
rhythm of a façade. Frequently the structural members
become the main means of decorating a building. The
classical orders established rules whereby embellishment
subscribed to a predetermined plan. Often the orders
obscured rather than expressed the structural logic of a
building – and it was partly an escape from the limitations
of the classical decorative language that justified the flight
into the Gothic Revival and thence, a century later, into
modern architecture. 
It is rewarding to compare an architect-designed
building of the eighteenth century to that erected by an
engineer or surveyor. The design of a country house or
town hall of the time would no doubt be correct from an
academic point of view, but one would be hard pressed to
identify clearly what method of construction had been
employed. By way of contrast, an area of dockland would
contain wharfs and warehouses of honest construction
and simple, unadorned lines. The hand of the engineer
would be evident in the use of robust arches, plain areas
of undecorated brickwork and functionally expressed
beams or roof trusses. In both cases the façade makes
visible the values that led to the erection of the building –
values that the act of drawing should reveal. 
Whether you are drawing for pleasure or discovery,
the architectural sketch is best rendered in good light –
preferably sunlight. The texture of the various building
materials, the play of structure against background
walling, the depth of windows and façade projections are
better observed in strong light, and best depicted with the
aid of shadows. 
As in plan drawing, shadows or shading can enhance
the three-dimensional qualities and bring alive qualities of
the façade, which have become obscured by generations
of soot deposits or by your own overfamiliarity with such
buildings. The architectural sketch is a means of cult-
ivating a personal sensitivity to buildings and to their
construction. Whether your subject is a vernacular house,
a modern factory or historic church, the sketch should
make visible to you some of the key qualities of the
architectural design. 
CLUES TO PROPORTIONAL SYSTEMS 
If you see the elevations of a building in more geometric
terms, it may become evident that the design is based
upon a proportional system of one kind or another. Many
buildings of classical inspiration employ proportional
harmonies based upon squares, circles and the golden
section. Beauty was seen to lie in the adoption of shapes
128 Understanding architecture through drawing

and outlines that related well to each other and contained
in themselves a harmonic repose. Hence the front of a
house may be a double square on its side, with windows
also in the proportion of a double square placed vertically.
Sometimes an elevation may consist of a circle within a
square or the placing and size of windows may be
dictated by the diagonal lines of the golden section. 
In modern buildings the repeating pattern of lines
within curtain walling may also subscribe to similar rules
of proportion. At South Quay Plaza on the Isle of Dogs in
London Docklands, an office development by Seifert
Architects mixes double squares, squares and diamonds
to good effect. Here the buildings can be viewed across
the river Thames, allowing the calculated use of harmonic
subdivisions to have maximum impact on the observer. 
Often architects draw attention to the key lines that
they want you to read in order to understand the
proportional system they are using. String courses may
be employed or the building may be set upon a solid base
(piano nobile). Frequently corner definition is employed,
thereby creating a rectangular frame across the façade.
By changing the colour, texture or nature of the
constructional material, the designer is able to express
the critical lines or planes of the proportional system. 
The problem that architects often face is how to
subdivide a large elevation into smaller parts that fix the
position of windows, doors, columns, etc. in a logical
fashion. A proportional system should embrace both large
and small parts, and should also allow the observer to
‘read’ where the important elements or functions are
located. Many modern buildings are so abstract in design
that the same pattern is wrapped around all sides of a
building irrespective of functional hierarchy. On the other
hand, a study of older buildings, even functional ones like
warehouses, can reveal the use of proportional systems
worked out to a surprising level of detail, if you make the
effort to uncover them. 
15.10 (opposite)
These buildings in Chicago exploit not just the technical possibilities of steel
construction, but the aesthetic ones as well. The contrast between the stoneclad
skyscraper and the one finished in glass is immediately evident. Open public spaces
like this demand a matching architecture of scale and interest. 
15.11 a and b (below)
These drawings of Georgian terraces in Glasgow show how proportional systems
can create elevation with repose and dignity. 
The façades of buildings 129

SOURCES OF DECORATION 
A modern abstract façade can add up to dull architecture.
Similarly a severe historical building whose beauty derives
almost totally from proportional systems tends not to
attract our attention for very long. Just as a townscape
made up almost entirely of modern office blocks can be a
visually depressing experience, so too a district of
buildings constructed according to strict classical
principles can be quite lifeless. The Victorian writer on art
John Ruskin was particularly critical of Queen Street in
the heart of Georgian Edinburgh for this very reason when
he visited the city in 1853. 
It is a responsibility of buildings that they enrich the
public domain. Frequently the sources of richness derive
from the simple expression of how people wish to live.
For example, an apartment block will probably contain
balconies where families can sit in the sun, dry their
clothes or grow their plants. These activities not only
enrich the façade, but provide justification for the
presence of certain architectural details: the balcony may
be edged by a balustrade or a colourful awning may
protect the area from the midday sun. Similarly French
windows can add an extra dimension to a room by
opening up a view on to the street, but because such
large openings require closing at night for acoustic and
visual reasons, there may be window shutters as well as
doors and probably a lace curtain. All three features
become part of the architecture of the façade – and
worthy subjects for drawing. 
Entrance doors are often similarly treated, and where
there is a slight change of level, plants around the steps
add to the diversity of the scene. As doorways need to be
lit, there are often interesting light fittings projecting from
the wall face and complementing the other special
qualities of the entrance. 
Each element of the building can be so treated. The
celebration of function in this everyday fashion is part of 
our architectural tradition. The more the façade gives
expression to the activities of the building, the richer the
architecture. Earlier we saw how the form of the building
can be manipulated to allow people to ‘read’ the activities
it contains, but here the detailed expression of function is
the source of our interest. 
Shops are a good example of how local colour can be
provided at the base of buildings. Not only will the form of
the building change to accommodate a different function,
but there will be shop signs, goods on display and
pavement activity to add diversity to the immediate
environment. Where shops, banks and restaurants occur,
there will probably be competition for space and
attention, and here the architecture will probably respond.
This visual richness bred of competition is a healthy
aspect of the building façades of most high streets. 
Decorative ironwork, applied columns, pilasters
and banners are other ingredients of elevational em-
bellishment. Often the orthodox will be distorted in order
to attract attention: exaggerated columns may mark a
shop or supermarket front, or ironwork may be twisted
into the curving forms of Art Nouveau. 
By focusing upon the decorative elements of the
building façade, the student or artist will be able to relate
embellishment to function. Pure decoration in arch-
itecture can become a sham unless it is justified by use or
legibility. Although decoration is eminently drawable, the
real benefit lies in relating the four main strands together
– of linking structure, function, proportion and decoration
into a united whole. Buildings are complex entities, and
though a specific style or artistic movement may focus
upon a particular aspect of their construction, most
façades reflect a compromise between conflicting
priorities. The freehand drawing can help break down the
façade into its component parts, and in the process
provide insights into the nature of architectural design. 
130 Understanding architecture through drawing

15.12
South Quay Plaza on the Isle of
Dogs seeks to apply proportional
systems to give expression to 
modern office block. 
15.13
Buildings at angled corners are often
given special treatment. Here at the
Russell Institute in Paisley the façade
rhythms reach a climax in a dramatic
entrance tower topped by an Art Deco
angel. Such buildings should be sought
out and cherished. Note the classical
subdivision overlaid by modernist
principles.
The façades of buildings 131

Chapter 16
Machinery, function and modernism
The functional character of trains, machinery and ships
makes a pleasant contrast to the historicism or concern
for applied style in buildings, especially very recent ones.
Machinery makes no concession to surface aesthetics,
and derives its visual qualities instead from meeting strict
utilitarian criteria: rivets are left exposed and moving parts
are placed on the outside for ease of access and
servicing. The result of this unassuming functionalism is
often to produce objects of rare beauty or structures of
haunting presence. To draw them is to understand their
essence as working objects and to appreciate their form.
When placed against everyday buildings and landscapes,
the industrial object has both an immediacy and charm
that can be attractive to draw. 
Sketching machinery is not easy, yet the functionalism
of the subject often gives the picture great power. The
‘functional aesthetic’ is normally expressed at both a
detailed level (in the bolts, welds and pressed metal
panels) and in the general massing or arrangement of the
subject. You have only to look at such essentials as the
steps up to the cabs of diesel engines or the door handles
of tractors to realise that a rugged utilitarianism reigns. If
beauty is to be found in the machine-made detail, the
same is true of these objects as seen in their entirety.
Their silhouettes are often evocative, and the exposed
frames of such structures as pit heads and gantry cranes
make them striking features in any landscape. 
Industrial landscapes are often linear affairs. The
parallel lines of railway tracks or dock basins allow the
artist to exploit the directness of single-point perspective.
The balance between horizontal and vertical lines is also
important. Since trees are often lacking from such places
or appear only as a self-seeded scrub, the lines of the
industrial features are not generally softened by
landscape. Hence the artist can approach the subject
using 6B pencils and plenty of dark wash or crayon. The
spirit of such places lends them to bold representation. 
It is often a good idea to exploit silhouette, especially
in structures that are quite high. Industrial buildings and
working machinery are not normally painted – their colour
derives from oily splashes, rusting steelwork and the
hues of manufacture. In a landscape of flour mills and
cement works much will look frosted by the white dust,
and mining areas will be darkened by the colour of coal
and iron ore. Such places tend to be dark and rather
dramatic, with ‘spillage’ providing a counterbalance to
sculptural shape. The best industrial scenes are almost
sublime (to paraphrase the eighteenth-century Romantic
Edmund Burke) in their honest juxtaposition of structure,
dilapidation and enormous scale. 
132 Understanding architecture through drawing

16.1
The construction of fishing
boats, crab and lobster pots
share a common interest in
functional and practical design.
This sketch is from a beach
scene on the Orkney Islands. 
Machinery, function and modernism 133

Graphics frequently play an important role within the
functional landscape. The numbering of railway wagons
and the alphabetic coding of buildings adds a further
component to the air of rationalism. The graphic style is
necessarily practical – a form of squared-off lettering
tends to be used, often in conjunction with exaggerated
scale. The scene (and hence the analytical sketch) can
take on the qualities of a Russian Constructivist painting
as a result of the almost abstract superimposition of
graphics, structures and architecture. 
As the lettering does not normally have to appeal to
city sensibilities, it is often crudely painted or at least has
a visually carefree style typical of industrial landscapes. In
modern factory areas, the graphics are often part of
corporate identity (as with British Steel) and have a
corresponding lifelessness, but in older industrial areas
the style of lettering can be rather idiosyncratic and hence
more rewarding for the artist. 
The sketches that result from a close scrutiny of
industrial areas can have artistic value, as well as helping
to teach us lessons about design. If buildings are
designed purely out of practical consideration, with no
special regard for appearance, then the resulting
structures have a form quite different from buildings
designed on aesthetic grounds. Only the ‘high tech’
modernists such as Lord Rogers and Lord Foster produce
contemporary architecture that has qualities which derive
from the spirit of our industrial tradition. These architects
place the building services on the outside and leave
cranes on the roof to suggest a flexible and utilitarian
approach to design. Their use of sheet metal and
an exposed, often exaggerated structure has obvious
parallels with buildings associated with the manufacturing
process. The Lloyds Building in London is a tour de force
of such an approach to design, though to this author it is
as unhappy in the City of London as a factory would be.
But to understand some of the more assertive aspects of
contemporary architecture, a few days spent sketching
decaying pit heads at local coal mines or dilapidated
warehouses at the dockside should prove invaluable. 
The current fashion for a kind of fragmented
modernism (known as Deconstructivism) has part of its
origins in the architecture of industrial areas. The peeling
away of façade to expose the structure, the distortions of
scale and angle, and the expression of physical change or
structural impermanence are qualities frequently
encountered in factory areas or mechanical plant. When
decay has set in, these monuments to functionalism can
be romantic in the extreme, but they can also teach us
much about the role of frame, panel, fixing and assembly.
In analysing such subjects through the sketchbook, we
can gain an invaluable insight into the construction of
industrial architecture and machinery. 
Nature, when it encroaches, has an interesting
relationship with the industrial landscape. Trees are rarely
planted as decorative elements – they simply seed
themselves in odd corners or high up on the outsides of
134 Understanding architecture through drawing

buildings. Wild flowers and creepers are also quick to
colonise waste areas and these can provide an attractive
foil to the straight lines of factory buildings. Try not to
ignore the presence of nature – the odd weed or
sprouting willow can add a welcome air of tranquility or
contradiction to the sketch. Nature is also good at giving a
sense of scale to the drawing. A typical industrial scene
has an inhuman scale and though this is one of the
charms of the subject, a few weeds (and even the
occasional factory worker) will immediately establish the
size of what has been drawn. The contrast in scale and
texture between the built and natural elements makes not
only attractive sketches, but is instructive of the
connected role of townscape and landscape within our
cities.
While buildings and cities are densely inhabited, many
industrial scenes appear unpopulated. Instead fork-lift
trucks, lorries and railway wagons tend to occupy the
spaces between buildings. Since they are important
elements in most of our functional landscapes, their
presence cannot be ignored. In many cases the style of
the structures is reflected in the design or detail of the
means of transport. Hence in dockland areas the wharves
and cranes have features in common with the ships, and
in factories the conveyor belts share a visual language
with aspects of the buildings. 
Sketching the structure of the industrial landscape has
arguably more lessons to teach the designer of buildings
or objects than more conventional architectural subjects.
The lessons are best learnt through the sketchbook, but
in addition the drawings themselves can be of great
power and interest.
16.2 (opposite)
Coal mines (here at Chislet
Colliery in Kent) can be a
collection of bold abstract
shapes grouped into sculptural
assemblies in open landscapes.
They too offer lessons in
architectural composition and
construction.
16.3 (right)
This mechanical grab displays
the muscular qualities of much
industrial design. 
Machinery, function and modernism 135

136 Understanding architecture through drawing

16.4 a, b, c and d
These sketches of Santiaga
Calatrava’s bridge at Bach
de Roda in Barcelona seek
to capture this engineer’s
extraordinary grasp of geometry
and form. Such structures
can uplift the spirit in
inner-city areas. 
Machinery, function and modernism 137

16.5
The character of the industrial
landscape extends not just
through buildings but the spaces
between them. Here at
Kalamazoo in Michigan, railway
tracks, traffic signs, trains and
telegraph poles establish an
appropriate foreground to the
factories
16.6
This Russian built bulldozer
contains details and forms that
could be translated into an
architectural context. 
138 Understanding architecture through drawing

MODERNISM
With its geometric discipline and avoidance of
superfluous decoration, the modern movement in
architecture makes a good subject for investigation
through drawing. The key principles of modernism,
namely functionalism and honest construction, provide
good material for the sketchbook. Space, structure,
physical form and climatic response were driven by the
principles of modernism from the 1930s to the end of the
century. Although today there are new and perhaps more
exciting ideas shaping contemporary design practice,
buildings from a few decades earlier provide valuable
insights into the spirit of the modern age.
Since light was a revolutionary force in much
twentieth-century design, drawings that express the
effects of light on space can be particularly useful.
Sunlight and the corresponding patterns of shadows help
bring modernist design approaches into focus. Space is
less easy to draw but the use of shadow and shade along
with strong black lines can provide a tangible element of
the atmosphere sought by architects from Le Corbusier to
Louis Khan. The use and delineation of line tells us a great
deal about how an architect thinks. If one compares the
thin but authoritative line of Mies van der Rohe with the
chunkier and soft-edged line of Frank Lloyd Wright it
prepares us for the difference in the resulting approaches
to modernism. Our own drawings can use line in a way
which respects these different qualities.
Line by itself can rarely express the emotional and
shocking aspects of much modern architecture. The
shock of the new often requires the employment of a
wider range of graphic tools from colour to strong
textures and dark, almost black shadows. Since the
engineering precision and linearity of many twentieth-
century structures mattered greatly, the use of straight
edges can help in understanding and representing the 
buildings of the age. Hence, the type and thickness of line
is an important consideration in sketching buildings of the
period. Also since line was the primary tool employed to
represent edges, planes and the grids of construction, the
abstraction of lines by twentieth century architects gives
their buildings an intellectual quality. 
Much modern architecture was sculptural, if not
brutal, in character. The drawings made today should seek
to capture the atmosphere of neighbourhoods created on
the premise that ‘form follows function’. This may require
a more lively form of sketching than formerly employed,
perhaps extending into collage and multiple image
making. Whatever tools are used, the distinctiveness of
the age should be expressed in the drawings made. 
Machinery, function and modernism 139

16.7a and b
These sketches of Lille Eurostar
Station and Kansai Airport
explore tectonic construction.
The designs go beyond the
honest expression of structure
in order to create poetic spaces.
16.8a, b and c (right)
These sketches of modernist
buildings from the 1930s in
Antalya, Turkey, show the
structural possibilities of new
technical solutions such as
portal frames and reinforced
concrete.
140 Understanding architecture through drawing

Machinery, function and modernism 141

Chapter 17
Landscape
The landscape of cities and the countryside around them
can be divided roughly into the following categories: 
• tree-planted squares and parks; 
• waste land occupied by vegetation; 
• trees used for visual screening, such as around
industrial estates;
• farmland and parkland in the countryside; 
•
private gardens and courtyards. 
These various landscape types can each be sketched and
their aesthetic qualities explored. Before doing so,
however, it is important to understand the structure of
landscape and how best to represent its basic ingredients
– hills, fields, boundaries, hedges, paving, etc. 
Landscape drawing is a well-developed art, and
sufficient guidance in its principles is given elsewhere to
make duplication here unnecessary. As a rule, the artist
should concentrate upon the structure and form of
landscape, leaving matters of detail to a secondary
17.1
Landscape provides the setting
for most towns. The open fields
of Norfolk and remnants of old
hedgerows enhance the scene
of the market town of Reepham.
The church towers built on high
ground make distant landmarks
and provide the focus for the
drawing.
142 Understanding architecture through drawing

sketch. The character of towns requires an appreciation of
landscape, but vegetation is rarely a dominant element in
the scene. Normally the structure of land form, the
pattern of landscape and the geometry of planting are the
essential ingredients. As landscape and architecture are
closely interwoven within towns and the city edge, the
principles already mentioned for drawing the urban
elements can be applied to the natural ones. 
Hence, seek out patterns and structures within the
landscape as you would with buildings, and represent
them broadly. See the trees and hedges as enclosing
‘rooms’, as brick walls are in the urban scene. Tall trees,
especially if columnar in shape, can be depicted as
landmarks rising above the background townscape. In
Continental cities the spires of churches are often set in
competition with the cypresses planted in the nearby
graveyards. Similarly, the parallel lines of trees planted
along a city street can have a formality nearly as great as
that of the enclosing buildings. The perceptive eye of the
artist should pick out these qualities of form and
geometry, and represent them clearly in the sketch. 
The modern landscape often contains straight lines
and bold arrangements. The urban fringe is frequently
filled with large-scale engineering structures that contrast
with the old cottages and farmsteads of former times.
Modern bypasses, electricity pylons and reservoir dams
often stand right at the edge of the city. The difference in
scale and the strict geometry of the new structures are
worthy of a carefully drawn sketch. The new landscapes
of the twentieth century are crowded into the green belts
around most cities. Their modernist lines, smooth
surfaces and strictly controlled vegetation contrast
pleasantly with the landscapes of earlier generations. 
The modern landscapes of reservoirs, airfields and
science parks can all be explored, understood and
enjoyed through freehand sketching. The scale and speed
of modern life is well captured in the new landscapes of
the urban edge. As in much townscape drawing, an
understanding of perspective is important, especially as
many characteristic landscapes of the twentieth century
are made up of parallel lines. Straight field edges, railway
and electricity lines, the geometric pattern of modern
forestry, all require a good grasp of perspective if they are
to be accurately represented. 
These parallel landscapes often overlap older field
boundaries or the ancient alignment of a country lane.
Hence the modern elements can be drawn alongside an
earlier order, making not only an interesting drawing, but
also highlighting the historical processes that shape our
landscape. The patterns of different geometries, of old
17.2
Perspective plays a large part in
landscape drawing. This view of
a water works outside Glasgow
exploits the strange geometries
of such places. 
Landscape 143

17.3
Landscape and engineering are
the two main elements of
modern road design. Here at the
Edinburgh city bypass electricity
pylons form a barrier between
the road and Pentland Hills and
reinforce the geometries of the
road system. 
17.4
The bold patterns of the
ploughed fields in upland
landscapes can make for
interesting drawings. The
flowing lines of hills, fields
and shelter belts stand in
contrast to the more man-made
landscapes of the urban fringe
(see Figure 17.1). 
17.5a and b 
These simple drawings, made from
a train window, of a forest and fields
in Ontario, Canada, with melting
snow benefit from a large measure
of subtraction. The patterns have
design potential.
144 Understanding architecture through drawing

17.6 (above)
In suburban areas landscape
design and architectural design
are often well balanced.
Different shapes and colours of
trees complement the diverse
patterns of building in this drive
in Glasgow. 
17.7 (right)
The proximity of the date palm to
this merchant’s house in Palma,
Majorca, creates a tension
between building and landscape
design. The terrace provides an
opportunity to enjoy the shade of
the tree and gives privacy to the
main apartments on the first
floor. 
Landscape 145

17.8
The density of planting along this
road in Glasgow results in the
landscape elements dominating
the urban ones. The different
textures of the trees and plants
have been deliberately exploited
partly to aid identifying the
species invloved. 
146 Understanding architecture through drawing

and new textures, frequently extend through both urban
and rural areas. Compared to the countryside well away
from towns, the landscapes at the urban edge are
complex subjects, being neither truly rural nor truly urban.
They are the servicing areas for the city, and therefore
contain sewage farms, railway yards, industrial parks
and motorway corridors interspersed with remnants of
the older farmed landscape. The somewhat artificial
boundary between town and country is represented in
the untidy and often vandalised countryside immediately
around cities. Using the sketchbook in these areas can
result in interesting compositions. The challenging
material of the urban countryside is also helpful in
teaching landscape design and in cultivating an
appreciation of issues facing modern geographers and
town planners. 
The modern industrial landscape at the urban edge
frequently contains relics of the Industrial Revolution. In
former mining areas heaps of coal spoil, like mini
mountains, can often be found alongside the dilapidated
remains of pit winding gear. These relics have a poetic
quality, especially if softened by invading vegetation.
Disused canals and railway lines have a similar quality and
in time, perhaps, the elements of the twentieth-century
landscape (pylons, motorways) will also be transformed
into romantic ruins. 
The pre-industrial landscape made up primarily of
agricultural countryside and compact settlements has
given way to dispersed towns and disrupted countryside.
As a consequence, the town now extends into the
countryside, leaving pockets of fields and orchards
marooned in the city. Hence fragments of the countryside
can often be found in towns, and transplants of the city in
the countryside (frequently in the form of new towns or
business parks). The old rigid distinction between town
and countryside has been broken, creating much material
for exploration through the sketchbook. 
Green belts seek to hold on to the romantic notion of
the countryside surviving as a discrete entity alongside
towns. They are usually well-defined areas consisting of
country parks, old planted estates and modern
recreational facilities. They provide good material and a
tranquil setting for those wishing to learn through
freehand drawing. 
Landscape sketches are more successful if there is a
focus to the drawing. This can either be a farm or house
set within its rural context, or, more challengingly, a large
engineering structure such as a radio mast or motorway
bridge. By mixing the natural and the artificial, the sketch
will develop a complexity and meaning otherwise lacking
if it depicts the countryside alone. 
Trees can be drawn individually or as blocks. The
structure of an individual tree (whether circular, columnar,
pyramidal) is worth noting, but as a group the trees will
form a screen like a planted wall. In urban situations trees
may be planted in formal rows or grouped geometrically
in a square. The challenge then is to capture their
17.9
These palm trees in a
courtyard in Palma, Majorca,
provide a feeling of
tranquillity. The wide,
spreading leaves of the palms
offset the hard lines of the
arcade and stairs behind. 
Landscape 147

17.10
Upland landscapes (as here in
this view of the Pentland Hills
near Edinburgh) are usually
seen from the road. Signs,
poles and fences form the
poorly designed foreground
for many such views. 
17.11
The cypress tree in this
suburban street in Barcelona
provides a landmark almost as
important in civic terms as
Antonio Gaudi’s apartment
block behind. The relationship
between trees, walls, cars
and buildings establishes a
balance that is typical of
Mediterranean towns. 
148 Understanding architecture through drawing

17.12
The Place Dauphine in Paris
provides a perfect balance
between urban and landscape
design. The trees have a
significant impact and provide
welcome shade and
tranquillity within the
congested city. 
17.13
The Barcelona Pavilion, built
in 1929 by Mies van der Rohe,
makes little distinction
between building design and
landscape design. Here
paving and pool are merely
an extension of walls and roof. 
Landscape 149

formality and to use the planted elements to complement
the built ones. Often trees are employed along with
shrubs and ground-cover planting. These three layers of
landscape are usually designed to act together, especially
in city parks. The shape of leaf, colour and texture of
foliage contribute much towards the visual effect, and can
be highlighted in a sketch. In more urban situations trees
are mixed with paving, and here the contrast between the
gnarled trunks of ancient trees and the smoother surfaces
of brick or stone is deliberately exploited. Whether as an
amateur artist or as a professional designer, it is worth
searching out such details and learning to use them. 
UNDERSTANDING ANDY GOLDSWORTHY
THROUGH DRAWING
A number of artists work in the media of landscape, such
as Andy Goldsworthy whose installations at the Yorkshire
Sculpture Park are explored here. Landscapes are pri-
marily man-made and hence lend themselves to analysis
through drawing, particularly when artists and sculptors
intervene in interesting ways. Goldsworthy’s art engages
directly with nature, producing work in the countryside
that draws upon ecological understandings, local
materials and cultural references. Using dry stone walls,
ambiguous holes, woven branches, twigs and leaves,
Goldsworthy produces sculpture of great beauty whilst
also engaging the viewer in questions of sustainability.
Sketching the landforms and installations created by
Goldsworthy helps bring the structural properties of his
work into greater focus. There is considerable under-
standing of engineering and craft in his work, especially
that placed directly in the landscape rather than in a
gallery context. With Goldsworthy, the structural
solutions employed borrow directly from constructions
found in nature, such as the weaving of birds’ nests or the
suspension of spiders’ webs. However, in the exploitation
of familiar natural phenomena, Goldsworthy adds local
cultural and craft references, which anchor his work into
specific locations. In bringing together nature, craft and
indigenous materials, Goldsworthy is making a statement
about the particular as against the universal – an arena in
which architects are also much engaged. 
Recording Goldsworthy’s often ephemeral work via
the sketchbook is a departure from the usual
documentation via the camera lens. As mentioned before,
the process of sketching forces the student to explore
beneath the surface whilst also providing the opportunity
to modify the drawing in order to enhance the learning
experience. This is particularly pertinent in an analysis of
Goldsworthy’s land art, where the surface structures
reflect deeper intellectual investigations by the artist.
Bringing these into focus by drawing helps the student to
understand his art at two main levels. First, there are the
practical areas such as the materials, crafts and structural
techniques used to realise what are often large
constructions built to withstand the harsh realities of the
outdoor world. Second, there are the artistic aspirations,
values and working principles followed by the artist.
Through sketching, Goldsworthy’s use of geometry and
space becomes clearer, especially the play of circle and
square, and straight and serpentine line, which recur in
his art at different scales. 
All of Goldsworthy’s work can be explored via the
sketchbook. However, his large site-specific sculptures,
which address themes of nature and time, holes and
layering, cracking and stability, lend themselves to
analysis through drawing better than his smaller gallery
works. The conceptual journeys undertaken by artists
working in the medium of landscape art from
Goldsworthy to Richard Long and Ian Hamilton Finlay are
often concerned with time, space and construction – the
very issues faced by architects. Drawing encourages
these parallels to be explored, perhaps in the process
enriching future architectural practice. 
150 Understanding architecture through drawing

17.14
Andy Goldsworthy constructs installations that bridge art, landscape and
architecture. This example is known as ‘Striding Arches’.
17.16a, b and c 
The use of landforms and structures based upon farming practice is a feature of Goldsworthy’s work. Here in these installations the artist alludes to
the enclosure of nature as a metaphor for wider ecological concerns.
17.15
Stone Room at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park is a construction by Goldsworthy of
sandstone domes with ambiguous holes. 
Landscape 151

Chapter 18
Sustainability
The concept of sustainable development, and associated
practices such as sustainable construction, lend them-
selves to investigation via the sketchbook. It is possible to
use freehand drawing to explore aspects of modern green
design, be it the use of solar energy, wind power or
natural ventilation. Conversely, most of the buildings
constructed before the Industrial Revolution utilised local
renewable energy sources, building materials were from
the immediate locality, transport and farming practices
relied on human and horse power, and cities were located
where natural resources demanded. There was little or no
importation of energy, food, water or materials, and since
there was scarcity all round, there was a great deal of re-
use and recycling. In this there are lessons for the future,
which can be recorded and understood through freehand
drawing. So sketching can help reveal best green
practice, whether old buildings or more recent examples
are employed.
The resources available also shaped the technologies
and design practices employed. Here again the
sketchbook can be used to study the crafts as well as the
buildings and cities produced. In this there is no
difference in principle between practice in the eighteenth
century and that in the twenty-first. In both cases, science
and technology seek to achieve the maximum benefit
from the minimum of resource consumption, using
design to mediate between resources and uses. Hence,
as in all sustainable practice, design and technology are
intimately related. The function of drawing is to record
this relationship so that lessons can be learned that may
have relevance for future design practice.
Sustainable development, defined as development
which meets the needs of the present without com-
promising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs, is essentially concerned with development,
i.e. what architects do. Sustainable development is about
cities and large-scale decisions that act upon global
players, such as politicians. The architect is involved in
this, but more commonly at the level of sustainable
design and sustainable construction. Hence the subject of
sustainability is best explored through freehand drawing
at all three levels – urban, building and construction.
There are different green practices in different regions
of the world as a result of variations in climate or cultural
practices. The sketchbook can be used to explore these
differences and in the process gain some insight into the
subject of sustainable development. Since there are
marked inequalities in the global distribution of resources,
from water to agricultural land and energy supplies, the
subject has considerable educational benefit if sketching
152 Understanding architecture through drawing

is employed as the media of investigation rather than
words. Drawings allow the experience of green design to
be analysed from various perspectives – plan, section,
sketch views, details, etc. When key words are added,
the drawings display deeper understanding thereby
allowing the subject to be shared with others and
assessed if they are done as part of college work. Such
sketches should retain an analytical quality if the
principles are to be understood, although they can be
more descriptive if the aim is to relay the character and
experience of green design.
Sustainable architecture comes in various guises, from
modern solar-designed houses to traditional wind towers
or courtyard forms. In terms of solar energy, there is the
problem of keeping buildings cool (a growing problem
with global warming) as well as exploiting the sun for heat
gain. Hence practice varies in different regions of the
world and at different times of the year. For example, in
many twentieth-century modern movement houses the
architect balanced the need for high levels of daylight
with solar protection in the summer, whilst also affording
access to the health-giving qualities of sunshine in winter.
Many buildings (both houses and schools) constructed
around the mid century provide an interesting case study
of how architectural design responded to climate and
health in a sustainable way. 
There is a clear link between cultural practices in
architecture 
and 
sustainability. 
Much 
vernacular
architecture carries in its construction and craft practices
a solid knowledge of low energy design, recycling, the
18.1
Drawing of the south-facing façade at BedZED, a low-energy housing
project designed by Bill Dunster in south London.
18.2
Sketch of ventilating cowls at BedZED. They rotate to take advantage of
wind to cool the houses and workshops beneath.
Sustainability 153

18.3
Development sketch of the
Green Building in Manchester
to designs by Sir Terry Farrell.
The three renewable energy
sources employed in the
building (solar, wind and
geothermal) are clearly
shown. The building claims to
reduce carbon dioxide
emissions by 75 per cent.
(Terry Farrell and Partners)
154 Understanding architecture through drawing

18.4
Sketch by Sir Nicholas
Grimshaw explaining the
energy strategy at the British
Pavilion at the Seville Expo.
(Sir Nicholas Grimshaw)
Sustainability 155

use of thermal mass for heating and cooling, rainwater
collection, sustainable drainage systems and integration
between human and animal shelter to provide greater
levels of comfort. There was a respect for nature and the
landscape that provided the resources upon which the
building or village drew. Modern practice has often broken
the continuity of these traditions with serious social,
cultural and environmental consequences. By using the
sketchbook to learn from the past, students and architects
may be better prepared for a future with fewer global
resources upon which to draw. In regions like Africa and
the Middle East, where much future dev-elopment
attention is likely to be focused, there are well-established
vernacular practices that are unique to their localities and
climate. Recording and under-standing these provides the
opportunity to update them for the demands of the
twenty-first century. Rather than take Western industrial
traditions into these areas, it may be more valid to
transport ideas from the less developed world into the
resource-hungry cities of Europe and the USA.
It is temping to use the camera to undertake the type
of recording and analyse described here. However, as
chapter 10 argues, photography has limitations in
reaching a deep understanding of design or construction
practices. The camera records the surfaces, not the
structural or spatial arrangements, nor the thickness of
materials or air flows. The drawing is better equipped to
undertake this type of investigation, although sketches
and photographs can be combined to fully narrate an
example of green practice. The benefits of drawing to
learning are obvious: there are judgements and
interpretations that need to be made (unlike in photo-
graphy), and in the quality of the graphic investigation
there is a basis to assess the level of intellectual inquiry.
Sketches also provide a vehicle for taking learning from an
existing building and applying the principles to the design
of a new one. Hence in learning about sustainable design
from existing structures, whether vernacular or more
recent examples, the sketches are the bridge into the
imagination.
As mentioned earlier, the subject can be examined at
three levels – urban, building and construction. All are
156 Understanding architecture through drawing

relevant to the architecture student. Three examples are
given here from the author’s sketchbook. The first
concerns the relationship between transport systems and
urban design using Tokyo as an example, based upon a
study visit with Edinburgh students in 2005. The metro
system in Tokyo has shaped the profile of the city above
ground. Where stations are located there is a greater
intensity of buildings of various kinds from offices to
hotels and apartment blocks. As a result the city achieves
the kind of mixed use, pedestrian friendly compaction
advocated by architects such as Lord Rogers. This type of
intensity of commercial and cultural life leads to other
changes to the city fabric. Parks become enclosed and
cherished for the tranquillity they provide, railway stations
become interchanges connecting different transport
modes together, and streets become places mainly for
people rather than cars. Using the sketchbook, the world
below and above ground can be superimposed, the
mixture of land-uses analysed and street life described –
leading to a better understanding of sustainable practice
in Japanese cities.
18.5 a, b, c and d
These sketches show various methods of dealing with environmental control using
architectural means rather than air-conditioning. The fins, louvers, balconies and
overhangs protect the buildings from the midday sun whilst also encouraging cross-
ventilation. These houses are in southern Portugal and date from 1930–60.
18.6
Sketch showing the relationship between development above and below ground in
Tokyo. Public transport is an essential element of sustainable development.
Sustainability 157

Another example, this time at the level of building
design, is that of courtyard houses in Syria and other parts
of the Middle East. Again the studies are based upon
student field trips to the region. The form of the traditional
courtyard house was a direct response to climatic con-
ditions, although over time it assumed a cultural and social
significance. The dimensions of the courtyard, thickness of
walls, presence or absence of ventilating chimneys, the
size and position of windows and much else was a direct
response to solar design. These characteristics lend
themselves to sketchbook analysis and, if time permits, to
more thorough investigation of temperatures at different
times of the day and over the year. By combining visual
analysis with building physics, the student can learn a
great deal about sustainability in the field.
The final example at the level of construction concerns
the use of ventilating cowls in contemporary building
design in the UK. The sketches concern buildings of
different types (library) and different architects (Rab
Bennetts and Bill Dunster). The aim behind the drawings
was to investigate the workings of natural wind-assisted
ventilation, the impact upon the interior spaces and the
external aesthetic consequences. By combining different
types of drawing (mainly sketches and cross-sections) it
was possible to understand more fully this phenomenon
of current green design practice.
The exercises described here were of academic as
well as personal interest. The sketchbook provided the
means to more fully understand the subject of sustainable
development than had photography alone been
employed. Different types of drawings were needed to
interpret the complexities of sustainability, and frequently
words and arrows were added to the sketches to
elaborate in some detail. As with understanding
architecture generally, the use of sketching gets beneath
the surface of subjects, allowing the principles to be
better understood.
18.7 (top)
Typical courtyard house in the Middle East. The drawing explains the traditional
methods employed for cooling using wind towers.
18.8 (above)
Study of ventilating cowls at Brighton Public Library designed by Bennetts
Associates. The building was short-listed for the Stirling Prize in 2005.
18.9 (right)
The Loch Lomond Visitor Centre designed by Bennetts Associates uses local oak in
its construction and rhythms drawn from the adjacent woodland. The building seeks
to reduce its environmental and visual impact whilst still being modernist in spirit.
158 Understanding architecture through drawing

Sustainability 159

Chapter 19
History and archaeology
Drawing is a particularly useful tool to employ in the study
of the history of architecture and in related fields of
archaeology. The site sketch supplemented by measure-
ments on the ground brings the organisation, structure
and construction of historical and archaeological subjects
into a graphic form that can be readily understood.
Historical sites come in many forms – some are
predominantly below ground, others are fragments
of structure above, others are relatively complete
assemblies covering quite large areas, others still are
large settlements or areas of cities. Invariably, the man-
made structures and surrounding landscape have a
special and often planned relationship although it may not
be evident to the casual observer. The role of the sketch
is to bring these relationships into focus, thereby
beginning to understand the design content of the
building or site in question.
Unlike drawing modern buildings, a typical arch-
aeological site usually sits independently of the urban
context. Although the subjects under exploration may be
160 Understanding architecture through drawing

large and well-preserved (such as Egyptian pyramids,
Greek temples, Roman townships and Crusader castles),
they normally exist in relative isolation. This allows the
subject to be drawn from various angles, in different
lights and at progressively greater scale of detail. Hence,
the student may begin with sketches that explore how
the subject relates to the wider landscape, then progress
to how it is organised in plan or section, and finally make
detailed drawings of construction and decoration.
In the north of Europe many historical and arch-
aeological sites exist as dramatic constructions of rock
and lintel, creating sculptural compositions in open
landscapes. Here the stone circles, burial cairns,
fragments of castles or early settlements often display a
planned rather than casual relationship with the adjoining
countryside. The sites were often chosen for their
symbolic or defensive role, with earth mounding, ditches
and vistas being important elements of the total
composition. In southern Europe and the Middle East, the
same symbiotic relationship between historic site and
adjoining landscape exists but here moor and open
grassland are replaced by low scrub and desert. In all
cases, however, the importance of orientation should be
noted on the drawing, recording, for example, the angle
of the sun, the axis of due north and any ancient routes
into the site. As many early sites have ritual significance it
is likely that buildings, field enclosures, lines of valleys
and the positions of hills or mountains are in some kind of
meaningful relationship. Again, the sketchbook can be
used to note these factors, helping to develop an
19.1
Skara Brae in Orkney, northern Scotland, is an ancient settlement of stone houses by
the sea. It is one of the oldest Iron Age villages in the world and being constructed of
stone has survived remarkably well. The sketches and accompanying plan explore
the relationship between enclosure, climate and landscape.
History and archaeology 161

understanding of how early man fashioned the
environment. There may be lessons here not just in
construction and site planning but in sustainability,
particularly the use of water and renewable energy. 
How our ancestors designed their world has relevance
today. Many ancient sites were successfully occupied for
hundreds of years and have lessons to teach us today as
the modern world strives to achieve more sustainable
patterns of development. Examples like Skara Brae in
Orkney, thought to be one of the best preserved Neolithic
sites in Europe, show how early man used primitive
forms of engineering to modify the environment. Here the
residents of this small community of twenty or so stone
built, mainly subterranean dwellings (perhaps housing
seventy to eighty people) harvested food from the nearby
sea and used peat for heating. Living on fish, mammals
(such as seals and whales), oats and turnips they eked out
a life in dwellings made of huge slabs of thin stone cut
from the immediate vicinity. The limited timber available
as driftwood from Scandinavia was used for roofing rather
than furniture, which was constructed also of sandstone
cut into shape using primitive iron and granite tools. How
the village was planned, how it was designed and
constructed, and how the lives of people were conducted
in these simple, Spartan stone dwellings are subjects that
can be more effectively explored through the freehand
drawing than the lens of a camera. The analytical drawing,
supplemented by observational drawing, gets the student
beneath the surface of the subject, bringing into con-
sciousness lessons about construction and sustainability.
162 Understanding architecture through drawing

Little evidence exists of the lives of our ancestors four
to five thousand years ago, except that left behind in the
form of structures and artefacts. The burial cairns of the
Neolithic and Bronze Ages offer tantalising glimpses into
a world of ritual significance. Here the dead were buried
in large community vaults, often as family groups and
frequently with a clear pecking order of importance.
People were buried with tools, clothes and cherished
artefacts, making funerary monuments of particular
anthropological importance. Such cairns or pyramid
tombs were often sited where they had commanding
views over a moorland landscape, a river valley, or along a
coastline. Studying these sites, as well as the jewellery
and tools discovered within them, provides insights into a
world without written records. For many historical or
archaeological sites it is the use of technology, design and
construction that holds the key to understanding the lives
of people who lived long ago.
The path of the sun, and to a lesser extent the moon,
is the key to deciphering the spatial layout of many early
sites. In the north the sun was associated with harvests
(and hence survival) and appears to have had greater
impact upon the design of ancient sites (such as
Stonehenge) than places of similar date further south. The
motion of the sun (and moon for those who endured the
long, dark winters in places like Iceland and Orkney) had
an influence upon the geometry of buildings and other
structures. Layout on the ground often reflected cosmic
or astronomical relationships. Through the field sketch
and simple site measurement it may be possible to
19.2a, b, c, d and e 
These sketches of Roman buildings on the Aegean in southern Turkey seek to
investigate construction as well as more formal aspects of classical architecture. 
History and archaeology 163

19.3a and b 
Built at much the same time as
the classical buildings of the Aegean
(Figure 19.2) these sketches of burial
cairns and Bronze Age monuments
on the island of Rousay in Orkney,
Scotland, display a similar tabular
stone architecture. Once roofed,
these enclosures now stand open
to the elements.
164 Understanding architecture through drawing

understand relationships partly lost on the surface. Even if
all the evidence is not available, analysis through the
sketchbook may allow new theories to be postulated or
old ones tested. 
Many historic and ancient sites faced problems that
modern city planners and architects also frequently
address. How were the resources needed for survival to
be gathered, where were they stored, and how was
waste to be disposed of without jeopardising the health
of the community? Where was water to be found and
how could energy from the sun and wind be exploited for
heating or cooling? How could the settlement be
sheltered from winds or protected from attack, and what
was the best relationship between field, forest, farm and
hamlet? These are all questions that can be addressed in
the context of archaeological sites and for which the
sketchbook could be used to draw lessons.
More recent histories, such as Roman settlements,
can be explored in similar ways. With its strong sense of
geometry and monumental construction, Roman
architecture lends itself to investigation through freehand
drawing. The clean lines of the Roman builders, their
compact town planning and well-articulated public
monuments provide good material for those intent upon
sketching the remains rather than recording them through
photography. Line and shade are the best techniques to
employ – the first to understand the orthogonal discipline
of Roman structures, the second to express the visual
weight of its construction. Roman city planning was
based upon grid layouts intersected with cross-axes and
19.4
A deserted highland
village in Scotland showing
the close relationship
between buildings and the
enclosure of landscape
with stone walls. The
drawing edits out much
unnecessary material to
focus on the melancholic
scene.
History and archaeology 165

public open spaces that contained market halls, shopping
streets, stadia and theatres. The point and counterpoint of
a typical Roman settlement are a pleasure to contemplate
and draw, especially in the tranquil decay of many
classical sites in the Mediterranean or Aegean regions. 
A grasp of perspective helps in fashioning the
sketches on the page. Few Roman sites are without a
grand vista, monumental gateway or viaduct striding
across the countryside. Single point perspective allows
the heroic ambition of the Roman architect to be analysed
in the context of the wider landscape. However, parallel
geometries and right-angled crossings are only part of the
typical scene; there are also usually fragments of
sculpture, friezes and intricately carved capitals. These
provide an attractive richness of detail to the orthogonal
discipline of Roman town planning whilst also alluding to
the cultural significance of art in classical times. Sketching
on site demands the kind of attention to large gestures
and small details that is the essence of classical
architecture.
Where a large amount of sculpture and carved detail
has failed to survive (it is often to be found in nearby
museums rather than in situ, as at Palmyra in Syria and
Perge in Turkey), there is still much to investigate via the
sketchbook. One can learn about Roman construction
techniques, not just the use of arch and lintel but the way
stone blocks were cemented together and mixed with
brick in areas away from public gaze. The sketchbook can
be used to explore the ingenuity of Roman engineering as
well as architecture, not just in the walls but beneath the
166 Understanding architecture through drawing

ground in the water channels, hot springs and sewage
systems of many towns. At many sites these are open to
scholars and tourists to view, though they rarely receive
much attention in spite of their significance today.
Roman architecture and town planning displays
considerable intellectual thought. The Hellenistic
synthesis of art and science is best displayed in the public
monuments of the period. Analysis through freehand
drawing can reveal patterns and richness that escape
casual viewing. Sketching can also bring alive fragments
of existing structures by completing buildings either in the
imagination or on paper. Since drawing is a fluid tool, the
things beneath the surface can be revealed through line,
texture or shade. When key words are added, such as the
identification or naming of parts, these sketches become
alive with real understanding. Hence, the hidden story of
architecture, which is usually described in words, is
revealed through the alternative medium of drawing.
Architecture is shaped by lines, not words. They are
the basis for much architectural draughtsmanship, either
to aid the builder in the task of construction, or as
described here in the analysis of existing buildings. Lines
serve a useful purpose and obey certain conventions that
are shared across the construction professions. The same
is true of sketching, where weight of line, effects of
shade and technical rendering such as perspective are
understood by all architects. Hence, to discover the
principles, values and techniques employed in Roman
architecture through the medium of sketching requires
the student to adhere to standard conventions of drawing
19.5a, b and c 
This sequence of drawings of the
Buddhist temple site of Sigiriya in
Sri Lanka explores the relationship
between religious structures and
the wider landscape.
History and archaeology 167

wherever possible. Roman buildings display an
unswerving adoption of certain universal principles of
design – in this sense the architecture of the period was
not unlike modernism in the twentieth century in its
stylistic consistency from Scotland to Asia Minor. To draw
such buildings reveals more than architectural truths – the
sketches tell us something about the Roman world view.
Ancient sites are often busy places in which to draw. It
may be best to plan a sketching visit to coincide with
when tourists are less in evidence – as in the early
morning – or to find a quiet corner away from the crowds.
Often Roman or Greek sites are quite extensive and there
are usually stone slabs on which to sit. Since sunlight was
used to articulate many classical buildings, it is advisable
to plan a visit to get the most out of the effects of light
and shadow. A diagonal sun (rather than one directly
overhead) is preferable and, since conditions are not
always ideal, the student is advised to apply effects to the
sketch that bring the monumental qualities out. 
Buildings and towns display the social structures of
their age. Attention to the plan is important if the social
hierarchies present are to be understood. Hence,
sketches can have a combination of view, plan and
perhaps also section and elevation. This combination can
help in unravelling complex relationships on the ground,
particularly when the archaeological evidence is
incomplete. Architecture is a social art where the plan
provides the clue to power and order in society.
As with many subjects discussed elsewhere in this
book, freehand drawing is not just an observational tool
but one that allows questions to be posed and answered.
The modification of the landscape by early man was an
exercise in design as much as it was the result of
developments in agriculture or social organisation. By
design one means a wide definition of human intervention
involving the construction of field walls or defensive
enclosures, of dwellings, the evolution of primitive
technologies, the making of furniture or domestic
implements, the design of fighting tools and ceremonial
or ritual jewellery. In fact, the root of modern design
19.6
A sketch by Basil Spence made in
1962 showing how the proportions for
his design for the British Embassy in
Rome were influenced by the adjacent
Porta Pia designed over 400  years
earlier by Michelangelo. Drawings
rather than words are the best means
of exploring such ideas. (RCAHMS)
168 Understanding architecture through drawing

disciplines from textile design to architecture, product
design to landscape planning, are to be found in the
historical and archaeological sites of our ancestors. The
freehand sketch and field measurement can release the
secrets of the past.
19.7 (right)
Sketch plan and section of Bronze Age tomb on Orkney.
19.8 (below) 
Sketch of pyramids at Giza with diagrammatic plan.
History and archaeology 169

Chapter 20
Interiors
Many of the rules that apply to the drawing of exterior
space are equally applicable to interior volumes; in both
cases one is depicting the play of solid against void, of line
against plane, and light against shade. To sit and draw
a room is rather like drawing a courtyard and the
same general principles apply. After all, a room is little
more than a square with a roof, and a corridor a scaled-
down street. 
First, select a good place from which to view the
room – a position that shows its design attributes to
best advantage. Choose a location that does justice
to the subject, whether it be the interior of a
Baroque church or of a modest café. Look at the play
of light upon the surfaces, how the space is used,
and how the function of the room determines its
general organisation and level of detail. Activity, though
difficult to draw, defines the function, and hence
character, of the room. Some interiors are frequently
empty, devoid of human bustle, whereas others
are always alive with human activity. A typical pub or
railway station cannot adequately be drawn or understood
as a space without the rich layers of human life
found there, while the composition of the inside of a
church or of a power station may benefit from their
emptiness.
In sketching a scene you are seeking to understand
space – the objective is to look, draw and learn. The
picture is important, but the heightened awareness
obtained through sketching is perhaps more rewarding
and ultimately more useful to the potential designer.
Select your subject with care, therefore, and be critical in
the approach to drawing it. If the subject is complicated,
then either focus upon a detail that is typical of the whole,
or abstract the view in order to pare the subject down to
essentials. Never attempt too much; you will quickly tire
and lose any pleasure from drawing, and the learning
process will also suffer. If a complicated interior has to be
recorded, then use a camera – the sketchbook is for
analysis, understanding and, one hopes, pleasure. 
The sketch of the Europa Bar in Prague shows an Art
Nouveau interior typical of those to be found in many
European cities, from Glasgow to Moscow. The design of
the space is perceived as an ellipse within a rectangle,
with a pair of columns defining the cross-axis. In this
sketch much of the detail is left out – the key elements
are highlighted and Art Nouveau decoration is added to
enrich the overall geometry. As the room was nearly
empty at the time of the sketch, the seating level is
merely hinted at, and this allows the eye to focus upon
the splendid gallery and ceiling. 
170 Understanding architecture through drawing

The Europa Bar employs a device common to turn-of-
the-century interiors – it is constructed as a circle within a
square, treated rather like a clearing in a forest with the
dome of space representing the pulling back of the trees
to reveal the sky. In such an interior the columns could be
likened to the trunks of trees and the exposed beams to
branches. Many famous interiors employ a biological
metaphor, especially those in the Art Nouveau style
whose forms echo those in nature. At the Glasgow
School of Art the renowned library by Charles Rennie
Mackintosh has also been likened to a woodland clearing,
the verticality of the columns suggesting some northern
pine forest. 
By way of contrast, a sketch of the interior of a
medieval cathedral should evoke its imposing ambience
and Gothic detail. Here the architecture is not one of line
and rectilinear decoration, but of light, shade, space and
carved decoration. Accordingly, the artist should adapt his
or her style to suit the interior and choose materials that
are appropriate for depicting the subject in question. The
resulting sketch may well tell us more about Gothic
architecture than could be communicated by laboriously
measured drawings of walls, windows and columns, and
certainly more than could a photograph. 
In terms of design, interior spaces are treated in a way
that is so similar to certain exterior ones that it is hardly
worth analysing them as a separate entity. The rules of
articulation, of the manipulation of scale and of the
exploitation of axial arrangements are equally relevant to
the design of the interior of buildings as their exteriors.
What is different is the fact that interiors are designed to
be entered: these are spaces that can be inhabited and
modified, rather than simply gazed upon. As such, the
positioning of the artist is vital; drawings are static records
yet 
the 
viewpoint 
should 
seek 
to 
show 
the
interpenetration of space, and how light is used to
20.1
The use of timber shutters to reduce glare
in North African houses creates
attractive patterns on floors.
Interiors 171

illuminate a decorative panel, or to channel the visitor
through rooms and corridors. Interiors, like exteriors, are
experienced as linear and progressive volumes – the
interplay of rooms, doorways and connecting corridors
have their parallels in squares, gateways and streets.
Through sketching, one may come to understand the
complexity of interior design, and the essential
relationships between the observer and the spaces he or
she occupies. 
For beginners seeking to learn how to draw and
understand form, the interior as a subject offers many
advantages. Sketching inside does, of course, provide
shelter from the elements and generally there are fewer
people peering over your shoulder than in busy city
streets. In addition, interiors are normally regular spaces
and hence they abide by the rules of perspective with
greater clarity than do the complex angles of busy streets.
Moreover, interiors are well articulated in the sense that
doorways are framed by mouldings (known as
architraves), walls join ceilings with a cornice, and most
rooms have a focus of attention in the form of a fireplace
or handsome piece of furniture. You can also move
around interiors so that the sketch can become an
accumulation of views or the superimposition of points of
interest. Such collaging of material can make the interior
sketch interesting in itself, and instructive as a piece of
drawing. Hence interiors are a useful starting point for
learning not only how to draw, but also how to understand
the rules of architectural design. 
The way space is depicted tells us a great deal about
how that space is used. In Le Corbusier’s sketches of the
apartment-block interior at Unité, for instance, all is open,
with the rooms mere zones of interconnected territory.
The dividing walls barely exist, and where they do they
are stripped of decoration. As a consequence, the space
has little of the sense of meaning that results from
applied decoration; instead, the quality of the apartment is
172 Understanding architecture through drawing

20.2 a and b (opposite)
Church interiors are usually well-articulated spaces. Columns, arches and windows
define the interior volumes and provide space for different liturgical activities.
These sketches are of Wells Cathedral and deliberately focus upon the building
structure.
20.3 (right)
The handling of light and shade helps express the structural complexity of this
fine space inside St Mark’s Cathedral in Venice. The weightiness of the columns
and piers means that surface decoration is barely needed. 
20.4 (below)
Michelangelo’s staircase to the San Lorenzo Library in Florence is a study in
spatial complexity.
Interiors 173

determined by its proportions, the sense of openness,
and the pictures, furniture and rugs. By way of contrast,
the sketch of the 1930s ranch house in Kalamazoo,
Michigan, derives its character from the decorative
elements – be they columns supporting a beam or the
patterned wallpaper. From such drawings we can learn
that how one perceives an interior is not just to do with
the relationship of shape and volume, but with the
meaning given to the spaces by the applied elements of
moulding, pattern and texture. Plan and section are not
always adequate to explain the differences, whereas the
sketch can capture the essential qualities and
communicate the designer’s intention, or at least the
artist’s interpretation of this. It is also a useful method for
testing alternative ideas for improving an existing interior
or for creating new designs. 
The links between the inside and outside of a building
are as important as those between the building and the
city to which it belongs. In a building the connection
between interior enclosed space and exterior open space
is the doorway. This is an important perceptual element
and often has symbolic value. Hence sketches of interior
space are often drawn looking through a doorway, and
likewise drawings of the façades of buildings frequently
contain glimpses through doors or windows into the
interior. The combination of these elements gives the
drawings extra complexity and richness, and no little
mystery. 
To understand architecture is to appreciate these
qualities, and the sketch is a good way to cultivate such
20.5
The bar of the Europa Hotel in Prague exploits a circular gallery in the centre of
the room supported by Art Nouveau columns. The interior is a little, like a forest
clearing with light flooding down from above. 
174 Understanding architecture through drawing

20.6 (right)
The grotto-like quality of Parc Guell
(Barcelona) by Gaudi is expressed
here in a carefree drawing style. The
roughly hewn stone columns and
bizarre vaulting makes the space
immediately memorable. Notice how
the columns articulate the curved
passageway. 
20.7 (far right)
This domestic scene in Kalamazoo,
Michigan, is typical of suburban life.
The columns and screen wall divide
the dining room from the living room
without introducing unnecessary
enclosure.
20.8 (below left)
The interior of this hotel room in Barcelona opens on to the view of the street.
Window shutters and the balcony provide a transition space between the interior
and exterior worlds. 
20.9 (below)
The linking of rooms is a common feature of interior design. In this apartment in
Grenoble the dining room and salon are joined by double doors. The perimeter
windows and the interior doors are almost on the same axis. 
Interiors 175

20.10 (far left)
The lesson to be drawn from this
interior is the play of horizontal and
vertical lines. The gallery and columns
divide the space into units once used
by the Glasgow tobacco merchants. 
20.11 (left)
The harmonious proportions of
this mosque in Mostav, Serbia, are
expressed by the use of dark shading.
By selecting a position on the centre
line of the space, the drawing conveys
something of the spiritual qualities of
the interior. 
awareness. Thus the artist should not begin a sketch in
too precipitate a fashion, but only after much careful
contemplation of the subject. The interior of a building
reveals a more personal world, by contrast to the
public image of its exterior. Portraying the human
dimension is often critical when evoking the quality of the
interior – be it in the choice of furnishings, furniture or
colour scheme. For instance, a room full of plants has
quite a different character to one filled with paintings,
or one left unembellished. Modernist interiors are
often difficult to draw, but they can have a poignancy
that would be lost in rooms where every surface is
trimmed with mouldings and divided into panels. 
The artist’s choice of drawing materials and the
selection of shading or colour should suit the
mood or complexity of the subject. For example, un-
adorned modernist interiors are best rendered in
washes, using pencil or magic markers to provide
highlighting. Classical rooms suit pen and ink with
pale blue and pink washes. By contrast, the interiors
of churches require deep tones and dark shadows
to emphasise their weighty structure; yet the details
need to be picked out, too, perhaps in pen or sharp
pencil.
176 Understanding architecture through drawing

On a practical level, because the artist is unimpeded
by the weather when sketching an interior, whether of
a house or of a ship, train or aeroplane, he or she is free
to examine it in closer detail. Hence, one’s critical
judgements are often sharper with regard to interiors than
with any other architectural subjects. Added to this, the
artist can sketch while enjoying a cup of coffee, for
instance, or listening to music, and the leisurely pace
engendered by mixing activities means the act of drawing
becomes more enjoyable. 
Since we spend most of our time in interiors we are
often more aware of their shape and mood than that of
city streets. Thus our drawings of interiors should be
accurate with regard to both proportion and perspective.
However, precisely because we are so used to occupying
such spaces means that we have a tendency to sketch
them in an instinctive fashion, without proper regard to
the rules of perspective. If a room is regular in plan, the
lines of the walls must be running to a single vanishing
point even if it does not feel as though that is the case.
By first establishing the eye level and vanishing
points, the subject will not only be easier and more
rewarding to draw, but the sketch will ultimately be more
valuable as a means of understanding interior space. 
20.12a and b 
This comparison of two cloisters at San Lorenzo, Florence (left) and Pienza
(right) shows the importance of articulating interior spaces.
Interiors 177

Chapter 21
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 
CASE STUDY 1 
THE MERCHANT CITY, GLASGOW 
The Merchant City area of Glasgow is typical of the kind
of inner city neighbourhood that can be analysed through
drawing. By using a combination of freehand sketching
and mechanical drawing it is possible to describe the
main ingredients of urban form and the key role played by
particular features of architecture or townscape. 
Depending upon the nature of the area, the analysis
could deal with the following points:
•
the urban structure of the area; 
• the role played by public buildings; 
• the nature and characteristics of the background
architecture;
• key decorative elements such as windows or doors; 
• entrances and gateways; 
• squares, streets, urban spaces and landscape design; 
• proportional systems. 
21.1
This axonometric drawing of the
Merchant City area of Glasgow shows
the public buildings in black and the
rest in white. Simple shade has been
employed to show the approximate
height of buildings relative to the
width of streets. The importance of
Ingram Street is highlighted by the
public monuments at either end (only
one survives). 
178 Understanding architecture through drawing

This list is not exhaustive; you should seek to embrace
the particular qualities that the district in question offers.
As the Merchant City was a planned expansion of
Glasgow in the eighteenth century, the layout is fairly
regular and this makes the analysis a little easier than had
the area grown organically. However, subsequent
changes to the urban pattern and to the neighbourhood’s
architecture have added complexity and spatial richness,
and it is largely these qualities that the freehand drawing
seeks to describe and understand. 
THE URBAN STRUCTURE OF THE AREA 
By using a good town map, preferably an Ordnance
Survey sheet, it is possible to see at a glance the basic
geometry of the area. The layout of streets, the pattern of
squares, the placing of public buildings are all well
described on plans and can be highlighted through figure-
ground analysis. Moving from the two-dimensional plan to
the three-dimensional image is where drawing comes in.
By employing axonometric or isometric projection, or by
using bird’s-eye perspective (i.e. singlepoint, high-level) it
is possible to represent the underlying structure of the
area. Such a drawing requires a degree of simplification or
abstraction, otherwise the irregularities of building height
or façade line would defeat all but the most gifted artists. 
Drawings of urban structure do not need to show
detail – their function is to represent the spatial geometry
in a simple, easy-to-grasp, three-dimensional fashion. By
drawing cubes of building mass that show height in
proportion to width, and that relate the various urban
blocks to each other, the layout of an area will become
clearer than had plans alone been employed. 
The method is simple: with axonometric drawing,
simply rotate the plan through 45° and project the lines
upwards using the same scale for building heights as the
one in which the plan is drawn. With isometric drawing
you will need to employ a 60°/30° setsquare and, again,
do not allow for perspective in height or depth of field.
Alternatively, you can employ perspective drawing, taking
a high eye-level and vanishing point placed near to the
centre of the sheet. Whichever method is employed (and
remember axonometric drawing is the easier to make), it
helps if the sides of the blocks are shaded to highlight the
three-dimensional effect. 
Other key information, such as the location of public
buildings, parks and important squares, can be added
relatively easily to the basic three-dimensional drawing.
The advantage of this approach to drawing is that the
relationship between the urban parts becomes self-
evident. For example, the importance of a public
monument to a street, or the role of a park in defining the
edge of an area, becomes a little more obvious. Had your
analysis relied upon plans alone, such relationships may
not have become so apparent. 
THE ROLE PLAYED BY PUBLIC BUILDINGS 
The three-dimensional drawing described above is also
important in helping to establish the scale of influence of
a public building or civic monument. A public building can
have its position in the townscape eroded by unsuitable
neighbours. How far the setting of a building extends can
be plotted on such drawings. Often the major buildings in
an area have a relationship to each other, perhaps as
skyline features or as markers along a particular street.
Freehand drawing can be employed to study these
aspects of the townscape, particularly if such sketches
are related to the drawing of the whole area. Similarly, if a
design is proposed for a building, it can be tested against
existing neighbours so that the potential benefits or
injuries to skyline or space patterns can be analysed. 
In the Merchant City public buildings are generally
located so that they terminate street vistas. This classical
device is common to planned towns of the eighteenth
century. In Glasgow it means that you can find your way
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 179

21.2 (left)
This isometric view shows buildings
in less abstract terms than in Figure
21.1. Now the public monuments are
given architectural form. George
Square is at the far right. The drawing
distinguishes between monuments
and background buildings in order
to show the relationship between
the two. 
21.3 (opposite)
The termination of Ingram Street by
the Stirling Library (formerly the Royal
Exchange) makes a dramatic sketch.
The drawing is rendered with sunlight
on the main façade and shadows
expressing the depth of the
colonnade. Notice how the eye is
taken into the adjoining spaces by the
arcade to the right. 
180 Understanding architecture through drawing

with ease around gridded street layouts because the ends
of certain streets are differently terminated. Although the
public buildings were constructed over a relatively short
period, their styles vary from classical to Gothic, and from
simple shapes to elaborate structures adorned with
towers and domes. The freehand sketch allows the
varying ambitions of the different architects to be
recorded and analysed. You will find that certain roads,
such as Ingram Street, are terminated at one end – in this
case by the former Royal Exchange (now the Stirling
Library), which has a handsome portico projecting into the
street space. The other end of this straight street opens
on to the derelict east end of Glasgow. Thus a sketch of
the street could not only highlight its distinctive qualities,
but could form the basis for speculative proposals for
terminating the open end. 
Public buildings have a scale and presence greater
than that of the background architecture. Although in the
Merchant City they are not necessarily taller than their
neighbours (except the City Chambers), they employ
columns, pediments and domes to establish their position
in the architectural hierarchy. The use of decoration and
visual codes can be the subject of a drawing, especially if
it is related to the pedestrian’s experience of the city. 
In the Merchant City many public buildings have
changed their function since they were built. Mention has
been made of the former Royal Exchange now being
used as a public libary, but there are also churches that
currently serve as night clubs, restaurants or theatres, and
market buildings that are concert halls. The ability of
monuments to adapt to new public uses is an argument
of Aldo Rossi’s in his Architecture of the City, and is well
represented in Glasgow. The important point is to realise
that the visual currency of places like the Merchant City
depends upon the survival of the inherited public
buildings.
THE NATURE AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
BACKGROUND ARCHITECTURE 
The background architecture of the Merchant City
determines the physical context for the public buildings.
Whether the everyday buildings are houses, offices or
warehouses, they are the backcloth to urban life and
contribute significantly to the character of this inner city
area. The relationships between the function of an area,
its buildings and how they are decorated are worthy
subjects for sketchbook exploration. 
The character of residential neighbourhoods in the
Merchant City depends upon whether apartment blocks,
tenements or converted warehouses are the main type of
housing. Each has a different relationship to the street
and a different form of exterior expression. Likewise, the
degree to which housing is mixed with shops or work
spaces determines not just the appearance but use of
exterior space. 
The industrial areas, too, have their own character. The
presence of cranes, bollards, heavy doors and robust
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 181

materials give the workshop and industrial areas qualities
that are immediately recognisable. Even the modern
factory buildings such as the Glasgow Herald printing
works incorporate similar industrial features. 
The main business district is also distinctive; the
perpendicular façades of modern office blocks and their
sheer glass walls create unique townscapes. They are a
challenge to the artist since decorative elements are
normally in short supply; one has to rely upon plane,
surface texture and parallel line. When an historic church
or old house is marooned in such areas, a rendition of the
relative scale and degree of decoration can lead to a
telling drawing.
KEY DECORATIVE ELEMENTS SUCH AS WINDOWS
OR DOORS 
The design and detailing of windows and doors help
establish the style of architecture. The use of decorative
surrounds picked out in stone, brick or timber allow us to
categorise buildings into particular styles, and often
provide clues to their date of construction. Also the use of
specific technologies in the design and fabrication of
windows and doors tells us a great deal about the
technology of the age that produced them. For example,
the narrow width of Georgian windows and their
subdivision into many small panes of glass provide
insights into the structural limitations of the age and the
specific problems experienced by the glaziers of
eighteenth-century Glasgow in the production of glass.
Similarly, the design and detailing of Georgian doorways
give clues to the symbolic value of building entrances,
and to the level of sophistication achieved by joiners at
the time. Added to this, the proportional elegance of such
doors suggest that even in provincial towns the language
of the pattern book had been well assimilated. 
Whole buildings are complex and frequently daunting
subjects to draw, and you may instead prefer to
21.4
This sketch of Hutcheson Street being
terminated by Hutcheson’s Hospital
(Glasgow home of the National Trust
for Scotland) exploits the verticality of
the streets in the Merchant City.
Although the original street pattern
survives, this view shows how much
the architecture has changed over
the years. Note how the
perpendicular lines of the buildings
arrest the movement of the eye down
the street. 
21.5
As the termination of streets by public
buildings is such a feature of the
area, any graphic analysis should
focus upon this theme. Here Robert
Adam’s Trades House (1794) acts as a
focal point to Garth Street. It is
framed by buildings whose height is
the same as the width of the street. 
21.6
Carved stone detailing such as this
city coat of arms high on a church
gable is typical of the older buildings. 
182 Understanding architecture through drawing

concentrate your attention upon doors or windows. The
architect often invests a great deal of time in the design
of these elements, which makes them particularly
worthy subjects for freehand sketches. As doors and
windows are openings into a building, they are frequently
framed in a distinctive fashion, and sometimes given
symbolic value by the addition of figurative sculpture or
lettering. Windows are normally dark openings criss-
crossed by glazing bars in an attractive design. With
the addition of blinds, curtains and shutters, the window
provides a good subject for the artist, with its layers
of different materials not normally depicted in
architectural drawing. Although windows allow light
into buildings, they also permit those on the inside to
look out. Hence the world of the interior and exterior
have their interface at the window, making windows
and doors a good subject for a sketch.
In the Merchant City, doors and windows come in
many forms. In the warehouse areas many are plain and
with repetitive forms, yet they establish interesting
rhythms or patterns in the street scene. The subdivision
of larger windows into smaller openings and the grouping
together of these into tall bands give such areas their
distinctive character. In some of the new apartment
buildings circular windows have been used to express
major street corners or to give verve to the design of
rooftops.
When drawing windows and doors, it is often useful to
exploit shadows. The set-back of windows within their
frames allows a shadow line to be established that then
becomes a major element in the composition of the
sketch. The depth of shadow should reflect the distance
21.7
This view of George Square shows
the dominating presence of the City
Chambers (Town Hall), built in 1880.
The vanishing point is along George
Street on the left. Notice how statuary
provides a focus to the square, which
in this drawing excludes the trees
and people. 
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 183

the window or door is set back within its frame, although
when drawing this some licence is permitted. Each pane
of glass or timber panel would also have a shadow, which
provides a secondary layer of articulation. If the door or
window is framed in columns with a pediment, these
bigger architectural elements form a bold frame that
imposes an order on the drawing – an order that makes
visual reference, perhaps, to the larger structure of the
building’s façade. The various components of the subject
will have their own scale, pattern and proportion – and it is
these elements that should attract the architectural
draughtsman’s attention. 
Modern doorways can be quite minimal in design, but
the need for handles and hinges, and even security
cameras, makes them interesting subjects. Like
traditional doorways, the change of level at the threshold
and the presence of signage and perhaps interior planting
can provide material for a telling sketch. 
To assess your local environment graphically, you
should look at the details as well as the whole. The quality
known as townscape is to be found in both the whole
urban scene and in many of its smaller parts, such as
windows and doors. Often the details are changed
unsympathetically whereby the broader view, though
structurally much the same, is gradually devalued. 
ENTRANCES AND GATEWAYS 
Every neighbourhood or district has its boundaries and
hence entrance buildings. As we saw in Chapter 14,
these may not be self-evident; sometimes you have to
search them out, or to see such structures as hotels or
pubs as gateway buildings. Just as every neighbourhood
has its centre and a few special, often public, buildings, so
too you will probably have a perception of the edges to
the area and its entrances. In the Merchant City such
entrance buildings may be recognised, for instance, in
the cliffs of sandstone tenements and wide, straight
streets penetrating into the heart of the area and
flanked by gateway shops (such as Marks & Spencer in
Glassford Street). 
The personal nature of a sketch will result in different
people viewing the same place in different ways.
Consequently, your perception of the entrances and
gateways in an urban district – and this applies equally to
the Merchant City – will differ from someone else’s. But
this is the strength of the sketch: unlike the camera,
which can only record the same view no matter who
pushes the shutter, a drawing is able to express different
meanings and interpretations of a scene. 
SQUARES, STREETS, URBAN SPACES AND
LANDSCAPE
The gridiron layout of the Merchant City gives the streets
a particular distinction. Planned in the eighteenth century,
the area is not unlike parts of Chicago or New York –
straight streets with right-angled junctions leading into
leafy squares. Indeed, the streets are more important
than many of the buildings, which merely provide the
backcloth to urban life. The framing of the streets, their
periodic punctuation by key buildings, and the fashion in
which streets are linked to squares or churchyards make
them a subject worthy of sketchbook analysis. 
To obtain such drawings means, of course, that you
have to work within the space of the street. The bustle,
fumes and noise do not make for comfortable freehand
drawing, and aids such as rulers are essential if speed
is important. If you are concentrating upon street
space then the activities of the street may be important.
The relationship between the function of the buildings
that line the street and how, as at the Italian Centre in
John Street, the public space is modified by it may be
central to the quality of place and therefore to its portrayal
in your sketch. 
184 Understanding architecture through drawing

21.8 a, b and c
New buildings bring with them
modern details. These windows can
be found in recent apartment blocks
constructed in the area. 
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 185

It is useful to get to know an area before starting
to draw; note-taking can help to save frustration later
on. What you will need to jot down are the best times to
draw with regard to the angle of light and levels of
activity, the position of terminating buildings (to
provide visual stops to the gridiron layout) and places
where greenery can soften the harsh lines of the
drawing. If your sketch focuses exclusively upon the
perpendicular lines of modern office buildings, then
noting the best times for lighting effects could prove
useful, as well as recording how such buildings relate to
the street. 
Tone, line and texture are useful techniques to exploit
in such drawings. The rectilinear nature of modern streets
and the canyon-like edges formed by modern buildings
are best rendered in Conté, crayon, pen or soft pencil.
Where a particular building or tree stands in contrast to
the remainder of the scene, it can be drawn in a different
material, thereby adding complexity to the sketch. 
PROPORTIONAL SYSTEMS 
Many of our urban environments have evolved under the
influence of building codes or planning regulations. Much
of the New Town of Edinburgh grew up under a rule
limiting buildings to three storeys, and the same was true
of the Bloomsbury area of London. In many Victorian
cities the buildings could not be higher than the width of
the streets they faced because of the restrictions placed
on them by the Municipal Building Acts. The effect was to
lead to a certain monotony of layout, particularly in
working-class districts, where ‘mean houses faced mean
streets’.
21.9
The silhouette of the Merchant
City is as distinctive as its ground
plan. Here the City Chambers and
the tower of Hutcheson’s Hospital
are shown as viewed from an
apartment in Ingram Square. 
186 Understanding architecture through drawing

In spatial terms, however, the regulations often led to
a rather classical sense of order. Where the buildings
were high and the streets wide, a generous cube of space
existed in the front of each building. The harmonious
relationship between buildings and space engendered by
such regulations was often reflected in the subdivision of
the façades of buildings. In many nineteenth-century
towns, and particularly in the Merchant City, a
proportional system can be traced in both urban layout
and building design. 
Recent development in Glasgow has departed from
the earlier pattern, and now modern buildings are higher
relative to the street width than were their predecessors.
The same is true of Edinburgh, London and even Boston,
which grew up under similar influences. 
Sketching proportional systems requires detailed
analysis. You will need to look at the relationship of the
various parts (buildings to streets, windows to walls,
streets to squares) and record them through plan, section
and elevation as well as the freehand sketch. An
understanding of the inherited geometry of places is
particularly useful if, as a student of architecture or a
designer, you intend to make speculative proposals for
the redevelopment of a site or, as a member of the
public, you wish to object to the overdevelopment of a
particular site. 
A grasp of proportion is also important when drawing a
complicated building so that its different sections are
represented accurately. Buildings that are full of ornate
detail or complex structural systems are not easy for the
beginner to draw. By dividing the building into parts, each
based upon an expressed structural system such as
columns or a repeating pattern of windows or storey
heights, a complex building can be reduced to its
constituent parts. Once the basic subdivisions are in place
and each has at least an approximation to reality, then the
detail can be added later. 
The advantage of breaking down a complex subject
into simple subdivisions is to draw attention to the
proportional systems behind the design. Often the
proportions of a fine building are disguised by over-
elaborate decoration or an array of recent signs. If as an
artist you can see beyond the surface embellishment, you
may uncover a proportional code that not only helps you
draw the building, but also provides clues to design
guides that could be adopted in the future, should you
have ambitions towards being a planning officer, architect
or developer. 
CASE STUDY 2
THE BASTIDE TOWNS, FRANCE 
The Bastide towns in the Dordogne region of France
represent a unique collection of small country towns
eminently suitable for a sketchbook study. Built as new,
fortified settlements in the thirteenth century by different
sovereigns, including the English King Edward I, each
town contains a central market square surrounded by
handsome arcades. A common range of elements is
found in each of the dozen or so towns; besides an
arcaded market square there is generally a timber-framed
market hall, a centrally placed church used originally for
defensive purposes, a town wall with gateways, and a
gridded layout of streets. These elements make for a
remarkable consistency in spite of the different origins of
the towns. For whilst Edward I laid out Beaumont and
Lalinde-Villeréal, Castillonnes and Eymet were new towns
founded by the local monarch Alfonse de Poitiers. 
The Bastide towns are grouped in a fertile region about
25 miles square, west and south of Bergerac in south-
west France. Each occupies, or overlooks, a valley bottom
since the agricultural development of the surrounding
marshes was the principal starting point for the towns. As
their economy grew, so too did their architecture.
Houses, often restricted to three storeys high, blossomed
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 187

with first Gothic, then Renaissance, decoration, reflecting
the wealth of the merchants and farmers who flourished
under aristocratic protection. Civic buildings quickly
became more imposing, leaving a splendid heritage today.
As the latter are grouped around or stand within the
market square, their impact is both immediate and
impressive.
Since the Bastide towns were developed according to
a predetermined plan, they have a clarity that is unusual in
medieval settlements. The square street blocks, central
market place and clearly defined town edges (usually
formed by a defensive wall or river) result in places that
are well ordered and legible in architectural terms. In
most cases the centre of the town is marked by a church
or market hall, the main commercial activities are grouped
within the arcade around the central square, and the
secondary streets support private houses and small
shops. With gated entrances or approaches via medieval
river bridges, the sequence from outside to inside is also
well articulated. 
The unusual qualities of urban design represented by
the Bastide towns make them a fine subject for
sketchbook exploration. As cafés and bars are grouped
around the market square, drawings of the square and its
contents can be prepared in some comfort from well-
located positions.  Several drawings are required to gain a
full understanding of even fairly modest towns. In the
case of the Bastide towns, a series of sketches can
perhaps capture the sequence of views from the town
edge to the centre, focusing upon key elements such as
21.10 a and b
These town plans drawn from tourist
maps help to explain the structure
of the central squares of two of the
Bastide towns of the Dordogne Eymet
(a) and Villeréal (b). 
a
b
188 Understanding architecture through drawing

21.11 a and b (above)
This axonometric sketch of Eymet
is drawn from a postcard. The
relationship between square, river
and church is more clearly shown
on the sketch than in the plan. 
21.12 (left)
This view into the arcade of the
central square in Eymet is typical
of the Bastide towns. 
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 189

21.13 a, b and c
The market hall in Villeréal fills
the central space. This sequence
of sketches explores the progression
from outside the square to the area
beneath the timber floor of the
market hall. 
190 Understanding architecture through drawing

21.14 a, b, c and d
A similar exploration can be
undertaken of the central market
square at Castillonnes. Here the
main square is left open, with
public functions grouped beneath
the irregular arches of the perimeter
arcade.
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 191

the gateways, arcades and public buildings. 
Since the Bastide towns have characteristic layouts,
picture postcards often show them from the air. These
views can be adapted by the artist to show the structure
of each particular town, thereby supplementing the street
sketches with more analytical drawings. Detailed maps
also show the town layout and these allow the geometry
of street blocks, and the position of arcades and market
halls, to be plotted. Combining sketches, axonometric
views and figure-ground plans can result in an informed
exploration of the subject. 
Having studied the urban structure of the Bastide
towns, the next step is to record the design of specific
buildings. You might choose to focus on market halls, for
example, where expressive carpentry could be the
attraction; or upon private houses, which vary from
modest structures to those with sculpted doorways,
ornate window surrounds and splendid street-fronting
courtyards. Hence in a few days the character of the
Bastide towns can be studied and sketched, from the
whole town to the details of individual buildings. 
Rather than drawing subjects at random, the selection
of particular themes gives a sense of purpose to the task
of sketching that is both enjoyable and educational for the
artist. In addition, the advantage of sketching small towns
is their relative simplicity of design and lack of bustle. The
modest Bastide towns demonstrate the advantages of a
predetermined town plan which contains well-defined
edges and has a clear civic focus in the centre. The layout
of such towns offers lessons, perhaps, for our age with
its ribbon development, poorly maintained central areas
and lack of skyline definition. Like nearly all plantation
towns, the new settlements of the Bastides brought with
them a sense of geometric unity. It is this spatial and civic
order that the sketchbook can record, and that is sadly
lacking from the current proposals for urban villages. 
CASE STUDY 3
JAPANESE URBANISM
Japanese cities are quite different in character and
organisation to those in the West. The juxtaposition of
urban elements, both commercial and industrial, and the
presence of natural features leads to distinctive city
forms. This is evident particularly in the skylines of the
major cities, from Tokyo to Hiroshima. This case study
uses freehand drawing to document the urban
phenomena in order to better understand the forces at
work.
There are perhaps four lessons to be gained from an
analysis of the Japanese city. The first concerns the
effects of deregulation, particularly of the impact of
commercial pressures on the skyline of the major cities.
High buildings are in a state of competition for the
attention they can attract through architectural design.
This is expressed particularly in the profiling of
skyscrapers at their very top. Although high buildings are
often distinguished by elaborate shaping from base to
top, it is the upper storeys that are most celebrated. Here
penthouse apartments for company executives, or
conference suites, provide an excuse to depart from the
standardised accommodation below. In the process there
is competition for urban prominence that mirrors the
commercial ethos present in many Japanese companies.
The second observation concerns the nature of the
spaces between the skyscrapers. The urban landscape is
squeezed by the architecture of the high-rise buildings
with advertising signs, elaborate wire-scapes and
glittering shop fronts providing the street experience at
ground level. As a result, two conditions apply – that of
the top of the skyscrapers and that of the bottom. At
street level one is rarely aware of the rarefied world of the
penthouses that exist sometimes forty storeys above.
Since the buildings are so high and densely developed,
only a limited amount of light reaches pavement level.
192 Understanding architecture through drawing

22.15 a, b, c and d
This study of the Shinjuku district of Tokyo highlights the benefits
of clustering tall buildings together.
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 193

21.16 a, b and c
Skyline of Hiroshima from the 33rd
floor of the Rihga hotel. The distant
landscape is a welcome foil to the
architecture of the city.
194 Understanding architecture through drawing

This adds to the drama of the spectacle and increases the
impact of the advertising signs. 
High buildings in Japan are normally clustered into
tight groups around railway stations. A good example is
Shenjuku in Tokyo where many of Japan’s big companies
have their headquarters. The competition for space and
architectural impact is enormous, yet there are hints at
the top of the towers of traditional Shinto or Buddhist
temple imagery. This combination of high tech and
tradition makes the silhouette of Japanese cities
exceptional in their respect for cultural continuity.
The final observation that drawing such scenes reveals
is the close proximity between architecture and
landscape. Even in cities of several million people, parks
close at hand and distant mountains set the architecture
into a wider, more natural frame of reference. This is
evident particularly in the studies of Hiroshima, where the
sea and countless mountainous offshore islands soften
the rectangular outlines of recent urban building. In a city
that has suffered so much, nature provides an important
source of reflection. 
Using drawing to analyse an urban area 195


Part Four
The Way Forward 

Chapter 22
Exploration through the sketchbook –
some suitable subjects 
Developing a personal appreciation of buildings and
places through the sketchbook benefits from a structured
approach. The pursuit of design experience via the
freehand drawing requires an allocation of time and the
selection of topics relevant to your urban enquiries.
Rather than try to draw a whole town, it is often useful to
focus upon part of a neighbourhood or a particular topic
and explore it systematically. For example, you may
decide to concentrate upon one street and show how its
character changes from one end to another. Alternatively,
you could focus your attention on a square or courtyard,
recording how the buildings relate to the space, and how
people interact with it. 
As a student exercise it is often valuable to record and
analyse through the sketchbook the key qualities of
places, from their skyline to the spaces between buildings
and the edges of districts. In fact a systematic exploration
of topics along the following lines can heighten one’s
personal understanding of places. 
KEY STREETS 
Choose a street with which you are familiar and sketch
interesting buildings or details, such as distinctive
façades, signs or shopfronts, or spaces set back from the
street. Once you have walked along the street a few
times, storing in your mind the key qualities and
significant buildings, your next task is to record them
through the freehand sketch and perhaps to locate them
on a sketch plan of the street. Some points to note might
be the positions and design of signs, changes in the angle
of the street, and deliberate points of punctuation. If the
street is a major one, you will probably find important
shops or civic buildings located along it. 
Once the exploration is complete and you have
a collection of sketches and a plan, you can then begin
to analyse the street by noting the critical factors in
its design. Although valuable in itself and in your growing
awareness of places, the exercise could lead to
you suggesting changes in the design of the street to
enhance its qualities. Sites for new buildings could be
identified and sketch designs prepared, or suggestions
could be made for tree planting or even traffic
management.
Part of your exploration could involve the study of
façades of buildings along the street. The patterns of
windows, the rhythm created by the varying widths and
heights of buildings and the different materials employed
in their construction make good subjects for sketchbook
analysis. Your drawings may consist of both a formal
study of the street, in which detail is edited out, and a
198 Understanding architecture through drawing

descriptive rendering that captures such features as
texture and colour. 
URBAN SPACES 
Select a space in your town and record its key features
using freehand drawing. These may include public
buildings such as libraries or the town hall, or – if the
space is a residential square – perhaps repeating house
fronts. The degree to which the space is enclosed, the
height of the surrounding buildings, and any features such
as sculpture or trees in the centre of the square should all
attract the artist’s attention. 
If the square is large and complex, you will probably
have to focus your attention on a single aspect of it. If,
say, you decide to explore how the library relates to the
square, then you could draw the façade of the library,
its entrance, and the way the doors open out from the
space. Many public buildings have a gathering space
outside the entrance, perhaps sheltered beneath a
columned portico. Often major squares are landmarked
by a tower or spire and this, too, could form the subject of
your personal exploration. 
In smaller residential squares, the use of shared
balconies, communal drying areas or playgrounds for
children may be an important feature. Such courtyards
are frequently jam-packed with cars or filled with
dense greenery, and again this could provide a fruitful
topic for sketching. 
22.1
The sketch of Penicuik high street in
Scotland shows the rhythm of house
fronts. The sketch records the curve
of the street and shows how the
house in the distance becomes a
focus and deflects the eye around the
bend.
Exploration through the sketchbook 199

22.2a, b, and c 
This sequence of sketches records
monuments in the Turkish city of
Antalya. Each tower has a square
base which accommodate different
shapes of the tower above.
200 Understanding architecture through drawing

SKYLINE
The study of skyline and silhouette shows how important
tall buildings are to the character of different towns. Many
cities are marked by distinctive skylines: London’s
Houses of Parliament (and particularly Big Ben), the Eiffel
Tower in Paris, the Empire State Building in New York all
give a unique stamp to the urban silhouette. Lesser
towns have their own characteristic skylines, too, though
on a smaller scale. Places like Guildford, with its
twentieth-century cathedral, and Antalya in Turkey, with
its collection of Roman monuments, have skylines that
shape the perception people hold of the towns. 
Drawing skylines requires a bold approach and much
use of dark shading. The skyline should ideally be drawn
from both inside and outside the town, and from different
angles. You may well find that tall structures denote the
town centre, acting as markers to the commercial core. It
may be, however, that the tallest buildings are the least
interesting. Many modern office and apartment blocks are
dreary structures, while the lower church spires are more
profiled and hence worthier of note. 
When sketching the skyline, one is also free to use
one’s imagination to modify the silhouette of the town. By
re-profiling tower blocks or by adding new structures to
the roof, the shape of the building can be changed to the
benefit of the city skyline. As most of the high buildings in
Britain were built in the 1960s and 1970s when the
aspirations of building design were not very high, the
opportunity exists to use the sketches to speculate upon
how such structures could be enriched to improve the
skyline and hence legibility of our towns. 
NEIGHBOURHOODS
Big towns are really a collection of villages of which each
is a separate entity, a neighbourhood shaped by
distinctive building types (terraced houses, semi-
detached, tenements, flats) or different land uses (offices, 
warehouses, educational areas). Land use is usually
reflected in building type, reinforcing the sense that a big
town is really a collection of different districts each with
its own characteristic architecture. 
Freehand drawing is a good tool to use in analysing
neighbourhoods. First choose an area that is not too large
or too complex to draw. Determine the boundaries of the
area, its centre and key urban and architectural qualities.
Study where the public spaces are and how they are
designed. Look at how different districts are defined by
major traffic routes or natural features such as hills or
rivers.
Sketch the major building types in order to record and
understand their form. Look at how buildings and spaces
are arranged in plan form and perhaps in section. Draw
characteristic details such as bay windows and entrance
porches if you are dealing with a residential area, or
glazing grids and office doorways if you are sketching a
commercial neighbourhood. 
The heightened awareness achieved by such an
exploration allows students of architecture and design to
intervene in a fashion that enhances, rather than destroys,
the inherited patterns. The task of the urban designer
should be to strengthen the character and culture of
places and to add new richness. Places should be visually
firm and well structured, with additions reinforcing the
existing style of the neighbourhood. 
BOUNDARIES AND BARRIERS 
Towns, and even the countryside, consist of places with
marked boundaries. These are often natural features such
as rivers, but they can be railway lines, motorways and
embankments. These barriers help divide the city and its
surrounding countryside into parcels with clearly defined
edges. Edges, corridors and boundaries are rewarding
subjects to draw because of the way buildings interact
with them. In London, for instance, the Thames forms a
Exploration through the sketchbook 201

22.3 a, b and c
The streets of Bath provide an
opportunity to study urban proportions.
These quick sketches mix details with
general views and employ simple
graphics to augment freehand drawing. 
202 Understanding architecture through drawing

Exploration through the sketchbook 203

major barrier between the two halves of the conurbation.
The river itself is lined with warehouses, office and
apartment blocks, and the occasional public building. The
bridges create links between the two edges, giving them
a particular significance. If you take a river bus in London
or Paris, you quickly become aware of the qualities the
river has as a corridor with firm urban edges. 
Similarly, to drive along urban motorways is to be
aware of the edges formed by these vast concrete
structures that divide the city into huge parcels of land. A
study of how buildings interact with these barriers is
important to both the architect and town planner. 
Roads often define the limits of our cities: a ring road,
for instance, may constitute an urban boundary – built up
on the city side and left green on the other. In sketching
boundaries the task of the artist is to search out examples
of continuity and discontinuity. Edges are best when they
are visually firm and well defined. One could perhaps
explore a river or motorway, noting and sketching strong
and weak points. Rivers often flow through fragmented
areas, such as older docklands, passing through to well-
regulated townscapes in the city centre. By selecting
particular viewpoints you can explore these physical
barriers, noting in the process areas where the edges
should be better defined, or where the barrier may be
bridged by some form of new structure. 
22.4
This courtyard house in Syria expresses
well the values of the society that it
serves. The courtyard house is a
relatively neglected domestic type.
204 Understanding architecture through drawing

BUILDING TYPES 
Most towns consist of a collection of distinctive building
types whose qualities and variety are representative of
the area. The three-bedroomed semi-detached villa is
typical of southern England, the terraced house of the
Midlands, the tenement of Scotland and the courtyard
house of the Middle East. By selecting a specific building
type you can explore its various manifestations within a
neighbourhood or geographical area, relating the elevation
of different buildings to aspects of their plan. Such an
exploration through the freehand sketch can highlight
regional differences and teach you about the traditions of
your area. 
Your exploration could embrace factory buildings,
offices, warehouses and churches as well as residential
buildings. By selecting a specific building type and
studying the permutations of form and arrangement in a
precise area, it is surprising how many examples can be
discovered, and how varied their design is. In addition,
focusing upon selected building types encourages you to
become knowledgeable about the design of that
particular category of buildings. In the past, schools of
architecture required their students to keep a sketchbook
of buildings, categorising arrangements of plan and
elevation within specific building types. Besides
cultivating an appreciation of the links between the design
of the building plan and the treatment of the façade, the
use of sketchbooks also encouraged the students to learn
from past examples rather than seeking to design new
building types from scratch. 
22.6 (below)
The imposing suburb of Pollokshields in
Glasgow provides ample material for
the sketchbook. Here houses with bay
windows and turrets look on to leafy
gardens.
22.5  (left)
Fragments of buildings can be
rewarding, especially if as well
articulated as this Glasgow
apartment block. 
Exploration through the sketchbook 205

22.7 (left)
This street of urban tenements in
Glasgow exploits the compositional
possibilities of bay windows. The
terrace forms a crescent around a
shallow planted square. 
22.8 a and b (below)
Many inner city areas contain the
houses of once prosperous merchants.
These two villas are from a 19th-century
district of Vancouver. 
206 Understanding architecture through drawing

BUILDING DETAILS 
If whole buildings or engineering structures are too
complex for your needs or drawing skills, then select an
aspect of their architecture or construction. You could
concentrate on a relatively simple subject such as
windows, chimneys or roofs, or alternatively you could
attempt the more difficult topic of shopfronts, curtain
walling or decorative paving. Whatever subject is
selected, ensure you locate the example clearly and use a
drawing style that allows one example to be compared
with another. It is remarkable how much pleasure you will
derive from building up a collection of examples drawn
from your neighbourhood or on your travels. You will be
surprised, too, at how freshly you view your local
environment once you have taken the time to record and
analyse it through the freehand sketch. 
EXPLORING YOUR LOCAL HERITAGE 
Sketching is an excellent way to study your local
architectural or archaeological heritage. You do not
have to be a great artist to benefit from the heightened
awareness of the subject that drawing it gives. The
exploration of one’s locality through the freehand sketch
can be supplemented by accurately measured surveys or
searches through documentary sources. No matter
where one lives, the local environment will provide much
material for those intent upon exploring a town’s
heritage.
Whether you choose to study the conservation of
town houses, rural farms or industrial monuments,
drawing on location is an essential starting point. Such
studies can deal with building types that may interest you
– perhaps the arrangement of farm buildings outside your
town – or with special parts of the town, such as
conservation areas. If you are drawing primarily for
pleasure, seek out attractive compositions and
comfortable locations, but if your sketch is part of a
systematic analysis then you should adopt a more
methodical approach. 
For example, if you are studying farm buildings, start
with a specific building type, such as threshing barns, or
particular farm layouts, whether U-shaped or based
around a courtyard. The important point is to build up a
collection of sketched case studies that can be compared
in both general form and detail. In no time you will be
surprised at the similarities that exist between subjects
and the subtle evolutions of form that emerge in
response to changing farm practices or different climatic
demands. By analysing a specific building type fairly
closely, your knowledge of the local environment and its
architectural 
heritage 
may 
well 
exceed 
the
documentation available in local libraries. It may be
possible to compare your field sketches and notes with
historic maps of the area, allowing you to speculate upon
the development of particular farm types in your
neighbourhood. Such exercises have obvious value in
environmental education and could be used to support
the conservation of such buildings if they are threatened
by planning applications. 
If you are seeking to analyse historic buildings in your
neighbourhood through the medium of freehand drawing,
you may find it useful to add sketch plans or details of
such things as windows or gate hinges to the space
around the edges of your drawing. A single sheet can
then provide a wide range of useful documentary
material. This supplementary material may prove useful if
you are seeking to date the building or identify the people
who built it. 
EXPLORING DESIGN:THE WORK OF FOUR GREAT
ARCHITECTS 
A great deal can be learnt from a careful study of buildings
designed by famous architects. How they fashion a
corner, model a façade, or organise the ground plan are
Exploration through the sketchbook 207

useful fields of inquiry. Armed with a sketchbook and
plenty of time, the student should be able to visit a
building and, through making descriptive or analytical
drawings, come away with an enhanced appreciation of
architectural design. 
It is remarkable how many buildings by famous
architects exist in most European cities. Wherever you
live, it should be possible to analyse a building of real
worth. As a resident of Glasgow I have the works of
Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Alexander ‘Greek’
Thomson on my doorstep, and should I live in Edinburgh
or London, I would have the buildings of Robert Adam or
Richard Rogers to explore. The examples given here are
from Glasgow’s two great architects, together with
sketchbook studies of Le Corbusier’s Ronchamp Chapel
and various buildings by Antonio Gaudi. Sketches of
works by the latter are the result of visits to France and
Spain specifically to experience, record and explore the
works of these two fine European architects. 
It is important to seek out the works of major
architects. Experiencing buildings and places first hand is
infinitely more valuable than studying their designs by
way of slides and construction drawings. The sketch
heightens the act of experience, and forces the observer
into a critical relationship with the subject. A systematic
approach is desired, though many undertake the freehand
drawing in a more spontaneous fashion. 
Depending upon the building, the sketchbook analysis
will probably move from the exploration of the whole to
the detail, and from the edge to the interior. Such features
22.9 (far left)
The Norman carving on the capital of
each of the nave columns at Bayeux
Cathedral varies from one column to
the next. This sketch is one of a series
that chart the differences along the
nave.
22.10 (left)
Industrial architecture provides some
of the most sculptural subjects for
those intent on learning about design.
This crane is to be found at Harwich. 
208 Understanding architecture through drawing

22.11 a, b, c, d and e
These drawings of buildings by
Mackintosh seek to explore how he
handles design. His bold massing and
contrast beween horizontal and
vertical lines, and between solid and
void, are the basis for these studies. 
Exploration through the sketchbook 209

22.12 a, b, c and d
Alexander Thomson is recognized
as a master of street architecture.
This graphic study of his buildings
in Glasgow focuses upon his handling
of façades. 
210 Understanding architecture through drawing

Exploration through the sketchbook 211

as entranceways and staircases might deserve a specific
sketch, as would windows or railing details in the case of
an architect such as Mackintosh. The general sketch may
relate the structure to its context, showing perhaps how
the building interacts with the pavement that edges it.
The analysis may include a sketch plan or section to
show how the external form relates to the plan of the
building. Drawings help unravel the complex parameters
under which designers operate, making clear their
architectural intentions. 
By examining the work of different architects, the
student of design gains insights into the diverse
philosophies in operation. It is evident in the illustrations
included here that while Mackintosh is concerned with
abstract forms and shapes, Thomson is stretching the
classical language almost to breaking point. While Le
Corbusier employs heavy concrete walls to create a
monumental modernity, Gaudi breaks the surface
into decorative flowing lines derivative of natural or
organic shapes. 
By focusing upon a specific issue of design, the sketch
should be selective in spirit. It is of little value to strive
to record every detail whilst missing the fundamental
truth. No matter where one lives, there are examples of
good architecture available to help teach lessons in
design. Our accumulated wisdom as designers resides in
the buildings round about us. Both the successes and
failures of design are to be found in most towns, even
those lacking the works of well-known architects. Armed
with an appetite for sketching, the student should gain
useful insights into what has been built, thereby
continuing a tradition. Of course, good design is not a
case of blindly repeating the language of the inherited
monuments, but of inventing new forms by changing the
angle of refraction. The sketch teaches us how to look
and learn from the past without inhibiting movement into
the future. 
22.13
Antonio Gaudi built several notable
apartment blocks in Barcelona at the
turn of the century. How he composed
the façade around flowing lines is of
interest here. 
212 Understanding architecture through drawing

22.14 a, b and c
Le Corbusier’s chapel at Ronchamp
has lessons for those interested in
church architecture. His handling of
shape, light and space is the main
interest of these sketches. 
Exploration through the sketchbook 213

Chapter 23
From sketch to design 
Having become accustomed to using the sketchbook as
an aid to visual understanding, it is not too much of a leap
to begin thinking in design terms. Your sketches will not
only have sharpened your perceptual awareness, but
more importantly opened your eyes to how a designer
thinks. Basically an architect or urban designer has to
evolve a form – hopefully an elegant one – to suit a
particular function, and relate it to a context. Hence
design is a two-way process – working from the
functional programme outwards, and from the physical
surroundings inwards. How well the balance is struck
establishes the appropriateness and even beauty of the
design.
Most books on design focus upon programme,
process and function, leaving aside questions of suitability
to townscape or landscape. By way of contrast, this book
looks at the visual language of places in an attempt to
address the balance. Drawing existing buildings, squares
and streets not only provides a rich repertoire of details
and forms from which to seek inspiration, but teaches
something of the significance of particular places and
their functions. To draw an area of eighteenth-century
London, for instance, is to realise how important buildings
and squares are to each other – to understand that a
23.1 a, b and c
Richard Reid’s drawings of Epping
High Street provide the context for
the design of his town hall. The
dictates of function are moderated by
a concern for the historic fabric of
the town. These sketches show how
place and programme are reconciled.
214 Understanding architecture through drawing

From sketch to design 215

designer must consider both the buildings and the space
they occupy. Similarly, sketches of Los Angeles show
how central the road and parking lot are to modern civic
design. If you were to sketch in parts of Paris or New
York, you may also discover the urban significance of
corner sites – not just as a place for architectural display,
but as a location for prime real estate. 
The process of drawing is, therefore, crucial to
understanding the significance of architectural ‘events’ in
the urban scene. Gateways may be special buildings but
their real value to you as a designer is to help you
establish the relative importance of such structures within
the hierarchy of the city. Designers have responsibilities
towards the town as well as their clients: addressing
questions of legibility, order, hierarchy and continuity are
part of the architect’s and urban designer’s wider duties. 
By sketching you will begin to understand the visual
structure of an area, and the various details that
collectively make up cityscape or landscape. Places are
assemblies of parts held together by an organising
principle. The latter may be simple, such as an urban grid
of streets or a network of docks, or complex, such as an
inner-city neighbourhood made up of fragmented parts.
Landscapes, although superficially beautiful, are often
composed of irregular or dislocated elements. It is
analysis through the sketchbook, rather than through
words, that can best unravel these complexities. 
Designing from the basis of a sharpened visual
perception is of obvious benefit to you, to your client and
to the environment. If your task is relatively simple, such
as designing a new house, then it is a straightforward
undertaking to sketch the houses in the neighbourhood,
recording their basic shapes and window, door, roof and
wall details. The cataloguing of parts and general
arrangements make a good starting point for the design
of the new house. Your ambitions as a designer may go
further than blindly repeating the pattern round about, but
a clever architect will reinterpret the old forms, not invent
completely new ones. Should you decide to place a glass
box in a district of Arts and Crafts houses, then it is hardly
surprising that the planning authority will take a dislike to
your design. 
The form and details of what you have drawn are
important, but so is their significance. A particular
assembly of glass and steel on an office block may prove
useful in the design of objects unrelated to architecture,
such as in furniture or product design. The way the
juxtaposition of materials is handled can, therefore, have a
universal application. Similarly, an aircraft wing may
provide clues as to how a building could be put together –
the moving parts giving hints, for instance, as to how
flexible solar screening could operate. When drawing, one
should be asking questions about the subject, discovering
the essence rather than merely recording the surface
forms. It is often the underlying principles, more than the
details, that prove a source of inspiration in design. 
It is obvious that the way we draw influences how we
23.1 continued
216 Understanding architecture through drawing

23.2 a, b and c
This sequence of a photograph and sketches
showing urban changes demonstrate how
flexible the graphic medium is. In this case
Hawksmoor’s church at St Anne’s Limehouse
in London Docklands is opened to view by
removing the clutter of recent buildings in
Commercial Road. 
From sketch to design 217

think about places and buildings, and hence plays a
significant part in how we might approach design. The
use of perspective drawing, axonometric, figure-ground
or shadow-enhanced image shapes our perception of the
subject. The current fashionable interest in figure-ground
representation has discouraged the deconstructed
distortions of many designers. Five hundred years ago the
discovery of geometric perspective led to a similar
interest in spatial patterns, vistas and terminations. 
If drawing sharpens our visual awareness, the method
of representation directly influences how we view the
world. To move from sketchbook exploration to design
requires the intermediary of a drawing. Many graphic
techniques are available, from simple plan, section and
elevation to more elaborate methods of three-
dimensional representation. Whichever method is
chosen, it is important to follow the established rules,
rather than make up new conventions as you go along.
Like writing or mathematics, the rules are well
understood and relatively inviolable. The grammar of
drawing, its syntax and composition are important
matters, whether you are a graphic illustrator or a
designer. 
The shift in emphasis from sketchbook studies to
questions of design requires an appreciation of some
simple theories of architecture. Like all patterns formed
by the interrelationship of objects and space, the
architecture of buildings and cities can be understood
from various perspectives. One can view the subject in
terms of space, surface, structure or decoration.
Architecture as space has long captivated designers who
have contrived to carve complex spatial effects out of the
solid mass of buildings or even whole cities. Baroque
churches and many modern office buildings enhanced
with atria manipulate architectural space to dramatic
effect. Even in relatively small rooms space can be
moulded and modified to excite the senses. 
Architecture as plane or surface is the converse of
architecture as space, though obviously both cannot be
considered in isolation. Here the interest is in design of
the surfaces that define the spaces, both inside and out.
As the surfaces are what we see, they have long
fascinated the topographical artist, for it is they that
provide clues to the function and significance of a
building. Focusing on the surfaces allows the designer to
exploit modelling, hierarchy of form, colour and texture in
order to transmit to the observer the ‘meaning’ of a
building.
Architecture as structure is another readily understood
classification. It derives great legitimacy from modernist
functional theory, which requires the honest expression
of the means of supporting a building. To take an example
from history, Gothic cathedrals were as concerned with
structural expression as with the moulding of space. The
visible display of a building’s structure can greatly
influence one’s perception of both its interior and exterior. 
Architecture as decoration concerns itself with applied
embellishment. The task of the designer is to provide
enough decoration to allow people to understand and
enjoy the building. Decorative detail can relate the
building to its surroundings or function by adopting a
familiar code of expression, or allow advertising in some
form or another. Decoration provides a cheap and ready
means of instilling symbolism for commercial, civic or
private reasons. 
These four key interests should be integrated in a
design. The integrity or appropriateness of a design –
whether for a chair, building or city – should be generated
by weighing the demands of functional arrangement
against these principal means of expression. The designer
has the task of striking the balance and relating it to other
points mentioned earlier, such as the physical or historical
context. Sometimes the clue to how the balance should
be struck derives from precedent (churches are often
218 Understanding architecture through drawing

concerned with space and symbolism, while office
buildings focus upon structure and surface) or the dictates
of context. Whether as a student of architecture, a
professional involved in the construction industry, or as an
interested lay person, a visual awareness sharpened by
use of the sketchbook leads quite naturally to a sensitivity
towards design. 
Many designers employ the freehand drawing to help
develop their ideas. A completed design proposal does
not happen all at once; rather it grows from a series of
early sketches and abstract probings. The sketch plan or
section allows the architect to grasp the complexity of the
subject and develop particular strands. The methods
employed in reaching an understanding of an existing
building or place are much the same as those used to
develop a design proposal. Such drawings have the prime
objective of explaining to the architect aspects of the
design. A series of sketch drawings are normally
prepared, each representing a layer of development or an
aspect of the design. They can be used in three important
ways:
• to relate new design proposals to the existing
structure of site and buildings; 
• to communicate the broad design strategy to others
involved in the creative process; 
• to analyse and explain aspects of the design to
oneself.
Mention has already been made of how Charles Rennie
Mackintosh and Richard Reid use the freehand drawing
as part of the creative act. For many architects and
engineers the sketch is an essential starting point for any
design proposal. The investigation of options and the
development of particular avenues of thought are best
achieved through the medium of the freehand sketch.
23.3 a, b and c
Another sequence of a photograph and sketches remodels Great Western Road in
Glasgow by removing the traffic and planting trees. Notice how the first drawing
begins to edit out the unnecessary information of the photograph. 
From sketch to design 219

23.4 a, b and c
A more ambitious change is described by way of sketches at the Gorbals in
Glasgow. Here Alexander Thomson’s church is freed of the visual competition
of tower blocks and given a square at the front. 
220 Understanding architecture through drawing

There comes a time when a more critical and analytical
approach is needed, and here formal perspective
drawings or computer simulation can be useful. But at the
conceptual stage, when designs are still fluid and where a
number of options need to be explored quickly, the sketch
can be invaluable. At this point the designer will be
relating the plan and form of the proposed building to
such matters as function; considering how to link patterns
of circulation to the section; and having initial thoughts
about structure and servicing. Depending upon the
project in hand, the designer will probably be grappling
with questions of site layout, landscaping and shelter.
These and many other issues lend themselves to the
freehand sketch, not as a means of recording a final
decision, but as a method of weighing up options from
the point of view of design and the organisation of form
and space. 
23.5
These analytical drawings show
the development of a design idea
by Arup Associates. The sketch
becomes the vehicle for testing
concepts and reconciling the
interests of architecture,
engineering and sustainability. 
From sketch to design 221

For the artist to become comfortable with using
drawing as a creative tool, the sketchbook must be
employed as a means of recording and analysing existing
buildings. The sense of a ‘sketchbook culture’ needs to
underpin the creative design process. 
Arup Associates, whose designs have received many
recent awards, operate in much this fashion. Here design
proposals are explored around the central focus of
the sketch. The concept for the whole building, and its
various parts, is explained to mixed teams of architects
and engineers using the sketch of a plan, section or
detail as the starting point for debate. The lack of
distinction in Arup Associates office between architects
and engineers has resulted in a climate where most
designers, irrespective of their backgrounds, have
become skilful communicators through the medium of
the freehand sketch. 
23.6 a, b and c
In these sketches (of 1992) Arup
Associates seek to establish the
development framework for a
business park. The sketches try to
integrate the needs of urban,
landscape and engineering design. 
222 Understanding architecture through drawing

23.7
This sketch by Ted Cullinan is based
upon a masterclass in urban design
held in Glasgow in 1992. Cullinan’s
‘dot’ drawing proposes a new
gateway building near Cathedral
Square.
23.8
The same masterclass (see Figure
23.7) led to the development of this
proposal for decking over the M8
motorway near Glasgow’s Mitchell
Library. The drawing by architect
Terry Pawson uses free graphics to
capture the spirit rather than details
of the proposal. . 
From sketch to design 223

224 Understanding architecture through drawing

23.9 (opposite)
More matured proposals by
architects Reiach and Hall are
detailed in this drawing of 1992 in
which the design for an office
development accords well with the
surrounding buildings in Edinburgh’s
George Street. 
23.10 (right)
Richard Reid’s sketch of his housing
proposal for Finland Quay in London
Docklands uses boats and people
to give scale and interest to the
public spaces. 
From sketch to design 225

Chapter 24
Designing through drawing  
The idea as formed in the mind was imperfect and could
only be given its consequent form through examination,
exercise of judgement, and modification of the idea
through drawing.
Leon Battista Alberti (1452), Ten Books on Architecture
The traditional view is that the objective of design is the
creation of form and the task of drawing is to give that
form some shape or expression (Alexander 1964 p15).
Hence, in modernist practice form is grounded in function
and meaning – the argument being that the legitimacy of
built form is based upon programmatic clarity (Alexander
1964 p15). As a consequence the designer must define
the problem in order to determine its functional
characteristics using the drawing process to test a variety
of form responses. According to this mechanistic
perspective the drawing helps achieve fitness between
the brief, context and other technical and physical
determinants. 
Being 
forward-looking 
‘design’ 
is
concerned primarily with the meaningful ordering of
things in the environment using sketching, mechanical
drawing, models and CAD to map the mental diagram into
a physical reality (Lawson 1990 p173). The key question in
this chapter concerns the role of freehand drawing and
particularly how it interfaces with other media (model and
CAD) in the process of achieving excellence in
architecture. Can the drawing perform the dual task of
providing authority in a constructive as well as an artistic
sense? Put another way, are freehand drawing and
concept sketching the means to establish the marriage of
art and technology necessary in the twenty-first century? 
Since built form is the solution to the design problem
brought about through the action of drawing, and given
expression by the product of drawing, how drawing is
used deserves close attention (Lawson 1994 pp141–2).
The architectural diagram and sketch drawing mediates in
the process of solving a design problem but it is not the
only tool employed (Robbins 1997). Just as how the
problem is defined influences the solution, so too the
tools used to solve the design problem have bearing on
how the problem is understood and ultimately solved. The
graphic analysis and spatial diagrams that architects
produce can be studied to see how the best fit solution is
achieved. In this regard the drawing is both a record of the
stage reached and, being a tool that is abstract and
intellectual in nature, it also opens up the inner processes
of design development to external examination. However,
the 
assumption 
that 
there 
exists 
a 
structural
correspondence between the pattern of a problem and
the drawing of a physical form that solves that problem
226 Understanding architecture through drawing

raises two important concerns. First, can the three-
dimensional nature of a building be adequately
represented on a flat sheet of paper – can space be truly
understood and designed by such means? If it cannot,
what is the relationship at different points in the design
process between the three tools commonly used for form
analysis and development – namely, drawing, models and
CAD – in representing an imagined reality? How is three-
dimensional space to be designed, understood and
communicated two-dimensionally, and since architectural
space is not static but fluid, how is movement
accommodated in the graphic analysis?
The second problem concerns the private nature of
the design drawing. In a task that involves many, namely
the design of a building, can drawings truly be a vehicle
for shared problem solving and, more importantly, shared
form evolution? The team drawing is relatively rare and
not much of a feature of contemporary architectural
practice, even in offices where multi-disciplinary skills
exist. Advocates of CAD argue that the screen provides
for more effective design collaboration and contains in
this the seeds of a more democratic process of
architectural production. 
In spite of these difficulties many architects
acknowledge the primary importance of the act of
drawing to solving design problems and in understanding
design precedent (Lawson, 1994 p141). In fact, some
architects claim that the actual holding of a pencil
encourages creative thinking, the pencil or pen being the
go-between that links the mind and hand. The drawing
allows thoughts to flow and, when combined with words,
creates a framework whereby design problems are
turned into embryonic solutions. This is commonly called
the ‘Diagram’ (Architectural Review 2006a p28). The
mind, eye, hand, pencil and drawing exist as a seamless
interface in the experience of accomplished architects; in
fact, it has been argued that thinking through drawing is
what distinguishes the architect from others in the
building design process (Eastman 1970; Schon 1983;
Curtis 1999). Architects draw in a way unique to their
24.1
For the architect the freehand
drawing mediates between the
conflicting demands of brief, site and
construction. Here words are used to
augment the ideas expressed in line.
(Source unknown)
Designing through drawing 227

profession, and although engineers and industrial
designers also draw to solve problems their graphic
techniques are quite distinct. 
The question addressed in these final chapters is
whether drawing still retains this central position in the
face of considerable development of other investigative
design tools such as CAD. Specifically, how do ideas,
drawings, models and CAD interact at the early stages of
design evolution, and, more fundamentally, can the
architect design without the aid of freehand drawing? All
designers, and here architects are no exception, interpret
and solve problems by graphic mediation. One can design
without drawing but, as the research described here
relates, it is difficult for architects to communicate an
imagined design without the use of drawing. Equally, it is
difficult to undertake the development of a design idea,
particularly at its early stages, without recourse to
freehand drawing (Lawson 1994 p142; Bowers 1999
p13). Although the CAD-based design drawing has an
increasing role in the genesis of an architectural concept,
traditional drawing is still required to resolve problems as
they arrive. Hence, this chapter argues that there is a
dynamic relationship between sketching and other
investigative modes such as models and CAD right
through the design process. In the hands of more
adventurous architects the line in plan becomes the line in
section, and this in turn becomes the line that is traced
through the model. However, as the design idea matures
beyond the diagram and early concept sketches, there is
an increasing reliance upon CAD and more formal model-
24.2 a, b and c
These drawings by Santiago Calatrava are little more than a structural diagram for
the Lisbon Orient Station yet they are rich in architectural and spatial potential.
(Santiago Calatrava)
228 Understanding architecture through drawing

making. But when later changes are required, the
freehand sketch retains its prime position as the first tool
employed in testing options. 
The argument outlined in this chapter is in contrast to
the more theoretical perspectives on the nature of the
architectural drawing that have been the primary concern
of scholars over the past decade. The drawing has tended
to become an object of interest in its own right rather than
a vehicle to develop ideas and engage in design dialogue.
Few have sought to investigate the changing role of
drawing as a design tool under the impact of ever more
sophisticated computer-aided design software and
modern methods of model-making such as CAD/CAM.
What these final two chapters seek is an understanding
of how an architectural idea is born, and how it is
represented, tested and articulated through drawing,
either manually or digitally generated. 
PERSPECTIVES ON ARCHITECTURAL DRAWING
The literature on drawing highlights a number of
important characteristics of the architectural drawing.
Whereas Paul Klee describes drawing as ‘taking a line for
a walk’, the architectural drawing has an important role to
play in the conceptualising process we call design (Stern
1977 p382). In architecture, the line is taken for a walk
with purpose – i.e. design. The renewal of interest today
in drawing is part of a more general discourse surrounding
visual culture embracing themes such as ‘ways of seeing’
and ‘ways of imagining’ (Bowers 1999 pp13–15).
Although it is recognised that there is a link between
24.3
This sketch by the engineer Ove Arup
of the structural arrangement at the
nave of Coventry Cathedral designed
by Basil Spence displays the
difference in how engineers and
architects draw. (Ove Arup/ Bruce
Yoell)
Designing through drawing 229

techniques of drawing and the perceptual experience of
space, the tools employed by architects to represent
reality (drawings, models, CAD) have not received the
attention they deserve in shaping some imagined future.
Architects are generally innocent actors in these wider
debates yet, as the Critical Architecture conference at
University College London in 2004 noted, ‘the drawing of
lines and the drawing forth of ideas’ is what designers do
as matter of course even if the deeper significance is
rarely addressed (Critical Architecture 2004). Not only do
architects draw forth creative ideas habitually, they use
drawing to gain a better understanding of the context to
the problem in hand, whether this be the physical sight or
precedent studies.
Although there is a large body of understanding
surrounding the interface between the initial functional
diagram, drawing, briefs and site characteristics (Lawson
1990 and 1994; Dunster 2006), the more critical role of
drawing in evolving new technological solutions or fresh
constructs of space is less understood. Admittedly there
is an increasing interest in the use of drawing to represent
different philosophical approaches to design, though until
recently these have rarely developed into buildings of a
concrete nature. However, Zaha Hadid, Frank Gehry and
Will Alsop have begun to open up a debate between the
mode of drawing and its design consequences. Rather
than separate the media of painting, drawing, models and
CAD onto different drawings, these architects have
24.4
Sir Terry Farrell’s sketch design for
an Arts Centre in Newcastle
combines different drawing types
on one sheet. (Sir Terry Farrell)
230 Understanding architecture through drawing

24.5 (left)
This sketch by Gemma Hickling, a
final year student at Sheffield Hallam
University, shows how a single
drawing can effectively explain
complex environmental aspects of a
design project. (Gemma Hickling)
24.6 (below)
This sketch of Alexandria Public
Library in Egypt, designed by
Snohetta, helped the author
understand the logic of the roof
construction. The process of drawing
provided the means to better
appreciate the ideas behind the
design.
Designing through drawing 231

24.7
This sheet of sketches by Lord Foster
of Riverside displays an almost
Darwinian interest in the evolution
of design ideas. The ordering of types
into chronological sequences shows
how freehand drawing can be
employed in an intellectual fashion.
(Lord Foster of Riverside)
232 Understanding architecture through drawing

begun to combine them onto a single sheet, producing
drawings almost without precedent. As a result,
architecture has been liberated from the straightjacket of
orthogonal thought process of plan, section and elevation.
Part of the problem has been the relegation of drawing
under the influence of post modernism to that of
‘rendering’ and under modernism to the ‘diagram’. These
renderings were views of designed buildings in their still-
unrealised but complete state (the perspectives of Leon
Krier or Aldo Rossi are good examples). On the other
hand, at the Bauhaus students were not encouraged to
explore through drawing but rather to use paintings and
cardboard models to investigate the properties of form
and colour (Periton 1996 pp189–205). Writing in 1943
Kenneth Clark observed the decline of architectural
drawing, which he attributed to the influence of
modernism with its concerns for abstraction and the
functional diagram (Architectural Review 1943 p148). A
similar point has been made by Curtis in the context of Le
Corbusier (Curtis 1999) and Arnell and Bickford with
regard to Gehry (Arnell and Bickford 1985). Gehry has a
particular interest here because of his acknowledged debt
to Mondrian and the way his particular art-design graphic
processes are translated into digital media in order to
positively influence any subsequent architectural
drawings.
The recent rebirth of interest in drawing is largely a
manifestation of the engagement by academics in
emerging cultural and social theories of design. Here the
author is not concerned with new modes of architectural
24.8a, b and c 
These sketches of the square in  front of Huddersfield Station test
an idea for remodelling the space.
Designing through drawing 233

representation or with the beautiful drawing whose roots
extend back to the Ecole des Beaux Arts and the Royal
Academy but with the use of drawing as a creative design
tool. After all, most architectural schools in the UK still
retain a curriculum based, at least in the early years,
around the discipline of drawing. In fact, skill in drawing is
a key element of the RIBA validation process and is
strongly linked in terms of ARB prescription to that of
competency in design. The key word used is that of
‘communication’ – the ability to represent ideas
graphically to oneself and others. All the architects
interviewed in the next chapter afforded supremacy to
the drawing as the main design generator and as a skill
they expect in young graduates. 
Five types of architectural drawing can be identified –
the initial diagram, the sketch design, technical and
preparatory details, site and other context studies, and
the definitive drawing. The first consists of mere lines and
fragmentary sketches often more akin to a notebook, the
second is concerned with the initial physical form often
with variations explored, the third is analytical and
technical, the fourth consists of records and analysis of
the site or questions posed by the brief, the fifth is a
representation of the architectural concept itself using
conventions such as plans, sections and perspective
views. The latter allows the question posed by the brief to
be tested against visual and practical criteria. These tools
allowed Michael Graves to posit the view that ‘without
234 Understanding architecture through drawing

24.9a, b and c 
Drawing allows the urban scene to
be documented in a way that allows
design interventions to be tested.
These sketches are deliberately
skeletal to help identify development
sites for student projects.
Designing through drawing 235

the discipline of drawing it would be difficult to employ in
the architecture the imagined life implicit in the brief’. This
is an argument also explored by Robin Evans, who posits
the opinion that the key power of drawing in architecture
is to act as a bridge between the imagined and real worlds
(Evans 1997 pp153–94). Similarly, according to the
architect Richard MacCormac, different frames of mind
require different instruments for producing and
representing what you are doing as a designer (Lawson
1994 p142). What this suggests is not only that different
types of drawing allow design problems to be solved from
different perspectives, but more importantly, the choice
of drawing type (or painting in Gehry, Hadid and Alsop’s
case) help mediate across the various cognitive phases of
design production. Put simply, the ‘drawing is the frame
of mind’.
The limitations of drawing have, however, been
highlighted, amongst others by Henri Lefebvre who
claims that drawing restricts architectural speculation (Hill
2003 p173). Lefebvre is particularly critical of plans and
elevations which in their geometric bias objectify
drawings to the point where communication is lost with
users and often other designers (Lefebvre 1991 p361).
Hill further argues that conventional architectural drawing
limits rather than expands design speculation through its
mechanistic origins. A slightly different criticism of
architectural drawing is made by Bob Sheils, who claims
that since the drawing has to visualise both the real and
virtual worlds at the same time, it is not capable of testing
the information without translation into physical form
(Sheils 2003 p204). The answer, he suggests, is to rely
more upon CAD/CAM as a means of operating in multiple
modes at the design stage rather than rely upon the
architectural sketch.
Four main criticisms of drawing are often cited: first,
that the mechanistic tendencies in traditional architectural
drawing limit creativity; second, that greater attention
should be paid to the modernist ‘diagram’ rather than the
traditional sketch design; third, that to be most useful
drawings need to interact with other modes of spatial
exploration; fourth, that different frames of mind require
different types of drawing at different points in the
creative process, and this has the tendency to exclude
non-designers in the process of architectural generation.
These criticisms and speculations beg the question
whether the type of drawing influences the content of
architecture. Or put another way, in order to develop a
new architecture we need to evolve, as Gehry and others
suggest, a new language of drawing. At a more practical
level most architects adjust the choice of drawing types in
order to mediate across the various cognitive phases of
design production. 
Two opposing positions have been outlined so far.
First, the more theoretical view that drawing is part of a
wider discourse grounded in art practice and how
architects use drawing should be seen in cultural rather
than purely technical terms. Second, since drawing is the
main begetter of built form, its central role should be as
the practical generator of architectural form free of
philosophical dogma. However, since architects employ
drawing in a fashion distinct to their discipline (there are
few parallels with engineering drawing) one should not
perhaps expect non-architects to fully appreciate the
significance in generative terms of the architectural
drawing, especially the freehand sketch and associated
design diagram. 
Until recently, it was assumed that the processes of
drawing inspired by contemporary art practice had limited
relevance to the architectural profession. However, one
can see in the drawings and paintings of Frank Gehry,
Zaha Hadid and Will Alsop the emergence of a wider
engagement with abstract spatial concerns that challenge
the more functionalist view of drawing. Gehry’s approach
to drawing, for example the linear adaptations of the
236 Understanding architecture through drawing

Matisse collages that inspired the Bilbao Guggenheim,
mirrors that of the sculptor Richard Serra who describes
drawing as a ‘verb’ with the emphasis on process rather
than product. Gehry’s design drawings approach that
‘perpetual state of becoming’ identified by Laura Hopton
(Hopton 2002 p11) and explored in the ‘Drawing Now’
exhibition at MoMA, New York in 2002. These emerging
currents are beginning to influence mainstream
architectural practice in the UK, judging by the designers’
inner thoughts voiced in the interviews conducted (see
next chapter) and the sketches produced. But if traditional
freehand drawing remains paramount at the start of
projects, CAD offers the chance to realise forms that
could previously only be imagined. In the digital age CAD
appears to bridge the worlds, if not of theory and practice,
at least of art and architecture. 
24.10
This masterplan sketch by Malcolm Fraser shows the benefits of mixing
line and text. (Malcolm Fraser)
Designing through drawing 237

Chapter 25
Drawing in architectural practice 
It is now necessary to explore how freehand drawing is
employed today in design generation by a selection of
leading architects in the UK. The emphasis is not upon
drawings as end products but on the role of drawing in the
process of designing buildings. The investigation is into the
drawings that architects produce – their type at different
points in the evolution of a design idea, the paper and
graphic techniques employed, the interrelationships with
thought processes and other tools such as models and
CAD. The focus is upon the role of drawing in the context
of the architects’ office rather than in the rarefied arena of
the public exhibition or gallery.
In this concluding chapter ten architects were selected
for interview, six with London practices, three based in
Edinburgh and one in Glasgow. Each architect interviewed
was the principal of a large or medium sized practice and
hence the person most likely to be the originator of the
design concept as well as the person most likely to
intervene at later stages. The architects chosen also
represented a wide range of design approach, from those
whose concerns were mainly in urbanism to architects
whose work is seen as high tech, rationalist, art or socially
motivated. In each case study, the architects were selected
because of their reputation as ‘designers’, as evidenced by
the architectural awards won. Each architect was of a
generation trained in the tradition of the freehand drawing
but practising in an age where digital representation was
the norm. The resulting tension between the screen and
the sketchbook interested the author. The nine questions
put to the architects can be divided into three types – those
dealing with the relationship between drawing and thought
processes, those dealing with drawing and problem
solving, and those dealing with drawing techniques and
communication.
The key drawing questions addressed
Drawing and abstract thought processes
Can you think without drawing?
Can you draw without designing?
Can you design without drawing?
Drawing and practical problem solving
What type of drawing do you begin with?
How do drawing, model-making and CAD interrelate?
How does sketching inform designing?
Drawing tools and techniques
What do you draw with?
What do you draw on?
How does the drawing become shared?
238 Understanding architecture through drawing

The first set of questions tried to tease out the cerebral
role of drawing not just in terms of organising and solving
abstract problems but also in relaying something of the
thought processes of the designer. In this there was an
attempt to discover the architects’ inner thoughts and
how they interfaced with traditional and electronic graphic
tools. The second group of questions aimed to discover
the specific nature of drawing in the more practical arenas
posed by design problems, the type of drawings used at
different points in the design process (using the RIBA
Plan of Work as a guide), and the interrelationship
between drawing, CAD and model-making. The third
group sought to investigate the tools and techniques
employed, particularly how and when the drawing
becomes a shared design tool. The questions posed dealt
only with the early stages of a design project: the
research had no interest in the perspective drawing
prepared to simulate a final design nor with drawing as
part of the ‘information package’ aimed at the
construction process. As such the investigation examined
drawing in the context of visual thinking and sought in
particular to discover whether drawing remains a critical
part of the architect’s armoury of spatial and technical
problem solving techniques. 
THE FINDINGS: DRAWING AND ABSTRACT
THOUGHT PROCESSES
Without exception all of the architects questioned
acknowledge the symbiotic relationship between
thinking, drawing and designing. However, not all thought
that drawing was a prerequisite for design: many
architects, including Cullinan, Grimshaw, Alsop and
Foster, often arrived at an initial design idea in their head
before they committed a line to paper. These early design
ideas were generated spontaneously, perhaps whilst
jogging in Foster’s case, cutting logs in Cullinan’s or
painting in Alsop’s. The subsequent drawings prepared,
often the merest diagram or sketch, gave physical form to
cognitive processes already undertaken. As Cullinan puts
it, ‘drawing allows me to express what is already in my
mind’s eye’. Likewise, Grimshaw admits that he not only
generally draws an idea already partially formed in his
head but he uses drawings to clarify spatial structures
lodged in the imagination. Similarly Alsop states that
‘drawing tests an idea which is already in my head’, but
to make sure he is thinking conceptually (rather than
just problem solving) he prefers not to draw too soon.
This view is shared by Farrell, who states that design is
a mental process that remains more fluid in your head,
and although line is fluid it is not as fluid as the first
design idea. 
Many architects reported that at the conceptual stage
drawings per se can be limiting and they prefer to
represent their thoughts with diagrams. A useful
distinction exists here between the sketch and the
diagram: the latter is the germ of an idea drawn with the
minimum of lines but containing the potential genetic
code of a project. All ten architects interviewed are
admittedly experienced designers but they share the
facility to construct images in their mind, which they then
commit to paper in sketch form. One could go further and
suggest that they deliberately avoid drawing too soon in
an attempt to keep the creative options open. In this they
are like composers who hum out a tune before they
commit notes to paper. 
If a design idea pre-exists its representation in drawn
form, all of the architects acknowledge the power of
sketching to test and develop the initial design concept.
Murphy thinks it ‘absurd to think you can design without
drawing’ and Foster states that ‘design is about ordering
and this is expressed and explored through drawing’. To
Foster a distinction can be made between thinking and
designing, and although he engages in both as an
architect, ‘drawing is essential to the latter but not the
Drawing in architectural practice 239

Responses to the research questions by architects interviewed
Architect
Bob Allies
Will Alsop
Ted Cullinan
Sir Terry Farrell
Lord Foster
Malcolm Fraser
Sir Nicholas
Grimshaw
Richard Murphy
Allan Murray
Gordon Murray
Does design
exist in head
before the first
drawing?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Type of first drawings
made
Site plan and building
diagram combined
Abstract drawing or
painting followed by plan
Section, overhead
axonometric
Section, plan view 
Urban plan, section 
Plan and section diagram
Masterplan and detail
Plan and section
Site analysis and plan
Site analysis and design
diagram
Drawing tool used
Two sizes of black felt-
tip pen
Painting followed by
soft pencil or charcoal
Black and coloured
felt-tip pen
Black felt-tip pen
Pencil and black felt-tip
pen
Black felt-tip pen
Blue broad gauge
fountain pen
Black felt-tip pen
Pencil
Varies
Paper used
Sketch pad and tracing roll
Large cartridge sheet
Tracing paper
Layout paper
Cartridge pad
Narrow white tracing roll
Sketch book
A3 tracing pad
Narrow detail paper roll
Narrow yellow tracing roll
240 Understanding architecture through drawing

Is site sketching
undertaken as
design generator?
Sometimes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Main design development
tool at stage 1 (RIBA Plan
of Work C)
Diagram/drawing
Drawing
Drawing
Diagram/drawing
Sketch/drawing
Diagram/drawing
Sketch/drawing
Sketch/drawing
Drawing
Diagram/drawing
Main design development
tool at Stage 2 (RIBA Plan
of Work D)
Drawing and model
Drawing and model
Drawing
Model and CAD
Drawing model and CAD
Drawing
Model
Drawing
Drawing and model
Sketch/drawing model and
CAD
Main design development
tool at stage 3 (RIBA Plan
of Work E)
Model and CAD
CAD
Drawing
CAD
Drawing, model and CAD
Drawing, model and CAD
Drawing and model
CAD
Drawing and CAD
CAD
Drawing in architectural practice 241

former’. A similar view is expressed by Allies, who says
he cannot design without drawing, since ‘drawing is how
I understand the problem’. A distinction, therefore, can be
made between those architects who see design in
conceptual terms where drawing may become an
impediment to deeper cognitive processes, and those
who see design as a synthesis of complex factors whose
resolution is undertaken partly or wholly through manual
drawing. Some architects admit, however, that in the initial
design sketches lines and words are often combined in
order for there to be synthesis of spatial, functional and
contextual concerns (Allan Murray, Alsop, Farrell). All of
the architects questioned believed you could think without
drawing (although two admitted its usefulness here too),
suggesting that to the architect drawing and designing are
more closely related than thinking and drawing. However,
after the initial stage of tentative form generation
expressed usually as a plan or less frequently as a section
diagram, all admitted the usefulness of freehand drawing
in the development of design ideas ‘right through the
design and construction process’ as Allies put it. The latter
is a useful point, for whilst the design is developed and
tested using CAD, when changes occur during the
evolutionary process, these are invariable undertaken
through freehand sketching.
Farrell relayed the process of designing the Visitor
Centre in Newcastle. The first idea was a sketch from
above, which represented the formal elements in
relationship to the city. This volume was then divided into
functional and hierarchical elements using diagrammatic
axonometrics drawn in felt-tip pen from above. Various
forms of testing, some involving a rough model, were
undertaken before the first section was drawn, and this in
turn led to the exploration of structural possibilities drawn
by hand. When these were resolved, the plan was
addressed both internally and in relationship to the city.
Once a working solution had been arrived at, the sketches
at 1.500 were then translated into digital format and
tested further. The CAD explorations involved views from
various points, the addition of colour and texture, and
then structural delineation. These were printed and
overdrawn and led to a fresh round of freehand sketching
and then further refinement on the screen. In time these
sketches were digitised and allowed to interact with the
CAD images, which in turn became the medium for the
detailed involvement of engineers. Farrell’s role in all this
was that of a conductor, leading the team with sketches,
diagrammatic lines and the occasional word. 
Although most of the architects interviewed could and
often did draw without designing, the majority still kept
either a sketchbook or notebook. The practice of drawing
a repertoire of forms and precedents to employ in new
designs, what the architect Thomas Jackson in 1873
called ‘the making of careful drawings of existing
buildings to inspire the designer later in life’ (Royal
Academy of Arts, 2003), is still employed. For example,
Foster keeps a sketchbook ‘whose images influence my
25.1 (opposite)
This collage of architectural sketches
and diagrams represents well the
early design thoughts for a number of
projects. (Architectural Review)
242 Understanding architecture through drawing

Drawing in architectural practice 243

Relative importance of drawing, models and CAD at different stages of design
evolution by architects interviewed 
Scale 5: very important; 4: important; 3: less important; 2: occasionally used; 1: rarely used. 
Design stage 1
(RIBA Plan of Work C)
Drawing 5
Model 3
CAD 1
Drawing 5
Model 3
CAD 2
Drawing 5
Model 1
CAD 1
Drawing 5
Model 3
CAD 1
Drawing 5
Model 3 
CAD 3
Drawing 5
Model 2
CAD 2
Drawing 5
Model 4
CAD 1
Drawing 5
Model 2 
CAD 2
Drawing 5
Model 3
CAD 1
Drawing 5
Model 3
CAD 1
Design stage 2 (RIBA Plan of
Work D)
Drawing 4
Model 4
CAD 1
Drawing 4
Model 4
CAD 2
Drawing 5
Model 2
CAD 3
Drawing 2
Model 4
CAD 4
Drawing 3
Model 3
CAD 3
Drawing 4
Model 3
CAD 3
Drawing 4
Model 5
CAD 1
Drawing 5
Model 2
CAD 3
Drawing 4
Model 4
CAD 2
Drawing 4
Model 4
CAD 4
Design stage 3 (RIBA Plan of
Work E)
Drawing 2
Model 4
CAD 4
Drawing 3
Model 3
CAD 4
Drawing 5
Model 3
CAD 4
Drawing 2
Model 3 
CAD 5
Drawing 3
Model 3
CAD 3
Drawing 3
Model 3
CAD 3
Drawing 4
Model 4
CAD 3
Drawing 3
Model 2
CAD 5
Drawing 4
Model 2
CAD 4
Drawing 3
Model 1
CAD 5
Architect
Allies
Alsop
Cullinan
Farrell
Foster
Fraser
Grimshaw
Murphy
Murray, A.
Murray, G.
244 Understanding architecture through drawing

design work’, arguing that sketching helps reinforce his
visual memory, and Alsop does the same. Farrell thinks,
too, that his earlier New York sketchbooks may have
influenced his approach to design although today Farrell
sees sketching as a ‘way of seeing rather than a way of
designing’. Six of the architects interviewed (Cullinan,
Foster, Fraser, Grimshaw, Gordon Murray and Allan
Murray) did, however, admit to using the sketchbook as a
method of recording the site and analysing its visual
characteristics – these early sketches then being used to
test design proposals. The use of referential drawings
where the design ideas interfaced with the site context
proved useful to explaining design concepts to clients or
community groups. Alsop took the opposite view, stating
that he never draws the site, preferring to use digital
cameras, which produce images that can be scanned and
used to interact with emerging freehand designs. Farrell,
too, prefers the camera to record the site, which he can
then reproduce and draw over. In both cases (as explained
in chapter 10, the photograph can be painted and
sketched over, then scanned digitally, allowing the design
to be tested against an accurate record of site
characteristics.
THE FINDINGS: DRAWING AND SPATIAL
INVESTIGATION
The type of freehand drawing first employed often
depended upon the nature of the architectural problem
posed. Seven of the architects talked about the primacy
of the plan as the main generator of built form, often
combining a sketch site plan with an embryonic diagram
of building functions drawn to scale. Although the plan
was the primary generator it was normally merely a
diagram of circulation, functional disposition or urban
relationship. However, the word ‘diagram’ should not
belittle what is often a thinking drawing of importance to
all later stages of design development. Order in plan and
its correspondence with site characteristics appears to be
the main concern of most architects. However, in the
case of Murphy and Fraser the first drawing was
frequently a marriage of plan and section explored on a
single sheet. For Cullinan, on the other hand, the first
drawing was generally an overhead axonometric and for
Farrell it was frequently a diagrammatic section. For Alsop
the first drawing that followed the painting stage was
often an abstract composition of lines and marks in soft
pencil or charcoal that encouraged him ‘to see something
in interesting and unfamiliar ways’. Alsop also talks about
‘mark making’ rather than the use of conventional
architectural drawing techniques but after this explorative
stage the first drawing is a plan. Conversely, Grimshaw
approaches the design problem from both ends (site plan
and construction detail), allowing the marriage of
technology and materials to influence his thinking right at
the beginning of the design process. 
All of the architects interviewed drew first and then
somewhat later interacted with CAD and model-making.
CAD remains, in spite of considerable software
development, a mechanical drawing and testing tool
rather than a design aid. Foster, like most architects, is
interested at the start of a project in how things work
rather that how they look and this he thinks is better
explored through freehand drawing. Also since he spends
some of his time re-shaping projects developed by others,
the drawing allows for the ready identification of key
design changes in a fashion which is interactive with
members of the team. In Murphy’s view the role of
drawing is to ‘test the mental diagram that solves the
problem rather than represent the object’. Again the
importance of the diagram is highlighted with the
perception that CAD does not represent the thinking
drawing well. 
For all ten architects the traditional freehand drawing is
the main development tool with models and then CAD
Drawing in architectural practice 245

employed at later stages. Models, either plasticine or
card, tend to be used to explain ideas to clients, and CAD
becomes essential when engineers are involved. The
sequence of diagram, then sketch design in plan and 3D,
followed by more formal drawing and rough model,
followed then by CAD is employed by seven out of the
ten architects interviewed. The only significant variation
concerns whether CAD emerges significantly in the
second rather than third stage of design development. For
Allies, CAD can deceive the designer and alter the quality
of the built product. Alsop goes further, believing that
CAD can ‘produce a believable building too soon’ and
undermine creative exploration, which is the central
responsibility of being an architect.
The increasing employment of complex forms in
architecture means that CAD inevitably becomes a
modelling tool in projects early on (Foster, Grimshaw).
The respondents make a useful distinction between CAD
as a design tool and CAD as a means of visualising
complex ideas developed by other means. In Grimshaw’s
office, for example, rough models are made at an early
stage (rather than use professional model-makers)
because these can be integrated more readily with
freehand drawing and through digital scanning with CAD.
Grimshaw has reservations concerning the ability to
develop sketch designs on the screen, believing that
drawings and models used together are better ways of
‘understanding the visual tensions and weight of
architecture’. The point made by all ten architects is that
CAD is used in their offices almost entirely as a drawing
tool, and when it is used to develop spatial design ideas it
tends to diminish the quality of the resulting architecture.
A similar point was made over a decade ago (Lawson
1994 p14), suggesting that in spite of improvements in
software technology mainstream architectural practice in
the UK relies little upon CAD for initial design
development. However, this is not to suggest that many
smaller and younger practices do not use CAD right at the
inception of a design project or that CAD is not
indispensable at later stages. In fact, much of the current
renaissance in architecture is due to the amplifying
potential of digital media at both a creative and technical
level.
Many of the respondents made an interesting
distinction between freehand drawing in design
development and its parallel role in communication.
Farrell talks about the drawing having three functions in
architectural practice – problem solving, communication
and persuasion. The problem solving role has already
been discussed but because design by drawing is an
iterative process, many people can become involved at
different points in time using different levels of sketching
skill. This helps the design idea (according to Allies, Alsop,
Farrell and Grimshaw) to become owned by a wide range
of stakeholders, including the client. Hence the process is
one of a small initial doodle or diagram that grows to A4,
then A3 and perhaps A1 format. In Alsop’s case, where
community involvement is encouraged it may entail large
rolls of paper and coloured markers, perhaps augmented
by video. Freehand drawing allows more authors to
participate 
than 
had 
design 
development 
been
undertaken solely on the screen.
Often early sketches prepared by senior partners are
worked up by others at a later stage. What starts as a
design diagram quickly becomes corporate and
increasingly complex as more players become involved.
In Grimshaw’s office sketchbooks are provided to
encourage visual thinking and Alsop provided staff with
evening life classes. Foster believes the most effective
drawings in terms of design generation are those often
prepared spontaneously in the confines of a design team
meeting. Here Foster alludes to the role of drawing in
responding to the perspectives of others – their critical
thinking acting as a catalyst for design insights. What
246 Understanding architecture through drawing

starts as a self-generated design idea quickly becomes
shared as colleagues are drawn into the process. In this
sense the freehand drawing aids the democratising of
design. However, Cullinan notes that the lack of graphic
skill by members of the team can be a serious
impediment to the idea of an interactive drawing involving
participation by non-professionals (e.g. users and clients).
Murphy warns that the loss of ownership of a design
drawing through its duplication via CAD can have an
adverse impact upon subsequent architectural quality. A
further point worth noting from the interviews is that the
initial design drawing is nearly always individually
generated. Although many minds are drawn in later, at the
very beginning projects were generated by a single mind
often on a single sheet of paper. Here the sketch comes
into its own as a begetter of future form rather than as a
means of documenting what already exists.
THE FINDINGS: DRAWING TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES
The materials, tools and techniques of architectural
drawing have not overly concerned academics. The
questions addressed here seek to tease out the drawing
tools employed in a practical sense for design exploration.
The issue concerns the role of line, its weight and
permanence, the type of paper and pen used, and the
strategies 
for 
integrating 
sketching 
with 
other
investigative tools.
Whilst all architects interviewed designed primarily by
drawing, not all employed the pen. Foster, for instance,
designs mainly in pencil (HB) because of its flexibility and
textural potential. The dogmatic nature of black pen lines
worries Foster and he feels they suggest a solution too
soon. Allan Murray, who also designs in soft pencil (2B)
on detail paper, enjoys the way pencil glides over paper
giving the author the ability to alter the weight of line in a
way that reflects the hierarchies implicit in architectural
briefs. He also notes that pencil leads to drawings that,
with their many revisions and erasings, provide a better
narrative of the evolution of a design than the more
bombastic pen drawing. To several of those interviewed
line was the primary organisational device that allowed
the problem to be defined and then solved. However,
Alsop, who uses pencil (6–6B) and sometimes charcoal to
describe lines that can then be filled in with colour (usually
acrylic paint), refuses to solve the problem by line alone.
He, like Gehry, does not see the drawing as ‘finished
product’ but part of the process of creativity, which also
includes CAD, models, painting and collaboration with
fine artists and sculptors. On the other hand, felt-tip pen is
25.2
Will Alsop’s painting was part of the process for the design of the
Cardiff Bay Visitor Centre. (Will Alsop)
Drawing in architectural practice 247

25.3
Lord Foster’s sketch of the
context for the new BBC
headquarters in London.
Notice the mixing of lines and
words, and the skillful shade
rendering. (Lord Foster of
Riverside)
25.4
Sir Nicholas Grimshaw’s
overhead sketch of the
proposed Western Daily News
Building reveals a number of
design interests with a
refreshing freedom of line.
(Sir Nicholas Grimshaw)
248 Understanding architecture through drawing

25.5
Lord Foster’s sketch of the
view from the Commerzbank in
Frankfurt explains the design
concept in a fashion that is
readily understood by non-
architects. (Lord Foster of
Riverside)
25.6
Sir Terry Farrell’s sketch of the
Sea Life Centre in Hull
confirms Leon Alberti’s
proposition that beauty is
found in the section of a
building whilst the plan relays
the order. (Sir Terry Farrell)
Drawing in architectural practice 249

the preferred medium for the majority of remaining
architects interviewed. For Farrell the black felt-tip pen
has an authority and discipline that mirrors the rigour of
design, whilst Cullinan talks of the way black pen is
‘difficult to erase and makes you think well’. Grimshaw,
on the other hand, often draws with a blue fountain pen,
moving onto black drawing pen later when the initial ideas
have firmed up.
Some of the architects questioned used black lines
because they knew they reproduced well in professional
journals. Others referred to the ease of scanning
unambiguous black lines whilst several thought that
clients were impressed by the implied confidence of the
black pen line. Cullinan went further and said that he liked
to draw in front of clients as he thought that had helped
him win commissions. Fraser mentioned the benefit of
photocopying and faxing black pen drawings to clients
and consultants, inviting their contribution to drawings,
which deliberately had an open framework. Farrell, too,
used faxed sketches to communicate with team
members often working overseas, preferring this form of
communication to CAD. With the design of the Seoul
Interchange in Korea, Farrell notes that the first sketch on
a napkin was modelled in clay, then cut into sections that
were scanned onto computer; these images were then
printed and faxed to Korea, having been further drawn
over by the architect. The interactive nature of traditional
and digitised drawing methods allowed the project to
develop without loss of the formal clarity of the initial
‘paper napkin’ conception.
The abstraction and discipline of pen drawing appears
to be a useful means of clarifying design intentions to
oneself and others – a point made by Allies who uses two
weights of pen line (the thicker Pentel and thin Artline
200) to distinguish the design hierarchies and layers of
meaning implicit in the work of Allies and Morrison.
Weight of line and its architectural symbolism is noted too
by Farrell who (with Murphy and Gordon Murray) likens
the blackness of felt-tip pen on white paper to the solid
and void relationships in architectural composition. Only
two of the architects interviewed (Alsop and Cullinan)
used colour in their initial design drawings, whilst later in
the design process Murphy used colour to explain
drawings to clients. Fraser warned, however, that the use
of colour can undermine the essential rigour of design
drawing.
Irrespective of the medium of drawing, all ten
architects admitted the importance of line. Designs grew
by being shaped by lines in the first instance. These lines
were edges and demarcations that ordered the
abstractions of sites, urban footprints, the accomm-
odation listed in briefs, structural rhythms and light. Lines
in this sense were the delineation of space in both plan
and section. Lines remain the fundamental ordering
system of architectural exploration. Often, however,
these early generative drawings were combined with
words or photographs to evoke an essence rather than
provide a mere description. In every case cited, lines
occur before physical models or modelling on CAD. The
lines produced were not usually neutral but were infused
with meaning – artistic in the case of Alsop, evolutionary
and democratic in the case of Allies, Murphy, Fraser, Allan
Murray, Grimshaw and Foster, and authoritative and
assured in the case of Cullinan, Farrell and Gordon
Murray.
Related to the question of line is that of paper. Small
cartridge sketchbooks are used for design development
by Alsop and Foster, larger ones by Grimshaw and Allan
Murray. Tracing paper in narrow rolls was preferred by
Allies because its feeling of endlessness encouraged
dialogue and a narrative record of thought processes.
Others used layout and detail paper in A3 pads because of
the ability to build up solutions in transparent layers. The
see-through nature of tracing and layout paper had
250 Understanding architecture through drawing

practical and aesthetic benefits (Murphy, Gordon Murray,
Grimshaw), whilst the smooth quality of such paper in
relationship with felt-tip pens or pencil appealed to others
(Grimshaw, Allan Murray). Often there was graduation
from small cartridge sketch pads to larger tracing sheets,
with a corresponding change from early pencil sketches
to felt-tip pen and marker, a point noted in particular by
Foster and Alsop.
It appears that the evolution of design ideas is
matched by a gradual expansion in the size and often
sophistication of drawing tools or techniques involving
both freehand and digital media. However, drawing
boards were only noted in two of the offices visited and
here their role was rather more social than practical. Allan
Murray, for example, shares an A0 board with his partner,
the two of them working from opposite sides of the same
board in order to encourage collaboration in design. The
pattern found generally, however, is that of a progression
from the initial design diagram, to small freehand design
sketches to larger freehand drawings, rough card or
plasticine models and then CAD visualisation, followed by
CAD-generated contract drawings (for the contractor) and
often a professionally made model (for the client).
In design investigation the model became an
important supplementary tool for many of the architects
questioned. Although drawings always pre-existed
models, rough models of whole or parts of buildings were
employed to explore spatial arrangements, or sometimes
façades. For Allan Murray, the model was often made
before sections were drawn, as he believes that in design
development drawing has limitations after the initial
stages. Gordon Murray also used the physical model
extensively in testing design options for the SAS hotel in
Glasgow, employing freehand drawing and CAD after this
stage. Both Allan Murray and Fraser noted that
exploration by model was less common than their
experience of practice in the USA. Allies talks about two
types of plan being drawn (abstract organisational
diagram and site plan) which, when combined into the
first tentative design, were then tested through the
vehicle of a model. These rough models in card, plastic or
wood (usually made by the office model-maker) became
maquettes, which is akin to the process followed by
sculptors. Allies sees such models as a more reliable tool
to test the abstractions of the plan than CAD. Many of the
architects reported that investigation by model
sometimes took over as the main driver of architectural
form at a stage midway between the initial sketch design
drawing and CAD. Grimshaw likes to make his own
models in card or balsa wood, using then to test elements
of the building rather than the whole, the images then
being scanned onto computer without intervening
drawings.
25.7
Composite drawing by Richard Murphy showing the plan and section of the
Computer Centre at Napier University, Edinburgh. Although the economy of line
means this sketch is little more than a diagram, it contains the kernel of a strong
design idea. (Richard Murphy)
Drawing in architectural practice 251

252 Understanding architecture through drawing

The sequence of design generation by the three main
vehicles investigated (freehand drawing, model and CAD)
varied between architects interviewed. What did emerge,
however, was the primacy of freehand drawing in each
case and the perceived limitation of CAD as anything but
a graphic tool. In fact, where CAD was specifically
employed for design evolution some of the architects
expressed the view that design quality suffered unless
there was parallel inquiry via freehand drawing or model-
making. The poor opinion of CAD is surprising given the
development in design software particularly aimed at
building designers. Using the RIBA Plan of Work as a
guide, all ten architects used freehand drawing as the
primary or sole design tool at the first stage of design
conceptualisation. Freehand drawing also remained an
important tool at the second stage, but model-making
then emerged as an important contributor to design
evolution. Although two architects interviewed employed
CAD significantly at the second stage (Gordon Murray and
Farrell), its usefulness was mainly in the third stage of
design development. However, even at the third stage,
CAD was employed in equal measure with model-making
in four cases and with model and freehand drawing in a
further two. So in spite of popular perception, CAD is not
universally used for design evolution by many of the
country’s leading architects – this role continues to be
undertaken by freehand drawing on its own or drawing in
association with model-making. More worrying perhaps is
the perception that CAD glamorises the image and
provides at best a superficial impression of design quality.
There are lessons here for architectural education.
The research undertaken sought to explore the use of
freehand drawing in design by undertaking structured
interviews with ten leading architects in the UK. The
architects questioned were all educated before the
advent of CAD yet practise in an age of universal use of
digital media in design. As such they are the last
25.8a and b (above left)
These sketches by Richard Murphy show the layering of construction for two
Edinburgh house extensions. (Richard Murphy)
25.9a and b  (left)
Edward Cullinan’s sketches showing the structural principles behind a green oak
grid-shell roof. (Edward Cullinan)
25.10 (above)
Edward Cullinan’s sketch section of his own house in London. (Edward Cullinan)
Drawing in architectural practice 253

generation of architects whose education was based
upon the modernist concept of the ‘architectural diagram’
and creativity developed through the medium of drawing,
painting and abstract model-making. The focus of the
investigation was upon how freehand drawing was
employed at different stages in the design process and
particularly how drawing interfaced with CAD and model-
making. The intention was to move from documentary
and explorative freehand drawing (the theme of this book)
to examine sketching in the context of architectural
practice in the twenty-first century. Inevitably, the
interviews relayed both personal experience as well as
wider perceptions of the role of freehand drawing in the
offices concerned. Four main conclusions can be drawn.
First, in the process of solving design problems the
freehand drawing is the pre-eminent tool employed. The
drawings produced are a kind of conversation acted out in
line and often integrated with words, symbols and
photographs to produce a kind of collage of design
potential. Whilst architects tend to employ different
explorative drawing techniques, they all rely upon the
freehand drawing at the initial design stage and to a
degree at subsequent stages. The first drawings are
‘thinking’ drawings or abstract diagrams, usually private
rather than shared, often produced after much inner
reflection, and generally in plan form. These initial
drawings invariably record design thoughts rather than
the thoughts following the design sketches. The diagram
can be a mere dozen lines but it contains the kernel of a
design idea and its very presence is one of the defining
25.11a and b 
These sketches by Sir Nicholas Grimshaw display an interest in the
poetics of construction. They relay more intended character than a
CAD drawing. (Sir Nicholas Grimshaw)
254 Understanding architecture through drawing

25.12a, b , c and d 
This sequence by Sir Terry Farrell’s office shows the evolution of a project via
freehand drawing, model and CAD. (Farrell and Partners)
Drawing in architectural practice 255

25.13 (left)
Gordon Murray’s façade studies for the SAS hotel in Glasgow. (Gordon Murray)
25.14 (below)
Concept drawings for tower block in central Moscow based upon the intertwining of
two figures. The design is by RMJM’s Edinburgh and Moscow offices in
collaboration with the artist Karen Forbes. (RMJM)
256 Understanding architecture through drawing

25.15 a , b and c 
These sketches by Sir Basil Spence for the design of the British Pavilion at Expo67
show the architect exploring architectural options through freehand drawing. (Sir
Basil Spence Archive)
Drawing in architectural practice 257

features of being an architect.
Second, since many architects, especially the more
experienced, design in their heads and often visualise the
external form of a building in their imagination, the
progression of design thought consists of setting down in
drawing the first concepts and developing these via tools
such as models and CAD. These early drawings are
generally diagrammatic rather than real plans and contain
the essence of architectural thinking. Generally the sketch
plans diversify into sections, perspective sketches and
studies of details, materials or light. Elevations tend to
come late in the process. In some instances, the section
diagram assumes authority over the plan especially when
environmental considerations are paramount. Although
less experienced architects rely more upon freehand
drawing at the initial design stage, there is a consistent
progression from the architectural diagram to plan
drawing, then to other drawing types (section,
axonometric), to investigation via models and finally CAD.
Hence CAD remains essentially a drafting, documenting
and presentation tool.
Third, CAD is not only rarely employed as a design tool
at the early stages of concept gestation by the country’s
senior architects, it is felt by many interviewed to hinder
initial design investigation. Several architects deliberately
avoid its use until the building has been relatively resolved
by other means. In fact, the view expressed by some was
that the use of CAD too early undermined architectural
exploration and had a detrimental effect on the quality of
architectural thought. Furthermore, two of the architects
interviewed thought that graduates today from UK
schools of architecture were too dependent upon CAD.
One large Edinburgh practice, for instance, preferred to
recruit new staff from Europe because they were still
trained to think through traditional drawing. Another
regretted the loss of spatial inquiry through the interfacing
of drawing and model-making, which he had found
prevalent in the USA. He found UK graduates too eager to
move to CAD to explore questions of space, thereby
neglecting the potential of freehand drawing.
Four, a surprising number of experienced and
successful architects kept a personal sketchbook and
others commonly used sketches of the site to influence
their design thinking. Sketching was seen to be useful in
terms of visual thinking, in undertaking spatial analysis
and in carrying out site investigation. Such sketches were
not just views but rough plans and analytical studies of
existing buildings. The discipline of looking through
drawing was as important as the role of sketching in mere
recording of site features. Since four of the architects
interviewed had won prizes as students for their drawings
(Foster, Grimshaw, Farrell and Allies) this was hardly
surprising but it remained significant that sketching was
closely aligned with the creative side of design drawing.
In reaching these conclusions, the author admits
several methodological limitations. First, the generational
aspects of the inquiry make the results specific rather
than universal. One suspects that younger architects and
those educated outside the UK will give quite different
responses to the questions posed. The tensions
displayed between modes of exploration reflect in many
ways the Britishness of architectural design with its
emphasis in the post-war years upon programme,
technology and urban redevelopment. Freehand drawing
is both a tool and the product of an era faced by this
generation of architects. Another limitation concerns the
small sample and the prestige of those interviewed.
However, the smallness of the sample is balanced by
depth, both in terms of the questions posed and the time
given to the interviewer (usually an hour). Those
interviewed were also architects of whom a great deal
has been said elsewhere, thereby allowing the answers
given to be set against existing scholarship and a large
body of published buildings. 
258 Understanding architecture through drawing

Architects interviewed
Architects
Name of practice
Size of practice
Bob Allies
Allies and Morrison
74 architects
Will Alsop
Alsop Architects
40 architects
Ted Cullinan
Edward Cullinan and Partners
35 architects
Sir Terry Farrell
Farrell and Partners
45 architects
Lord Foster
Foster and Partners
174 architects
Malcolm Fraser
Malcolm Fraser Architects
17 architects
Sir Nicholas Grimshaw
Grimshaw
34 architects
Richard Murphy
Richard Murphy Architects
28 architects
Allan Murray
Allan Murray Architects
24 architects
Gordon Murray
Murray Dunlop Architects
21 architects
Drawing in architectural practice 259

Bibliography
Alexander, C. (1964 and 1977) Notes
on the Synthesis of Form,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Architectural Review (The) (1943) vol.
12, p148.
Architectural Review (The) (2006a)
vol. 219.
Arnell, Peter and Bickford, Ted (1985)
Frank Gehry: Buildings and Projects,
New York: Rizzoli, see in particular
p.vix
Bacon, E. (1967) The Design of
Cities, London: Thames and Hudson.
Bentlley, I., Alcock, A., Murrain, P.,
McGlynn, S. and Smith, G. (1985)
Responsive Environments: A Manual
for Designers, London: Architectural
Press.
Bowers, J. (1999) Introduction to
Two-Dimensional Design, London
and New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Broadbent, G. (1990) Emerging
Concepts in Urban Space Design,
London and New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Clark, Kenneth (1943) ‘Ornament in
Modern Architecture’, The
Architectural Review, vol. 94,
pp147–50.
Critical Architecture Conference
(2004) Online at
www.criticalarchitecture.ucl.ac.uk
Cullen, G. (1971) The Concise
Townscape, London: Architectural
Press.
Curtis, William (with Thorne,
Martha)(1999) Pritzker Architecture
Prize: The First 20 Years, Chicago:
Chicago Art Institute.
Dunster, D. (2006) ‘The diagram:
design essence’, The Architectural
Review, vol. 229, pp28–30.
Eastman, C.M. (1970) ‘On the
analysis of the intuitive design
process’, in G.T. Moore (ed.)
Emerging Methods in Environmental
Design and Planning, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp42–59.
Evans, R. (1997) Translations from
Drawings to Building and Other
Essays, London: Architectural
Association, pp153–94.
Giedion, S. (1941) Space, Time and
Architecture, 1954 edn, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Graves, Michael (1977)
‘Conversation through drawing’,
Architectural Design, vol. 6, no. 77,
pp 394–6.
Farrell, T. (1998) Sketchbook,
London: Rightangle Publishing.
Forty, A. (2004) Words and Buildings:
A Vocabulary of Modern Architecture,
London: Thames and Hudson. 
Gomez, P. (1997) Architectural
Representation and the Perspective
Hinge, Boston, MA:  MIT Press.
Hill, J. (2003) ‘Hunting the shadow –
immaterial architecture’, Journal of
Architecture, vol. 8, summer,
pp165–79.
260 Understanding architecture through drawing

Hogarth, P. (1973) Drawing
Architecture: A Creative Approach,
London: Pitman.
Hopton, Laura (2002) Drawing Now,
New York: Museum of Modern Art.
Jenkins, D. (ed.) (2005) Norman
Foster Works 2, Munich: Prestel.
Lambert, P. (1998) Architecture and
its Image: Four Centuries of
Architectural Representation,
Montreal: Canadian Centre for
Architecture.
Lawson, B.R. (1980) How Designers
Think, Oxford: Architectural Press.
Lawson, B.R. (1990) How Designers
Think (second edition), Oxford:
Butterworth Architecture.
Lawson, B.R. (1994) Design in Mind,
Oxford: Butterworth Architecture.
Lefebvre, H. (1991) The Production
of Space (trans. D. Nicholson-Smith),
Oxford: Blackwell.
Lynch, K. (1960) The Image of the
City, Cambridge, MA and London:
MIT Press.
Matheou, D. (1995) ‘In the news’,
The Architects’ Journal, 17 August,
pp18–19.
‘Pendock Competition results’
(1996), The Architectural Review, vol.
200, no. 1193, pp18–19.
Periton, D. (1996) ‘The Bauhaus of
cultural paradigm’, Journal of
Architecture, vol.1, autumn,
pp189–205.
Powell, K. (2001) Will Alsop Book 1,
London: Laurence King.
Quantrill, M. (1999) The Norman
Foster Studio, London: Spon Press.
Rattenbury, K. (2002) This is not
Architecture: Media Constructions,
London: Routledge.
Richard Murphy Architects: Ten Years
in Practice (2001), Edinburgh:
Fruitmarket Gallery.
Robbins, E. (1997) Why Designers
Draw, Cambridge, MA and London:
MIT Press.
Rossi, A. (1982) The Architecture of
the City, Cambridge, MA and
London: MIT Press.
Royal Academy of Arts (2003) In
Search of Architecture: The
Watercolour Albums of Sir Thomas
Graham Jackson, exhibition
catalogue, London: RA Publications.
Saint, A. (1996) Allies and Morrison,
Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Schenk, P. (1998) ‘Drawing for
design: the impact of computer-
assisted design on the role of
drawing for communication
designers in commercial practice’,
The Design Journal, vol. 1, issue 3,
pp45–50.
Schon, D.A. (1983) The Reflective
Practitioner: How Professionals Think
in Action, London: Temple Smith.
Sheils, B. (2003) ‘Making paradigms’,
Journal of Architecture, vol. 8,
summer, p205.
Stern, Robert (1977) ‘Drawing:
towards a more modern
architecture’, Architectural Design,
vol. 6, no. 77, pp382–90.
Zaha Hadid (2006) Guggenheim
Museum, New York.
Bibliography 261

Index
Page numbers in bold
refer to illustrations. 
Abstraction 50
Alexandria Public Library
231
Allies, Bob 242-59 
Alsop, Will 12, 230, 236,
239-59
Andraixt, Majorca 21, 42
Antalya 141, 200
Approximate plans 64 
Aylsham, Norfolk 
church 46
Ayr, Scotland 39
ARB prescription 234
Archaeological sites 160-4 
Architecture
as decoration 218 
as structure 218 
Arup Associates 218, 221,
222
Authenticity, in design
125-6
Axonometric drawing
179, 245 
Background architecture
181
Baghdad 49
Barcelona
Bach de Roda 136-7
Cathedral cloister 94
Placa Reial 93
Parc Guell 175
Pavilion 125, 149
street scene 148
Bastide towns 187–192 
Bath
Pulteney Bridge 117
Pump Rooms 4
Royal Crescent 65
street studies 202-3
Bayeux Cathedral 208
Bedzed 153
Bennetts, Rab 158, 159
Berlin
Jewish Memorial
Museum 81, 81
Stock Exchange 68
Bidborough, Kent 2
Bilbao Guggenheim
Museum 78, 79
Bingham, James 82
Birmingham, near 44, 63
Black Creek Pioneer
Village, Ontario 40
Boston, Beacon Hill 55
Boundaries 201-4 
Bridges 116
Brighton Public Library 158
British Pavilion, Seville
Expo 155
Building
acts 185-7 
construction 135-8 
details 207
types 205
CAD 80, 85, 86-7, 226-32,
236, 239-59 
Candleholders 61
Cardiff Bay Visitor Centre
247
Carrington, Scotland 91
Castollonnes, France 191
Charles, Prince 5
Chartwell Visitor Centre 18
Chicago 43, 109, 129
Chislet Colliery, Kent 3,
134
Cinemas 102 
City, visual language of 90 
Cley, Norfolk 62
Cockerel, C.R. 1 
Composition 50-8 
Corbusier, le 212, 213, 233 
buildings 213
Courtyard house
Middle East 158
Syria 204
Coventry Cathedral 229
Cromer, Norfolk 68
Cullen, Gordon 72, 90
Cullinan, Edward 223,
239-59
Damascus skyline 112
Decoration 130 
Design
importance of 1-9 
Problems with 227-9
process of 12-13, 16,
214-8, 226-232 
progression into
214-220, 226-259 
Deserted village, Scotland
165
Devey, George 10 
Diagonals, use of 40-1
Diagram 227, 233
262 Understanding architecture through drawing

Digitisation 86-7 
Documentary investigation
64-70
Doorways 114, 116-120,
182-4
Dordogne, France 188 
Dovercourt, Essex 20, 47
Drawing
freehand 226-45 
function of 1-5, 227-32 
language of 29, 226-7
materials 25-8, 247-9
perspectives on 229-38
problems with 226-9
research 238-59
today 10-3, 226-59 
tools 247-51
types of 9, 234-8 
Dublin 96
Dubrovnik 63, 97
Easdale, Scotland 76–7,
Edinburgh
George Street 224
House extensions 252
Old Town 79
Royal Mile 49
Entrances 114, 115, 182
Epping High Street Studies
214, 215
Eymet, France 113, 118,
189
Exploration 199-213
Expo67, British Pavilion
257
Façades
clues to internal
function 123–5 
clues to proportional
systems 128-9 
clues to structure 125-7 
rhythms 110 
sources of decoration
129–30
Fahy, Susan 80, 81, 83, 84
Faro Island houses 125
Farrell, Sir Terry 23, 28, 71,
154, 230, 242-59
Figure ground 67
Financial Times printing
works, London 4
Flockerton Mill, Douglas,
Scotland 65
Florence 46, 79, 87, 95
San Lorenzo Library 173,
175
Foster of Riverside, Lord 1,
29, 232, 239-59
Framing elements 132-5
Frankfurt Commerzbank
249
Frazer, Malcolm 237,
242-59
Functional traditional
132-41
Gaeta, Italy 48, 125
Gateways 114-20 
Gaudi, Antonio 208, 212
Giza, Egypt 169
Glasgow
apartment block 205
Blythswood Square 40
Cathedral Square,
proposals 223
central 110, 122
circular tenement 2
crescent 118
Daily Express Building 6
Gorbals 220
Great Western Road
175
Gribloch 8
Hill House 41, 124
Merchant City 53,
178–87, 178, 180, 181,
182, 183, 185, 186
motorways, proposals
for decking 223
Pollokshields 91, 205
SAS Hotel 251, 256
suburban street 146
Templeton’s Factory 31
tenement area 100, 206
terraces 129
Tobacco Exchange 176
Gloucester 57
Goddards 120,121
Goldsworthy, Andy
150,150
Gravesend, Kent 69
Green Building,
Manchester 154
Grimshaw, Sir Nicholas
155, 239-59
Guildford, Surrey 102
Hadid, Zaha 12-3, 23, 87,
230, 236 
Harwich, Essex 21, 208
Hiroshima 192, 194
Hirst, Nick 32, 57, 120,
121
Holt, Norfolk 106, 115
Holy Island,
Northumberland 5
Huddersfield Railway
Station 233
Hull, Sea Life Centre 249
Industrial, influence on
design 132 
Industrial landscapes 145-7 
Industrial subjects 132-5 
Interiors 170-5 
Interior design 
framing elements 174-5 
principles 171 
rendering techniques
173
Japanese urbanism 192-5 
Kalamazoo, Michigan 139,
175
Kansai Airport 140
Kinlochmoidart House 32
Koolhaas, Rem 13
Kyoto, Horyu-Ji Temple
119
Ryoanji Temple 79
Landmarks
hierarchy of 108-13 
navigation by 111-3 
old and new 111 
similarity of 108 
Landscape drawing 142-50
Lille Eurostar Station 140
Lisbon Orient Station 228
Loch Lomond Visitor
Centre 159
London
BBC Headquarters 248
Cullinan house 253
Docklands 67
Finland Quay 225
Isle of Dogs 131
Limehouse 217
Pimlico 105
Samsung Building 28
South Bank 127
Manchester 71
Machinery 133-9 
Mackintosh, Charles
Rennie 5, 16, 20, 208-12 
Index 263

Mackintosh buildings study
209
Modern landscapes 147 
Modern movement, in
architecture 119
Modernism 138 
Montreal grain silos 83
Murphy, Richard 242-59
Murray, Allan 242-59
Murray, Gordon 242-59
Nagy, Lazio-Moholy 83
Nature 142 
Neighbourhood 201 
New Lanark, Scotland 48
New York 23
Newcastle upon Tyne, 
Royal Victoria Hospital 19
Arts Centre 230
Nimes, Maison Carree 11
Norland, drawing of 48
North Walsham, Norfolk 94
Oman village 107
Ontario landscape 144
Orkney fishing boats 133
Paisley, Russell Institute
131
Palma, Majorca 145, 147
Paris
Place Duphine 149
Pompidou Centre 33
view 110
Patterns, exploiting 50 
Penicuik 199
Pentland Hills, Scotland
144, 148
Perspective
discovery of 38 
techniques 38, 40-5 
Photography and drawing
80-7
Pienza, Italy 177
Planning codes 144–6 
Practice 60 
Prague
Europa Bar 170-1, 174
general view 48
Proportion 128-9 
Public buildings, impor-
tance of 178-87 
Reepham, Norfolk 142
Reid, Richard 18, 22,
214, 221
Robin Hood Interchange
proposals 231
Roman settlements 165-8
Rome
Baroque square 105
British Embassy 84, 168
San Maria della Pace 53
Ronchamp, chapel 213
Routes
changes of level 103 
exploitation of 101-4 
landmarking of 103 
punctuation of 101 
San Felice Circio, Italy 115
San Gimignano, Italy 45,
102
Sequential drawing 9, 72-9,
188-9
Sequential photography 83 
Shadows 46-8, 184 
Sheringham, Norfolk 18,
34
Siena 101, 103, 109
Sigiriya, Sri Lanka 166,167
Skara Brae, Orkney 160,
161, 162-4
Sketchbook
learning through 9, 16-9,
26-7, 154-69 
size of 25 
use of 1, 2, 9, 12, 113,
154-69, 242-50 
Sketches
choosing subject 30-5 
selecting right time 72 
types of 9, 226-37
Skyline 108-13, 201 
Snowdown Colliery, Kent 9
Spence, Sir Basil 8, 168,
229, 257
Sperlonga, Italy 103, 116
Squares
drawing 90-3, 98-9 
focal points 92
hierarchy 99 
perimeter activity 98 
types of 90 
Streets
character of 101-4 
key qualities 198 
types of 100-1 
Sustainability and drawing
152-8
Taversoe Tuick Cairn,
Orkney 169
Thomson, Alexander 208 
Thomson buildings study
210, 211
Tokyo, Shinjuku 193, 195
Subway system 157
Town planning 67-9 
Townscape 90-2 
Triangular framing 58 
Turin, Piazza San Carlo 66
Tuscan landscape 59
Ukiah, California 55, 123
Urban design 
key qualities 90-3, 111 
spaces 98, 199
typologies 95
Vancouver, BC, Canada
23, 109, 206
Venice 
bridges 74, 75
St Marks 127, 173
Villeréal, France 188, 190
Visual 
Discipline 7 
perception 218 
structure 214-20
Visualizing through
drawing 29 
Wells Cathedral 172
Western Daily News
Building 248
Windows 4, 184-5, 185
Yorkshire Sculpture Park
151
264 Understanding architecture through drawing

