Man-made board page 1  
general - plywood - chipboard - edge laminated softwood board - blockboard - 
hardboard - mdf - stirling board
General 
Store any sheet material in dry conditions, stacked flat. Do not place directly on a floor 
surface (unless a dry, timber floor). Always use sufficient bearers to prevent the panels 
sagging or distorting. Care should be taken to protect edges. Where the panels are to be 
stored for a prolonged period, additional 
bearers should be installed.  
Sheet material tends to sag if a load is applied 
to it (such as books on a bookshelf), the sag 
does not immediately appear but will gradually 
develop over time. Where possible, fit a 
support batten to all sides, This is often fairly 
easy along the ends and the back of the shelf 
- the front can be more of a problem. The 
picture to the right shows the use of a piece of 
machined softwood (50x50) along the front 
edge of a shelf which not only adds an 
attractive finish, but also provides added 
stiffening. 
This 
shelf 
is 
about 
1.2m 
unsupported; for shorter lengths, smaller sized softwood can be used.  
 
 
 
Right shows a sectional view of the machined softwood used to support the front of a shelf 
made from sheet material.  
 
Sheet material is often supplied in large sheets, these can be heavy and awkward to move.  
To cut the sheets accurately using a power saw, fix a batten across the sheet to guide the 
side of the saw's sole plate. Make sure that the batten is not too thin as it may flex sideways 
as you work along it.  
Only cut sheet material which is well supported and stable, remember that having cut though 
the sheet, there is going to be an offcut; nothing to worry about if it is a 25 mm strip of 3 mm 
ply (but you will still have to hold it), but it will need full support if it is half a sheet of 32 mm 
ply. If the offcut is heavy and unsupported, it will twist away before the cut is complete and 
cause damage to the cut edge, and possible damage to the saw/ injury to the operator. 
Always take the required safety precautions.  
Plywood 
Plywood is probably the most widely available 
manufactured board material. It is made by 
bonding together a number of thin veneers of 
softwood or hardwood - or a combination of 
each. There is always an odd number of 
veneers and the direction of the grain runs 
alternately to give the material strength; the 

more veneers used, the stronger the plywood. Both the type of glue and veneers determine 
the suitability of a sheet for a particular application. The finish quality of plywood varies 
enormously, some have attractive grains while others can have a large number of knots.  
 
• 
Exterior grade plywood (WBP - Weather and Boil Proof) is specially made 
using a water-resistant adhesive to withstand a certain amount of moisture and can 
be used for outdoor constructions - sheds etc. and is sometimes used as a cladding 
material, particularly for insert panels under windows. WBP does require additional 
protection (paint or varnish) to protect the outer veneer.  
• 
Internal plywood is of a similar quality as Exterior grade but it does not use water 
resistant adhesive. It can be used for wall panelling, flooring and furniture.  
• 
Shuttering Ply is used in the construction industry for making shuttering boxes for 
containing concrete while it goes off. Although water resistance to a degree, the sides 
of this material are not finished with a decorative veneer and is generally not suitable 
for 
use 
where 
the 
a 
quality 
finish 
is 
required.  
Marine Plywood is made with waterproof adhesive so that it will stand immersion 
in water, the veneers themselves will not last forever under water so the material 
should still be finished with paint or varnish.  
Plywood is normally available in 2440 x 1220 sheets (or subdivisions) and in thicknesses from 
3 to 35 mm.  
Working with plywood 
If the sheets are to be used in a centrally heated room, store them in similar conditions before 
use so that the moisture content of the sheets will stabilise before installation - this will avoid 
shrinkage later.  
Cutting 
To avoid damage to the finishing face, cut into the panel from that face - for hand sawing 
have the face upwards, for power sawing have the face downwards. To reduce the damage, 
score through the outer veneer on both sides of the sheet using a sharp knife before starting 
to saw.  
Thin 
sheets 
(upto 
3mm) 
can 
be 
cut 
using 
a 
sharp 
knife.  
From 
3 
to 
6mm 
use 
a 
tenon 
saw.  
From 
6 
to 
12mm 
thick, 
use 
a 
fine 
tooth 
panel 
saw.  
For thicker sheets use a coarse tooth panel saw.  
Power saws can be used with thicker material but are more likely to damage the outer skin 
where the saw cuts away from the material.  
Fixing 
Plywood may be fixed in place with adhesive and screws or nails.  
Generally only small screws grip well in thick plywood itself but even then they will not stand 
up to repeated changes in force. When fitting hinges to any thickness, use bolts with large 
washers and nut to 'squeeze' the sheet. It is not practical to screw or nail into the edge of 
plywood.  
Where a corner joint is required, fit a softwood batten in the corner so than both sheets of ply 
can be fixed to it.  

For thin material, always fix plywood to a pre-made frame, use glue and panel pins (on about 
a 200mm pitch), use a punch to knock the head of the pins below the surface. The frame 
should support all edges of each plywood sheet and at about 400mm centres (for 6mm ply), 
600mm centres (for 9mm) or 900mm centres for thicker material.  
Knocks to the edge of ply can cause damage to all the veneers which is hard to rectify, so fit a 
thin strip of softwood along the finished edge or put a rebate in the frame so that the edge of 
the plywood can be recessed. This will also improve the appearance as the edge of plywood 
is not very attractive.  
When gluing plywood, roughen the surface with coarse abrasive paper and brush clean 
before applying the glue. Spread the glue evenly and apply pressure.  
Finishes 
Plywood which is supplied with a decorative veneer can be varnished or painted but to get a 
really smooth surface will need good preparation as most plywoods are not as smooth as 
planed timber.  
Sheets are also available with pre-printed faces such as mock panelling.  
Edge laminated softwood board  
At first sight, edge laminated softwood board 
can look like one piece of timber, but it is 
actually made up of narrow (25 to 100 cm) 
strips of softwood glued edge to edge. This 
board is ideal for making furniture where the 
natural gain can be left exposed.  
Boards are available in a number of 
thicknesses (15, 18, 22, 28mm), widths (400, 
450, 500, 600 mm) and lengths (1.2m to 
2.1m). This wide choice means that the 
appropriate sheets can be selected to suit 
the job while minimising waste. Some DIY 
superstores stock a surprisingly small range, 
so it may be necessary to visit a 'real' 
builder's merchant to see a wider range.  
Working  
Edge laminated softwood board can be worked as ordinary softwood. Boards should be 
stored flat.  
Fixing  
Edge laminated softwood board can be screwed, nailed or glued just like ordinary softwood 
timber.  
Finishing  
Generally where edge laminated softwood board is used, it is desired to leave the grain 
visible by finishing with stain, varnish, wax, or actually leaving it untreated. Most common 
formulations for these finishes can be used without affecting the board.  

Chipboard 
Chipboard is made by bonding 
together wood particles with an 
adhesive 
under 
heat 
and 
pressure to form a rigid board 
with a relatively smooth surface. 
Chipboard 
is 
available 
in 
a 
number 
of 
densities; 
normal, 
medium and high-density. Normal 
density is fairly soft and 'flaky', high-density is very solid and hard (often used for worktops 
and fire doors) - medium density is somewhere in between.  
There are exterior grades of chipboard available but most are only suitable for internal use as 
all but high-density tend to soak up water like a sponge. Once water logged, chipboard tends 
to swell and breakdown.  
Veneered Chipboard is widely used 
for self-assembly furniture, work 
surfaces, wall linings and partitions. 
High-density chipboard is often 
used as a basis for the carcasses of 
kitchen furniture, worktops, and 
flooring - this is hardwearing, rigid 
and heavy.  
Other 
grades 
available 
are 
standard, flame-retardant, flooring, 
and moisture-resistant. 
Chipboard is normally available in 
2440 
x 
1220 
sheets 
(or 
subdivisions), 
finished 
veneered 
sheets are available in smaller 
sheets so that the four decorated edg
25 mm.  
es do not need to be cut. Thicknesses range from 12 to 
Flooring grade chipboard is marked 'flooring' and no other should be used. It is normally 
available in 2440 x 1200 and 610mm sheets and in 18 and 22mm thicknesses with tongued 
and grooved edges for easy laying and fixing. Before using flooring grade material check it is 
suitable for your floor joist spacing.  
Working with chipboard 
Apart from high density chipboard, the finish after cutting is generally poor. As with plywood, 
veneered chipboard should be cut with the saw blade going into the finish face to prevent the 
finish veneer chipping. To reduce the amount of damage when cutting chipboard, apply a strip 
of masking tape along the line of the cut and cut through the tape.  
A panel, circular or jig saw can be used.  
Fixing  
Nails, pins and screws may be used on normal chipboard, but they should always be fixed 
through the chipboard and into a support. If you pin, nail or screw into chipboard, the fixings 
may pull out easily. With high density chipboard nails, screws and fixing can be used. The 

screw-holding power is improved if double-threaded or chipboard screws are used. Follow the 
manufacturer's instructions for fixing special purpose boards.  
Any woodworking adhesive may be used with chipboard although when it does fail, normally 
the outer 'chips' separate from the rest of the board. Do not rely on gluing only to support 
heavy weight.  
Finishing 
Generally only laminate chipboard will give a satisfactory finish although laminate or self-
adhesive decorative film can be used.  
Edging (normally self adhesive) strip is available to add laminate type finish to sawn edges of 
pre-laminated chipboard.  
Ordinary chipboard is fairly unattractive on its own but if you want to paint it, use oil based 
paints - using water based paints can cause chipboard to swell.  
  
Blockboard 
Blockboard is composed of a core 
of softwood strips (up to about 
25mm wide) placed edge to edge 
and sandwiched between veneers 
of hardwood, the 'sandwich' is then bonded under high pressure.  
An interior grade adhesive is normally used, so blockboard is not suitable for use out of doors.  
When using blockboard for such items as a door or a long table, make sure the core runs 
lengthways to give maximum strength. Blockboard can be used for shelves, doors, panelling 
and partitions.  
Blockboard is normally available in 2440 x 1220 sheets (or subdivisions), thicknesses tend to 
be limited to around 30mm.  
Working with blockboard  
Fixing 
Providing that screws or nails miss the joints of the inner strips and enter the strips in a sound 
position, they will give good fixings - but it is a bit of a gamble as you cannot see where the 
fixing is going.  
Finishing  
The edges of blockboard do not clean up well and are not very attractive, so cover exposed 
edges with a decorative strip of softwood or fill and paint them.  
The surfaces of standard boards can be painted, while pre-finished boards are available with 
a variety of applied surfaces such as decorative wood veneers and plastic laminate facings.  

Blockboard has a good resistance to warping if both sides are left natural or painted/papered. 
If only one side is finished, then surface tensions build up which will cause the sheet into a 
bend.  
 
 
Man-made board page 2  
general - plywood - chipboard - edge laminated softwood board - blockboard - hardboard - mdf - stirling 
board
Hardboard 
Hardboard 
is 
a 
compressed, 
composite board. Fibre residuals are 
saturated in a wet process and then 
compressed to a sheet. A fine fibre 
overlay is applied (normally to one 
side) to provide smooth face.  
Three basic types are available - 
standard, medium and oil-tempered. 
A number of specially finished 
boards are available for specific 
purposes.  
• 
Standard 
With a smooth surface on one side and a mesh texture on the other, this can be used 
for wall and ceiling panelling, floors, door panels, built-in cupboards and fitments etc.  
• 
Medium 
This is less dense than standard hardboard but it is thicker and so more rigid. There 
are two types: LM (low density) which will take drawing pins and can be used for pin 
boards and notice boards, and HM (high density) which is suitable for wall and ceiling 
lining, partitions.  
• 
Tempered 
Treated 
This is usually treated with oil to give extra strength and water resistance, it is 
particularly suitable for exterior use.  
As well as being supplied in flat sheet form, 
hardboard is also available with various 
designs of perforations (to act as peg board 
or decorative grills) and with 3D decorative 
designs on one face (usually ridges or similar 
repeat 
patterns).  
 
Working with hardboard 

When handling hardboard, take care not to damage the surface of the finish face. If a full 
sheet twists it can tear across the whole width.  
Conditioning  
To prevent sheets buckling due to a change in moisture content, manufacturers recommend 
they should be conditioned before use. There are two ways of doing this.  
• 
For standard and LM (low density) type medium and tempered boards, scrub the 
backs with water, using I litre to every 2440 x 1220mm sheet. Then stack the sheets 
flat, back to back, for 24-48 hours (48-72 hours for tempered boards).  
• 
For HM (high-density) type, medium boards and all boards to be used in centrally 
heated surroundings, stack the sheets on edge in the room where they are to be 
used, separating them with wood off cuts to allow the air to circulate. Leave HM 
medium boards for 48 hours and other boards for 72 hours before using them.  
Use a fine tooth saw and cut into the face of the board, supporting it on both sides of the 
cutting line. Pre-decorated and plastic-covered boards should first be scored along the cutting 
line using a sharp knife and straightedge to prevent the edges chipping.  
Fixing 
Hardboard may be fixed by screws, hardboard pins, nails or adhesives; follow the 
manufacturer's recommendations relating to the particular type of board and its use. The 
heads of hardboard pins are designed so that they 'disappear' into the surface after they have 
been hammered home.  
You can use general purpose impact adhesive (for instant fixing) and woodworking PVA or 
synthetic resin-based ones - where possible, pin or cramp the work piece while the glue is 
setting. Generally the glue only bonds to the top surface of hardboard and if a joint fails, it is 
generally not the glue but the top surface of the board which separates from the underlying 
board.  
Finishes 
Knocks to the edge of hardboard will cause damage, so fit a thin strip of softwood along the 
finished edge or put a rebate in the support frame so that the hardboard can be recessed.  
Hardboard which is not already primed should be treated with special hardboard primer/ 
sealer before being painted or papered. Diluted emulsion paint (one part of water to four of 
paint) or aluminium paint may be used as a primer unless the surface is to be papered. Wood 
primer should not be used.  
Hardboard is normally available in 2440 x 1220 sheets (or subdivisions) and in thicknesses 
from 2.4 to 13 mm.  
  
MDF (Medium Density Fibreboard) 
MDF is a type of hardboard which is made from wood 
fibres glued under heat and pressure. MDF has many 
qualities that make it an ideal alternative to plywood or 
chipboard. It is dense, flat, stiff, has no knots and is 
easily machined. Its fine particles provide a material 
without a recognisable "grain". Unlike plywood and 

blockboard, MDF contains no internal voids, and will produce better edges providing that it is 
correctly machined.  
But use MDF with care - it is manufactured using urea-formaldehyde resin which maybe 
released in low concentrations over a long period of time. Formaldehyde can cause 
temporary eye and respiratory irritation, it can also aggravate respiratory conditions or 
allergies in some people. Proper ventilation and precautions during working and use will 
reduce the risk of such problems. Some people have been reported as being affected by just 
a piece of MDF in a room.  
Working with MDF 
Dust is a major hazard when working with MDF. The large amounts of dust generated by 
cutting and machining requires the use of proper breathing and eye protection. As a 
minimum, always use a dust mask while there is dust in the air, not just while actually cutting. 
A professional style respirator is preferable. Goggles should always be worn while using tools 
on MDF.  
MDF can be cut in the same manner as a fine-grained hardwood although as it does not have 
a grain, it can be successfully sawn in any direction. MDF can also be machined, drilled and 
tapped.  
Due to its high glue content, steel cutting tools will dull very quickly; the use of carbide tools is 
preferred.  
Being without a grain, cutting or machining MDF will result in a very smooth edge providing 
that the tools are sharp and used correctly.  
Fixing 
Screws and nails can be used to fix MDF, however with these fixings, there is a risk of the 
MDF splitting if care is not taken. The risk of splitting depends upon the thickness of material, 
generally fixings should not be less than 25mm from the edge.  
When using nails, drive them in at right angle to the surface, this will avoid bending and 
reduce the chances of splitting. Use ring-shank nails to ensure a good grip.  
With screws, always use pilot holes - about 85 % to 90 % of the root diameter of the screw 
being used and at least as deep as the screw. Straight sheet metal screws with constant size 
shank give best results, avoid using tapered wood screws.  
Because MDF can be milled to just about any profile, many of the traditional woodworking 
joints can be used as can dowels.  
MDF can be glued using gap-filling or PVA glues. Epoxy and hot melt glues are also suitable. 
The edges of pieces of MDF can be glued to make larger sheets.  
Finishes 
As mentioned previously, MDF is typically made using urea-formaldehyde resin which will be 
gradually released into the atmosphere wherever MDF is used. While this will not affect most 
people, some people are sensitive to formaldehyde emissions so precautions must be taken. 
Where possible, use low formaldehyde or formaldehyde-free MDF, or consider methods of 
controlling these emissions through proper finishing.  

Where a finish is applied, it should be applied to ALL exposed surfaces, even those not 
immediately visible. Finishes that work best at controlling formaldehyde emissions are solid 
surfaces such as laminates, vinyl covering, and finished wood veneers. Oil based paints and 
varnishes can be used. Less effective at controlling emissions are simple wax and oil 
coatings.  
Stirling Board 
Sterling board is a wood-based panel manufactured from 
softwood strands compressed and bonded together with 
exterior grade, water resistant resins. It is readily identified 
by the random pattern of flattened, softwood strands 
which make up the surface.  
It can be used in place of other sheet materials but due to 
the surface finish, it is generally restricted to areas where 
appearance does not matter. Tongue and Grooved is also 
available for use on flat roof decking and flooring 
applications.  
 
 
Working with Stirling Board  
Stirling Board can be sawn using either a hand or power saw. No matter how carefully it is 
cut, the edge will tend to 'lift' on the reverse side. Always make all cuts of a sheet from the 
same side, then all of the delamination will be on one side.  
Fixing  
When fixing with nails, use ring shank nails to increase the grip. When using screws, there is 
generally no need to countersink the holes, as the screw head will compress the board as it is 
tightened.  
Where Stirling board is to be used for roofing:  
1. All edges should be supported on joists or other support.  
2. Panel edges should bear approx. 20mm onto joists.  
3. Nailing should be at least 10mm from the panel edges.  
4. Panels should be fixed using approx. 3mm ring shank nails or screws whose length 
are 2.5 times the thickness of the panel.  
Finishes  
The surface of the ordinary quality is often considered unsuitable for a finished surface, the 
strands of wood often lifts slightly and, if pulled, will 'run'. The edge of the panels can become 
'flaky' and are easily damaged by careless handling and knocks. This does not matter too 
much where appearance is not important or where a physical covering (e.g. roofing felt) is to 
be fixed to it.  
Stirling board can be painted. Where a fine finish is required, factory sanded panels are 
available. With unsanded panels, the surfaces can be wire brushed to remove any loose 
wafers and resin deposits. Priming and top coating with oil based timber paint can give a 
good, although not perfect, finish. Water-based products should be avoided as they may 
cause some swelling of the surface wafers.  

 
 

