Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

edition
MANAGEMENT
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Effy Oz
The Pennsylvania State University, 
Great Valley
Kenneth J. Sousa
Bryant University
seventh
© Wavebreak Media/Thinkstock
Australia • Brazil • Mexico • Singapore • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Management Information Systems,
Seventh Edition
Kenneth J. Sousa and Effy Oz
Product Director: Joe Sabatino
Product Manager: Clara Goosman
Senior Content Developer: Kate Mason
Development Editor: Deborah Kaufmann
Product Assistant: Brad Sullender
Market Development Manager: Heather Mooney
Marketing Coordinator: Eileen Corcoran
Design and Production Service: PreMediaGlobal
Manufacturing Planner: Ron Montgomery
Senior Rights Acquisition Specialist: Christine
Myaskovsky
Cover Image(s): © Nikada/Getty Images
© 2015, 2009 Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to
photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution,
information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Microsoft and the Office logo are either registered trademarks or
trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other
countries. Cengage Learning is an independent entity from the Microsoft
Corporation, and not affiliated with Microsoft in any manner.
iPhone, iPad, and iPod are registered trademarks of Apple Inc.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013950990
ISBN-13: 978-1-285-18613-9
ISBN-10: 1-285-18613-3
Cengage Learning
200 First Stamford Place, 4th Floor
Stamford, CT 06902
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions
with office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at:
www.cengage.com/global.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our
preferred online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Instructors: Please visit login.cengage.com and log in to access instructor-
specific resources.
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent
analysis in connection with any of the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume,
and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that provided to it by
the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might
be indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the
instructions contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions.
The publisher makes no representations or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the
warranties of fitness for particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations implied
with respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such
material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in
whole or part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material.
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 17 16 15 14 13
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
WCN: 02-200-203

To my father, Henry, and in memory of my
mother, Virginia, and my sister, Karen.
—Kenneth J. Sousa
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Memoriam: Dr. Effy Oz
Dr. Oz was a passionate and beloved teacher at The Pennsylvania State
University, Great Valley. He wrote several books, including six previous
editions of this popular textbook on management information systems. He
touched the lives of many students at Boston University, Boston College,
Wayne State University, and Penn State. With this revision, we honor his
legacy and careful thought about MIS education.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONTENTS
brief
© Wavebreak Media/Thinkstock
PART ONE THE INFORMATION AGE
1
Chapter 1
Business Information Systems: An Overview 4
Chapter 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems 34
Chapter 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains 66
PART TWO INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
107
Chapter 4
Business Hardware 108
Chapter 5
Business Software 148
Chapter 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications 183
Chapter 7
Databases and Data Warehouses 220
PART THREE WEB-ENABLED COMMERCE
253
Chapter 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise 254
Chapter 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems 298
PART FOUR DECISION SUPPORT AND BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE
323
Chapter 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems 324
Chapter 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management 358
PART FIVE PLANNING, ACQUISITION, AND CONTROLS
385
Chapter 12
Systems Planning and Development 386
Chapter 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition 420
Chapter 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery 450
v
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONTENTS
detailed
© Wavebreak Media/Thinkstock
PART ONE THE INFORMATION AGE
1
Textbook Case: Kimball’s Restaurant 1
Chapter 1
Business Information Systems: An Overview 4
Kimball’s Restaurant: Business Systems and Information 5
Does Information Technology Matter? 6
The Power of Digital Systems 6
The Purpose of Information Systems 7
Why You Should Be Well-Versed in Information Systems 8
Data, Information, and Information Systems 8
Data vs. Information 8
Data Manipulation 8
Generating Information 9
Information in Context 9
What Is a System? 10
Information and Managers 12
Information Systems in Organizations 13
The Four Stages of Processing 14
Computer Equipment for Information Systems 15
From Recording Transactions to Providing Expertise:
Types of Information Systems 15
Transaction Processing Systems 16
Supply Chain Management Systems 16
Customer Relationship Management Systems 17
Business Intelligence Systems 18
Decision Support and Expert Systems 18
Geographic Information Systems 18
Information Systems in Business Functions 19
Accounting 20
Finance 20
Marketing 20
Human Resources 21
Web-Empowered Enterprises 21
Ethical & Societal Issues: The Downside 22
Careers in Information Systems 23
Systems Analyst 23
Database Administrator 24
Network Administrator 24
vi
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

System Administrator 25
Mobile Applications Developer 25
Webmaster 25
Chief Security Officer 25
Chief Information Officer and Chief Technology Officer 26
Summary 27
Kimball’s Revisited 28
Key Terms 28
Review Questions 29
Discussion Questions 29
Applying Concepts 30
Hands-On Activities 30
Team Activities 30
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 31
References 33
Chapter 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems 34
Kimball’s Restaurant: Using Information Strategically 35
Strategy and Strategic Moves 36
Achieving a Competitive Advantage 38
Initiative #1: Reduce Costs 39
Why You Should Understand the Notion of Strategic
Information Systems 40
Initiative #2: Raise Barriers to Market Entrants 40
Initiative #3: Establish High Switching Costs 41
Initiative #4: Create New Products or Services 41
Initiative #5: Differentiate Products or Services 44
Initiative #6: Enhance Products or Services 44
Initiative #7: Establish Alliances 45
Initiative #8: Lock in Suppliers or Buyers 47
Creating and Maintaining Strategic Information Systems 48
Creating an SIS 49
Reengineering and Organizational Change 50
Competitive Advantage as a Moving Target 51
JetBlue: A Success Story 52
Massive Automation 52
Away from Tradition 53
Enhanced Service 53
Late Mover Advantage 54
Ethical & Societal Issues: Size Matters 55
Ford on the Web: A Failure Story 56
The Ideas 56
Hitting the Wall 57
The Retreat 57
The Bleeding Edge 57
Summary 59
Kimball’s Revisited 60
Key Terms 60
Detailed Contents
vii
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review Questions 61
Discussion Questions 61
Applying Concepts 62
Hands-On Activities 63
Team Activities 63
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 64
References 65
Chapter 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains 66
Kimball’s Restaurant: The New Location 67
Effectiveness and Efficiency 67
Accounting 70
Why You Should Know About Business Functions and
Supply Chains 71
Finance 71
Cash Management 72
Investment Analysis and Service 72
Engineering 73
Supply Chain Management 75
Material Requirements Planning and Purchasing 76
Manufacturing Resource Planning 77
Monitoring and Control 78
Shipping 78
RFID in SCM 80
Customer Relationship Management 82
Market Research 83
Targeted Marketing 84
Location-Based Services 85
Customer Service 86
Salesforce Automation 87
Human Resource Management 88
Employee Record Management 88
Promotion and Recruitment 89
Training 89
Evaluation 90
Compensation and Benefits Management 90
Ethical & Societal Issues: Consumer Privacy 92
Supply Chain Management Systems 93
The Importance of Trust 94
Continuous Attention to Inventory 95
Collaborative Logistics 96
Enterprise Resource Planning 97
Challenges and Disadvantages of ERP Systems 97
Providing the Missing Reengineering 98
Summary 99
Kimball’s Revisited 100
Key Terms 100
Review Questions 101
Discussion Questions 101
viii
Detailed Contents
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Applying Concepts 102
Hands-On Activity 102
Team Activities 103
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 104
References 106
PART TWO INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
107
Chapter 4
Business Hardware 108
Kimball’s Restaurant: Hardware for the Appetite 109
Computer Hardware Components 109
Why You Should Understand Information Systems
Hardware 111
Classification of Computers 111
Supercomputers 111
Mainframe Computers 112
Servers 113
Personal Computers 113
Computers on the Go: Notebooks, Tablets, and
Smartphones 113
Converging Technologies 114
A Peek Inside the Computer 115
The Central Processing Unit 115
Computer Power 117
Input Devices 118
Keyboard 118
Mouse, Trackball, and Trackpad 118
Touch Screen 119
Source Data Input Devices 120
Imaging 122
Speech Recognition 123
Output Devices 124
Monitors 124
Printers 125
Storage 126
Modes of Access 126
Magnetic Tapes 127
Magnetic Disks 127
Optical Discs 128
Solid-State Storage 129
DAS, NAS, and SAN 130
Cloud Storage 131
Ethical & Societal Issues: Computers May Be Hazardous
to Your Health 132
Business Considerations in Evaluating Storage Media 132
Considerations in Purchasing Hardware 135
Scalability and Updating Hardware 138
Summary 139
Detailed Contents
ix
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Kimball’s Revisited 140
Key Terms 140
Review Questions 141
Discussion Questions 141
Applying Concepts 142
Hands-On Activities 143
Team Activities 144
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 145
References 147
Chapter 5
Business Software 148
Kimball’s Restaurant: Software Added to the Bill 149
Software: Instructions to the Hardware 149
Programming Languages and Software Development
Tools 150
Why You Should Be Software Savvy 152
Visual Programming 153
Object-Oriented Programming 154
Language Translation: Compilers and Interpreters 156
Application Software 157
Office Productivity Applications 158
Hypermedia and Multimedia 160
Website Design Tools 162
Groupware 163
3-D Geographic Software 163
System Software 164
Operating Systems 165
Other System Software 169
Open Source Software 169
Software Licensing 171
Software Licensing Models 171
Software as a Service 172
Ethical & Societal Issues: Software Piracy 173
Considerations for Packaged Software 173
Summary 175
Kimball’s Revisited 176
Key Terms 176
Review Questions 177
Discussion Questions 177
Applying Concepts 178
Hands-On Activities 178
Team Activities 179
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 180
References 182
Chapter 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications 183
Kimball’s Restaurant: A New Look at Customer Service and
Technology 184
Telecommunications in Business 185
x
Detailed Contents
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Telecommunications in Daily Use 186
Cellular Phones 186
Videoconferencing 187
Wireless Payments and Warehousing 187
Why You Should Understand Telecommunications 188
Peer-to-Peer File Sharing 188
Web-Empowered Commerce 188
Bandwidth and Media 189
Bandwidth 189
Media 189
Networks 192
Types of Networks 193
PANs 194
Networking Hardware 195
Virtual Private Networks 195
Protocols 196
TCP/IP 196
Ethernet 197
Wireless Protocols 197
Generations in Mobile Communications 201
Internet Networking Services 201
Cable 202
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) 203
T1 and T3 Lines 203
Satellite 204
Fixed Wireless 204
Fiber to the Premises 204
Optical Carrier 204
Ethical & Societal Issues: Telecommuting: Pros and Cons 205
Broadband Over Power Lines (BPL) 206
The Impact of Networking Technologies 206
Broadband Telephony 206
Radio Frequency Identification 208
Converging Technologies 210
Summary 212
Kimball’s Revisited 213
Key Terms 214
Review Questions 214
Discussion Questions 215
Applying Concepts 215
Hands-On Activities 216
Team Activities 216
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 217
References 219
Chapter 7
Databases and Data Warehouses 220
Kimball’s Restaurant: An Appetite for Data 221
Managing Digital Data 221
Detailed Contents
xi
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Why You Should Know About Databases 222
The Traditional File Approach 223
The Database Approach 223
Database Models 228
The Relational Model 228
The Object-Oriented Model 231
Relational Operations 232
Structured Query Language 233
The Schema and Metadata 233
Data Modeling 235
Databases on the Web 236
Data Warehousing 238
From Database to Data Warehouse 238
Ethical & Societal Issues: Every Move You Make 239
Phases in Data Warehousing 242
Data Warehousing and Big Data 243
Summary 244
Kimball’s Revisited 245
Key Terms 245
Review Questions 246
Discussion Questions 246
Applying Concepts 247
Hands-On Activities 247
Team Activities 248
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 249
References 252
PART THREE WEB-ENABLED COMMERCE
253
Chapter 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise 254
Kimball’s Restaurant: Using the Internet 255
Web Business: Growing and Changing 255
Web Technologies: A Review 256
HTTP 256
Why You Should Know More About Web-Enabled
Business 257
HTML and XML 257
File Transfer 258
Blogs 258
Wikis 259
Podcasting 260
Interactive Communication Technology 261
Cookies 262
Proprietary Technologies 263
Web-Enabled Business 264
B2B Trading 264
B2C Trading 269
xii
Detailed Contents
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ethical & Societal Issues: Online Annoyances and Worse 276
Social Media on the Web 279
Supply Chains on the Web 280
Options in Establishing a Website 282
Owning and Maintaining a Server 282
Using a Hosting Service 283
Considerations in Selecting a Web Host 285
More than Meets the Eye 287
Rules for Successful Web-Based Business 287
Target the Right Customers 287
Capture the Customer’s Total Experience 288
Personalize the Service 288
Shorten the Business Cycle 288
Let Customers Help Themselves 288
Be Proactive and De-Commoditize 289
E-Commerce Is Every Commerce 289
Summary 290
Kimball’s Revisited 291
Key Terms 291
Review Questions 292
Discussion Questions 292
Applying Concepts 293
Hands-On Activities 294
Team Activities 294
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 295
References 297
Chapter 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems 298
Kimball’s Restaurant: Long Distance Recipes 299
Multinational Organizations 299
The Web and International Commerce 300
Think Globally, Act Locally 303
Why You Should Learn About Challenges of Global ISs 303
Challenges of Global Information Systems 303
Technological Challenges 304
Regulations and Tariffs 305
Differences in Payment Mechanisms 306
Language Differences 307
Cultural Differences 308
Conflicting Economic, Scientific, and Security Interests 308
Political Challenges 309
Different Standards 310
Ethical & Societal Issues: Legal Jurisdictions in
Cyberspace 311
Legal Barriers 312
Different Time Zones 313
Summary 315
Kimball’s Revisited 315
Key Terms 315
Detailed Contents
xiii
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review Questions 316
Discussion Questions 316
Applying Concepts 317
Hands-On Activities 317
Team Activities 318
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 319
References 321
PART FOUR DECISION SUPPORT AND BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE
323
Chapter 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems 324
Kimball’s Restaurant: Preparing to Serve 325
Decision Support 325
The Decision-Making Process 326
Structured and Unstructured Problems 327
Why You Should Be Familiar with Decision Aids 329
Decision Support Systems 329
The Data Management Module 330
The Model Management Module 331
The Dialog Module 333
Sensitivity Analysis 334
Decision Support Systems in Action 335
Ethical & Societal Issues: Decisions by Machines 339
Expert Systems 340
Expert Systems in Action 343
Group Decision Support Systems 346
Geographic Information Systems 347
Summary 350
Kimball’s Revisited 351
Key Terms 351
Review Questions 352
Discussion Questions 352
Applying Concepts 353
Hands-On Activities 353
Team Activities 354
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 355
References 357
Chapter 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management 358
Kimball’s Restaurant: Building and Developing Loyality 359
Data Mining and Online Analysis 359
Data Mining 360
Why You Should Learn About BI and KM Tools 361
Online Analytical Processing 364
More Customer Intelligence 369
Dashboards 371
xiv
Detailed Contents
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Knowledge Management 372
Capturing and Sorting Organizational Knowledge 373
Employee Knowledge Networks 373
Ethical & Societal Issues: Knowledge and Globalization 375
Knowledge from the Web 375
Autocategorization 377
Summary 378
Kimball’s Revisited 378
Key Terms 379
Review Questions 379
Discussion Questions 379
Applying Concepts 380
Hands-On Activities 380
Team Activities 381
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 382
References 384
PART FIVE PLANNING, ACQUISITION, AND CONTROLS
385
Chapter 12
Systems Planning and Development 386
Kimball’s Restaurant: Planning Loyalty 387
Planning Information Systems 387
Steps in Planning Information Systems 387
Why You Should Understand the Principles of Systems
Development 390
The Benefits of Standardization in Planning 390
From Planning to Development 391
The Systems Development Life Cycle 391
Analysis 392
Design 397
Implementation 400
Support 402
Agile Methods 403
When to Use Agile Methods 405
When Not to Use Agile Methods 405
Outsourcing 406
Project Planning and Management Tools 407
Systems Integration 408
Ethical & Societal Issues: Should IS Professionals
Be Certified? 410
Summary 412
Kimball’s Revisited 413
Key Terms 413
Review Questions 414
Discussion Questions 414
Applying Concepts 415
Hands-On Activities 415
Team Activities 416
Detailed Contents
xv
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 417
References 419
Chapter 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition 420
Kimball’s Restaurant: Technology for Customer Loyalty 421
Options and Priorities 421
Outsourcing 422
Outsourcing Custom-Designed Applications 423
Why You Should Understand Alternative Avenues
for the Acquisition of Information Systems 423
Outsourcing IT Services 425
Advantages of Outsourcing IT Services 428
Risks of Outsourcing IT Services 429
Considering Outsourcing IT Services 430
Licensing Applications 431
Software Licensing Benefits 432
Software Licensing Risks 433
Steps in Licensing Ready-Made Software 433
Software as a Service 435
Caveat Emptor: Buyer Beware 437
User Application Development 438
Managing User-Developed Applications 439
Advantages and Risks 439
Ethical & Societal Issues: Computer Use Policies
for Employees 441
Summary 442
Kimball’s Revisited 443
Key Terms 443
Review Questions 444
Discussion Questions 444
Applying Concepts 445
Hands-On Activities 445
Team Activities 446
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 447
References 449
Chapter 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery 450
Kimball’s Restaurant: Plating the Opening 451
Goals of Information Security 451
Why You Should Understand Risks, Security, and Disaster
Recovery Planning 452
Risks to Information Systems 452
Risks to Hardware 453
Risks to Data and Applications 454
Risks to Online Operations 459
Denial of Service 459
Computer Hijacking 460
xvi
Detailed Contents
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Controls 461
Application Reliability and Data Entry Controls 461
Backup 461
Access Controls 462
Atomic Transactions 464
Audit Trail 465
Security Measures 466
Firewalls and Proxy Servers 466
Authentication and Encryption 468
The Downside of Security Measures 475
Recovery Measures 475
Ethical & Societal Issues: Terrorism and PATRIOTism 476
The Business Recovery Plan 476
Recovery Planning and Hot Site Providers 478
The Economics of Information Security 479
How Much Security Is Enough Security? 479
Calculating Downtime 480
Summary 482
Kimball’s Revisited 483
Key Terms 483
Review Questions 484
Discussion Questions 484
Applying Concepts 485
Hands-On Activities 486
Team Activities 486
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases 487
References 489
Glossary 490
Subject Index 504
Name & Company Index 524
Detailed Contents
xvii
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

preface
© Wavebreak Media/Thinkstock
The goal of Management Information Systems, Seventh Edition is to provide a real-world understand-
ing of information systems (ISs) for business and computer science students. Like its predecessor,
this Seventh Edition provides students with a firm foundation in business-related information
technology (IT) on which they can build successful careers regardless of the particular fields they
choose. They may find themselves formulating strategic plans in executive suites, optimizing
operations in businesses or on factory floors, fine-tuning plans for their own entrepreneurial ven-
tures, designing ISs to optimize their organization’s operations, working as consultants, augment-
ing business activities on the web, or creating valuable new information products in any number
of industries. Ultimately, the integration of technology into the strategy and operations of a busi-
ness is an important factor in its success.
This Seventh Edition is organized in 14 chapters that contain the most important topics for
business students. The fundamental principle guiding this book is that ISs are everywhere in
business. Information systems are pervasive because information is the single most powerful
resource in every business function in every industry. Knowledge of IT is not always explicitly
stated as a job requirement. However, a solid understanding has become an essential element of
success in virtually any position. Not everyone in business needs to have all the technical skills
of an IT professional, but everyone needs a working knowledge and exposure of the subject to
know how to use IT in his or her profession. These skills are imperative in the increasingly digital
and networked business world.
Management Information Systems provides students with the proper balance of technical infor-
mation and real-world applications. No matter what field they undertake, students will enter the
business world knowing how to get information to work for them. They will know enough
about IT to work productively with IT specialists, and they will know enough about business
applications to get information systems to support their work in the best way possible.
Approach
Ongoing Business Case Shows IS Principles in Action
In this edition, one business example is used as the foundation to integrate business case
material for each Part and each Chapter. Part One introduces the textbook case, Kimball’s
Restaurant. The restaurant case provides a practical, “real world” example of a business scenario.
In the succeeding chapters, material is added to the case to communicate a scenario tailored to
each chapter’s content. Each chapter case provides a narrative similar to the challenges and
opportunities
a
business
professional
or
entrepreneur
would
encounter
in
a
company.
Ultimately, the case scenario gives students the opportunity to integrate business IT principles,
view IS issues in action, and to solve business problems related to IT just as they arise in the real
world. The running case approach shows students how the full range of business functions
operate while gaining an in-depth knowledge of a specific business. The textbook case is
integrated into the text in several ways:
●
The Case: Each chapter begins with a case based on the textbook running case, Kimball’s
Restaurant. The case is structured to be sequential in nature, beginning as a small restaurant
then expanding to a new location at the Lakeside. In each chapter, a new “episode” of the
restaurant’s expansion is framed with new strategic and operational issues. Students are
xviii
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

encouraged to “embed” themselves as a consultant to the business by (1) identifying the pro-
blems and opportunities, (2) applying general business and information technology concepts,
(3) analyzing the alternatives to resolve the issues, and (4) recommending a suitable solution
to focus on the success of the business.
●
The Business Challenge: At the beginning of each Part in the textbook, a series of statements
introduces the restaurant’s challenges, which are outlined in more detail in each chapter case.
●
Kimball’s Revisited: At the end of each chapter, the textbook revisits issues framed in the
chapter opening case and sets the environment for students to analyze the specific challenges
facing Kimball’s in two sections. Students can assume the role of consultants, providing
advice to the restaurant’s owners.
●
What Is Your Advice?: This section communicates the various strategic and operational pro-
blems and issues confronting the restaurant. Students should carefully read the discussion
points, analyze the issues, and integrate the technology concepts to provide specific advice.
●
New Perspectives: In this section, students have an opportunity to answer questions that
introduce a wide variety of “what ifs,” reaching beyond the original scope of the case and ask-
ing students to think creatively and assume various different roles to meet business challenges.
Emphasis on the Real World
Management Information Systems is not afraid to warn about the limitations and challenges of ISs.
The text also explains the great potential of many information technologies, which many
organizations have not yet unleashed. Of course, this book includes chapters and features that
provide a thorough, concise—and refreshingly clear—focusing on the technology of information
systems, because all professionals in successful organizations are actively involved in making
decisions about hardware, software, and telecommunications. But, through current, detail-rich,
real-world case studies throughout the book, and a dedication to qualifying each presentation
with the real-world factors that may affect business, this book provides issues and topics that are
directly related to the business workplace in its presentation. It is important to understand the
basic issues and concepts associated with information systems. However, business organizations
continue to require its professionals to reinvent, integrate, and create a competitive advantage
using information systems.
Attention to New Business Practices and Trends
Large parts of the text are devoted to discussing innovative uses of information technology and
its benefits and risks. Contemporary concepts such as supply chain management systems, Big
Data and data warehousing, business intelligence systems, knowledge management, social
media, web-based electronic data interchange, and software as a service are explained in plain,
easy-to-understand language.
Illustration of the Importance of Each Subject to One’s Career
Business students often do not understand why they have to learn about information
technology. The reason many students are frustrated with introductory MIS courses is that they
do not fully understand how information technology works or why it is important for them to
understand it. One of the primary goals of this book is for its entire presentation to make the
answers to these questions apparent. First, all subjects are explained clearly that even the least
technically
oriented
student
can
understand
them.
Technology
is
never
explained
for
technology’s sake, but to immediately demonstrate how it supports successful business strategies
and
operations.
For
instance,
networking,
database
management,
and
web
technologies
(Chapters 6 through 8), which are often confusing topics, are presented with clear, concise, and
vivid descriptions to paint a picture of technology at work. In addition, each chapter includes a
feature titled Why You Should, which explains to students how being well-versed in that
chapter’s aspect of IT is important to their careers.
Preface
xix
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Emphasis on Ethical Thinking
The book puts a great emphasis on some of the questionable and controversial uses of
information technology, with special treatment provided in the Ethical & Societal Issues
boxes. The students are required to weigh the positive and negative impacts of technology and
to convincingly argue their own positions on important issues such as privacy, free speech, and
professional conduct. Successful businesses focus not only on profit and revenue, but also on
ethical and transparent interaction with their stakeholders.
Emphasis on Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is used throughout the text as well as in the book’s many features. For instance,
the students are put in the midst of a business dilemma relating to the running case of each
chapter and required to answer What Is Your Advice? questions. The questions motivate
students to evaluate many aspects of each situation and to repeatedly consider how quickly IT
evolves. Similarly, many of the Discussion Questions at the end of chapters call for their
evaluation and judgment.
Additional Emphases in the Seventh Edition
Building on the success of the Sixth Edition, Management Information Systems, Seventh Edition
includes a uniquely effective combination of features.
Updated Textbook Running Case Study
This Seventh Edition introduces a modified and dynamic pedagogical tool: one running case
focusing on a business entity that incorporates a wide array of real-world events and challenges
that dramatize how information technology is integrated into everyday business. The integration
of one business example, rather than several different cases across chapters, focuses the attention
of students on gaining an intimate and up-close perspective on one business. As students
progress through the textbook, their analysis and insights will expand as they leverage the
previous knowledge and information on Kimball’s Restaurant. Additionally, the one case
example helps students develop a distinct perspective on the maturation and development of
one business as it wades through a variety of obstacles and challenges.
Strong Foundation in Strategic ISs in Business Functions
In addition to a complete chapter on strategic uses of ISs (Chapter 2), strategic thinking is an
underlying theme throughout the book. Current examples are used to illustrate how information
systems can help give businesses build and sustain a strategic competitive advantage.
Up-to-date Coverage of Web-Enabled and Mobile Commerce
Reflecting the use of web technologies in so many business activities, the book integrates the
topic seamlessly throughout the text, just as it has become integrated into business in general.
But the text goes beyond the well-worn discussions of the topic (and the handful of sites
everyone knows about) to tell the students what works about e-commerce and what doesn’t
work. In addition, the rapid adoption of mobile technology through the use of tablets and
smartphone technology is integrated throughout the textbook.
xx
Preface
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Current Real-world Examples Reflect a Wide Variety of Businesses
The textbook incorporates more applications, cases, and projects in the full range of business
functions and industries throughout the book. The cases at the end of the chapter, in the From
Ideas to Application: Real Cases sections, have been carefully selected to include critical
thinking questions to guide students to apply what they have learned. Most of these cases are
new to this edition and others have been updated and reflect current technology and trends. In
addition, for strong pedagogical reinforcement, examples are embedded throughout the book.
Coverage of Global Issues
Globalization has become an important issue both economically and technologically. An entire
chapter, Chapter 9, is devoted to discussing challenges to global information systems, from legal
discrepancies through cultural issues to time zone issues. The chapter also discusses how the
challenges can be met successfully. This topic receives little coverage in similar textbooks. The
breadth and depth of coverage of challenges to global uses of IT in this book has been
enthusiastically received by adopters.
New Aspects of Ethical and Societal Issues
The coverage of Ethical & Societal Issues in Management Information Systems builds on the
strong foundation started in the first six editions. However, new issues have emerged, such as
data security, Big Data and privacy, and offshoring, which are discussed in this edition.
New Student Assignments for Reinforcement of Material
This Seventh Edition continues to provide an updated selection of assignments at the ends of
chapters, mainly assignments that require the use of relevant software and the web. Many of these
assignments, including Applying Concepts, Hands-On Activities, and Team Activities, have
been updated for this Edition. Responding to instructors’ recommendations, more assignments
require research involving the web. In addition to the hands-on exercises in each chapter, students
and instructors will find a host of additional new hands-on work available at the student
companion website, which is discussed later in this Preface.
More Points of Interest
Responding to instructors’ enthusiastic reception of Points of Interest, a wealth of updated
sidebar statistics, anecdotes, and short stories were added to this edition which add an
interesting and entertaining aspect to the main chapter text. Except for a few entries believed to
have remained accurate, all points of interest are updated in this edition.
Instructor’s Package
Management Information Systems, Seventh Edition, includes teaching tools to support instructors in
the classroom. The ancillaries that accompany the textbook include an Instructor’s Manual,
Solutions, Test Banks and Test Engine, PowerPoint presentations, and Figure Files. This textbook
is one of the few accompanied by an Instructor’s Manual written by the text author, ensuring
compatibility with the textbook in content, pedagogy, and philosophy. All teaching tools
available with this book are available on Cengage.com.
Preface
xxi
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Instructor’s Manual
The text author has created this manual to provide materials to help instructors make their
classes informative and interesting. The manual offers several approaches to teaching the
material, with sample syllabi and comments on different components. It also suggests alternative
course outlines and ideas for term projects. For each chapter, the manual includes teaching tips,
useful websites, and answers to the Review Questions, Discussion Questions, and Thinking about
the Case questions. Having an Instructor’s Manual created by the text author is particularly
valuable, as the author is most familiar with the topical and pedagogical approach of the text.
Solutions
We provide instructors with solutions to Review Questions and Discussion Questions as well as
for quantitative hands-on work in each chapter. If appropriate, we will also provide solution files
for various activities.
Cengage Learning Testing Powered by Cognero
A flexible, online system that allows you to:
●
author, edit, and manage test bank content from multiple Cengage Learning solutions
●
create multiple test versions in an instant
●
deliver tests from your LMS, your classroom, or wherever you want
PowerPoint Presentations
Microsoft PowerPoint slides are included for each chapter. Instructors might use the slides in a
variety of ways, including as teaching aids during classroom presentations or as printed
handouts for classroom distribution. Instructors can add their own slides for additional topics
introduced to the class.
Figure Files
Figure files allow instructors to create their own presentations using figures taken directly from
the text.
Organization
Management Information Systems, Seventh Edition is organized into five parts, followed by a
glossary and an index. It includes the following major elements.
Part One: The Information Age
Part One of the book includes three chapters. Chapter 1, “Business Information Systems: An
Overview,” provides an overview of information technology (IT) and information systems (ISs)
and a framework for discussions in subsequent chapters. Chapter 2, “Strategic Uses of
Information Systems,” discusses organizational strategy and ways in which ISs can be used to
meet strategic goals. Chapter 3, “Business Functions and Supply Chains,” provides a detailed
discussion of business functions, supply chains, and the systems that support management of
supply chains in various industries. Together, these three chapters address the essence of all
overarching ideas that are discussed at greater depth in subsequent chapters.
xxii
Preface
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Part Two: Information Technology
To understand how ISs enhance managerial practices, one must be well versed in the technical
principles of information technology, which are covered in Part Two. Chapters 4, “Business
Hardware,” 5, “Business Software,” and 6, “Business Networks and Telecommunications,”
provide a concise treatment of state-of-the-art hardware, software, and networking technologies
in business. Chapter 7, “Databases and Data Warehouses,” covers database management systems
and data warehousing, which provide the technical foundation leading to an expanded
discussion of business intelligence and knowledge management in Chapter 11.
Part Three: Web-Enabled Commerce
Part Three is devoted to networked businesses and their use of the Internet. Chapter 8, “The
Web-enabled Enterprise,” is fully devoted to a thorough discussion of relevant web technologies
for business operations. All chapters were updated to include mobile computing, tablets, and
social media. Chapter 9, “Challenges of Global Information Systems,” highlights cultural and
other
challenges
organizations
face
in
planning
and
using
the
web
and
international
information systems.
Part Four: Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Part Four provides a view of state-of-the-art decision support and expert systems in Chapter 10
and business intelligence in Chapter 11. Electronic decision aids have been integrated into other
systems in recent years, but understanding of their fundamentals is important. Business
intelligence applications, such as data mining, Big Data, and online analytical processing, are
essential tools in a growing number of businesses. Ample examples have been provided to
demonstrate their power and benefits for businesses.
Part Five: Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Part Five is devoted to planning, acquisition, and controls of information systems to ensure their
successful and timely development and implementation, as well as their security. Chapter 12,
“Systems Planning and Development,” discusses how professionals plan information systems. It
details traditional and agile methods of software development. Chapter 13, “Choices in Systems
Acquisition,” presents alternative acquisition methods to in-house development: outsourcing,
purchased applications, end-user systems development, and software as a service. Additional material
and recent trends in outsourcing and offshoring have been integrated as alternatives in systems
acquisition. Chapter 14, “Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery,” discusses the risks that information
systems face and ways to minimize them, as well as approaches to recovering from disasters.
New Features of this Edition
We listened carefully to our adopters, potential adopters, and reviewers in planning and writing
this Seventh Edition of Management Information Systems. We kept the number and organization
of chapters the same as in the previous edition to suit optimal coverage, pedagogy, and allow for
flexibile term management. The major changes and improvements in this edition are:
●
Complete update to integrate a running case into all 14 chapters
●
Updated and extended coverage of the latest technologies and trends in MIS, including infor-
mation security, mobile computing, social media, cloud computing, and Software as a Service
●
New Point of Interest boxes throughout each chapter
●
All end-of-chapter case studies were updated with recent examples
●
New or revised end-of-chapter exercises
Preface
xxiii
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Some instructors would like students to consider careers in IT. Therefore, the discussion of IT
careers was moved to Chapter 1, “Business Information Systems: An Overview.” This allows the
students to learn what IT professionals do early on.
Supply chain management (SCM) systems and customer relationship management (CRM)
systems have become important staples in businesses. Therefore, they are now introduced early
in Chapter 1, thoroughly explained in Chapter 3, “Business Functions and Supply Chains,” and
discussed widely throughout the text in various contexts. While we still discuss information
systems by business function in Chapter 3, a large part of the chapter is devoted to enterprise
applications such as SCM, CRM, and ERP systems.
Chapter 4, “Business Hardware,” now includes shorter discussions of the innards of
computers and extensive discussions on external memory devices and networked storage
technologies such as SAN, NAS, and cloud storage.
In Chapter 5, “Business Software,” the discussion of programming language generations was
significantly cut to make room for more important discussions of software that all students will
encounter in most organizations. The growing trend of using open source software is extensively
discussed and students are exposed to a plethora of open source applications.
Chapter 6, “Business Networks and Telecommunications,” focuses on the use of various
networking technologies in business. A new section covers the latest wireless technologies, as
this is the future of networking in communities, businesses, and homes. A detailed discussion of
RFID technologies is included to provide the technical foundation for further discussion of
current and future application of this technology in business.
The major web technologies are discussed and demonstrated in Chapter 8, “The Web-
Enabled Enterprise.” The chapter reflects the latest technologies. The section on alternatives in
establishing commercial websites reflects the latest array of hosting options. Chapter 9,
“Challenges of Global Information Systems,” is devoted to illuminating the challenges and
efficiencies of managing business information systems on a global scale.
Many current examples of decision support systems and artificial intelligence are provided in
Chapter 10, “Decision Support and Expert Systems.” Chapter 11, “Business Intelligence and
Knowledge Management,” combines discussions that were included in different chapters in
earlier editions. The concept of employee knowledge networks is explained and demonstrated in
examples.
Chapter 12, “Systems Planning and Development,” discusses the traditional “waterfall”
approaches such as the systems development life cycle, but also devotes a thorough discussion
to agile methods, which have become so popular among software developers.
Chapter 13, “Choices in Systems Acquisition,” discusses alternatives to in-house software
development, such as Software as a Service.
Security and disaster recovery are discussed in Chapter 14, “Risks, Security, and Disaster
Recovery,” with more attention to increasingly severe risks, such as phishing. The discussion of
threats to privacy were updated to address new technologies such as RFID tags and location-
based services.
Except for very few entries, all the Point of Interest box features are new. All Ethical & Societal
Issues discussions have been updated.
Nearly all of the end-of-chapter Real Cases are new. As in previous editions, all are real-world
examples reported in a wide range of major business and technology journals.
Acknowledgments
I am honored to have been selected to revise the successful textbook that Effy Oz created. Dr. Oz
was an exceptional educator and author, and my first and primary acknowledgment is to him. It
is my hope that my efforts will continue his legacy and his great work.
xxiv
Preface
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Revising a textbook is a challenging process that requires commitment and unwavering disci-
pline. However, as in any long, challenging initiative, a project such as this could not be successful
without the contribution of many people. I would first like to thank my colleagues in the business,
consulting, IT, and academic organizations whose ideas, efforts, and opinions over all these years
have helped me understand the educational needs of our students and the marketplace. Without
them, it would be impossible to have attained the experience and knowledge required to compile
this textbook. I also must recognize the indirect but important contribution of the many students
I have taught. Their comments (and criticism) helped me refine and sharpen my teaching. Over
20 years of teaching, they have helped me to comprehend the points that needed extra emphasis,
a different presentation, or an experiential assignment to make topics that may be overwhelming
clearer and more interesting. I have learned that teaching only prepares students for today, but
educating builds skilled and mature professionals for life.
Many thanks go to Kate Mason for being so enthusiastic about this project. She was always
there for me with advice, encouragement, and patience as a new author. Kate demonstrated and
exerted unbounded energy while leading this project. Her active guidance and constant involve-
ment made an immense contribution to this edition. Kate also handled the smooth coordination
of the instructor’s package, web materials, and more. Arul Joseph Raj, the Content Product Man-
ager, guided the textbook through its production while managing the process in a very orderly
and timely manner. The design and art managers at PreMediaGlobal ensured the textbook and
photos were visually appealing, and the team of artists skillfully rendered our ideas. I extend
both my personal and professional gratitude to these talented professionals.
Deb Kaufmann, the developmental editor, has demonstrated again her excellent skills and
high integrity. I was very fortunate to have Deb on the team because of her involvement with
Dr. Oz for the sixth edition. It was wonderful to work with an editor who excels not only in
improving style and organization but who is also so knowledgeable in the subject matter. She is
a consummate professional who helped me tremendously through her broad perspective while
always attending to the details that were essential ingredients supporting my work.
Reviewers are the most important aides to any writer, especially when preparing a college text-
book. I would like to thank the reviewers who carefully reviewed each chapter for this edition:
Merlin Amirtharaj, Stanley Community College
Don Danner, San Francisco State University
John Delalla, University of Arizona South
Lewis Todd, Belhaven University
Patricia Wallace, The College of New Jersey
A special thanks goes to Charles McCormick, who retired from Cengage in 2012, for support-
ing me to author this textbook.
This textbook would not be possible without the contribution of my research assistant. Jerry
Theiler, a senior accounting student, assisted with the research and compilation of updates for
this edition. Jerry is a diligent, intelligent, and mature young man who provided me with quality
work throughout this revision.
Lastly, I would like to thank my mother Virginia, who recently passed away, and my father
Henry. They have provided me with the work ethic, integrity, and loyalty that that has been the
bedrock of my achievements. This textbook and other accomplishments in my life could not
have been gained without their exceptional influence and support. Additionally, I would like to
acknowledge my many friends and former students as well as my colleagues at Bryant University
for their constant encouragement and support. As Kingman Brewster said, “There is no greater
challenge than to have someone relying upon you, no greater satisfaction than to vindicate their expecta-
tions.” It is my hope that I have fulfilled your expectations.
I welcome suggestions and comments from our adopters and their students to continue
developing a quality textbook as well as to continue Dr. Oz’s legacy and contributing to the edu-
cation of students that this textbook will provide.
Kenneth J. Sousa
author@sousamis.com
Preface
xxv
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
one
PART
Thinkstock/photos.com
THE INFORMATION AGE
CHAPTER 1 Business Information Systems 4
CHAPTER 2 Strategic Uses of Information Systems 34
CHAPTER 3 Business Functions and Supply Chains 66
Textbook Case: KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT
Liz and Michael Kimball dreamed about opening
their own restaurant. They believed that they could
use their talents and experience to operate a suc-
cessful restaurant. Liz was a great cook and had
accumulated many family recipes for appetizers,
entrees, and bakery desserts. Michael had a degree
in business and several years of experience in busi-
ness management. They believed that it was the
right time to think about new careers and realize
their dream.
Michael
began
his
career
in
the
human
resources department of a local manufacturing busi-
ness. Over the course of his 20 years in human
resources, he was responsible for recruiting, com-
pensation evaluation, and employee orientation. He
also managed employees’ performance evaluations
for the production departments. While he has some
accounting and budgeting experience, it was specific
only to human resources, not for an entire business
organization.
Liz started work as a customer service rep for a
financial services company right after high school.
Her 15 years of customer service experience has
given her some ability to manage people. She does
not have a formal culinary education, but she has an
excellent sense of food preparation, ingredient selec-
tion, and meal planning. These skills should provide
a foundation for the menu development and food
preparation that a restaurant will require. However,
her lack of a formal culinary education and experience
in commercial kitchen operations might require some
additional training.
The Kimballs live in Lakeside Heights, a suburb
of a metropolitan city. Their community and the
adjacent towns consist of primarily middle-income
households. Many of the adults in the community
are college-educated and have professional jobs in
business and manufacturing. The population of the
town
and
surrounding
communities
is approxi-
mately 40,000 people. The city, about 12 miles from
Lakeside Heights, has a population of 110,000.
Michael and Liz believe that a restaurant serving
Liz’s specialties of “home style” American, Italian,
and seafood dishes would be a good choice for
their location. They are excited about the possibility
of providing quality food at a reasonable cost. The
same family and friends that enjoy Liz’s cooking
would match their expected customers. They want
to offer a quiet, relaxed dining environment offering
mid-priced meals.
n Researching the Business
As they talked about the details, their dream gath-
ered momentum. However, they both knew that
they couldn’t build their business on dreams alone.
They would need additional business advice and
perspective to ensure that their business concept
was realistic. First, they checked out the numbers.
The Information Age
1
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Liz and Michael, along with their advisors and
friends, assessed the capital required for starting a
restaurant. They agreed that Liz and Michael had suf-
ficient funds to use as start-up capital for the new
venture.
Tom, a family friend employed as a marketing
consultant, felt that their business model would be
well suited for their location. They had their eye on
a strip mall location that was vacant and could be
suitable for a small family restaurant. They con-
tacted the local real estate agent, Anne Marie Sim-
mons, to ask about its rental cost, availability, and
size. Liz and Michael visited the location with Anne
Marie. The agent said that the store housed a diner
for three years before it closed. She speculated that
the diner might not have been able to compete
against the fast-food franchises in the area. The
agent also believed that the owners did not have
the proper financial and marketing plan to be
successful.
Liz studied the store’s floor plan and dimen-
sions. The store had floor space to accommodate
about 50 diners as well as a full kitchen operation
and storage areas. The strip mall location had plenty
of parking as well as access on a major road. The
gas, plumbing, and electrical infrastructure were in
good working order. The décor and kitchen appli-
ances need to be purchased as well as all restaurant
fixtures (pans, dishes, flatware, etc.) if they signed a
lease to occupy the restaurant.
In order to be efficient and leverage their individ-
ual skills, Liz and Michael segregated the various
research tasks necessary to compile business pro-
jections and forecasts. Michael focused his attention
on the front-house operations, sales, and marketing
plan while Liz analyzed the kitchen operations,
inventory, and menu planning. Each of them com-
piled forecasts for the startup and operational costs
in their areas of specialty. These costs included the
labor, materials, food, utilities, rent, and other neces-
sary costs. These forecasts would be the foundation
of their business, financial, and operations plan.
n Creating the Business Plan
Michael continued to work with Tom on the market-
ing and promotion of the restaurant. Their first
thought was to gather sales, customer, and meal
data from the previous owner. To protect the ano-
nymity of the new owners, Michael asked Anne
Marie to contact the previous owner. She provided
three years of weekly data on the number of meals
and
tables
served.
Unfortunately,
the
previous
owner could not or did not want to provide any
sales data. Michael entered 164 weeks of data into
a simple Excel spreadsheet to review. The spread-
sheet contained three data points: week ending
date (Sunday), total checks, and total meals served.
Michael and Tom reviewed the spreadsheet to
attempt to find some relevant information for their
marketing and forecasting projections.
The diner had been open seven days a week.
However, the data Michael received was not broken
down by the day of the week. Therefore, the data
could not be used to analyze daily traffic and sales,
but only to analyze weekly trends without informa-
tion on daily traffic and sales.
Tom coached Michael on how to analyze the
data through a “rough” first glance. He separated
the data into three spreadsheet tabs by year, where
the first row of weekly data was the first week in the
calendar year. He added a column that calculated the
average meals per check. Then, to gain an under-
standing
of the
restaurant’s customer load, he
ranked both the number of meals and checks within
the year. These values provided a basic sense of the
high and low weeks for the previous restaurant. He
then sorted each of the three calendar years by the
meal count (descending with the highest ranking
first).
The lack of daily data limited the depth of analy-
sis that could be completed. Tom looked at the hard-
copy of three years of data side by side. After
reviewing the three years of data, Tom pointed out
that their weekly data showed only one clear trend:
Some weeks showed lower sales than the other per-
iods. Upon further analysis, it appeared that they
were holiday periods (Thanksgiving and Christmas
weeks) as well as some summer weeks. Without
the daily data, it was impossible to determine the
distribution or trending of customer sales.
Liz completed another tour of the restaurant
location. The kitchen was equipped with an opera-
tional
walk-in
refrigerator,
exhaust
fan,
several
tables, and shelving units. She assembled a tentative
new floor plan for the kitchen and food preparation
area. From the floor plan, she compiled a cost esti-
mate listing the appliances and fixtures still needed
for the kitchen.
In addition to seating about 50 people comfort-
ably with 15 tables, Michael believes that a bar can
be built to seat an additional 10 patrons. He created
estimates for dining room and bar equipment, furni-
ture and fixtures, including all labor installation
costs.
Tom helped them create a spreadsheet using
various factors to estimate the weekly sales. They
used some of the previous owner’s data to calculate
the seasonal and weekly trends. With the menu that
2
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Liz compiled, they estimated the weekly sales for the
restaurant for the first year. The entire spreadsheet cal-
culated the variable costs (labor, food) based on the
number of meals served. The list of fixed overhead
costs (like utilities, taxes, and rent) then helped to gen-
erate the monthly cash flow and profit estimates. The
spreadsheet calculated three scenarios: aggressive,
reasonable, and conservative. The most conservative
estimate resulted in a small loss for most months.
They felt comfortable with the range of projections
they had compiled. Tom believed that Liz and Michael
could present these forecasts and a business plan to a
bank for a loan for the startup costs.
n Launching the Dream
Kimball’s Restaurant opened in the strip mall location.
As with any new business, the restaurant started out
slowly with sales closer to the conservative estimates.
However, as their reputation for quality, reasonably
priced meals developed, Liz and Michael knew their
dream had become a reality.
Three years later, Kimball’s was operating suc-
cessfully and profitably. Their dining room was often
at capacity with both new and returning customers.
They often had a small waiting line on weekend
nights. Liz and Michael were very satisfied with
their dream. What would be next?
BUSINESS CHALLENGES
In the next three chapters, you will learn what Michael
and Liz need to get started in harnessing the power
of information systems to help build and grow their
restaurant. They will need to understand how informa-
tion systems can help with a restaurant’s short-term
(operational) needs as well as plan for long-term initia-
tives (strategic) to expand the business.
●
In Chapter 1, “Business Information Systems: An
Overview,” you learn the various types of
information systems businesses use and why
familiarity with information technology is
important for your career. You also are
introduced to some of the major ethical and
societal concerns about acquiring, storing, and
reporting potentially sensitive information.
●
In Chapter 2, “Strategic Uses of Information
Systems,” you learn how to use information
strategically, and how to harness information
technology for competitive advantage.
●
In Chapter 3, “Business Functions and Supply
Chains,” you learn how you might best use
information technology to help manage a business,
whether you need to order inventory and track
sales, generate financial statements, or automate
payroll systems. You also learn how supply chain
management systems serve whole enterprises.
The Information Age
3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER
© watcharakun/Shutterstock.com
1
PART
one
BUSINESS INFORMATION SYSTEMS
An Overview
Learning Objectives
It is likely that you are carrying or using an information system. This is so if you have a smartphone, a tablet, or a
laptop computer. Information systems pervade almost every aspect of our lives. Whether you are withdrawing
money from a bank’s automatic teller machine, surfing the web, or making a hotel reservation on your cell phone,
hardly a day goes by without our feeding data into, or using information generated by, an information system. In
business especially, digital information systems generate most of the information we use. Information systems
receive and process data from various sources. These systems have become essential to successful business
operations.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Explain why information technology matters.
●
Define digital information and explain why digital systems are so powerful and useful.
●
Explain why information systems are essential to business.
●
Describe how computers process data into useful information for problem solving and decision making.
●
Identify the functions of different types of information systems in business.
●
Describe careers in information technology.
●
Identify major ethical and societal concerns created by widespread use of information technology.
4
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Business Systems and Information
The restaurant has been operating successfully for
three years. Although they experienced challenges, Liz
and Michael believe that they developed a great dining
establishment. Sales forecasts have steadily increased
over the last three years. Thankfully, the growth was
not so fast as to cause any “growing pains” or problems
with their business. Michael found that during most
weeks, they had reservations for 50 to 100 percent of
their dining capacity.
Processing Orders and Payments
Michael believed his analysis was fairly accurate, but it
took a lot of effort to compile his information. The ser-
vers wrote the customer orders on multipart paper
checks. One copy of these checks went to the kitchen
for preparation. The server tabulated totals on the origi-
nal copy and gave it to the customer when the meal was
complete. At that point, the customer paid the cashier
directly with cash or a credit card and the hardcopy of
the check was saved. Several times a week, Michael
used the paper checks to enter the sales and table infor-
mation in an Excel spreadsheet for analysis. Because he
was so busy with other operational priorities, the
spreadsheet data entry and subsequent analysis was
often delayed.
The restaurant processed its payroll through a local
service. Employees maintained their timecards manu-
ally. Each week, the timecard data was validated by
Michael and sent to the payroll service for processing
and check printing. Michael was not comfortable with
the manual entry of employee time punches, but he
did not have a simple, cost effective alternative.
Michael used a small business accounting package
to track the restaurant’s expenses, process payable
checks to suppliers, and record deposits. The software
was easy to use and provided the balance sheet and
income statement needed for the business. It also gen-
erated the required tax information for his accountant to
file the appropriate tax forms. However, it did not track a
level of information needed for analyzing the business
operations and forecasting sales. From his experience
in human resources, Michael understood the need for
quality data and business information. At his former
employer, the information technology department pro-
vided
that
expertise
and
assistance.
Unfortunately,
those skills were not available at the restaurant.
Michael knew that his time was limited and that he
needed to focus more on the operations rather than data
entry, but he also wanted to collect and analyze data
about his business to manage it and plan effectively.
Their son, Tyler, finished his education to complete
a
business
degree,
specializing
in
marketing
and
management. He had worked in the restaurant during
the summers and semester breaks as a busboy and
server so he had some familiarity with the business.
He was also anxious to gain more experience to try
out some of the skills he had learned in business school.
Liz and Michael decided it was a good time for Tyler to
join the business.
Defining the Problems
Michael told Tyler that he would like to streamline the
front- and back-house operations and gather more infor-
mation for analysis without relying on manual data
entry. Tyler understood the challenges because some
of the problems in these areas were directly related to
issues that Tyler encountered while he was a server at
the restaurant. The issues could be categorized into two
areas: completeness and accuracy of guest check infor-
mation, and check payment.
Because
the
guests’
orders
were
handwritten,
sometimes parts of the orders were not legible. In addi-
tion, especially with new servers, some of the informa-
tion needed to complete a meal was either inaccurate or
incomplete for that meal choice (cooking preferences,
toppings, special preparation). This issue added time
for the server and cooking staff as well as reduced cus-
tomer satisfaction. Check payment was another prob-
lem. Often, it was not clear to the customers whether
they should pay the server or the cashier. Michael
wanted to control the cash and credit-card processing
at a central location, but was willing to review this
policy.
Tyler talked to the servers and kitchen personnel to
gain perspective on the guest check and payment pro-
blems. The staff was pleased to be asked for input. They
confirmed that guest check accuracy and payment were
issues, but additional issues were uncovered. As in
many restaurants, at Kimball’s the servers were respon-
sible for any checks not paid by the customer. However,
it was impossible for the server to know if the customer
paid the cashier or left without paying. The servers
would
prefer
that
customers
settle
their
payment
directly with the server so that they could know if a cus-
tomer has paid. Servers also conveyed that even when
they wrote out the order legibly and completely, meals
sometimes were not prepared properly. The kitchen
staff said that changes to guest orders are often
“rushed” and disrupted the completion of other meals
in progress. On many occasions, servers submitted
changes after the order was ready to deliver to the
table. Kitchen staff said a new process was needed to
communicate order changes before the table’s meals
were cooked. Unfortunately, it was impossible to tell
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
5
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
from the current checks which orders required changes.
Therefore, no data was available to objectively assess
the magnitude of the problem.
Collecting Data to Address
Problems and Make Decisions
Tyler then focused his attention on the data analysis.
He asked his parents to define two lists of questions:
(1) What do you know from the information you cur-
rently maintain? and (2) What answers would you like
to know that would help you operate the business
more efficiently and profitably? They responded that
they knew how many tables were seated by day as
well as the total check amounts. The checks separated
the liquor and food totals for tax purposes, but the
daily totals for these categories did not provide any
details about the individual customers’ orders. Michael
would also like to know more details, such as … What
meals did they order? Did they order appetizers? How
many patrons were at the table (adults and children)?
Did the customer take advantage of any of the specials?
Liz wanted to know, how much food do I need to order
based on past sales?
Tyler said that these questions were a great start.
He categorized their questions into two areas: market-
ing/promotion and operational. He knew that additional
marketing information was needed to determine menu
planning, promotions, and customer satisfaction. He
wondered how many people were returning or new cus-
tomers. How did they learn about the restaurant? For
operational issues, was there any monitoring of the
operations as issues occurred?
Does Information Technology Matter?
The Denver-based hamburger chain Smashburger developed more than a secret recipe for its
hamburgers. It used social media giants, Facebook and Twitter, by inviting bloggers to promote
the opening of new locations in their area. Instead of relying solely on paid media promotion,
Smashburger engaged their consumers directly through the use of social media.
A survey compiled by Boston-based Aite Group of 1,000 consumers demonstrated their
adoption of mobile devices to complete banking transactions. Approximately one-third of the
consumers conveyed that they have increased their use of mobile banking applications to check
their account balances; an increase of 10 times within one year (Cerny, 2011).
These examples, as well as many other observations, show that IT can no longer be the sole
domain of IT professionals. Business professionals can no longer count solely on IT specialists to
make decisions on development, purchasing, and deployment of information systems. Social
media and mobile computing clearly rely on a well-developed strategy across all functions of
business organizations. Today’s business professionals are expected to know how to develop and
use IT significantly more than just a few years ago. Regardless of their major field of expertise,
those who have the proper IT knowledge and skills stand a better chance of receiving more
lucrative job offers and faster promotions.
The Power of Digital Systems
We are accustomed to using 10 digits to represent quantities. We call it the decimal counting
system. However, we could also use a system consisting of only two digits, zero and one, to
represent quantities. This is the binary counting system. Because computers and related devices
use the binary system—a system that uses two digits—they are referred to as digital systems.
However, digital systems are not used only to represent information that contains numbers, or
quantities. They can also represent any information as combinations of zeroes and ones, or,
more accurately, the two states that represent zeroes and ones.
Digital information consists of zeroes and ones representing two states. When you have a
mechanism that can represent two states, such as electrically charged and uncharged elements,
magnetized and non-magnetized areas, light and no light, you have a way to represent the
zeroes and ones. Based on such signals, information can be represented, stored, communicated,
and processed digitally.
6
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Unlike analog systems (systems based on a continuous signal that varies in strength or
quantity), digital systems are capable of delivering data and information—quantities, text,
sound, pictures, video, and any other type of information—so that the original information can
be re-created with complete accuracy. That is, a digital copy is an exact copy of the original. For
example, an analog copy machine reproduces images by reflection or a similar technique. The
copy may be good, but it is never as good as the original. And as you make a copy from the
copy, the quality deteriorates. When you make a copy of a digital file, such as an image file or a
musical file, the system you use first captures the combinations of signals (the digits, zeroes and
ones) that make up the file. When processed by the proper hardware and software, the digits are
transformed back into the image, or music, or whatever other information you copied. As long
as your computer or other digital device can capture all the digits that make up the information,
the original information can be re-created fully.
Digital information is stored and communicated by way of electromagnetic signals—
electricity, magnetism, and light. These processes involve few or no moving parts. Therefore,
storage, retrieval, processing, and communication of digital information are extremely fast.
These capabilities—accuracy and speed—make digital systems powerful and therefore useful and
important in so many fields: business, education, entertainment, and many others.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Tornadoes in Oklahoma City, Is Mom OK?
Social media technology can provide genuine benefits to its users. In 2012, The Weather Channel devel-
oped a Facebook app that alerts users when severe weather is approaching their friends. Users can
track severe weather in relation to their friends’ locations and post an alert on their friend’s Facebook
timeline. The idea is that people may pay more attention to a personalized alert from a friend or family
member than a generalized, local weather warning.
Source: Honker, D. (2012). “Weather Channel Launches ‘My Friends’ Weather’ to Integrate Alerts with
Social Media.” www.awareforum.org/2012/07/weather-channel-launches-my-friends-weather-to-integrate-
alerts-with-social-media/
The Purpose of Information Systems
People require information for many reasons and in varied ways. For instance, you probably seek
information for entertainment and enlightenment by viewing television, watching movies,
browsing the Internet, listening to the radio, and reading newspapers, magazines, and books. In
business, however, people and organizations seek and use information mainly to make sound
decisions and to solve problems—two closely related practices that form the foundation of every
successful company.
What is a problem? A problem is the root cause of an undesirable situation. When you are
stuck in the middle of nowhere with a flat tire, you have a problem. If you know that some
customers do not pay their debts on time, but you don’t know who or how much they owe, you
have a problem. You can solve both problems with the aid of information. In the first case, you
can call a towing company, which might use a computerized tracking system to send the tow
truck closest to your location; in the second case, simple accounting software can help.
An organization or individual that identifies more than one way to solve a problem or a
dilemma must make a decision. The problem “2+2=?” does not require decision making because
it has only one solution. However, as a manager, you might face a dilemma such as “Which is
the best way to promote the company’s new car?” There are many potential ways to promote
the new car—television advertising, radio advertising, newspaper advertising, web advertising,
auto shows, direct mail, social media, or any combination of these methods. This dilemma calls
for decision making.
Both problem solving and decision making require information. Gathering the right information
efficiently, storing it so that it can be used and manipulated as necessary, and using it to help an
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
7
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
organization achieve its business goals—all topics covered in this book—are the keys to success in
business today. The purpose of information systems is to support these activities. In addition to
solving problems and making decisions, businesses use information systems to support daily
operations, such as electronic commerce, making airline reservations, and many other activities. As a
professional, you need to understand and apply information fundamentals to succeed.
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Be Well-Versed in Information Systems
You might be surprised at how much information technology
(IT) knowledge your prospective employer will expect of you
when you interview for your next job, even if the position you
seek is not in the IT area. Today’s corporations look for IT-
savvy professionals, and with good reason. Information is the
lifeblood of any organization, commercial or nonprofit; it is
essential to sound problem solving and decision making,
upon which business success is built. In fact, the main factor
limiting the services and information that computers can pro-
vide within an organization is the budget.
Because of rapid changes in technology, information systems,
unlike many other business components, are quickly changing
in form and content. A computer considered fast and powerful
today will be an outdated machine in 18–24 months. In 12–24
months, a better application or technology model will surpass
one that is considered innovative right now. The dynamic
nature of information technology is like a moving target. Your
new idea or product concept using information technology will
be replaced by someone else’s new idea or product concept.
A professional who does not stay informed is of diminishing
value to an organization. All knowledge workers—profes-
sionals, scientists, managers, and others who create new
information and knowledge in their work—must be familiar
with IT. Moreover, they must know which IT is relevant for
their work and what information they can obtain with a certain
technology or networked resource.
Professionals must at all times maintain a clear picture of their
organizations and the outside business environment. They
must know what resources are available to them and to their
competitors. Information technology provides excellent tools
for collecting, storing, and presenting facts. But to be truly
effective, those facts must be manipulated into useful informa-
tion that indicates the best allocation of various resources,
including personnel, time, money, equipment, and other assets.
Regardless of the operations being managed, information sys-
tems (ISs) are important tools. Successful professionals must
know which ISs are available to their organizations and what
systems might be developed in the future.
Data, Information, and Information Systems
We use the words “data,” “information,” and “system” almost daily. Understanding what these
terms mean, both generally and in the business context, is necessary if you are to use
information effectively in your career.
Data vs. Information
The terms “data” and “information” do not mean the same thing. The word data is derived from
the Latin datum, literally a given or fact, which might take the form of a number, a statement, or
a picture. Data is the raw material in the production of information. Information, on the other
hand, is facts or conclusions that have meaning within a context. Raw data is rarely meaningful
or useful as information. To become information, data is manipulated through tabulation,
statistical analysis, or any other operation that leads to greater understanding of a situation.
Data Manipulation
Here’s a simple example that demonstrates the difference between data and information. Assume
that you work for a car manufacturer. Last year, the company introduced a new vehicle to the
market. Because management realizes that keeping a loyal customer base requires continuously
improving products and services, it periodically surveys large samples of buyers. It sends out
questionnaires that include 30 questions in several categories, including demographic data (such
8
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
as gender, age, and annual income); complaints about different performance areas (such as ease
of handling, braking, and the quality of the sound system); features that satisfy buyers most;
and courtesy of the dealer’s personnel.
Reading through all this data would be extremely time consuming and not very helpful.
However, if the data is manipulated, it might provide highly useful information. For example, by
categorizing complaints by topic and totaling the number of complaints for each type of
dissatisfaction and each car model, the company might be able to pinpoint a car’s weaknesses.
The marketing analysts then can pass the resulting information along to the appropriate
engineering or manufacturing unit.
Also, the company might already have sufficient data on dealers who sold cars to the
customers surveyed, the car models they sold, and the financing method for each purchase. But
with the survey results, the company can generate new information to improve its marketing. For
instance, by calculating the average age and income of current buyers and categorizing them by
the car they purchased, marketing executives can better target advertising to groups most likely to
purchase each car. If the majority of buyers of a particular type of car do not ask for financing, the
company might wish to drop this service option for that car and divert more loan money to
finance purchases of other cars. In this way, the company generates useful information from data.
Generating Information
In the examples just cited, calculating totals and averages of different complaints or purchasers’
ages may reveal trends in buying habits. These calculations are processes. A process is any
manipulation of data, usually with the goal of producing information. Hence, while data is
essentially
raw
materials,
information
is
output.
Just
as
raw
materials
are
processed
in
manufacturing to create useful end products, so raw data is processed in information systems to
create useful information (see Figure 1.1). Some processes, however, produce yet another set
of data.
F I G U R E 1.1
Input-process-output
Data
Process
Information
Raw Material
Process
Product
Input
Process
Output
Sometimes, data in one context is considered information in another context. For example,
if an organization needs to know the age of every person attending a basketball game, then a list
of that data is actually information. But if that same organization wants to know the average
price of tickets each age group purchases, the list of ages is only data, which the organization
must process to generate information.
Information in Context
Information is an extremely important resource for both individuals and organizations, but not
all information is useful. Consider the following story. Two people touring in a hot-air balloon
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
9
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
encountered unexpected wind that soon blew them off course. When they managed to lower
their balloon, they shouted to a farmer on the ground, “Where are we?” The farmer answered,
“You are right above a cornfield!” The balloonists looked at each other, and one groaned, “Some
information! Highly accurate and totally useless!” To be useful, information must be relevant,
complete,
accurate,
and
current.
And
in
business,
information
must
also
be
obtained
economically, that is, cost effectively. Figure 1.2 lists characteristics of useful information.
F I G U R E 1.2
Characteristics of useful
information
Relevant
Information must pertain to the problem at hand. For example,
the total number of years of education might not be relevant to a
person’s qualifications for a new job. Relevant information might
be that the person has so many years of education in mechanical
engineering and so many years of experience. The information
must also be presented in a way that helps a person understand it
in a specific context.
Complete
Accurate
Current
Economical
Partial information is often worse than no information. For example,
marketing data about household incomes might lead to bad decisions
if not accompanied by vital information on the consumption habits
of the targeted population.
Decisions are often based on the latest information available, but
what was a fact yesterday might no longer be one today. For example,
a short-term investment decision to purchase a stock today based
on yesterday’s stock prices might be a costly mistake if the stock’s
price has risen in the interim.
In a business setting, the cost of obtaining information must be
considered as one cost element involved in any decision. For
example, demand for a new product must be researched to reduce
risk of marketing failure, but if market research is too expensive, the
cost of obtaining the information might diminish profit from sales.
Erroneous information might lead to disastrous decisions. For example,
an inaccurate record of a patient’s reaction to penicillin might lead a
doctor to harm the patient while believing that she is helping him.
What Is a System?
Simply put, a system is an array of components that work together to achieve a common goal,
or multiple goals, by accepting input, processing it, and producing output in an organized
manner. Consider the following examples:
●
A sound system consists of many electronic and mechanical parts, such as a laser head, an
amplifier, an equalizer, and so on. This system uses input in the form of electrical power and
sound recorded on a medium such as a CD or DVD, and processes the input to reproduce
music and other sounds. The components work together to achieve this goal.
●
Consider the times you have heard the phrase “to beat the system.” Here, the term “system”
refers to an organization of human beings—a government agency, a commercial company, or
any other bureaucracy. Organizations, too, are systems; they consist of components—people
organized into departments and divisions—that work together to achieve common goals.
Systems and Subsystems
Not every system has a single goal. Often, a system consists of several subsystems—
components of a larger system—with subgoals, all contributing to meeting the main goal.
Subsystems can receive input from, and transfer output to, other systems or subsystems.
Consider the different departments of a manufacturing business. The marketing department
promotes sales of the organization’s products; the engineering department designs new products
and improves existing ones; the finance department plans a budget and arranges for every
unused penny to earn interest by the end of the day. Each department is a subsystem with its
own goal, which is a subgoal of a larger system (the company), whose goal is to maximize profit.
© Cengage Learning 2015
10
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Now consider the goals of a manufacturing organization’s information system, which stores
and processes operational data and produces information about all aspects of company
operations. The purpose of its inventory control subsystem is to let managers know what
quantities of which items are on hand and which may soon have to be reordered. The purpose
of the production control subsystem is to track the status of manufactured parts. The assembly
control subsystem presents the bill of material (a list of all parts that make up a product) and the
status of assembled products. The entire system’s goal is to help deliver finished goods at the
lowest possible cost within the shortest possible time.
Figure 1.3 shows an example of a system found in every business: an accounting system. An
accounting system consists of several subsystems: accounts payable, records information about
money that the organization owes to suppliers and service providers; accounts receivable,
records sums owed to the organization and by whom; a general ledger, records current
transactions; and a reporting mechanism, generates reports reflecting the company’s financial
status. Each subsystem has a well-defined goal. Together, the subsystems make up the
organization’s accounting system.
F I G U R E 1.3
Several subsystems make
up this corporate
accounting system
Sigma Co.
Accounting System
General Ledger
Our assets and
liabilities
Supplier
Address $ Owed
Address
Customer
$ balance
Accounts
Payable
Whom do we owe?
Accounts
Receivable
Who owes us?
Report
Generator
Status, problem areas
All professionals must understand systems, both organizational and physical. They need to
understand their position in an organization so they can interact well with coworkers,
employees of business partners, and customers. They need to understand information systems so
that they can utilize them to support their work and interactions with other people.
Closed vs. Open Systems
Systems are closed or open, depending on the nature of the information flow in the system.
A closed system stands alone, with no connection to another system: nothing flows in from
another system; nothing flows out to another system. For example, a small check-producing
system that prints and cuts checks when an employee enters data through a keyboard is a closed
system. The system might be isolated for security purposes. An open system interfaces and
interacts with other systems. For example, an accounting system that records accounts
receivable, accounts payable, and cash flow is open if it receives its payroll figures from the
payroll system. Subsystems, by definition, are always open, because as components of a bigger
system, they must receive information from, and give information to, other subsystems.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
11
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Increasingly, companies are implementing open—interfaced—information systems. Each system
may then be referred to as a module of a larger system, and the modules are interconnected and
exchange data and information. For better cooperation, many organizations have interconnected
their information systems to those of their business partners, mainly suppliers and clients.
Information Systems
With an understanding of the terms “information” and “system,” the definition of an
information system is almost intuitive: an information system (IS) consists of all the
components that work together to process data and produce information. Almost all business
information systems consist of many subsystems with subgoals, all contributing to the
organization’s main goal.
Information and Managers
Thinking of an organization in terms of its suborganizations or subsystems—called systems
thinking—is a powerful management approach because it creates a framework for excellent
problem solving and decision making. To solve problems, managers need to identify them,
which they do by recognizing the subsystems in which the problems occur and solving the
problems within those subsystems’ constraints and strengths.
Systems thinking can also help keep managers focused on the overall goals and operations of
a business. It encourages them to consider the entire system, not only their specific subsystem,
when solving problems and making decisions. A satisfactory solution for one subsystem might
be inadequate for the business as a whole. For example, when the sales department creates a web
site to take online customer orders, it automates a formerly labor-intensive activity of the sales
subsystem. This saves cost. However, increased orders may cause understocking of finished
goods. With systems thinking, improving the sales process could also improve other company
processes. Without systems thinking, managers from other departments aren’t involved in the
decision, so they don’t benefit. In the case of the sales department, if other managers are
involved in planning for automated online ordering, they could suggest that sales data recorded
on a shared database—a large collection of electronic records—connected to the web also be
accessible to other departments such as shipping and manufacturing. The shipping department
could use the records to expedite packaging and shipping, thanks to the information that
appears on a computer monitor rather than a sheet of paper. The manufacturing units could use
the order records for planning resources such as laborers and inventory. Figuratively, by applying
systems thinking, effective managers view their areas of responsibility as puzzle pieces. Each
piece is important and should fit well with adjacent pieces, but the entire picture should always
be kept in view.
One of an information system’s most important contributions to the sound workings of an
organization is the automation of information exchange among systems. Redbox offers DVD
and video game rentals through kiosks but there are other ways to rent. Customers can also
reserve a DVD or video game on a mobile phone or through the web and pick it up at a selected
Redbox kiosk. Redbox uses an inventory and reservation database to synchronize all three
channels of reservation processing (Chipchase, 2011).
Innovation in sales systems can be the competitive advantage a company needs to survive in a
harsh economic environment. For example, Redbox uses vending machines to distribute and
collect DVDs that they rent for only $1 per night. Redbox strategically places kiosks in high-footfall
areas and does not have the labor expenses that traditional retail video stores experience, thus
creating financial advantage. Their location placement strategy has created rapid sales growth;
31.2 percent revenue growth in the first quarter of 2011 (Anonymous, 2011; Pruitt, 2007). A May 2011
research report indicated that consumers spent 8 percent more on movies rented at kiosks, mail or
streaming while renting or purchasing a DVD at a retail store decreased 8 percent. (Gruenwedel, 2011).
The information map of a modern business—that is, the description of data and
information flow within an organization—shows a network of information subsystems that
exchange information with each other and with the world outside the system. In an ideal
organization, no human would need to retrieve information from one IS and transfer it to
another. The organization would capture only new raw data, usually from its operations or from
12
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
outside the organization. Then, data captured at any point in the system would automatically
become available to any other subsystem that needs it. Thus, systems thinking is served well by
information technology (IT), a term that refers to all technologies that collectively facilitate
construction and maintenance of information systems. Systems thinking is the basic reasoning
behind equipping organizations with enterprise software applications. Enterprise software
applications are systems that serve many parts of the organization by minimizing the need for
human data entry and ensuring timely, useful information for the organization’s entire supply
chain, including taking customer orders, receiving raw materials, manufacturing and shipping,
and billing and collection. In the service sector, companies often use document management
systems, enabling workers from many departments to add information and signatures to a
document from request to approval, or from draft to a final document. You will learn about
these systems throughout this book.
Information Systems in Organizations
In an organization, an information system consists of data, hardware, software, telecom-
munications, people, and procedures, as summarized in Figure 1.4. An information system has
become synonymous with a computer-based information system, a system with one or more
computers at its center, and which is how the term is used in this book. In a computer-based
information system, computers collect, store, and process data into information according to
instructions people provide via computer programs.
F I G U R E 1.4
Components of an
information system
Input that the system takes to produce information
Hardware
A computer and its peripheral equipment: input, output, and storage
devices; hardware also includes data communication equipment
Software
Sets of instructions that tell the computer how to take data in, how to
process it, how to display information, and how to store data and
information
Telecommunications
Hardware and software that facilitate fast transmission and reception of
text, pictures, sound, and animation in the form of electronic data
People
Information systems professionals and users who analyze organizational
information needs, design and construct information systems, write
computer programs, operate the hardware, and maintain software
Procedures
Rules for achieving optimal and secure operations in data processing;
procedures include priorities in dispensing software applications and
security measures
Data
Several trends have made the use of information systems (ISs) very important in business:
●
The capacity of data storage devices has grown while their prices have decreased.
●
The variety and ingenuity of software applications have increased.
●
A “bring your technology with you” environment has become mainstream with the adoption
of mobile computing, tablets, and cloud computing.
●
Quick and reliable communication lines and access to the Internet and the web have created
affordable software applications using Software as a Service (SaaS) implementation
methodologies.
●
The fast growth of the Internet has opened opportunities and encouraged competition in
global markets.
●
The convergence of technology innovations such as smart phones, mobile applications, orga-
nizational systems, and cloud storage systems have expanded both technology adoption and
functionality.
●
An increasing proportion of the global workforce is computer literate.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
13
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
In this environment, organizations quickly lag behind if they do not use information
systems and skills to meet their goals. Moreover, they must continuously upgrade the features of
their information systems and the skills of their employees to stay competitive.
The Four Stages of Processing
All information systems operate in the same basic fashion whether they include a computer or
not. However, the computer provides a convenient means to execute the four main operations
of an information system:
●
Entering data into the IS (input).
●
Changing and manipulating the data in the IS (data processing).
●
Getting information out of the IS (output).
●
Storing data and information (storage).
A computer-based IS also uses a logical process to decide which data to capture and how to
process it. This process will be discussed later.
Input
The first step in producing information is collecting and introducing data, known as input, into
the IS. Most data an organization uses as input to its ISs are generated and collected within the
organization. These data elements result from transactions undertaken in the course of doing
business. A transaction is a business event: a sale, a purchase, a payment, the hiring of a new
employee, and the like. These transactions can be recorded on paper and later entered into a
computer system; directly recorded through a transaction processing systems (TPS), such
as a point-of-sale (POS) machine, scanner, or camera; or captured online when someone
transacts through the web. A TPS is any system that records transactions. Often, the same
system also processes the transactions, summarizing and routing information to other systems;
therefore, these systems are transaction processing systems, not just transaction recording systems.
Input devices (devices used to transfer data into an IS) include the keyboard, handheld devices
that read and sense graphic codes, voice recognition systems, and touch screens. Chapter 4,
“Business Hardware,” describes these and other means to input data. The trend has been to
decrease the time and effort of input by using devices that allow scanning or auditory data entry.
Processing
The computer’s greatest contribution to ISs is efficient data processing. The computer’s speed and
accuracy enable organizations to process millions of pieces of data in seconds. For example,
managers of a national retail chain can receive up-to-date information on inventory levels of
every item the chain carries and then order accordingly; in the past, obtaining such information
would take days. The huge gains in the speed and affordability of computing have made
information the essential ingredient for an organization’s success.
Output
Output is the information an IS produces and displays in the format most useful to an
organization. The most widely used output device is the video display, or video monitor, which
displays output visually. Another common output device is the printer, used to print hard copies
of information on paper. However, computers can communicate output through speakers in the
form of music or speech and also can transmit it to another computer or electronic device in
computer-coded form, for later interpretation.
Storage
One of the greatest benefits of using IT is the ability to store vast amounts of data and
information. Technically, storing a library of millions of volumes on magnetic or optical storage
media is feasible. Publishers, libraries, and governments have done that. For example, YouTube
14
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
estimates that 72 hours of video are uploaded to its site every minute. Based on this statistic,
YouTube’s total storage would increase by approximately 21.6 billion bytes of storage per minute.
As of 2011, Amazon stored 762 billion objects within its Simple Storage Service (S3). These
statistics clearly illustrate our world’s growing appetite for data storage (Anonymous, 2012b).
Computer Equipment for Information Systems
To support the four data processing functions, different types of technologies are used. Figure 1.5
illustrates the five basic components of the computer system within an IS:
●
Input devices introduce data into the IS.
●
The computer processes data through the IS.
●
Output devices display information.
●
Storage devices store data and information.
●
Networking devices and communications lines transfer data and information over various
distances.
F I G U R E 1.5
Input, process, output,
storage and networking
devices
Storage
Devices
Output Devices
Input Devices
Process Device
(Computer)
Internet
In
addition
to
communication
that
takes
place
between
computer
components,
communication occurs between computers over distances (called telecommunications). The
distance to communicate can be as small as a few feet for a Bluetooth mouse or Wi-Fi handheld
scanning device, a few hundred yards for computers connected through a local area network
(LAN) within the same building, or thousands of miles for global network systems between
continents. Communications technology lets users access data and other electronic resources of
many computers, all connected in a network. This way, the capabilities of a single computer
might be augmented with the power of an entire network.
From Recording Transactions to Providing Expertise: Types of Information Systems
Different
types of information systems serve different
functions—for particular types of
organizations, functions within organizations, business needs, and management levels of an
organization. Business enterprises differ in their objectives, structure, interests, and approaches.
However, ISs can be generally categorized based on the level of a system’s complexity and the
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
15
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
type of functions it serves. ISs in business range from the basic transaction processing system
that records events such as sales to sophisticated expert systems, which provide advice and
reduce the need for the expensive services of a human expert. In recent years, the capabilities of
many applications have been combined and merged. It is less likely that you will find any of the
following applications as stand-alone systems with a single capability. Managers and other
professionals plan, control, and make decisions. As long as a system supports one or more of
these activities, it may be referred to as a management information system (MIS).
Transaction Processing Systems
Transaction processing systems (TPSs) are the most widely used information
systems. The predominant function of TPSs is to record data collected at the
boundaries of organizations, in other words, at the point where the organization
transacts business with other parties. They also record many of the transactions
that take place inside an organization. For example, they record the movement of
parts from one phase of manufacturing to another, from raw materials to finished
products. TPSs include POS machines, which record sales; automatic teller
machines, which record cash withdrawals, deposits, and transfers; and purchase
order systems, which record purchases. A typical example would be the purchase
of gasoline at a pump, using a credit card. The purchase is recorded by the
gasoline company and later at the credit-card-processing bank. After these data
elements are collected, the IS can automatically process the data immediately and
store it for later access on demand. Transaction processing systems provide most
of the data in organizations for further processing by other ISs.
Supply Chain Management Systems
The term “supply chain” refers to the sequence of activities involved in producing and selling a
product or service. In industries that produce goods, the activities include marketing, purchasing
raw materials, manufacturing and assembly, packing and shipping, billing, collection, and after-
the-sale services. In service industries, the sequence might include marketing, document
management, and monitoring customer portfolios. Information systems that support these
activities and are linked to become one large IS providing information on any stage of a business
process are called supply chain management (SCM) systems.
Often, such systems are called enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, because
the information they provide supports the planning of shipping resources such as personnel,
funds, raw materials, and vehicles. However, ERP is a misnomer for the systems, because they
mainly serve managers in monitoring and modifying business processes as they occur, and not
only for planning. The term “supply chain,” too, is somewhat misleading. Business processes do
not always take the form of a sequence; some processes take place in parallel. This is true in
manufacturing, where two or three teams work on different parts of a product, and in services,
where two or three different people peruse a document online and add their input to it within a
certain period of time rather than sequentially. In the production of goods and services, some
modules of SCM systems provide support to the major processes. These components include
human resources (HR) information systems and cost accounting systems.
SCM systems are the result of systems thinking and support systems thinking. They eliminate
the need to reenter data that has already been captured somewhere else in the organization. An
SCM is an enterprise application because the systems that support each business process are
connected to each other to form one large IS. Technically, anyone with access to the system can
know the status of every part of an order received by the business: whether the raw materials have
been purchased, which subassemblies are ready, how many units of the finished product have
been shipped, and how much money has been billed or collected for the order. HR managers can
tell which workers are involved in any of the processes of the order. Accountants can use their
module of the system to know how much money has been spent on the order and what the
breakdown of the cost is in labor, materials, and overhead expenditures. The figure shown below
combines several performance metrics into one screen called a dashboard. This dashboard from
Point-of-sale (POS) machines are a uni-
versal type of transaction processing
system
©iStockphoto.com/LuminaStock
16
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
iNetSoft shows the various sales, inventory, and quota metrics to monitor organizational
performance based on data processed by various transaction processing systems.
With enterprise
applications, many units
of the organization can
access the same data and
share information for their
own management tasks or
further processing
Customer Relationship Management Systems
Customer relationship management (CRM) systems help manage an organization’s
relationships with its customers. The term refers to a large variety of information systems, from
simple ones that help maintain customer records to sophisticated systems that dynamically analyze
and detect buying patterns and predict when a specific customer is about to switch to a competitor.
Many CRM systems are used by service representatives in combination with a telephone. When a
customer telephones, the representative can view the entire history of the customer’s relationship
with the company: anything that the customer has purchased, deliveries made, unfulfilled orders,
and other information that can help resolve a problem or help the customer find the desired
product or service. The convergence of various technologies has provided innovative methods of
providing customer service with online chat and callback services. Some companies
offer a “call back” feature where customers place their requests in a queue, which
allows customers to do other tasks while awaiting a phone call. Businesses have
adopted online chat customer service through their websites to reduce telephony
costs and increase customer service personnel productivity. The main goals of CRM
systems are to increase the quality of customer service, reduce the amount of labor
involved in serving customers, and learn as much as possible about the buying
habits and service preferences of individual customers.
CRM systems are often linked to web applications that track online shopping and
process online transactions. Using sophisticated applications, a company can learn
what makes a customer balk just before submitting an online order, or what a
customer prefers to see displayed on webpages. Online retailers such as Amazon.com,
Buy.com, and Target.com use applications that construct different webpages for
different customers, even when they search on the same keywords. The pages are
constructed to optimally suit the individual customer’s interests as inferred from previous visits and
purchases. CRM systems provide important data that can be accumulated in large databases and
processed into business intelligence.
Courtesy of inetsoft
Customer relationship management sys-
tems help support customers and glean
business intelligence
© wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
17
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Effective CRM systems are accessible to both sales and service people. They enable
continuous and smooth interaction with everyone from prospective customers to buyers who
need after-the-sale service. Both salespeople and service crews can view the entire record of a
customer and the product purchased and fit the service according to the product service
schedule. Because retaining loyal customers is significantly less expensive than acquiring new
ones, CRM systems may increase an organization’s profitability.
Business Intelligence Systems
ISs whose purpose is to glean from raw data relationships and trends that might help
organizations compete better are called business intelligence (BI) systems. Usually, these
applications consist of sophisticated statistical models, sometimes general and sometimes
tailored for an industry or an organization. The applications access large pools of data, usually
transactional records stored in large databases called data warehouses. With proper analysis
models,
BI
systems
might
discover
particular
buying
patterns
of
consumers,
such
as
combinations of products purchased by a certain demographic group or on certain days;
products that are sold at faster cycles than others; reasons for customers’ churns, that is,
customers leaving a service provider for a competitor; and other valuable business intelligence
that helps managers quickly decide on changing a strategy.
Decision Support and Expert Systems
Professionals often need to select one course of action from many alternatives. Because they have
neither the time nor the resources to study and absorb long, detailed reports of data and
information, organizations often build information systems specifically designed to help make
decisions. These systems are called decision support systems (DSSs). While DSSs rely on
models and formulas to produce concise tables or a single number that determines a decision,
expert systems (ESs) rely on artificial intelligence techniques to support knowledge-intensive
decision-making processes.
Decision support systems help find the optimal course of action and answer “What if?”
questions. “What if we purchase raw materials overseas? What if we merge our warehouses?
How many first-time buyers were gained from our social media sites?” These questions seek
answers like, “This is how this action will impact our revenue, or our market share, or our
costs.” DSSs are programmed to process raw data, make comparisons, and generate information
to help professionals glean the best alternatives for financial investment, marketing strategy,
credit approval, and the like. However, it is important to understand that a DSS is only a
decision aid, not an absolute alternative to human decision making.
Many environments are not sufficiently structured to let an IS use data to provide the one
best answer. For instance, stock portfolio management takes place in a highly uncertain
environment. No single method exists to determine which securities portfolio is best, that is,
which one will yield the highest return. Medical care is another unstructured environment.
There might be many methods of diagnosing a patient on the basis of his or her symptoms.
Indeed, a patient with a particular set of symptoms might receive as many different diagnoses as
the number of doctors he or she visits.
Using ESs preserves the knowledge of retiring experts and saves a company the high cost of
employing human experts. After gathering expertise from experts and building a program, the
program can be distributed and used repeatedly. The expertise resides in the program in the
form of a knowledge base consisting of facts and relationships among the facts. You will learn
about DSS and ES in detail in Chapter 10, “Decision Support and Expert Systems.”
Geographic Information Systems
In some cases, the information decision makers need is related to a map or floor plan. In such
cases, special ISs called geographic information systems (GISs) can be used to tie data to
physical locations. A GIS application accesses a database that contains data about a building,
18
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
neighborhood, city, county, state, country, or even the entire world. By representing data on a
map in different graphical forms, a user is able to understand promptly a situation taking place
in that part of the world and act upon it. Examples of such information include flood-prone
regions, population levels, the number of police officers deployed, probabilities of finding
minerals, transportation routes, and vehicle allocation for transportation or distribution systems.
Thus, when a supermarket chain considers locations for expansion, executives look at a map
that
reflects
not
only
geographic
attributes
but
also
demographic
information
such
as
population growth by age and income groups. GISs are often used to manage daily operations as
well as for planning and decision making. They also have been used to provide service via the
web, such as helping residents find locations of different services on a city map or plan travel
routes. Many GISs that support operations use information from global positioning system (GPS)
satellites, especially to show the current location of a vehicle or person on a map or to provide
directions or information on traffic congestion, alternate routes, or various services along a
route. This mobile type of GIS has become popular, preinstalled in vehicles, sold as a portable
device, or integrated into a smartphone.
Geographic information
systems, such as Google
Maps, help associate
information with locations
and regions. This map
identifies ATM locations
Commonly used GISs on the web are Google Earth and Mapquest. They combine maps with
street addresses, points of interest, directions, distances, and travel time calculations. Other web-
based GISs provide real estate information. One such popular system is Zillow (www.zillow.com),
which provides maps and information about homes for sale, recent sales, and price estimates.
Many businesses, such as hotels, integrate external GIS systems within their web-based systems
to provide more information to consumers. The figure shows an example of Google Maps that
identifies automated teller machines in a geographic area.
Information Systems in Business Functions
ISs serve various purposes throughout an organization in what are known as functional business
areas—in-house services that support an organization’s main business. Functional business areas
include, but are not limited to, accounting, finance, marketing, and human resources. As
previously mentioned, in a growing number of organizations these systems are modules of a
larger enterprise system, an SCM, or ERP system. Chapter 3, “Business Functions and Supply
Chains,” discusses business functions and their systems in detail.
Courtesy of Google, Inc.
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
19
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Accounting
In accounting, information systems help record business transactions, produce periodic financial
statements, and create reports required by law, such as balance sheets and profit-and-loss
statements. In the United States, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 has forced companies to
modify their ISs or install new systems to comply with more demanding accounting rules. ISs
also help create reports that might not be required by law, but that help managers understand
changes in an organization’s finances. Accounting ISs contain controls to ascertain adherence to
standards, such as a double entry accounting method.
Finance
While accounting systems focus on recording and reporting financial changes and states, the
purpose of financial systems is to facilitate financial planning and business transactions. In
finance, information systems help organize budgets, manage cash flow, analyze investments,
and make decisions that could reduce interest payments and increase revenues from financial
transactions.
Marketing
Marketing’s purpose is to pinpoint the people and organizations most likely to purchase what
the organization sells and to promote the appropriate products and services to them. For
instance, marketing information systems help analyze demand for various products in different
regions and population groups in order to more accurately market the right product to the right
consumers. Marketing ISs provide information that helps management decide how many sales
representatives to assign to specific products in specific geographical areas. The systems identify
trends in the demand for the company’s products and services. They also help answer such
questions as, “How can an advertising campaign affect our profit?” The web has created
excellent opportunities both to collect marketing data and to promote products and services by
displaying information about them. That is why organizations conduct so much of their
marketing efforts through ISs linked to the web.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Texting to Help Social Causes
New information systems have allowed mobile phone users to donate more quickly and easily than ever.
During the aftermath of the earthquakes in Haiti in 2010, the Red Cross utilized this ability to quickly raise
over $30 million, just through text message donations. By sending “GIVE” to a number, mobile phone
users automatically donated $10 which was added to their next phone bill.
For example, in Africa, mobile phone users can remind patients to take their medicines and warn farmers
when elephants are coming so they can ward them off rather than kill them. These examples demonstrate
how mobile communications hasten the efficient transmission of money and information in a fast moving
world.
Source: Alter, L. (2012). Texting Becomes Key Tool for Philanthropy. http://tlc.howstuffworks.com/
home/texting-changing-philanthropy.htm
20
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Human Resources
Human resource (HR) management systems help mainly in record-keeping, employee evaluation,
and employee benefits. Every organization must maintain accurate employee records. Human
resource management systems maintain such records, including employees’ pictures, marital
status, tax information, and other data that other systems, such as payroll, might use. For
example, the sample screen from Mipis Software shown here gives the experience captured from
an employee’s resume and stored in the database.
Human resource
management systems, like
Mipis Software, help
users hire and promote
employees
Performance evaluation systems provide essential checklists that managers can use to assess
their subordinates. These systems also offer a scoring utility to quantify workers’ strengths and
weaknesses.
HR management systems have evolved to serve many purposes: recruiting, selection,
placement, benefits analysis, requirement projections (how many employees with certain skills
will be required in so many months?), and other services. Many companies enable employees to
use online systems to compare and select benefit packages such as health insurance and pension
plans.
Web-Empowered Enterprises
The most exciting intersection of IT and business in recent years has been networked commerce—
buying
and
selling
goods
and
services
via
a
telecommunications
network—or
as
it
is
popularly called, e-commerce. The development of the web and the opening of the Internet
to
commercial
activities
spawned
a
huge
surge
in
business-to-business
and
business-
to-consumer electronic trade. Now, every individual and small business can afford to use a
network for business: the Internet.
The Internet is a vast network of computers connected across the globe that can share both
information and processing. The web is capable of displaying text, graphics, sounds, and moving
images. It has enticed thousands of businesses to become involved in commercial, social, and
educational initiatives. Social networking through sites such as Twitter, Pinterest, Foursquare,
and Facebook provide a virtual meeting place for people and an opportunity to advertise and
promote business organizations to mass audiences with minimal effort. Thus, the web is not
only a place to conduct e-commerce, but also an emerging advertising medium, gradually
replacing other media such as television and newspapers. Almost every brick-and-mortar
business has extended its operations to the web. Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise,”
discusses web technologies and how they are used in business activities. Because of its great
influence on the use of information technology, the web’s impact on the use of information
systems is discussed throughout the book.
Courtesy of Mipsis
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
21
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
The Downside
It does not require much effort to consider the positive impact of
technology in our daily lives. However, it often also has undesirable
or unintended effects. This was true of the labor-saving machines
that prompted the industrial revolution (introducing 16-hour
workdays and child labor under harsh conditions), and it is also
true about information technology. Think of the effect of IT: it
makes our work more productive because a few keystrokes on a
computer keyboard prompt the computer to calculate and print
what would otherwise take many human hours. It educates us
via technologies such as multimedia classes delivered online. It
opens new economic opportunities such as trading with
overseas consumers via the Internet. It makes the world smaller
by letting people work and socialize together over great distances
via networks such as the web. It creates communities and
establishes closer, more interactive relationships with customers
through social media sites. And it puts at our fingertips information
on practically every imaginable subject. So, what’s the downside?
There are quite a few downsides, which we will discuss in the
following chapters. Here is a sample of the main issues and the
questions they raise.
●
Consumer Privacy. The ability to inexpensively and
quickly collect, maintain, manipulate, and transfer data
enables every individual and organization to collect millions
of personal records. When visiting a commercial website,
chances are the site installs a little file, a “cookie,” on your
computer’s hard disk. This file helps track every click you
make on that site, so companies specializing in consumer
profiling can learn your shopping and buying habits. When
you use a mobile phone to search for a restaurant, it
records your exact location. Using an electronic toll pay-
ment device on your car stores the location, day, and time
each time you pass through a highway or bridge toll booth.
Every time you pay with a credit card, the purchase is
recorded to a personally identifiable record. All this data
is channeled into large databases for commercial exploita-
tion. Your control of such data is minimal. While consumers,
patients, and employees might consent to the collection of
information on one aspect of their lives by one party and on
another aspect by another party, the combination of such
information might reveal more than they would like. For
example, using the data gathered from a retailer’s “frequent
shopper card,” a firm can easily and inexpensively pur-
chase your data from several consumer goods companies,
combine the data into larger records, and prepare a dossier
about you: your name, age, and gender; your shopping
habits; the drugs you take (and through this information,
the diseases you might have); the political party to which
you contributed; and so on.
Civil rights advocates argue that IT has created a Big Brother
society where anyone can be observed, monitored, and
tracked. Lawmakers have passed legislation to regulate the
collection and dissemination of private data. Are you willing
to give up some of your privacy to help companies better
market to you products and services you might be interested
in? Do you accept the manipulation and selling of your per-
sonal data? Do you know how each of the businesses that
you visit on the web utilizes and shares your personal data?
●
Employee Privacy. IT helps employers monitor their
employees, not only via the ubiquitous video camera, but
also through the personal computers they use. Employers
feel it is their right to monitor keystrokes, email traffic, the
websites employees visit, and the whereabouts of people
whose wages they pay while on the job. So, while IT
increases productivity, it might violate privacy and create
stress. Which is more important: your employer’s right to elec-
tronically monitor you, or your privacy and mental well-being?
●
Freedom of Speech. On the web anyone can become a
publisher without censorship. The use of social media,
blogging, and other technologies encourage netizens (Inter-
net users) to opine about anything from products to their
employers’ misdeeds. Some of the material published may
be violent or embarrass people. If someone posts slurs
about your ethnic group at a website, do you want the gov-
ernment to step in and ban or penalize such postings? To
what extent should web server operators be responsible for
what others publish through their sites? Is unsolicited com-
mercial email (spam) a form of free speech?
●
Online Annoyances. Everyone has been a target of
spam email. It is often a nuisance, but how do you accept
this? And if you own a new small business and want to
advertise via email to reduce your promotion costs,
wouldn’t you want the freedom to do so? While surfing
the web, you encounter many pop-up windows. Or your
computer contracts spyware. Sometimes special software
hijacks your browser and automatically takes you to a com-
mercial site that you do not care for. Are these annoyances
acceptable, or should they be stopped by legislation?
●
Phishing and Identity Theft. Millions of people have
fallen prey to phishing, the practice of enticing netizens to
provide personal information to imposters. Email recipients
are directed to copycat sites that purport to be legitimate
sites of banks and other businesses where they are
requested to “update” or “correct” their Social Security
numbers, credit-card account numbers, passwords, and
other information. This information is used by the phishers
to make fraudulent purchases and obtain loans. Businesses
and consumers become victims and sometimes lose money.
In many cases when phishers steal an identity, the victims
experience a long ordeal with authorities and businesses to
deal with the damage from fraudulent activities.
●
IT Professionalism. IT specialists play an increasing role
in the lives of individuals and the operations of organiza-
tions. The information systems they develop and maintain
22
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
POINT OF
INTEREST
Malware Attacks Target Social Media
and Mobile Devices
Over the last several years, the adoption of portable technology has increased significantly with the
increasing use of smartphones, laptops, and tablets. At the same time, consumers have increased their
use of social media sites. A recent Internet Security Threat report published by Symantec shows that the
combination of social media sites and mobile devices has provided a wealth of new targets for malware
attacks. The report identified more than 3.1 billion attacks by 286 million unique variants of malware in
2010. The attacks used a variety of methods, including shortened URLs, SMS (text) messages, and
destructive applications. In addition, the report states that these attacks depended on users failing to be
attentive to the permissions being accepted.
Source: Anonymous. (2011, April 11, 2011). Mobile Devices and Social Networks Key Malware Targets,
Wall Street Journal (Online), p. n/a.
Careers in Information Systems
Regardless of the career you choose, you are almost certain to interact with IT professionals. The
IT trade is made up of people engaged in a wide variety of activities. According to a forecast by
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, demand for IT professionals in the United States will
continue to grow. The Bureau estimates an increase of 22 percent in demand for computer and
information technology specialists for the decade 2010–2020. These positions consist of
information security analysts, web developers, and computer network architects with a median
salary of $75,000 (Anonymous, 2012a).
The following sections review the responsibilities of IT professionals in typical areas of
specialization and show excerpts of posted online help wanted ads from employers seeking IT
professionals. These IT positions were selected due to their significant job growth projections. In
addition, these positions, specifically the “chief” job titles, describe the management potential
for IT professionals.
Systems Analyst
Many IT professionals start their careers as programmers, or programmer/analysts, and
then are promoted to systems analysts, positions that require a broad range of skills.
A programmer/analyst is partly involved in the analysis of business needs and ISs, but the
greater part of the job involves setting up business applications. A systems analyst is responsible
for researching, planning, and recommending software and systems choices to meet an
organization’s business requirements. Systems analysts are normally responsible for developing
cost analyses, design considerations, implementation timelines, and feasibility studies of a
computer system before making recommendations to senior management. A big part of this job
includes developing alternative system plans based on (1) analyzing system requirements
provided by user input, (2) documenting development efforts and system features, and (3)
providing adequate specifications for programmers.
affect our physical and financial well-being tremendously. If
IT specialists are considered professionals, why don’t they
comply with a mandatory code of ethics as other profes-
sionals, such as physicians and lawyers, do?
We will discuss these and other ethical and social issues
throughout this book. As you will see, these issues are not
easy to resolve. The purpose of these discussions is to make
you aware of issues and provoke your thoughts. Remember that
the purpose of education is not only to develop skilled
professionals but also to remind professionals of the impact of
their work on the welfare of other people, and to encourage
professionals to be socially responsible.
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
23
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
To succeed, systems analysts must possess excellent communication skills to translate users’
descriptions of business processes into system concepts. They must understand a wide range of
business processes and ways in which IT can be applied to support them.
Most importantly, systems analysts must always keep in mind that they are agents of
change, and that most people resist change. Unlike many other occupations, theirs often
involves the creation of new systems or the modification of existing ones. Because new or
modified systems often affect human activities and organizational cultures, systems analysts
must be able to convince both line workers and managers that change will benefit them. Thus,
these IS professionals must possess good persuasive and presentation skills.
Senior systems analysts often advance to become project leaders. In this capacity, they are put
in charge of several analysts and programmers. They seek and allocate resources, such as funds,
personnel, hardware, and software, that are used in the development process, and they use project
management methods to plan activities, determine milestones, and control the use of resources.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Technology Jobs and Women
According to a 2012 study by the National Center for Women & Information Technology, 57 percent of
2010 undergraduate degree recipients were women. However, only 18 percent of 2010 Computer and
Information Sciences undergraduate degree recipients were women. From 2000 to 2011, there has been a
79 percent decrease in the number of first-year undergraduate women interested in majoring in Computer
Science. While 57 percent of professional occupations in the 2011 U.S. workforce were held by women,
they only accounted for 25 percent of professional computing occupations. Considering the US Labor
Department’s increased projections for information technology positions, there are substantial opportu-
nities for women to secure quality, successful positions.
Source: National Center for Women & Information Technology. (March 3, 2012). Women in IT: By the
Numbers. http://www.ncwit.org/sites/default/files/legacy/pdf/BytheNumbers09.pdf
Database Administrator
The database administrator (DBA) is responsible for the databases and data warehouses of
an organization—a very sensitive and powerful position. Since access to information often
connotes power, this person must be astute not only technologically but politically as well. He
or she must evaluate requests for access to data from managers to determine who has a real
“need to know.” The DBA is responsible for developing or acquiring database applications and
must carefully consider how data will be used. In addition, the DBA must adhere to federal,
state, and corporate regulations to protect the privacy of customers and employees.
A growing number of organizations link their databases to the web for use by employees,
business partners, and consumers. Attacks on corporate databases by hackers and computer
viruses have made the DBA’s job more difficult. In addition to optimizing databases and
developing
data
management
applications,
this
person
must
oversee
the
planning
and
implementation of sophisticated security measures to block unauthorized access but at the same
time to allow easy and timely access to authorized users. The DBA is also highly involved in the
implementation of SCM systems, because they access corporate databases.
Network Administrator
Among the many IT areas, the one that has seen the most exciting developments in recent years
is networks and telecommunications. Not surprisingly, this area has also seen the greatest
increase in corporate allocation of IT resources in many organizations. The emergence of new
technologies, such as Voice over Internet Protocol and Wi-Fi, which are discussed in Chapter 6,
“Business Networks and Communications,” is expected to sustain this trend for some years,
allowing network professionals to be in great demand and to command high salaries.
24
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
The network administrator is responsible for acquiring, implementing, managing,
maintaining, and troubleshooting local area networks throughout the organization and their
interfaces with the wide area networks such as the Internet. He or she is also often involved in
selecting and implementing network security measures such as firewalls and access codes.
System Administrator
A system administrator—often referred to as “sys admin”—is responsible for managing an
organization’s computer operating systems. System administrators often manage and maintain
several operating systems, such as UNIX and Microsoft Windows and ensure that the operating
systems work together, support end users’ business requirements, and function properly. System
administrators
are also
responsible
for
the day-to-day
maintenance
of
an
organization’s
operating systems, including backup and recovery, adding and deleting user accounts, and
performing software upgrades.
Mobile Applications Developer
The explosive use of smartphones and other mobile devices has created a new
position for information technology professionals: mobile applications devel-
oper. These positions require technical expertise relating to the various software
development tools for mobile devices and programming languages such as Java,
ASP, and SQL. Mobile applications developers are often required to have
experience with designing and gathering information about the specific needs
of an application. Communication and system design skills are important for
this type of professional. Because mobile applications are used directly by
consumers, it is also important to understand their product preferences and
needs.
Webmaster
The rapid spread of the web, intranets, and extranets has increased the responsibility and stature
of the organizational webmaster. A webmaster is responsible for creating and maintaining the
organization’s website as well as its intranet and extranet. Webmasters are increasingly involved
in creatively deciding how to represent the organization on the web. These decisions involve
elements of marketing and graphic design. Since many organizations use the web for commerce,
webmasters must also be well-versed in web transaction software, payment-processing software,
and security software. In small organizations, the website may be the responsibility of a single
person. In large organizations, the webmaster often manages a crew of programmers who
specialize in developing and updating code specifically for webpages and their links with other
organizational ISs.
Chief Security Officer
Because of the growing threat to information security, many organizations have created the
position of chief security officer (CSO), or chief information security officer (CISO). In most
organizations, the person in this position reports to the chief information officer (CIO) (see next
section), but in some cases the two executives report to the same person, usually the chief
executive officer (CEO). The rationale is that security should be a business issue, not an IT issue.
A major challenge for CSOs is the misperception of other executives that IT security is an
inhibitor rather than an enabler to operations.
Mobile phone application development is
a rapidly growing information technology
career
J. Emilio Flores/Corbis
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
25
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Chief Information Officer and Chief Technology Officer
The fact that a corporation has a position titled chief information officer (CIO) reflects the
importance that the company places on ISs as a strategic resource. The CIO, who is responsible
for all aspects of an organization’s ISs, is often, but not always, a corporate vice president. Some
companies prefer to call this position chief technology officer (CTO). However, you might
find organizations where there are both a CIO and a CTO and one reports to the other. There is
no universal agreement on what the responsibility of each should be. Yet, in most cases when
you encounter both positions in one organization, the CTO reports to the CIO.
A person who holds the position of CIO must have both technical understanding of current
and developing information technologies and business knowledge. As Figure 1.6 shows, the CIO
plays an important role in integrating the IS strategic plan into the organization’s overall
strategic plan. He or she must not only keep abreast of technical developments but also have a
keen understanding of how different technologies can improve business processes or aid in the
creation of new products and services.
F I G U R E 1.6
Traits of a successful CIO
Technologist
Entrepreneur
Must understand
current and
developing IT; does
not have to be a great
technician but must
know to ask the
proper questions
about technology.
Must be
entrepreneurial,
proposing
development of new
products and services
that can be supported
with innovative IT.
Chief Information
Officer
Business Executive
Must understand
business processes,
the market, and the
competition. Must
think like a CEO and
tie IT strategy into
corporate strategy.
Leader
Must know how to
inspire staff, foster
enthusiasm for new
projects, and lead by
personal example.
© Cengage Learning 2015
26
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Summary
●
Today’s business professionals are expected to
know how to develop and use IT significantly
more than just a few years ago, regardless of their
major field of expertise.
●
Digital systems quickly and accurately store, pro-
cess, and communicate information of any type.
●
Computer-based
information
systems
pervade
almost every aspect of our lives. Their ability to
help solve problems and guide decisions makes
them indispensable in business and management.
Computer-based information systems take data as
raw material, process the data, and produce infor-
mation as output. Although data sometimes can be
useful as is, it usually must be manipulated to pro-
duce information that is useful for reporting and
decision making.
●
A system is a set of components that work together
to achieve a common goal. An information system
(IS) consists of several components: hardware,
software, data, people, and procedures. The com-
ponents’ common goal is to produce the best infor-
mation from available data.
●
Often, a system performs a limited task that pro-
duces an end result, which must be combined
with other products from other systems to reach
an ultimate goal. Such a system is called a subsys-
tem. Several subsystems might make up a system.
Sometimes, systems are also classified as closed
or open. A stand-alone system that is not interfaced
with other systems is called a closed system. A sys-
tem that interfaces with other systems is an open
system.
●
Data processing has four basic stages. In the input
stage, data elements are collected and entered
into the computer. The computer then performs
the next stage, data processing, which is the
manipulation of data into information using math-
ematical, statistical, and other tools. The subse-
quent stage, output, displays or presents the
information. We often also want to maintain data
and information for later use. This activity is
called storage.
●
Any information system that helps in management
may be referred to as a management information
system (MIS). MISs use recorded transactions and
other data to produce information for problem
solving and decision making.
●
There are several types of information systems.
They
include
transaction
processing
systems
(TPSs), supply chain management (SCM) systems,
customer relationship management (CRM) sys-
tems, business intelligence (BI) systems, decision
support systems (DSSs), expert systems (ESs),
and geographic information systems (GISs). Often,
some or all of these systems are linked to each
other or to other information systems.
●
Enterprise application systems, such as SCM or ERP
systems, are information systems that tie together
the different functional areas of a business, such as
order entry, inventory management, accounting and
finance, and manufacturing. Such systems allow
businesses to operate more efficiently by avoiding
reentry and duplication of information. The systems
can provide an up-to-the-minute picture of inventory,
work-in-progress, and the status of an order to be ful-
filled. Businesses that link each of their information
systems have an infrastructure to utilize data for
effective operational and strategic decisions.
●
ISs are used in many business functions, most
commonly accounting, finance, marketing, and
human resources. These systems aid in the daily
operations of organizations by maintaining proper
accounting
information
and
producing
reports,
assisting in managing cash and investments, help-
ing marketing professionals find the most likely
buyers for their products and services, and keeping
accurate employee records and assisting with their
performance evaluations.
●
The job prospects for IT professionals are bright.
Among the typical careers in this field are systems
analyst, database administrator, network adminis-
trator,
system
administrator,
webmaster,
chief
security officer, chief information officer, and chief
technology officer.
●
IT has many advantages, but it also has created
societal concerns. Issues such as privacy, phishing
and identity theft, free speech on the web, spam,
and web annoyances are viewed by many people
as serious ethical issues. And while IT profes-
sionals increasingly affect our lives through the
systems they develop and maintain, they are not
required to adhere to any code of ethics as other
professionals are. These and related issues are dis-
cussed throughout the book.
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
27
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Now that Chapter 1 has helped you understand how
businesses use data, information, and information
systems, let’s reexamine the Kimball’s Restaurant
case. Michael is spending significant time entering
the restaurant’s sales data. He does not have the
time to manage the business during its operating
hours as well as maintain the financial records. He is
responsible for rent payments, sales tax reports, and
paying
suppliers
for
operating
expenses
and
materials. He needs a better system to maintain the
guest check and meal information for forecasting.
What Is Your Advice?
1. What would you suggest to Tyler to improve the
restaurant’s operational efficiency? Examine the
business’s inputs, processing, and outputs. Formu-
late recommendations to streamline the business
transactions. What type of reports do Liz and
Michael need? How would you alter the back-
office work to better suit their needs?
2. Based on Tyler’s request, his parents provided
some questions. Michael knows that some meals
are selling better than others, but he can only
guess which ones. What sales and operational
data do they need to maximize revenues and
profits while minimizing costs? What data will
help them to make decisions on how to operate
and manage their business? What information
technology system(s) would you recommend for
gathering
and
reporting
the
necessary
information?
New Perspectives
1. The restaurant industry is not static; new competi-
tors and challenges always arise. Consider the fol-
lowing challenges:
●Economic trends. When economic downturns
occur and disposable income decreases, consu-
mers tend to dine out less. Dining establish-
ments
need
to
be
creative
in
order
to
counteract the possible loss of sales revenue.
●Operational efficiency. Like any business, Kim-
ball’s has both fixed and variable costs. Fixed
expenses can be budgeted and planned. However,
the variable expenses, if not managed properly,
can reduce profit and cash flow rather quickly.
●Marketing and promotional data. The former
owners did not gather and report any data on
their operations for analyzing marketing trends.
What can be done differently?
2. Explain how information technology and systems
can help Kimball’s to comply with gathering this
data.
Key Terms
business intelligence (BI), 18
chief information officer (CIO), 26
chief security officer (CSO), 25
chief technology officer (CTO), 26
closed system, 11
cloud computing, 13
customer relationship
management (CRM)
system, 17
data, 8
data processing, 14
data warehouse, 18
database, 12
database administrator (DBA), 24
decision support system
(DSS), 18
digital systems, 6
e-commerce, 21
enterprise application, 16
enterprise resource planning
(ERP) system, 16
expert system (ES), 18
geographic information system
(GIS), 18
information, 8
information map, 12
information system (IS), 12
information technology (IT), 13
input, 14
management information system
(MIS), 16
mobile applications
developer, 25
network administrator, 25
open system, 11
output, 14
process, 9
programmer/analyst, 23
Software as a Service (SaaS), 13
storage, 14
subsystem, 10
supply chain management (SCM)
system, 16
system, 10
system administrator, 25
systems analyst, 23
telecommunications, 15
transaction, 14
transaction processing system
(TPS), 14
webmaster, 25
28
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Review Questions
1. What does the word “processing” in data pro-
cessing mean?
2. Give three examples in which raw data also
serves as useful information.
3. Give three business examples (not mentioned in
the text) of data that must be processed to pro-
vide useful information.
4. Give three examples of subsystems not operating
in the context of IT. Why are these considered
subsystems and not systems?
5. How do TPSs and DSSs differ?
6. What is a problem? Give an example of a
business problem and discuss how a
computer-based information system could
solve it.
7. “An information system consists of hardware
and software.” Why is this statement
inadequate?
8. In which situations does one need to make a
decision? Give three examples not mentioned in
the chapter.
9. How can a DSS help make decisions?
10. Note the word “support” in decision support
systems. Why are these applications not called
decision-making systems?
11. Who is considered a knowledge worker? Will you
have a career as a knowledge worker? Explain.
12. When would a business use mobile computing or
web-based information systems in their opera-
tions? Discuss an example of a business function
that could be implemented on each platform, and
explain why that platform would be preferred
over the other platform.
13. TPSs are usually used at the boundaries of the
organization. What are boundaries in this con-
text? Give three examples of boundaries.
Discussion Questions
14. No longer the domain of technical personnel,
information systems are the business of every
professional. Why?
15. For information systems projects and initiatives,
what would you expect your involvement to be as
a business professional?
16. Assume that computers can recognize voices
easily and detect their users’ exact meaning when
talking. Will the necessity for written language be
reduced to zero? Why or why not?
17. Information systems cannot solve some business
problems. Give three examples and explain why
technology cannot help.
18. Practically all knowledge workers must know how
to use information systems. Why?
19. Think of two examples of fully web-based busi-
nesses. What made the web so attractive for
these entrepreneurs?
20. We will soon stop talking of e-commerce and
simply speak of commerce. Why?
21. Help wanted advertisements do not use the term
“computer specialists”; rather, they use the term
“information system professionals” or “informa-
tion technology professionals.” Why?
22. How do traditional commerce and web-based
commerce differ? What aspects of traditional
shopping do you prefer over online shopping?
How has mobile computing altered web-based
commerce?
23. Information technology might bring people
together, but it also isolates them. Explain the
latter claim and give an example. How does
social media help or harm inter-relationships
between business professionals? Business
organizations?
24. Give two examples of phenomena that are a
social concern because of information technol-
ogy. Explain.
25. What irritates you about the web? What would
you do to minimize this irritation?
26. Do you foresee an IT-related societal or
ethical concern that is not a current concern?
Explain.
27. Identity theft existed before the advent of the
Internet. However, increased identity theft is one
of the unintended, undesirable results of using
the Internet. What is the role of educating the
public in containing this crime?
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
29
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Applying Concepts
28. Recall what you did yesterday from the moment
you got up until the moment you went to bed.
How many times did you use a computer or
receive data or information from someone who
used a computer? (Do not forget ATMs, POS
machines, automated kiosks, personal devices,
etc.) Write a two-page essay on your daily expe-
rience with IT and on society’s dependency on
computers.
29. Contact a business organization and ask permis-
sion to observe a business process. Pinpoint the
segments in the process that a computer-based
information system could aid. Write a report
detailing your observations and suggestions.
30. Observe activities in a supermarket: shoppers
looking down aisles for specific products; lines
forming at the POS machines; workers putting
new prices on items. Prepare a list of shoppers’
and workers’ activities that could be carried out
with less use of human time and more accuracy if
they were aided by IT. Explain how you would
change those activities.
Hands-On Activities
31. Consider the Weather Channel Facebook app
example shown in a Point of Interest box earlier
in this chapter. List some initiatives that could
develop a new product or service by integrating
social media for business organizations.
32. Use a résumé template in your word-processing
program to type your résumé. If you don’t have a
lot of direct work experience, remember to
include all types of work, whether it’s babysitting,
camp counseling, mowing the lawn, or volunteer
work. Now turn your résumé into one that can be
displayed well as a webpage.
33. Prepare a list: what information that you currently
receive through other means could you receive
through your computer? The list should include
text, images, audio, and animated information.
Would you prefer to receive this information on
the computer or as you do now?
Team Activities
34. Form a team with two other students. Each team
member should play the role of a vice president
in charge of a business function: human
resources, accounting, marketing, finance, and
so on. Each vice president should enumerate
information he or she needs to perform his or
her function. Now list information that two or
more of the functions must share and data
produced by one function that another function
uses.
35. Team up with another two students. Brainstorm and
try to think of a new business opportunity that you
would like to pursue in which you will not need IT.
You should be able to convince your professor that
IT cannot improve the operations of this business.
30
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
The Personal and Portable Touch
FedEx is an organization that never sleeps. The
foundation of its business is “fast,” and every minute
counts. Each business day, the company’s more than
300,000 team members handle an average of 9 million
packages, using over 663 aircraft and 90,000 motorized
vehicles. During the holiday season, its operations
experience significantly increased package volumes
and high customer expectations. The company, which
generated $37 billion in revenue in 2012, serves more
than 220 countries and territories. Customers use
FedEx
because
they
want
reliable
delivery
in
a
compressed timeframe. When anything disrupts the
timely and safe delivery of those packages, FedEx’s
customer service reps are likely to receive a call from a
customer.
Prompt, efficient customer service is extremely
important
for
staying
in
this
highly
competitive
global shipping industry, let alone doing so with a
satisfactory profit. Incoming telephone calls at the
FedEx customer service centers are answered by
FedEx reps. Sitting in front of computer monitors in
a cluster of cubicles with headsets on, these agents
barely have time to stretch their limbs.
A
caller
complains
that
her
package
hasn’t
arrived, which is a common complaint. Another asks
if he can change his pickup time. A third caller is
confused about signature: is he supposed to sign for
the delivery or will the package just be dropped at his
doorstep? The reps are confident and friendly. They
welcome any question or complaint even if they
have heard it a thousand times before. The words “I
am sorry” are uttered often. They are careful not to
give the customers a feeling of being rushed, but try
to resolve complaints quickly. Time is money.
Several years ago FedEx installed software that
reps at the call centers can use to provide faster
service. Many of the callers are already registered in
the company’s database. One of the most frequent
requests is to send a FedEx worker to pick up a
package. Using the software, a rep can handle such
a request in 20 seconds. All she needs to do is enter
a name, which leads to a zip code, which in turn leads
to a tracking number. That number uniquely identifies
the package. Some complaints are more complex. For
example, a FedEx driver misunderstood a note a caller
had left for him and therefore misdelivered a package.
A complaint like that takes no more than 10 minutes
to resolve.
An experienced and efficient rep can handle
about 10 callers in 45 minutes. Ideally, though,
nobody would call. If FedEx had its way, at least six
of the ten callers would use their computers to go to
FedEx’s
website
and
solve
their
problem
by
themselves—because about 60 percent of FedEx’s
clients have a computer connected to the Internet.
Like other companies, FedEx tries to save labor by
directing callers to its website. Yet, many people
prefer to use the phone and talk to a human helper.
Every
time
a
customer
decides
to
use
the
company’s
website
instead
of
telephoning,
the
company saves up to $1.87. Efforts to divert callers
to the site have been fruitful. In 2005, FedEx call
centers received 470,000 calls per day, 83,000 fewer
than in 2000. This difference in calls translates into a
saving of $57.56 million per year. The company’s
website handles an average of 60 million requests to
track packages per month. Operating the website
does cost money. Each of these requests costs
FedEx 3 cents, amounting to $21.6 million per year.
However, if all these requests were made by phone,
the cost would exceed $1.36 billion per year. As it is
impossible to divert all callers to the website, the
company must maintain call centers. The annual cost
of these call centers is $326 million. This cost might
decrease
over
the
years,
as
more
and
more
customers use the website, but there will probably
always be call centers, because FedEx does not want
to lose frustrated customers.
In
2000,
management
purchased
customer
relationship
management
software
called
Clarify.
A new policy was established: systems and customer
service experts are equally responsible for the call
centers. Using PCs, reps can pull up historical data
on customers whenever customers call. Customer
records
that
are
immediately
available
to
reps
include shipping histories, preferences, and images
of the paper bills. Customers are happier now than
they were just a few years ago. So are the reps.
Turnover of service reps has decreased 20 percent.
Interestingly, customers are not interested in
friendliness, but in quick and accurate information.
FedEx
constantly
follows
customer
reactions
to
different
help
styles.
Managers
discovered
that
when reps’ time is not limited, they tend to speak
with customers beyond the time required to solve
the
problem.
Customers
perceive
them
as
too
talkative,
and
they
get
a
bad
impression
about
FedEx. Thus, reps are encouraged to get off the
phone as soon as the problem is resolved rather
than try to be “nice.”
The
web
has
clearly
transformed
customer
service. However, mobile computing now allows the
customer to “carry the company” with them. While
FedEx has a website version for smartphones, a fully
optimized mobile version was released in late 2010.
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
31
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART1 32
The Information Age
Mobile-based websites generate a fraction of the
traffic realized by the traditional website. However,
FedEx experienced steady growth on the mobile-
based product. The increasing adoption of the new
technology
forced
an
examination
of
the
new
product. They believed that a more robust product
was needed to support FedEx’s operations.
Ultimately,
FedEx
developed
a
product
that
offered a broader functionality using smartphone
technology
on
popular
devices
such
as
Apple
iPhones and Android phones. FedEx plans to track
the use of the apps and the mobile site against any
cost savings realized through reduced calls placed to
their call centers.
The availability of quality, fast customer service
continues to be realized by integrating information
technology
with
the
latest
mobile
technologies.
FedEx, like many business organizations, continues
to improve through innovative technology initiatives.
Sources: FedEx. (2012). About FedEx. Retrieved 13 Septem-
ber, 2012, from http://about.van.fedex.com/; Gage, D. (2005).
Personal Touch; Fedex already saves big bucks by steering
inquiries to its web site. So how can it justify spending
$326 million a year on call-center reps? Baseline, 1(39), 54-54;
Gordon, R. (2010). FedEx mobile strategy aims for customer
loyalty.
www.dmnews.com/fedex-mobile-strategy-aims-for-
customer-loyalty/article/181706/
Thinking About the Case
1. What is CRM in general? Give examples of dif-
ferent CRM applications.
2. Enumerate and explain the various ways in which
the CRM applications discussed here save costs
or help in other ways.
3. Which metrics would you use to measure before
and after performance regarding the information
technologies implemented in this case? Consider
cost, service quality, cycle time, and any other
performance factor and provide a specific metric
(i.e., ratio, product, or absolute value).
4. What are the challenges of implementing mobile
technology? Are the savings similar to web-based
systems?
5. As an executive for FedEx or a similar company,
what else would you implement using mobile
computing and the Internet?
Blooming with Technology
The use of information technology is needed by every
industry size and type of business. Small businesses
can realize the positive effects through adopting
technology. However, small businesses often do not
have
the
resources
and
expertise
of
large
corporations to implement information technology
strategies. However, the benefits of technology for
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are just
as crucial to business operations and strategy.
Consider Four Seasons Greenhouse and Nursery,
located in Colorado. This small nursery was like many
other small businesses and garden centers. They used
manual registers to track and maintain its inventory as
well as determine which products were realizing the
most profit. The profits from the nursery were either
“negligible” or a loss. They did not have access to
useful operational data to effectively manage their
business. For example, they did not track or review
the margins of individual products. However, they
believed that they needed to do something different
for their $1M business operation.
Enter a new point-of-sale system (POS) in 2008.
The system allowed the owners to track useful
business
data
from
the
sales
transactions
immediately at the time of the sale; eliminating the
need
for
tracking
sales
manually.
The
system
processes
and
stores
data
from
the
sale
while
updating the inventory as well as compiling a sales
history. This eliminates reliance on manual entry of
sales transactions and reduction of inventory units
for the items sold. POS systems provide much more
than a cash register. These systems provide more
robust
functionality
in
inputting,
tracking,
and
distributing data to provide useful information to
operate and manage the business.
Accurate inventory data maintained by the POS
helped with decision making. Decisions on how
many units of a product to order were no longer
based on speculation about current inventory units.
Now,
accurate
inventory
counts
eliminate
the
guesswork
on
how
much
to
order,
helping
the
business
to
operate
on
leaner
inventory
units.
The
system’s
reporting
can
provide
the
detail
transactions for an inventory item, such as how
many were purchased, discarded, and sold.
The
implementation
of
a
POS
system
also
confirmed that the owners did not know as much
about their business as they thought they did. As
they reviewed reports from the new system, they
saw that some products were less profitable than
they thought. The more detailed cost reporting by
item helped them to understand which products
contributed the most profit to the operation. Their
new perspective of the “real costs” provided the
opportunity to shift production to the higher-profit
items,
thereby
gaining
more
profit.
Prior
to
implementing the POS system, they simply did not
have the time to approach this level of decision
making.
Knowledge of their detailed product costs helps
them
to
price
products
more
profitably.
Price
changes can be implemented
temporarily (for a
promotion) or permanently and still remain within
acceptable product margins. The accurate and timely
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
reporting of this information assists them to be more
effective managers of their business operations. The
ability of the system to process sales, inventory, and
purchasing
transactions
immediately
reduces
the
need for data entry of paper information. The time
savings can be used for managing the business
rather than mundane clerical functions.
The new system has expanded Four Seasons’s
management control over employee schedules to
review
and
allocate
labor
expenses
to
specific
departments and functions. An additional benefit
allows the owners to delegate more responsibility to
the staff and establish accountability. Instead of the
owners establishing goals, they provide the system’s
data and ask staff to submit their sales goals for the
next reporting period. Ultimately, the information
technology system creates a solid infrastructure to
process and report the businesses operations for the
entire enterprise.
The garden center is an excellent example of how
technology can realize benefits for a business. The
ability for organizations to remain competitive and
agile is crucial. These systems allow organizations
large and small to leverage business data to gain a
competitive advantage and operational efficiency.
Source: Jones, R. (2011, May). Garden Center 2.0. Today’s
Garden Center, 8, 14-16.
Thinking About the Case
1. Why do point-of-sale systems process business
activities more effectively? Can the information
be tracked manually in an effective manner? Why
or why not? What types of questions could be
answered effectively? How could the information
be used to better manage the business?
2. Why do small business owners avoid the use of
information technology?
3. Consider the types of information systems dis-
cussed in the chapter. What other systems could
interact with the POS system as it processed a
sale?
References
Anonymous. (2011). Coinstar Reports 2011 1st Quarter
Results. Entertainment Close-Up.
Anonymous. (2012a). Information Security Analysts,
Web Developers, and Computer Network
Architects. www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-
information-technology/print/information-
security-analysts-web-developers-and-computer-
network-architects.htm
Anonymous. (2012b). Youtube Statistics. Retrieved
September 8, 2012, from www.youtube.com/t/
press_statistics
Cerny, J. (2011). Making the MOVE to MOBILE.
Mortgage Banking, 71(11), 68-70, 72-73.
Chipchase, J. (2011). “Innovation lessons from a
vending machine.” Retrieved 10 September 2012,
from http://globalpublicsquare.blogs.cnn.com/
2011/06/13/innovative-vending-machines/
Gruenwedel, E. (2011). Analyst: Consumers Prefer
Lower-cost Movie Rentals. Home Media Magazine,
33(22), 6.
Pruitt, A. (2007). Tiny Redbox’s DVD Kiosks Grow,
Wall Street Journal, p. B.5D.
CHAPTER 1
Business Information Systems
33
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
 
CHAPTER
PART
© Denphumi/Shutterstock.com
two
STRATEGIC USES OF
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Learning Objectives
Executives know that information technology is not merely a resource to support day-to-day operations. Clever use
of IT can significantly change an organization’s long-term strategic position. Often, innovative use of information
systems radically changes the way a firm conducts its business. Some information systems even change a firm’s
product or service, such as when innovative software is integrated into a physical product or when a service is
readily available on the web. Therefore, information systems are now an integral part of strategic planning for nearly
all organizations.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Explain what business strategy and strategic moves are.
●
Illustrate how information systems can give businesses a competitive advantage.
●
Identify basic initiatives for gaining a competitive advantage.
●
Explain what makes an information system a strategic information system.
●
Identify fundamental requirements for developing strategic information systems.
●
Explain circumstances and initiatives that make one IT strategy succeed and another fail.
34
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Using Information Strategically
Kimball’s business has steadily grown over its first
three years. With all their hard work and long hours, Liz
and Michael were pleased to see their dining room full
of customers on many nights. The bar developed a
strong, local clientele for weekday sporting events and
“after work” gatherings. Several nights a week, there
was standing room only in the bar area. The implemen-
tation of a point-of-sale system helped the dining and
kitchen operations and provided several benefits over
their antiquated hardcopy guest check process. The
new system tracked and stored each meal and customer
check information. This additional detail provided data
for analysis without the need to enter data from the
paper guest check method.
Restaurant sales continued to grow. As they grew,
Mike and Liz wondered if they should consider expan-
sion. Michael’s analysis of customer checks and sales
showed that their current location’s capacity was an
issue. However, they did not want to expand just for
the sake of expanding.
An Opportunity
Liz and Michael were approached by Shaun Reilly,
whose family owned a lakeside campground property
about five miles from the restaurant. The campground
business closed after his parents retired. With changing
consumer behavior and lifestyles, Shaun did not think
the property could continue successfully as a camp-
ground. Therefore, he was looking to sell or lease the
property for an alternative use.
The campground’s picturesque view of Lake Zephyr
was an excellent location for a restaurant. The main
building had housed a medium-sized restaurant for the
campground. Several areas could be easily converted to
expand the current dining room area. In addition, the
building included a spacious covered patio area that
was used as a lounge area for campers. The patio area
could be used for additional lakeview dining during the
warmer months.
Intrigued by Shaun’s proposal, Liz and Michael vis-
ited the campground. Although the building was over
30 years old, Shaun’s family had maintained the prop-
erty meticulously. The kitchen area was ample to cook,
prepare, and store food. The additional three rooms in
the building could be redesigned easily to serve as two
dining areas and a lounge/bar area. One of the dining
rooms could also be used as a small function room for
business meetings or family events. The views of the
lake provided a remarkable atmosphere for a unique
dining experience.
Michael
estimated
that
the
dining
area
would
increase their dining capacity to 110 seats and the
lounge area to 25. Liz thought “Could this location sup-
port a successful restaurant?” Would Liz and Michael
damage a successful restaurant to seek out a larger
establishment? They expressed some concern about
whether it would be a viable business opportunity. Or
were they leaning toward the safe, no-risk approach?
Or should they remain with the current location and
business model they currently have?
Looking Before They Cook
Michael and Liz spoke to their son, Tyler, about the
opportunity. They all agreed that it would be better to
revisit their original business plan. Because Tom’s mar-
keting
expertise
was
so
valuable
when
they
first
planned the business, they hired him to update the
plan in terms of the proposed new location. Michael
provided the detailed menu item and daily sales sum-
mary data that he had collected since Kimball’s point-
of sale-system was installed. At a first glance, it was
clear to Tom that the restaurant was doing well. With
the new point-of-sale system, Michael captured more
data than the previous owner had from the manual
guest check system.
Tom analyzed the time customers spent at each
table, known as table turnaround. The higher the value
of this metric, the more efficiently the tables were being
used, meaning less time spent by customers at tables.
Michael had never tracked this data, or understood the
range of information that was available from the new
system.
Tom worked with the data to develop several fac-
tors that he could use to forecast sales and expenses
for the proposed new location. He extracted the average
for the total check amount, dining time, and number of
people per table. Tom analyzed this data by day of the
week, specific timeframe (holidays, etc.), and months.
These different summaries of the data provided a wide
view of the factors to compile a more accurate sales
forecast. Michael had never reviewed the data from the
POS system using this approach. He was a bit surprised
by what the data could report.
Michael and Liz then had a meeting with Terri Jordan,
the restaurant’s accountant. She prepared all of the restau-
rant’s financial statements, state sales tax reports, and
income tax filings. Over the last two years, Terri reported
that while the restaurant was doing well, their total
expenses also increased. The financial statements showed
that the cost of goods sold as well as labor expenses
increased disproportionately compared to total sales.
Although sales increased, the net profit margin decreased
slightly each month. Liz asked Terri to tell them what they
were doing wrong and how they could fix it.
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
35
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Terri saw two possible factors in the declining prof-
its: excess inventory and labor costs. She had analyzed
the restaurant’s financial data, operations, and invoices.
The information system did not maintain data for direct
inventory costs for meals or spoilage. Terri was frus-
trated that she could not directly compare the meal
sales to inventory in order to calculate the amount of
spoilage (if any). However, using summary data, she
felt that Liz might be purchasing more food than neces-
sary based on forecasted sales. Without the ability to
forecast food purchases based on past meal sales, it is
difficult to maintain accurate inventory and to reduce
spoilage costs.
Terri also looked at the labor costs for servers and
kitchen staff. She reviewed and compared the weekly
personnel schedules. The comparison clearly indicated
that the hours scheduled did not match the anticipated
number of diners. Terri noticed that the staff schedules
did not change from day to day, even though some
days’ sales were consistently lower. This could poten-
tially explain the increased labor costs.
Liz and Michael thought about the information from
Tom
and
Terri.
Both
advisors
discussed
that
the
increased sales and customers probably distracted the
owners from managing the business from a strategic
perspective. The owners admitted that as the business
became popular, they felt that they did not need to man-
age costs and operations as strictly. Tom said this was a
common mistake that a lot of small business owners
make, and Terri had commented that the restaurant
still had strong, stable sales and remained popular
with customers. Therefore, they just needed to focus
on a few things to increase profitability. The easy solu-
tion would be to raise prices, but either Michael or Liz
wanted to do that. Michael decided that their first task
would be to implement some strategies to strengthen
their existing business before expanding.
Moving Forward
Liz, Michael, and Tyler met again with Shaun. Liz and
Michael loved the location and were excited by its pos-
sibilities, but after their discussions with Tom and Terri,
they realized that they weren’t ready to take on the
expansion.
Tyler agreed that the business was doing fine, but
they needed to focus their attention to building some
strategies in operations and information technology to
strengthen their business in the current location. He
said that this focus could provide the results to lever-
age in a new location. Expanding the restaurant with a
“critical eye” toward a lean operation would create a
perfect transition to the new location when the time
was right.
A solid action plan was in place!
Strategy and Strategic Moves
A survey of 2,335 CIOs by Gartner Research highlighted the ever-changing role of IT as an
integral player in corporations. The Gartner 2012 CIO Agenda Report noted that 61 percent of the
CIOs conveyed that their organization’s mobility strategy will be a top priority (Anonymous,
2012b). The majority of the respondents set a goal of being a “market leader” in their industry
specific to their use of mobile computing. The Gartner study also reported that CIOs business
priorities will focus on enterprise growth and attracting and retaining customers. One-third also
believed that IT innovation could enhance the customer experience. Clearly, IT is expected to
contribute to business strategy.
The word “strategy” originates from the Greek word strategos, meaning “general.” In war, a
strategy is a framework, or an approach, to obtaining an advantageous position. Other
disciplines, especially business, have borrowed the term. As you know from media coverage,
corporate executives often discuss actions in ways that make business competition sound like
war. Businesspeople must devise decisive courses of action to win—just as generals do. In
business, a strategy is an approach designed to help an organization outperform its competitors.
Unlike
battle
plans,
however,
business
strategy
often
takes
the
form
of
creating
new
opportunities rather than beating rivals.
Although many information systems are built to solve problems, many others are built to
seize opportunities. And, as anyone in business can tell you, identifying a problem is easier than
creating an opportunity. Why? Because a problem already exists; it is an obstacle to a desired
36
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
mode of operation and, as such, calls attention to itself. An opportunity, on the other hand, is
less tangible. It takes a certain amount of imagination, creativity, and vision to identify an
opportunity, or to create one and act on it. Information systems that help seize opportunities
are often called strategic information systems (SISs). They can be developed from scratch,
or they can evolve from an organization’s existing ISs. They are not defined by their technical
features per se, but by how they are used, that is, for strategic advantage.
In a free-market economy, it is difficult for a business to do well without some strategic
planning. Although strategies vary, they tend to fall into some basic categories, such as
developing a new product, identifying an unmet consumer need, changing a service to entice
more customers or retain existing clients, or taking any other action that increases the
organization’s value through improved performance.
POINT OF
INTEREST
IT as a Strategic Tool
E-business is one of the fastest growing industries in the United States as electronic commerce sales
totaled $61.2 billion in first quarter 2013, a 2.7 percent increase from the previous quarter. According to
eMarketing Inc., sales from electronic commerce sources are projected to grow to $434 billion by 2017.
Small- to medium-size firms feel pressured to develop an e-business strategy by using the Internet to
effectively fulfill customer orders and communicate with members of their supply chain. By doing so,
they can create new markets for their products and services thus, create competitive advantages. In
addition, effective integration of e-business information technology can also create operational efficien-
cies and lower the cost of processing a sale.
Sources: Anonymous. (2013). U.S. Census Bureau News. Washington, D.C.; Enright, A. (2013). U.S.
e-commerce sales could top $434 billion in 2017. Internet Retailer. www.internetretailer.com/2013/04/
25/us-e-commerce-sales-could-top-434-billion-2017; Gupta, M. (2010). The enabling role of E-business
technologies in strategic operations management. Journal of International Technology and Information Man-
agement, 19(2), 109–IV.
Many
strategies
do
not,
and
cannot,
involve
information
systems.
But
increasingly,
corporations are able to implement certain strategies—such as maximizing sales and lowering
costs—thanks to the innovative use of information systems. A company achieves strategic
advantage by using strategy to maximize its strengths, resulting in a competitive advantage.
When a business uses a strategy with the intent to create a market for new products or services, it
does not aim to compete with other organizations that make the same product, because that
market does not yet exist. Therefore, a strategic move is not always a competitive move in terms
of competing with similar products or services. However, in a free-enterprise society, a market
rarely remains the domain of one organization for long; thus, competition ensues almost
immediately. So, we often use the terms “competitive advantage” and “strategic advantage”
interchangeably.
The most innovative companies are battling on the front lines to create the next “got-
to-have-it” technology. In 2012, the battle revolved around mobile payment technology. Paying
on-the-go with a smartphone allows you to make purchases quicker and easier than ever.
Starbucks agreed to a partnership with Pay with Square, a mobile payment company, to process
credit card transactions via the Pay with Square smartphone app at 7,000 locations in the
United States To use the app, users activate a tab in the app that notifies the Starbucks of their
arrival and then the customer can pay simply by saying their name at the register. Mobile
payment technology is taking retail consumerism to the next level. Practically any mobile-based
system that gives a company competitive advantage is a strategic information system.
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
37
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Achieving a Competitive Advantage
Consider competitive advantage in terms of a for-profit company, whose major goal is to
maximize profits by lowering costs and increasing revenue. A for-profit company achieves
competitive advantage when its profits increase significantly, most commonly through
increased market share. Figure 2.1 lists eight basic initiatives that can be used to gain
competitive advantage, including offering a product or service that competitors cannot provide
or providing the same product or service more attractively to customers. It is important to
understand that the eight listed are the most common, but not the only, types of business
strategy an organization can pursue. It is also important to understand that strategic moves
often consist of a combination of two or more of these initiatives and other steps, and that
sometimes accomplishing one type of advantage creates another. The essence of strategy is
innovation, so competitive advantage is often gained when an organization tries a strategy
that no one has tried before.
F I G U R E 2.1
Eight basic ways to gain
competitive advantage
Initiative
Benefit
Reduce costs
A company can gain advantage if it can sell more units at a lower price while
providing quality and maintaining or increasing its profit margin.
Raise barriers to
market entrants
A company can gain advantage if it deters potential entrants into the market,
enjoying less competition and more market potential.
Establish high
switching costs
A company can gain advantage if it creates high switching costs, making it
economically infeasible for customers to buy from competitors.
Create new products
or services
A company can gain advantage if it offers a unique product or service.
Differentiate products
or services
A company can gain advantage if it can attract customers by convincing 
them its product differs from the competition’s.
Enhance products
or services
A company can gain advantage if its product or service is better than
anyone else’s.
Establish alliances
Companies from different industries can help each other gain advantage 
by offering combined packages of goods or services at special prices.
Lock in suppliers
or buyers
A company can gain advantage if it can lock in either suppliers or buyers, making
it economically impractical for suppliers or buyers to deal with competitors.
For example, Amazon gained a competitive advantage when it created a new subscription
service, Amazon Prime. For $79 a year, subscribers enjoy free two-day shipping on everything
plus access to over 25,000 movies and TV shows that can be streamed instantly. Prime members
also are allowed to borrow books for their Kindle e-readers from the Kindle Owners Lending
Library for no additional fee. Figure 2.2 shows that a company can use many strategies together
to gain a competitive advantage, as Amazon did.
© Cengage Learning 2015
38
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
F I G U R E 2.2
Many strategic moves can
work together to achieve
a competitive advantage
Reducing Costs
Locking in
Suppliers
or
Buyers
Establishing
Alliances
Enhancing Products
and Services
Differentiating
Products and Services
Creating
Barriers to
Entrants
The
Firm
Initiative #1: Reduce Costs
Customers like to pay as little as possible while still receiving the quality of service or product
they need. One way to increase market share is to lower prices, and the best way to lower prices
is to reduce costs. For instance, if carried out successfully, massive automation of any business
process gives an organization competitive advantage. The reason is simple: automation makes an
organization more productive, and any cost savings can be transferred to customers through
lower prices. We saw this happen in the auto industry. In the 1970s, Japanese automakers
brought robots to their production and assembly lines and reduced costs—and subsequently
prices—quickly and dramatically. The robots weld, paint, and assemble parts at a far lower cost
than manual labor. Until their competitors began to employ robots, the Japanese had a clear
competitive advantage because they were able to sell high-quality cars for less than their
competitors. A similar approach gave Intel, the computer microprocessor maker, a strategic
advantage that it maintains to this day: much of the labor involved in making and testing
microprocessors has been automated by information technology and robots. This enabled the
company to substantially reduce the prices of its products.
In the service sector, the web has created an opportunity to automate what until recently
was considered an activity that only humans could perform: customer service. An enormous
trend toward automating online customer service began with companies such as FedEx, which
initially gave customers an opportunity to track their parcels’ status by logging on to a
dedicated, private network and database. The same approach is now implemented through the
web. Many sites today include answers to FAQs (frequently asked questions). Others have special
programs that can respond to customer questions. Online service gives businesses two major
benefits: it changes service from being labor intensive to technology intensive, which is much
less expensive, and it provides customers easy access to a service 7 days a week, 24 hours a day.
Any executives of companies that operate call centers will tell you that they work hard to shift
callers off the phone and to their websites to receive the help they need. It not only cuts the
costs of expensive human labor but also of telephone and mailing charges. Companies that are
first to adopt advanced systems that reduce labor enjoy competitive advantage for as long as
their competitors lag behind.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
39
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Understand the Notion of Strategic Information Systems
Although devising strategic moves is mainly the responsibility
of senior management, let us remember Napoleon’s words:
“Every soldier carries a marshal’s baton in his knapsack.” To
paraphrase: every junior worker is a potential senior executive.
Thus, it is incumbent on every professional to try to think stra-
tegically for his or her organization. In fact, employees at the
lowest levels have proposed some of the most brilliant strate-
gic ideas. In today’s highly competitive market, strategy might
determine an organization’s rise or fall.
An increasing number of strategic moves are possible only
with the aid of ISs or by having ISs at the center of their strat-
egy—that is, technology provides the product, service, or
method that gains the organization strategic advantage. The
potential for new business models on the web is still great.
Thus, professionals must understand how to use technology
in strategic moves. Understanding how strategic information
systems are conceived and implemented might help you sug-
gest good ideas for such systems in your organization and
facilitate your promotion up the organizational ladder.
Initiative #2: Raise Barriers to Market Entrants
The smaller the number of companies competing within an industry, the better off each
company is. Therefore, an organization might gain competitive advantage by making it difficult,
or impossible, for other organizations to produce the product or service it provides. Using
expertise or technology that is unavailable to competitors or prohibitively expensive is one way
to bar new entrants.
Companies raise barriers to entrants in a number of ways. Obtaining legal protection of
intellectual property, such as an invention or artistic work, bars competitors from freely using it.
Microsoft, IBM, and other software powerhouses have gained tremendous strategic advantages
by copyrighting and patenting software. Numerous examples of such protection can be found
on the web. Priceline.com holds a patent for online reverse (“name your own price”) auctioning,
which has prevented competitors from entering its business space. Amazon.com secured a patent
for one-click online purchasing, which enables customers to enter shipping and credit card
information once and to place subsequent orders while skipping a verification webpage.
Although the software is quite simple, Amazon obtained a patent for it in 1999 that will not
expire until 2017. Amazon successfully sued Barnes & Noble (B&N) when BN.com implemented
a one-click technology. Now B&N, along with Apple, pays Amazon to use the technology. In
October 2010, Amazon patented the one-click order process in Canada. However, by November
of the following year, the patent was being appealed in Canada’s Federal Court of Appeals. The
one-click process also faced difficulties in Europe where it was denied a patent in 2011 because
the process was deemed not genuinely inventive enough. As a result, European companies can
use the one-click process without a fee while American companies must pay Amazon to use it.
Although technology can create a barrier to entry for other businesses, it can also come with
legal issues in a global market.
Another barrier to potential new market entrants is the high expense of entering the
particular market. Industries such as airlines have a significant barrier to entry due to the
investment of information technology for central reservation and other operational systems.
However, while technology can create an impediment for new market entrants, it can also have
the reverse effect. For example, manufacturing businesses rely heavily on technology to manage
their product lifecycle processes (from design, manufacture, service and disposal). Traditionally,
due to the cost and complexity
of implementing product lifecycle management (PLM)
technology systems were reserved only for large manufacturing businesses; ultimately creating a
barrier to entry for smaller companies. However, as new low-cost alternatives for PLM systems
have become available, many smaller manufacturing businesses have adopted this technology,
decreasing the barrier maintained by large manufacturers (Waurzyniak, 2012).
40
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Initiative #3: Establish High Switching Costs
Switching costs are expenses incurred when a customer stops buying a product or service from
one business and starts buying it from another. Switching costs can be explicit (such as charges
the seller levies on a customer for withdrawal from a contract) or implicit (such as the indirect
costs in time and money spent adjusting to a new product that competes with the old).
Often, explicit switching costs are fixed, nonrecurring costs, such as a penalty a buyer must
pay for terminating a deal early. In the mobile phone service industry, you can usually get an
attractive deal, but if you cancel the service before the one- or two-year contract ends, you have
to pay a hefty penalty. So although another company’s service might be more attractive, you
might decide to wait out the full contract period because the penalty outweighs the benefits of
the new company’s service. When you do decide to switch, you might discover that your phone
is not suitable for service with any other mobile service provider. The cost of the phone itself,
then, is another disincentive to switch.
A perfect example of indirect switching expenses is the time and money required to learn
new software. Once a company trains its personnel to use one word-processing or spreadsheet
program, a competing software company must offer a very enticing deal to make switching
worthwhile.
The
same
principle
holds
for
many
other
applications,
such
as
database
management systems, webpage editors, and graphical software. Consider Microsoft’s popular
Office productivity suite. Google Docs and OpenOffice.org offer products that can be used or
downloaded at no cost and are compatible with Office applications. This cost savings and inter-
product compatibility could significantly lower the switching costs for an office productivity
product. Yet, few organizations or consumers who are accustomed to MS Office are willing to
completely switch to Google Docs or OpenOffice.org.
Manufacturers of laser and ink-jet printers sell their printers at cost or below cost. However,
once you purchase a printer, you must replace a depleted ink or toner cartridge with a costly
cartridge that the printer manufacturer sells, or take a risk with other cartridges whose quality is
often low. You face high costs if you consider switching to another printer brand. Thus,
establishing high switching costs often locks in customers. Locking in customers by any means
is a way to accomplish a strategic advantage, and is discussed later in this chapter.
High switching costs are often more prominent when a company uses proprietary software,
especially when the software is expensive, such as an ERP or human resource management
system. In addition to the initial price of the system, the client incurs other costs, some tangible
and some not. Tangible costs include modification to suit the special needs of the client’s
unique business processes. Intangible costs include employees’ learning the new system and the
establishment of smooth working relations with the service unit of the software vendor.
Initiative #4: Create New Products or Services
Clearly, the ability to create a new and unique product or service that many organizations
and individuals need gives an organization a great competitive advantage. Unfortunately, the
advantage lasts only until other organizations in the industry start offering an identical or
similar product or service for a comparable or lower price.
Examples of this scenario abound in the software industry. For instance, Lotus Development
Corporation became the major player early on in the electronic spreadsheet market after it
introduced its Lotus 1-2-3 program. When two competitors tried to market similar products,
Lotus sued for copyright infringement and won the court case, sustaining its market dominance
for several years. However, with time, Microsoft established its Excel spreadsheet application as
the world leader, not only by aggressive marketing but also by including better features in its
application.
Another example of a company creating a new service is eBay, the firm that dominates
online auctions. The organization was the first to offer this service, which became very popular
within only a few months. While other firms now offer a similar service (e.g., Amazon.com and
Yahoo! Auctions), the fact that eBay was the first to offer it gave the company a huge advantage.
It quickly acquired a large number of sellers and bidders, a network that is so critical to creating a
“mass” of clients, which in turn is the main draw for additional clients. It also gave eBay an
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
41
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
advantage in experience and allowed it to open a gap that was difficult for competitors to close,
even for giants such as Amazon.com. eBay is an example of an entire business that would be
impossible without the web and the information technologies that support the firm’s service.
eBay’s success demonstrates the strategic advantage of the first mover, an organization
that is the first to offer a new product or service. By the time other organizations start offering
the same product or service, the first mover has usually created some assets that cannot be
held by the competitors: a superior brand name, a better technology or method for delivery, or a
critical mass. A critical mass is a body of clients that is large enough to attract many other
clients. In many cases, first movers simply enjoy longer experience, which in itself is an
advantage over competitors.
eBay gained a first mover
advantage by marketing
products to a mass
audience
XM and Sirius satellite-based radio services have changed radio broadcasting. The two
pioneers in this market have reaped the rewards of being first movers since 2001. Satellite
broadcasts release radio services from the constraints of territorial boundaries and from national
content regulation. Because of this, many radio personalities and radio stations offer programs
on satellite radio, hoping to participate in its strategic advantage. In 2008, Sirius Satellite Radio’s
$5 billion buyout of XM Radio was approved but the U.S. Department of Justice, despite strong
disapproval from consumer groups and lobbying from the land-based radio industry. The
Department of Justice said the merger was unlikely to hurt competitors or consumers, citing the
development of mobile broadband Internet devices as the upcoming replacement for satellite
radio. Sirius/XM had close to 23 million subscribers in 2012. In this case, both companies were
first movers and competition did not allow them to profit, so they agreed to merge.
A good example of a new product is Apple’s iPhone. Handheld devices that combine
telephony and computers had been around for many years. When the iPhone was introduced in
2007, it developed a new concept: no physical keys. All the functions are activated by using
touchscreen keys, and therefore can be more intuitively operated and offer more options. While
the original iPhone created a market advantage for a new product, the touchscreen concept was
quickly adopted by many competitors. This example clearly identifies that the advantage of a
new product or service, especially for technology, can rapidly fade.
Courtesy of ebay
42
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Since the release of the original iPhone, Apple has continued to make
improvements with every model. The iPhone 5 boasted a larger screen,
reduced weight and width, and other enhancements. Even though it had
record setting pre-order sales (2 million in 24 hours), its competitor
Samsung immediately seized on its shortcomings and promoted features
in their own mobile phone such as instant video sharing that the iPhone
lacked. This is another illustration of how being a first mover with
cutting-edge technology can be a difficult position to maintain.
Some websites were the first to offer certain services that soon
attracted millions of visitors per day. The high traffic they have created
gives them a significant strategic asset in the form of advertising
potential. Two successful social media outlets, Facebook and Twitter, are
using their massive user base to bring in advertising revenues; 1.1 billion
and 554 million users respectively (Anonymous, 2013c, 2013d). Both
social media sites contain advertisements on their websites. With the
exponential growth of mobile computing, these social media giants are
attempting to please investors by expanding revenue by streaming news
feed ads to users’ mobile devices. However, this type of advertising can
be irritating to some users, because the ads are often placed in the middle of the screen. What
may have been passive ignorance of these screen areas may irritate users (Winkler, 2012).
Facebook and Twitter are taking cautious approaches to mobile advertising in order to not lose
users.
YouTube is another social media giant that has benefited from first mover advantage.
YouTube enables individuals and corporations to upload video clips for viewing by its visitors.
By January 2012, the site was streaming more than 4 billion videos per day. Its popularity has
increased significantly since it was acquired for $1.65 billion by Google. Many businesses have
created YouTube accounts to advertise their products and services. YouTube’s marketing reach,
search engine capabilities, and no-cost model provide an effective environment for corporate
promotions and outreach. Broadcast networks and movie studios have uploaded video content
as another venue for their products. As shown in the figure, broadcast networks and media
organizations have leveraged YouTube as an additional method to distribute and promote their
content.
YouTube continues to be
used to promote television
shows and other media
content
The iPhone continues to be the most popular
smartphone device
©iStockphoto.com/franckreporter
Courtesy of Youtube
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
43
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Being a first mover is not always a guarantee of long-term success, however. One example of
how a first-mover strategic advantage can be lost within just a few months is in the web browser
arena. Netscape Corporation (now part of AOL) dominated the web browser market, which was new
in 1994. By allowing individual users to download its browser for free, it cornered up to 95 percent
of the market. The wide use of the browser by individuals moved commercial organizations to
purchase the product and other software compatible with the browser. Netscape’s dominance
quickly diminished when Microsoft aggressively marketed its own browser, which many perceived
as at least as good as Netscape’s. Microsoft provided Internet Explorer free of charge to anyone and
then bundled it into the Microsoft Windows operating system software distributed with almost all
PCs. Even after the court-ordered unbundling, its browser still dominated.
Other first movers have lost market share because they neglected to improve the service they
pioneered. Few web surfers may remember Infoseek, the first commercial search engine. Google,
which entered the search engine arena in 1998, improved the quality and speed of web searches,
offering a clutter-free home page. The strategy of its two young entrepreneurs was simple:
provide the best search engine, and refrain from commercializing it for a while. Over a period of
about three years Google established itself as the best search engine. In time, it started to
capitalize on this prominence by selling sponsored links (the right side of the results of a user’s
search, and later the top shaded results). Most importantly, the organization never stopped
improving its search algorithms and periodically has offered new services. The strategy has
succeeded so much that “google it” has become synonymous with “search for it on the web.”
Initiative #5: Differentiate Products or Services
A company can achieve a competitive advantage by persuading consumers that its product or
service is better than its competitors’. Called product differentiation, this advantage is usually
achieved through advertising and customer experience. Consider Skype. Although the software
was not the first to offer free phone calls over the Internet, its quality was higher than similar
applications. People noticed the difference, and hundreds of millions now use the application.
When the user base was large, the company (which was acquired by Microsoft) added many
features, including video chat. It makes money by selling features for videoconferencing, long
distance voice services, and mobile devices.
Brand-name success is a perfect example of product differentiation. Think of Levi’s jeans,
Chanel and Lucky perfumes, and Gap clothes. The customer buys the brand-name product,
perceiving it to be superior to similar products. In fact, some products are the same, but units
sold under a prestigious brand name sell for higher prices. You often see this phenomenon in
the food, clothing, drug, and cosmetics markets.
Initiative #6: Enhance Products or Services
Instead of differentiating a product or service, an organization might actually enhance existing
products or services, that is, add to the product or service to increase its value to the
consumer. For example, car manufacturers might entice customers by offering a longer warranty
period for their cars, and real-estate agents might attract more business by providing useful
financing information to potential buyers.
Since the Internet opened its portals to commercial enterprises in the early 1990s, an
increasing number of companies have supplemented their products and services. Their websites
provide up-to-date information that helps customers utilize their purchased products better or
receive additional services. Companies that pioneered such Internet use reaped substantial
rewards. For example, Charles Schwab gained a competitive advantage over other, older brokerage
companies by opening a site for online stock transactions. Within months, half its revenue came
from this site. All brokerage houses followed suit and allow customers to trade through a website.
Other companies use the Internet to maintain their competitive edge by continually adding to
and enhancing their online services. The Progressive Casualty Insurance Company, ranked 169 on
the Fortune 500 list, is an excellent example. The company enables insured drivers to place a
claim and follow its progress at the company’s site. The company has connected its information
systems with those of car dealerships and financing institutions. When a car is totaled (i.e., fixing
44
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
it would cost more than purchasing a new car), the owner can receive a check to purchase a new
car. However, since the company knows that purchasing a new car can be a hassle, the insured
owner can use, free of charge, the company’s Total Loss Concierge service. The company
developed special software that retrieves details about the totaled vehicle. The details are shared
with a network of dealerships, and the concierge selects the best alternatives in terms of
compatibility with the client’s needs and the price. The agent accompanies the client in the
contacts with the dealerships. If the client still owes money to a lender, the Progressive agent uses
the system to retrieve the financing information and sends it to a network of financing firms. The
agents send the client the best alternatives. In the auto insurance industry, the Total Loss
Concierge service is an enhancement offered only by Progressive. Recently, Progressive integrated
technology innovation into their business operations, offering mobile apps to access their site and
the Snapshot® device to track good driving habits. Each of these initiatives fulfills the strategies of
Gartner’s CIO report discussed earlier; attracting new customers and adding mobile applications.
Initiative #7: Establish Alliances
Companies can gain competitive advantage by combining services to make them more attractive
(and usually less expensive) than purchasing services separately. An alliance may also be created
to enable customers to use the same technology for purchases from different companies. These
alliances provide two draws for customers: combined service is cheaper, and one-stop shopping
or using the same technology is more convenient. The travel industry is very aggressive in this
area. For example, airlines collaborate with hotel chains and car-rental firms to offer travel and
lodging packages. Credit-card companies offer frequent flier miles for every dollar spent,
discounts on ticket purchases from particular airlines, or discounts on products of an allied
manufacturer. In all these cases, alliances create competitive advantages.
As Figure 2.3 indicates, by creating an alliance, organizations enjoy synergy: the combined
profit for the allies from the sale of a package of goods or services exceeds the profits earned
when
each
acts
individually.
Sometimes,
the
alliances
are
formed
by
more
than
two
organizations. Consider the benefits you receive when you agree to accept a major credit card:
discounts from several hotel chains, restaurant chains, flower delivery chains, and other stores;
free insurance when renting a car; and frequent flier miles, to name a few. Similarly, travel
websites such as Kayak and Orbitz offer you the opportunity to reserve lodging and car rental at
discounts while you make your airline reservations. These companies have established alliances
with hotel chains and car-rental companies.
F I G U R E 2.3
Strategic alliances
combine services to
create synergies
Before Strategic Alliance
Vacation Package
After Strategic Alliance
Restaurant
Hotel
Telephone Carrier
Car Rental
Floral Shop
Airline
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
45
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
What is the common denominator among these companies? They each have an information
system that tracks all these transactions and discounts. A package of attractive propositions
entices clients who need these services (and most businesses do). Would this offer be feasible
without an IS to track transactions and discounts? Probably not.
The growth in e-commerce and reduction of logistics costs has created new alliances.
Consider United Parcel Services (UPS), well known for its delivery services, and Medtronic, a
Minneapolis-based medical device company. UPS now fills pharmacy orders at their Louisville,
KY facility. UPS pharmacists log into Medtronic’s system to fill orders for medical devices
ordered by their patients. These medical devices are also stored at the UPS facility for immediate
shipment. Medtronic has closed its own warehouse facility and significantly reduced the costs of
processing its orders. Again, a clever IT initiative and corporate alliance enable an operational
efficiency strategy that will have positive benefits for business organizations.
On the web, an obvious example of alliances is an affiliate program. Anyone can place
links to commercial sites on his or her personal website. When a visitor clicks through to a
commercial site and makes a purchase, the first site’s owner is paid a fee. Some online retailers
have thousands of affiliates (sometimes referred to as associates). The early adopters of these
programs, such as Amazon.com, Buy.com, Priceline.com, and other large e-retailers, enjoyed a
competitive advantage in gaining new customers. It is easy for any website holder to become an
associate of Amazon.com.
Business affiliating with
Amazon can earn revenue
by adding a link to a
specific product
The web has generated strategic alliances that would probably never be created offline. Can
you imagine Wal-Mart inviting Sears to sell Sears’ merchandise from Wal-Mart stores? This is
exactly what Amazon does. Its site has links to products of other companies. When you search
for an item on Amazon, you might find links not only to its own products but also to those of
competitors, such as Ace Hardware, the consumer hardware store. If this sounds strange,
consider the rationale: Amazon wants customers to compare its price and its competitors’ price
for the same item and see that Amazon’s is lower, mainly because Amazon manages its
warehouses more efficiently than any other retailer. Even if customers decide to purchase from
the competitor through the Amazon site, Amazon receives a commission from the seller.
Courtesy of Amazon
46
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
A growing number of companies use software to help analyze the vast amounts of data they
collect. Some share the data and business intelligence with business partners because if their
partners do better, so will they. For example, Marriott, the large hotel chain, provides online and
traditional travel agencies with analyses about pricing, joint promotions, and inventory. The
analytical results help the agencies optimize their operations, which results in more customers
for Marriott.
Initiative #8: Lock in Suppliers or Buyers
Organizations can achieve competitive advantage if they are powerful enough to lock in
suppliers to their mode of operation or buyers to their product. Possessing bargaining power—
the leverage to influence buyers and suppliers—is the key to this approach. As such, companies
so large that suppliers and buyers must listen to their demands use this tactic nearly exclusively.
A firm gains bargaining power with a supplier either when the firm has few competitors or
when the firm is a major competitor in its industry. In the former case, the fewer the companies
that make up a supplier’s customer base, the more important each company is to the supplier.
In the latter case, the more important a specific company is to a supplier’s success, the greater
bargaining power that company has over that supplier.
The most common leverage in bargaining is purchase volume. Companies that spend
billions of dollars purchasing parts and services have the power to force their suppliers to
conform to their methods of operation, and even to shift some costs onto suppliers as part of
the business arrangement. Consider Wal-Mart, one of the world’s largest retailers. Not only does
the company use its substantial bargaining power to pressure suppliers to lower prices, but it
also requires them to use information systems that are compatible with its own automated
processes. The suppliers must use ISs that tell them when to ship products to Wal-Mart so that
the giant retailer is never left understocked or overstocked. In recent years this power allowed
the company to require its suppliers to use radio frequency identification (RFID) devices in
packaging to allow more accurate tracking of ordered, shelved, and sold items. This bargaining
power and tight control of inventory enables Wal-Mart to enjoy considerable cost savings,
which it passes on to customers, which keep growing in numbers thanks to the competitive
prices. Many suppliers are locked in with Wal-Mart because of the sheer volume of business they
have with the company: some sell a third to one-half of everything they produce to this single
retailer, and some, such as the giant consumer products maker Procter & Gamble, have a “Vice
President, Wal-Mart” as a member of the senior management.
One way to lock in buyers in a free market is to enjoy a situation in which customers fear
high switching costs. In the software arena, enterprise applications are a good example. This
type
of
software
helps
organizations
manage
a
wide
array
of
operations:
purchasing,
manufacturing, human resources, finance, and so forth. The software is expensive, costing
millions of dollars. After a company purchases the software from a firm, it is locked in to that
firm’s services: training, implementation, updates, and so forth. Thus, companies that sell
enterprise software, such as SAP, Oracle, and BMC Software, make great efforts to improve both
their software and support services to maintain leadership in this market.
Another way to lock in clients is to create a standard. The software industry has pursued
this strategy vigorously, especially in the Internet arena. For example, Microsoft’s decision to
give away its web browser by letting both individuals and organizations download it free from
its site was not altruistic. Microsoft executives knew that the greater the number of Internet
Explorer (IE) users, the greater the user base. The greater the user base, the more likely
organizations were to purchase Microsoft’s proprietary software to help manage their websites.
Also, once individual users committed to IE as their main browser, they were likely to purchase
Microsoft software that enhanced the browser’s capabilities.
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
47
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Similarly, Adobe gives away its Acrobat Reader software, an application that lets web surfers
open and read documents created using different computers running different operating
systems, such as various versions of Windows, the Mac operating system, and UNIX. When the
Reader user base became large enough, organizations and individuals found it economically
justifiable to purchase and use the full Acrobat application (the application used to create the
documents) and related applications. Using this strategy put Adobe’s PDF (portable data format)
standard in an unrivaled position.
Adobe uses a similar strategy for its Flash software used to create webpage animations. It
offers the Flash player for download free of charge but sells the development tool. Like PDF,
Flash created a symbiotic situation to augment a market: the more individuals download the
player, the more businesses are willing to purchase the development tool. The more companies
engage Flash modules in their webpages, the more individuals download the player, without
which they cannot enjoy those animations.
The simplest way to lock in buyers is to create a physical or software limitation on using
technology. This can be in the form of a company designing a socket for add-on plugs that takes
only a specific size or form, or designing files so that they run only on its software. Apple
Computer’s iTunes is a classic example of the latter. The online music store is a popular site for
purchasing music files. However, the files contain FairPlay DRM (digital rights management)
software, which ensures the files run only on Apple devices. Digital music players made by
competitors are locked out. Apple’s decision had a significantly positive impact on its profits.
Creating and Maintaining Strategic Information Systems
IT might offer many opportunities to accomplish a competitive edge, especially in industries that
are using older software, such as the insurance industry. Insurance companies were among the
early adopters of IT and have not changed much of their software. This is why some observers
say the entire industry is inefficient. Once an insurance company adopts innovative software
applications, like the Progressive insurance mobile app described in the section on Enhancing
Existing Products or Services, it probably will gain competitive advantage. Customers can submit
a claim through the mobile app and use the phone’s camera to upload pictures of the accident
scene. Airlines are another example of an industry that still uses antiquated hardware and
software. As you’ll learn later in the chapter, when JetBlue was established, it adopted the latest
technologies, and this was a major reason for its great competitive advantage.
Companies can implement some of the strategic initiatives described in the previous section
by using information systems. As we mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, a strategic
information system (SIS) is any information system that can help an organization achieve a
long-term competitive advantage. An SIS can be created from scratch, developed by modifying
an existing system, or “discovered” by realizing that a system already in place can be used to
strategic advantage. While companies continue to explore new ways of devising SISs, some
successful SISs are the result of less lofty endeavors: the intention to improve mundane
operations using IT has occasionally yielded a system with strategic qualities.
Strategic information systems combine ideas for making potentially winning business
decisions and ideas for harnessing information technology to implement the decisions. For an
information system to be an SIS, two conditions must exist. First, the information system must
serve
an
organizational
goal
rather
than
simply
provide
information;
and
second,
the
organization’s IS unit must work with managers of other functional units (including marketing,
finance, purchasing, human resources, and so on) to pursue the organizational goal.
48
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Creating an SIS
To create an SIS, top management must be involved from initial consideration through
development and implementation. In other words, the SIS must be part of the overall
organizational strategic plan. The danger always exists that a new SIS might be considered the IS
unit’s exclusive property. However, to succeed, the project must be a corporate effort, involving
all managers who use the system.
Figure 2.4 presents questions that management should ask to determine whether to develop
a new SIS. Executives meet to try to identify areas in which information can support a strategic
goal. Only after completing the activities outlined in Figure 2.4 will management be able to
conceptualize an SIS that seizes an opportunity.
F I G U R E 2.4
Questions to answer in a
strategic information
system idea-generating
meeting
1. What would be the most effective way to gain an advantage?
2. Would more accessible or timely information to our employees,
customers, or suppliers help establish a significant advantage? If so, how?
3. Can an information system be developed that provides more
accessible and timely information?
4. Will the development effort be economically justified?
◆ Can existing competitors afford to fund the development of a
    similar system?
 ◆ How long will it take the competitors to build their own, similar system?
◆ Can we make our system a moving target to the competition by constantly
   enhancing it, so that it always retains its superiority?
5. What is the risk of not developing such a system?
7. Will technology add value to the customer’s experience?  If so, how?
6. Are alternative means of achieving the same goals available, and
if so, how do they compare with the advantages and disadvantages of
a new SIS?
A word of caution regarding Question 4 in Figure 2.4, the issue of economic justification of
an SIS: an increasing number of researchers and practitioners conclude that estimating the
financial benefits of information systems is extremely difficult. This difficulty is especially true of
SISs. The purpose of these systems is not simply to reduce costs or increase output per employee;
many create an entirely new service or product. Some completely transform the way an
organization, or an industry, does business. Because so many fundamental business changes are
involved,
measuring
the
financial
impact
is
difficult,
if
not
impossible,
even
after
implementation, let alone before. For example, if a bank is considering offering a full range of
financial services via the web, how can management know whether the move justifies the cost
of the necessary software? It is difficult to estimate the success of such a bold approach in terms
of how many new customers the bank would gain.
Recently, many business organizations have been focusing on providing value as well as
enhancing the customer’s experience, and technology has been pivotal to their strategies.
Retailers can provide product videos on the retail floor to promote their products. Supermarkets
can offer scanning devices to reduce checkout time as well as offer specials and promotions to
their customers. E-tailers can offer suggestions of new products and specials based on past
searches and purchases. Hotels can offer room upgrades at a special price or destination
information for an upcoming stay at their property. Each of these examples leverages
information technology strategies to add value to the customer experience, thereby creating
additional revenue, retention of customers, and increasing organizational brand value.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
49
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Yet, a great number of SISs are the unintended consequence of exploiting information
technology to support activities that are not strategic. For example, in the 1990s, Owens &
Minor, a distributor of hospital supplies, built a data warehouse from which to glean business
intelligence. However, both its customers (mainly hospitals) and its suppliers (drug and medical
instrument makers) agreed to pay for mining the data warehouse to improve their decision
making. In this case, the company did not plan to create an SIS, but the data warehouse and the
tools that help mine it may become one, increasing Owens & Minor’s profit in a business that
has little to do with its original business.
Reengineering and Organizational Change
To implement an SIS and achieve competitive advantage, organizations sometimes must rethink
the entire way they operate. While brainstorming about strategic plans, management should ask:
“If we reestablished this business process from scratch, how would we do it?” The answer often
leads to the decision to eliminate one set of operations and build others from the ground up.
Changes such as these are called reengineering. Reengineering often involves adoption of new
machinery and elimination of management layers. Frequently, information technology plays an
important role in this process.
Reengineering’s goal is not to gain small incremental cost savings, but to achieve great
efficiency leaps—of 100 percent and even 1000 percent. With that degree of improvement, a
company
often
gains
competitive
advantage.
Interestingly,
a
company
that
undertakes
reengineering along with implementing a new SIS cannot always tell whether the SIS was
successful. The reengineering process makes it impossible to determine how much each change
contributed to the organization’s improved position.
Implementation
of
an
SIS
requires
a
business
to
revamp
processes—to
undergo
organizational change—to gain an advantage. For example, consumer electronics and appliance
manufacturer LG decided that it needed to apply its product innovation tactics to its supply
chain management system. In 2007, management found inconsistent practices for 115 factories
and subsidiaries within LG. Senior management believed that they need to reengineer its supply
chain to better manage its relationship with suppliers. Originally, they allowed each division to
negotiate its own agreements with suppliers. Therefore, the procurement personnel managing a
chip supplier for cell phones might not be aware of their colleague’s purchase of the same chips
from the same supplier for televisions at another LG manufacturing plant.
LG reengineered its procurement process to require that purchase orders be processed by a
centralized function. The analysis of their operations created a streamlined process, and they
compiled a single procurement manual. Ultimately, the new process replaced its fragmented and
uncoordinated
purchasing
procedures
with
consolidated
procedures,
saving
the
company
$2 billion; a savings of 6.7 percent. Coincidentally, these savings helped LG to be better
prepared for the forthcoming global downturn. This example reinforces the lesson that business
organizations should not ignore opportunities during successful times and rush to identify
opportunities only during challenging times. Being prepared for downturns is an important
strategy. For its reengineering efforts and results, LG was named as an innovator by Business
Week in 2010.
Interestingly, most reengineering of the 1990s and early 2000s failed and simply resulted in
massive layoffs. Executives found it impossible to actually change many business processes.
Business processes eventually did change in companies that adopted enterprise systems,
commonly called ERP systems. The reason: the new systems forced managers and employees to
change their way of work.
50
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Competitive Advantage as a Moving Target
As you might have guessed, competitive advantage is often short-lived. In time, competitors
imitate the leader, and the advantage diminishes. So, the quest for innovative strategies must be
dynamic. Corporations must continuously contemplate new ways to use information technology
to their advantage. In a way, companies’ jockeying for the latest competitive advantage is a lot
like an arms race. Side A develops an advanced weapon, and then side B develops a similar
weapon that terminates the advantage of side A, and so on.
In an environment where most information technology is available to all, SISs that are
originally developed to create a strategic advantage quickly become an expected standard
business practice. A prime example is the banking industry, where surveys indicate that
increased IS expenditures did not yield long-range strategic advantages. The first banks to
provide ATMs and online banking reaped some rewards in terms of labor savings and new
customers, but the advantage disappeared because most banks now offer these services.
A system can only help a company sustain competitive advantage if the company
continuously modifies and enhances the system, creating a moving target for competitors.
American Airlines’ Sabre—the online reservation system for travel agents—is a classic example.
The system, which was designed in the 1950s, was redesigned in the late 1970s to sell travel
agencies a new service, online airline reservations. But over the years, the company spun off an
office automation package for travel agencies called Agency Data Systems. The reservation
system now encompasses hotel reservations, car rentals, train schedules, theater tickets, and
limousine rentals. When the Internet became accessible to businesses and consumers, the system
was redesigned to let travelers use Sabre from their own computers. The system has been so
successful that in some years American earned more from the technology than from its airline
operations. The organizational unit that developed and operated the software became a separate
IT powerhouse at AMR Corp., the parent company of American Airlines, and now operates as
Sabre Holding Corporation, an independent company. It is the leading provider of technology
for the travel industry. Travelocity, Inc., the popular web-based travel site, is a subsidiary of
Sabre, and, naturally, uses Sabre’s software. Chances are you are using Sabre technology when
you make airline reservations through other websites, as well.
We return to Amazon as an example of how ISs help companies maintain competitive
advantage. Management believes that it must add new features to its website to attract buyers
over and over again. The company continuously improves its webpages’ look and the online
services it provides. Amazon has moved from merely selling books through the web to providing
best-seller lists, readers’ reviews, and authors’ interviews; selling almost any consumer product
imaginable; streaming audio and video; and posting consumer wish lists, product reviews by
customers, and other “cool stuff.” The constant improvements help the company maintain its
dominant position in online retailing.
However, all of these features have been imitated by competitors. Amazon now also offers
web hosting services and space for rent in its warehouses worldwide. Amazon has extended its
products and services to sell what it already does well; warehousing, fulfillment, and web-based
sales processing. If you are a small business, you can contract with Amazon to create the “look
and feel” of a major supplier and gain the order and fulfillment efficiencies of a larger business
organization.
Ultimately,
the
small
business
can
focus
on
its
core
competencies
of
manufacturing its product without the “back house” order fulfillment issues. Amazon has also
opened much of its software for developers to use.
Similarly, Google has offered access to some of its software. For example, it enables
webmasters and other website owners to use software that finds out why Google’s crawler—
software that searches the web and indexes new pages for search—has difficulties in indexing
pages. The result: the site owners get their new pages indexed so the public can access them,
and Google receives free labor in fixing problems its crawler faces. Organizations can integrate
Google mapping software into their own intranets to map customer locations, track shipments,
manage facilities, and perform other activities that are map-related. Amazon and Google have
augmented the portfolio of services they provide to increase the circle of organizations and
individuals who depend on them, thereby strengthening their strategic positions.
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
51
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
JetBlue: A Success Story
We usually expect entrepreneurs to enter a new and profitable industry, not an old, money-
losing one. However, with the proper technology and management methods, it seems that some
energetic people can gain strategic advantage where others have been hurting. The U.S. airline
industry has seen mainly bad times since the industry’s deregulation in the 1970s. The situation
deteriorated as the 1990s drew to a close, and grew even worse after the terrible events of
September 11, 2001. In 2001, the industry lost $7.7 billion, but JetBlue had a profit of
$38.5 million on revenue of $320.4 million. It continued to be profitable in 2002, 2003, and
2004 along with only one other carrier, Southwest Airlines, while all other U.S. carriers had
losses. JetBlue’s revenues grew from $998.4 million in 2003 to $1.27 billion in 2004. The
organization continues to be profitable, posting net income of $86M and $128M in 2011 and
2012 respectively (Anonymous, 2013b).
JetBlue was established in February 2000 by David Neeleman, who served as its
CEO. Two decades earlier, in 1984, Neeleman cofounded Morris Air, a small airline
in Salt Lake City, Utah, which was the first airline to offer ticketless travel, a program
that was developed inside the company. Working with a college student he
developed Open Skies, a computer program that integrates electronic ticketing,
Internet reservations, and revenue management. Revenue management tools help
an airline plan the most profitable routes and ticket pricing. Morris Air was sold to
Southwest Airlines, which enthusiastically adopted the e-ticket idea. Neeleman
became an executive at Southwest but left in frustration, because he believed that an
airline could achieve much more efficiency with information technology. JetBlue
gained a significant strategic advantage over larger and older airlines. The company’s
success was the result of understanding customers’ priorities and gaining marked
efficiencies through automating whatever IT can automate. Management also
learned to break away from practices that inhibit efficiency and agility.
In a highly competitive industry that traditionally has had a narrow profit margin, JetBlue
managed to gain strategic advantage by reducing cost, therefore reducing the price to the
customer, and improving a service, especially in terms of on-time departures and arrivals.
Massive Automation
We usually think of manufacturing organizations when mentioning automation, but benefits
can also be gained by automating services. JetBlue uses Open Skies, the software that Neeleman
developed. It is a combination reservation system and accounting system, and supports
customer service and sales tracking. Using JetBlue’s system directly to purchase a ticket, the
company avoids the cost of commission by booking a ticket through a travel agent. In addition,
JetBlue saves office space rent and electricity by using reservation agents who work from home
(telecommuting is discussed in Chapter 6, “Business Networks and Telecommunications”) and
use VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol, also discussed in Chapter 6) for telephoning. This
reduces its handling cost per ticket to $4.50.
Because all tickets are electronic, there is no paper handling or related expense. JetBlue
encourages customers to purchase their tickets online, and most of them do so, saving the
company much labor. The cost of handling a ticket ordered via the web is reduced to only 50
cents, as opposed to $4.50 paid to a reservation agent, and a far cry from the commission when
booking through a travel agent.
JetBlue automates other aspects of running an airline as well. Its maintenance workers use a
maintenance information system from Dash Group to log all airplane parts and their time
cycles, that is, when the parts must be replaced and where they can be found. The system
reduces manual tracking costs.
For jetBlue, information technology is at
least as important as fuel
© iStockphoto.com/Boarding1Now
52
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Flight planning to maximize yield—the number of seats occupied on a flight—is executed
on a flight-planning application from Bornemann Associates. It reduces planning costs and
makes operations more efficient. JetBlue also uses an application that its team of IT professionals
developed in-house, called Blue Performance. It tracks operational data that is updated flight by
flight. The company’s intranet enables its employees to access the performance data. Managers
have up-to-the-minute metrics, so critical in airline operations, which enable them to respond
immediately to problems.
When on the ground, employees use wireless devices to report and respond to any irregular
event, from weather delays to passenger injuries. The response is quick, and the events are
recorded in a database for later analysis.
When training pilots and other employees, no paper records are kept. An aviation training
management system provides a database to track each employee’s training record. It is easy to
update and efficient for record retrieval.
Away from Tradition
JetBlue decided not to use the hub-and-spokes method of routing its airplanes, a practice used by
all major airlines. Instead of having its airplanes land in one or two hubs and undergo
maintenance there before taking off for the next leg of a route, it simply uses the most profitable
routes between any two cities. All flights are point to point—no hubs, no spokes.
JetBlue was the first airline to establish paperless cockpits. The Federal Aviation Authority
(FAA) mandates that pilots and other aircrew members have access to flight manuals. The
manuals are the documents showing information about each flight, including route, weight,
how the weight is spread on board, fuel quantity, and even details such as how many pets are
on board. JetBlue was one of the first airlines to maintain electronic flight manuals, and the
pilots and first officers access and update the manuals on laptop computers that they carry into
the cockpit. As soon as the data have been entered, employees have access to the information.
The advantage once realized by the paperless cockpit has been adopted by several airlines.
Recently, tablet technology has been implemented to provide pilots with paperless access to
operational data (Anonymous, 2012c, 2013a). Data can be updated directly from the cockpit to
cloud data servers or PDFs sent directly back to operations centers.
The laptops enable the pilots and first officers to calculate the weight and balance of their
plane with a few keystrokes instead of relying on dispatchers at headquarters to do the
calculations for them. JetBlue saves paper and time by having employees enter flight data. The
company subscribes to SharePoint, a web-based portal that enables electronic updates to flight
manuals. This cuts 15 to 20 minutes from preflight preparations for every flight. The result is a
savings of about 4,800 hours per year and planes that take off and land on time.
JetBlue continues to harness IT to maintain the strategic gap between the company and its
competitors. Management planned a paperless frequent flier program, cockpit-monitoring
cameras transmitting through satellites so that ground crews can monitor activity, and biometric
applications in airport terminals. Biometrics use physical characteristics of people, such as
fingerprints and retina scans, for authentication and access to physical places and online
information systems. Biometrics are more secure than access codes.
Enhanced Service
Much of the technology that helps JetBlue employees provide better service is invisible to the
customers, but it also has some more obvious winning features. JetBlue offers leather seats and
individual real-time television on all its airplanes. When they began offering these services, other
airlines did not offer such seats on economy class, and offered only recorded television programs,
now others have followed. United Airlines has equipped 200 of its fleet with television
entertainment with over 100 channels free for first-class passengers and for a fee for coach
(Anonymous, 2013f).
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
53
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Its use of IT technologies also placed the airline at the top of the list for on-schedule
departures and arrivals, a service that is very important, especially to business travelers. Perhaps
even better, JetBlue ranks at the top as having the fewest mishandled bags. Thanks to constant
updates to the Open Skies system, the company has managed to maintain check-in time at less
than one minute. When passengers arrive at JetBlue’s terminal at JFK airport, they are directed
by a large LCD display with a computer-generated voice telling them which window is available
to serve them. Usually, checking baggage takes 45 seconds. When passengers arrive at their
destination, they do not have to wait for their suitcases. Their electronically tagged suitcases wait
for them at the baggage claim area.
The most important metric in the airline industry is cost per available seat-mile (CASM),
which is how much it costs to fly a passenger one mile of the journey. JetBlue was able to
maintain the lowest or next to lowest CASM in its first three years of operations. A February
2012 Airline Economic Analysis Report compiled by Oliver Wyman reported JetBlue’s CASM at
11 cents for 2011. Only two carriers posted lower costs, Spirit and Virgin America (Hazel,
Stalnaker, & Taylor, 2012).
Late Mover Advantage
Some observers cite the fact that JetBlue is a late competitor as an important factor in its success.
The company is not burdened with antiquated information systems, or as IT professionals like to
call them, legacy systems. This allowed them to implement the latest available technologies: fast
databases, VoIP, a slick website, laptop computers with the latest algorithms for fast calculation
of routes and loads in the cockpit, and other technologies. This situation illustrates the strategic
advantage of the late mover.
JetBlue executives quip that while other airlines run on fuel, theirs runs on information
technology. Its CIO said that up to 40 percent of the software the company was using was beta
or new software. Beta software is software that the developer gives to potential adopters for trial
use. Talk about being on the cutting—and possibly bleeding—edge! Yet, competitors took notice.
Many of them began to mimic JetBlue’s innovations, including live TV.
When ice storms wreaked havoc with airlines in February 2007, one of JetBlue’s major
problems was that crews who were supposed to be in a certain city were stranded in another,
and therefore staffing of flights was affected. While the crisis was on, the IT team developed a
special database and application to let crews call in their location and to replace it with the
location still stored in the system. The development process took a mere 24 hours. The IT team
also devised ways to communicate better with customers through broadcasting automated flight
alerts via email and mobile devices.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Costly Battles
In 2007, Microsoft was sued by i4i Inc., a Toronto-based software firm, for patent infringement of a small
piece of software code that was used in Microsoft Word. Four years later, the small Canadian technology
company had spent over $10 million in legal fees. Microsoft had appealed the case to the U.S. Supreme
Court. Two lower courts had ruled against Microsoft with one jury awarding i4i $290 million. By summer
of 2011, the U.S. Supreme Court had upheld the position of the lower courts and Microsoft was charged
$290 million. Because of the enormous value of patents in the tech industry, patent lawsuits are very fre-
quent, costly, and require significant corporate resources.
Source: Greene, Jay. (June 9, 2011). Supreme Court rules against Microsoft in i4i patent case. http://
news.cnet.com/8301-10805_3-20070308-75/supreme-court-rules-against-microsoft-in-i4i-patent-case/
54
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Size Matters
At what point do the public and the courts start to consider a
successful strategy as a predatory, unfair business practice
that makes competition from other businesses impossible,
even if their products are better? For instance, should a firm
that takes bold entrepreneurial steps to become a business
leader be curbed when it succeeds in becoming powerful?
Several
court
cases
against
software
industry
leader
Microsoft have focused on these questions. However, the
questions are not simply legal issues. They are also important
because they impact the economy and, as a result, society.
●
Historical Background. In the 1970s, Microsoft was a
small software company headed by its young president,
Bill Gates, who established the company at age 19. The
company was fortunate to find and buy an operating system
from a small company in Seattle, Washington, for $50,000.
An operating system (OS) is the software program that
“mediates” between any computer program and the com-
puter. Every application is developed with a particular oper-
ating system, or several operating systems, in mind. To a
great extent, the operating system determines which appli-
cations a computer can run. Therefore, it is an extremely
important program. We discuss operating systems and
other types of software in Chapter 5, “Business Software.”
People who purchased a computer had to consider the OS
to determine which applications they could run. After
Microsoft bought the operating system, it entered into a
contract with IBM, the most powerful computer manufac-
turer at that time. IBM needed an operating system for its
new creation, the IBM PC, and they chose Microsoft’s DOS
(Disk Operating System). While Microsoft did not make
much money on the IBM deal, its executives realized the
strategic potential of contracting with “the big guy.”
Indeed, the strategy paid off. Soon, Compaq (later part of
Hewlett-Packard) and many other manufacturers started
to market IBM PC clones, cheaper computers that per-
formed as well as IBM PCs and that could run the same
operating system and applications. Because Microsoft’s
contract with IBM allowed it to sell DOS to other parties,
it made a fortune selling DOS to Compaq and others. Later,
Microsoft developed Windows, an improved operating sys-
tem, and the success story repeated itself. To this day, the
majority of buyers of personal computers also buy a copy of
some version of Windows.
One major key to gaining a decent share of the new Inter-
net market was the widespread use of web browsers. In
the mid-1990s, more than 80 percent of web surfers used
Netscape’s browsers. Netscape was a young, entrepre-
neurial company selling innovative products. Microsoft
decided to increase its own browser’s market share of
about 15 percent to a leading position. If a great number
of people used its browser, Microsoft could expect hefty
sales of related software, such as server management
applications.
No one would deny that Microsoft’s attempt to compete in
the browser market was legitimate. While Netscape gave
its browsers away to individuals and educational institu-
tions but charged for-profit organizations, Microsoft gave
its browser to everyone free of charge. Also, the company
took advantage of Windows dominance; it started bundling
its browser with Windows, practically forcing any PC maker
who wanted to sell the machines with the operating system
installed to also install Internet Explorer (IE). The great
majority of new PC owners used IE without even trying
any other browser.
Within two years, a majority of web surfers were using IE.
But Netscape, the U.S. Department of Justice, and many
individuals considered Microsoft’s tactics unfair. Microsoft
used its muscle in the operating system market to compel
sellers of personal computers to include a copy of Internet
Explorer with Windows. Furthermore, the browser was insep-
arable from newer Windows versions. Since sellers had to
include Windows on every machine, and because it was
practically the only operating system most buyers would
accept, sellers had no choice but to succumb to the pres-
sure. The U.S. Department of Justice and the Attorneys
General of several states filed lawsuits claiming Microsoft
violated fair trade practices. Subsequently, legal authorities
in other countries, such as the European Union (EU) and
Taiwan, also either probed the company or sued it. In 2004,
the EU’s antitrust office fined Microsoft 497 million euros
($665 million) for abusively wielding Windows’ monopoly
and for locking competitors out of the software market.
●
Controversial Practices. In 2009, Microsoft settled with
the European Union for $2.2 billion for monopolizing the
world’s Internet searches. Their controversial practices led
to $400 billion in sales and domination of Internet browsing.
The fine is only one-half of one percent of sales over the
10-year period in which Microsoft was fighting the European
Commission and selling Windows outfitted to run only their
own browser, Internet Explorer. As part of the settlement,
Microsoft has been forced to alter its “bundled” packages
of software, which has allowed rival browsers to run on
Windows including Safari, Chrome, and Firefox. The move
benefits consumers who can choose their Internet browser
and encourages web innovation from entrepreneurs.
The U.S. government opted not to extend the antitrust over-
sight of Microsoft in 2011. The twice-extended oversight
forced Microsoft to release key software to assist competi-
tors and cooperate with a three-person committee that
ensured Microsoft did not engage in any predatory prac-
tices. However, since the settlement in 2002, Microsoft
has seen its share of the browser market decrease (check
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
55
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Ford on the Web: A Failure Story
Sometimes what seems to be a great, forward-looking strategic move ends up as a colossal failure.
It might be because of lack of attention to details or simply because the innovator could not
predict the response of customers or business partners, or had an idea too far ahead of its time.
Such was the great initiative of Jacques Nasser, the former CEO of Ford Motor Company, the
second largest U.S. automaker. In some cases, an early failure in a technology adoption can later
lead to a success through a change in industry practices and operations. The timing of initiatives
often is a key factor of success in business and some advances in technology are “before their
time” and may have a future and successful impact.
The Ideas
When Nasser was appointed CEO of Ford in 1999, he regarded himself as an agent of change. He
was eager to push the company into the web, which was then at the height of the “dot-com
bubble.” “We are now measuring speed in gigahertz, not horsepower,” he said at the 2000 North
American
International
Auto
Show
in
Detroit.
The
concept
cars
sported,
among
other
innovations, mobile Internet access. Ford Motor Co., he said, would put the Internet on wheels.
Ford launched Wingcast telematics, devices that would be installed in the company’s
vehicles and enable drivers and passengers to access the web. To this end the company formed
an alliance with Qualcomm, Inc., a telecommunications company, and Yahoo!
Ford created a joint venture with General Motors Corp. and DaimlerChrysler to establish
Covisint, a website that served as an electronic market for parts suppliers who could bid online
on requests for proposals posted by the automakers. Although not announced this way, the
automakers’ hope was that suppliers would fiercely compete in an open bidding process and cut
their prices dramatically, so the auto companies could enjoy cost cuts. This was the business-
to-business (B2B) part of Nassers’s grand plan.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_web_browsers
to see the current share statistics). The U.S. antitrust
oversight against Microsoft was completed in May 2011
(Goldberg, 2011). Microsoft was fined in March 2013 in rela-
tion to its non-compliance with stricter anti-trust regulations
imposed by the European Union (Foo, 2013).
Contrary to public perception, the United States, the Euro-
pean Union, and many other countries do not outlaw
monopolies. They only forbid unfair use of monopolistic
power. Because anyone may compete in any market, it
would be unfair to punish an entrepreneur for marketing
unique products and mustering market power of any mag-
nitude. Of concern in the eyes of U.S. law, for example, are
two issues: (1) have any unfair practices helped the com-
pany gain monopolistic power, and (2) does the monopolis-
tic situation serve customers well, or does it hurt them?
●
Up Side, Down Side. Microsoft argues that although it
could charge higher prices for Windows, it has not,
because it wants to make Windows affordable to all. Micro-
soft also argues that, unlike typical monopolists, it invests
huge amounts of money in research and development,
which eventually benefits society in the form of better and
less-expensive products. Microsoft’s rivals in the software
industry claim that Microsoft’s practices stifle true compe-
tition. Both claims are difficult to measure. Some observers
argue that allowing the same company to develop operat-
ing systems and many applications is good for consumers:
the applications are compatible with each other; all use the
same interface of menus and icons. Others suggest that
Microsoft should be broken into two organizations, one
that develops operating systems and another that develops
only applications and competes fairly in that market. And
some organizations and individuals simply fear the great
power that a single person can have. Recent changes in
two large organizations, Microsoft and Apple, clearly high-
light the impact of visionary leaders on technology compa-
nies. Apple’s Steve Jobs and Microsoft’s Bill Gates both
influenced the product development and innovation within
their businesses as well as our economy and society.
What is your opinion? What would you do about this issue?
Has the transition of their leadership impacted Apple and
Microsoft? Technology innovation?
56
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
The business-to-consumer (B2C) idea was bolder: Ford wanted to push vehicle sales to the
web. Nasser wanted to bypass dealerships and retail the vehicles online directly to consumers.
Consumers would go to the website, take a virtual test-drive, see images of a vehicle in all its
available colors, order a vehicle, pay for it online, and then have it driven to their door. Ford
would not only provide a great service but also save the dealer fees. The company called the site
FordDirect.com. A special organizational unit, ConsumerConnect, was established to build the
website and handle the direct sales. Today, many manufacturers such as Toyota, Chevrolet, and
Honda have integrated the functionality of building a vehicle on their websites. What once was
viewed as a failure changed the approach to selling vehicles on automakers’ websites.
Hitting the Wall
Apparently, buyers were not as enthusiastic about having web access in their vehicles as Nasser
predicted. In June 2001, Ford eliminated the Wingcast project. The B2B effort, Covisint, worked
for a while, but not as expected. It was later sold to Compuware, a software development
company. The B2C initiative failed.
The failure was not the result of faulty technology. There were web technologies that would
support retail through the web. There is no reason why a car cannot be selected, paid for, and
delivered (with the help of companies that specialize in such delivery from the manufacturer to
the buyer) via the web (and in fact this model became popular several years later, with some
changes). The company failed because it did not carefully consider state
laws and its
relationships with dealers.
Many state laws do not permit cutting an agent out of the sale. State franchising laws did
not allow Ford to bypass its dealers. Also, since Ford would still rely on dealers to sell cars to
people who do not have access to the Internet or who like to sit in a physical car and test-drive
it, it could not cut the relationship all at once. Ford still needed the collaboration of the dealers,
if it could overcome the legal hurdles, in order for direct sales to take off.
The Retreat
The circumstances convinced Ford to abandon its plan to sell directly to consumers. The
ConsumerConnect unit was disbanded. FordDirect.com morphed into a site that allows
consumers to build and price their own cars, compare vehicles, and search inventory—but
working with Ford dealers rather than trying to bypass them. Like any car dealer, the site also
offers used cars for sale, which is not what Ford originally wanted to do. The price tag of this
failed experiment was reported to be a hefty portion of the $1 billion Ford spent on its Internet
initiative under Nasser’s leadership. While other automakers were making modest profits in the
period from 2000 to 2001, Ford posted losses. Nasser was forced to leave the company.
Ford’s management can find some solace in the continued operation of FordDirect.com.
Although Nasser’s grand plan did not materialize, the site is the origin point of tens of
thousands of sales transactions per month. The site saves dealers marketing cost. A FordDirect
sale costs dealers only $160 (Anonymous, 2011). Ford also says the site helps it predict sales.
FordDirect continues to add new features to its system, such as DealerConnection for dealers
(Anonymous, 2012a).
The Bleeding Edge
As you might often hear, huge rewards go to whomever first implements a new idea. Innovators
might enjoy a strategic advantage until competitors discover the benefits of a new business idea
or a new technology. However, taking such steps before competitors have tested a system
involves great risk. In some cases, failure results from rushing implementation without
adequately testing a market. But even with careful planning, pioneers sometimes get burned.
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
57
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
For example, several supermarket chains tried self-checkout stations in the mid-1990s.
Consumers were expected to ring up their own purchases. By and large, investment in such
devices failed at that time not because the technology was bad, but because many consumers
either preferred the human touch, or because they did not want to learn how to correct mistakes
when the devices did not pick up the price of an item or picked it up twice. Recently, barcode
scanners at both the checkout and handheld scanners that allow shoppers to enter their
purchases as they shop have been installed by several chains. Consumers are finding these more
user friendly and less error prone, and their popularity is growing, as the technology has
matured.
While it is tempting to take the lead on new technology, the risk of business failure is quite
high. Several organizations have experienced disasters with new business ideas, which are only
magnified when implementing new technology. When failure occurs because an organization
tries to be on the technological leading edge, observers call it the bleeding edge. The
pioneering organization “bleeds” cash on a technology that increases costs instead of profits.
Adopting a new technology involves great risk: there is no experience from which to learn, no
guarantees that the technology will work well, and no certainty that customers, employees, or
business partners will welcome it.
Being on the bleeding edge often means that implementation costs are significantly higher
than anticipated, that the new technology does not work as well as expected, or that the parties
who were supposed to benefit—employees, customers, or suppliers—do not like using it. Thus,
instead of leading, the organization ends up bleeding, that is, suffering from high cost and lost
market share. For this reason, some organizations decide to let competitors test new technology
before they adopt it. They risk losing the initial rewards they might reap, but if a competitor
succeeds, they can quickly adopt the technology and even try to use it better than the
pioneering organization.
Microsoft generally takes this approach. It seizes an existing idea, improves it, and promotes
the result with its great marketing power. For instance, the company did not invent word
processing, but Word is the most popular word-processing application today. The company did
not invent the electronic spreadsheet, but Excel is the most popular spreadsheet application.
And Microsoft was not the first to introduce a PC database management application, but it sells
the highly popular Access. The company joined the Internet rush late, but it developed and gave
away Internet Explorer, the market leader in web browsers. You might call this approach
competing by emulating and improving, rather than competing by being on the leading edge.
Sometimes, companies wait quite a long time to ensure that a technology has matured
before they start using it, even at the risk of diminishing their strategic position. Although data
warehousing—the organization and summarization of huge amounts of transactional records for
later analysis—has been around since the mid-1990s, The Home Depot, Inc., decided only in
2002 to build a data warehouse. Home Depot is the world’s largest home improvement retailer.
It started the project years after its main rival in the United States, Lowe’s, had implemented a
well-functioning data warehouse, which it used effectively for strategic decision making.
58
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Summary
●
Some ISs have become strategic tools as a result of
strategic planning; others have evolved into strate-
gic tools. To compete better, executives need to
define strategic goals and determine how new or
improved ISs can support these goals. Rather than
waiting complacently until a problem occurs, busi-
nesses actively look for opportunities to improve
their position with information systems.
●
An IS that helps gain strategic advantage is called a
strategic information system (SIS). To assure opti-
mal utilization of IT for competitive advantage,
executives must participate in generating ideas
and champion new, innovative uses of information
systems. In recent years, many of these ideas
involved using the Internet.
●
A company achieves strategic advantage by using
strategy to maximize its strengths, resulting in a
competitive advantage.
●
Strategic advantage is often achieved by one or a
combination of the following initiatives. Cost reduc-
tion enables a business to sell more units of its pro-
ducts or services while maintaining or increasing
its profit margin. Raising barriers to potential
entrants to the industry lets an organization main-
tain a sizable market share by developing systems
that are prohibitively expensive for competitors to
emulate. By establishing high switching costs, a
business can make buying from competitors unat-
tractive to clients. Developing totally new products
and services can create an entirely new market for
an organization, which can also enjoy the advan-
tage of being a first mover for that product and
market. And if the organization cannot create new
products or services, it can still enjoy competitive
advantage by differentiating its products so that
customers view them as better than a competitor’s
products. Organizations also attain advantage by
enhancing existing products or services. Many
new services are the fruits of alliances between
companies: each contributes its own expertise to
package services that entice customers with an
overall value greater than that offered by the sepa-
rate services individually. Locking in clients or sup-
pliers, that is, creating conditions that make dealing
with competitors infeasible, is a powerful strategy
to gain advantage.
●
In the software industry, creating standards often
creates strategic advantage. A standard is an appli-
cation used by a significant share of the users. To
this end, many companies go as far as giving soft-
ware away. When the standard has been estab-
lished, the company enjoys a large sales volume
of compatible and add-on software.
●
Reengineering is the process of redesigning a
business process from scratch to save hundreds
of percentage points in costs. Almost always, reen-
gineering involves implementing new ISs.
●
Strategic advantages from information systems are
often
short-lived,
because
competitors
quickly
emulate the systems for their own benefit. There-
fore, looking for new opportunities must be an
ongoing process. Companies can maintain the stra-
tegic advantage gained through an IS by continu-
ously augmenting the services they provide.
●
To maintain a strategic advantage, organizations
must develop new features to keep the system
on the leading edge. But they must be mindful
of the bleeding edge, the undesirable results
(such as huge ongoing costs and loss of custo-
mers) of being the first to use new technology
with
the
hope
of
establishing
a
competitive
advantage. Early adopters find themselves on
the bleeding edge when the new technology is
not yet fully reliable or when customers are
uncomfortable with it.
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
59
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Tyler’s perspective was crucial in helping his parents
become
aware
of
the
strategic
and
operational
challenges of their business. He knows if he could
design and implement efficient changes to operations
as well as some information technology, the business
would be even more successful. Additionally, these
changes would build a solid business foundation to
objectively analyze the expansion decision.
What Is Your Advice?
1. Kimball’s has several challenges to resolve in its
operations to improve its current business and
prepare for a potential expansion. What changes
has Kimball’s implemented to positively impact
their business? Can you identify the strategic initia-
tives that Kimball’s can implement? What could
Tyler recommend to move the business forward?
Be sure to consider the following ways of gaining
a competitive advantage:
●Reduce costs
●Raise barriers to entrants
●Establish high switching costs
●Create new products and services
●Differentiate products and services
●Enhance products or services
●Establish alliances
●Lock in suppliers or buyers
2. Review the advice of the professional advisors, Tom
and Terri. Do you believe they have some merit?
What would you recommend to move forward
to resolve their perspective of the problem(s)?
What type of information technology could be
implemented?
New Perspectives
1. Considering the POS system, what information do
the owners need to manage and lead the restau-
rant? What data can help Liz and Michael monitor
their operations to ensure positive results or take
corrective action?
2. Michael and Liz operated the business without the
use of data from their operations. The oversight
and management of their operations associated
with inventory and labor appear to have been
overlooked. How do these categories of expenses
affect the profitability of the restaurant? How can
an information system assist with the manage-
ment of these functional areas?
Key Terms
affiliate program, 46
alliance, 45
bleeding edge, 58
competitive advantage, 37
create a new and unique product
or service, 41
create a standard, 47
critical mass, 42
differentiation, 44
enhance existing products or
services, 44
first mover, 42
late mover, 54
lock in clients or suppliers, 47
raise barriers to entrants, 40
reduce costs, 39
reengineering, 50
strategic advantage, 37
strategic information system
(SIS), 37
switching costs, 41
60
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Review Questions
1. In what respect does business strategy resemble
military strategy?
2. Refer to Chapter 1’s discussion of different types
of information systems. Which types of ISs can
gain strategic advantage and which cannot? Why?
3. What should an information system achieve for
an organization in order to be considered a stra-
tegic information system? How do strategic
information systems compare with operational
information systems?
4. What strategic goal can an IS attain that does not
involve wresting market share from competitors?
Provide some business examples.
5. What conditions must exist in an organization
planning an SIS?
6. Sometimes it is difficult to convince top manage-
ment to commit funds to develop and implement
an SIS. Why?
7. An SIS often offers a corporation short-lived
advantages. How so?
8. What is reengineering? Why is reengineering
often mentioned along with IT?
9. Why have most reengineering projects failed?
What has eventually affected reengineering in
some companies?
10. Software developers have made great efforts to
“create a standard.” What does creating a stan-
dard mean in the software industry, and why
are companies doing it?
11. What should an organization do to sustain the
strategic benefits of an IS?
12. Adobe encourages PC users to download its
Acrobat Reader and Flash Player free of charge.
How does this eventually help Adobe strategi-
cally? If they give the application away, how does
their generosity help them make money?
13. Referring to the list of strategic moves (see
Figure 2.2), classify the initiatives of JetBlue.
14. What were the reasons for the failure of the orig-
inal purpose of FordDirect.com? Who eventually
gained from the system and what were the gains?
15. The executives of well-established airlines are not
less smart than those at JetBlue, and yet, their
larger airlines have not done what JetBlue has
done. Why?
16. What does the term “first mover” mean?
17. Can a late mover have any strategic advantage
with IT? What is the risk that a late mover takes?
18. What does the term “bleeding edge” mean?
Discussion Questions
19. Can an off-the-shelf computer program be used
as an SIS? Why or why not?
20. The organizations that eventually use the sys-
tems, not consulting firms that try to help orga-
nizations, develop more successful SISs. What
might be the reasons for this?
21. You head a small company. You have an idea for
software that can give your company an advan-
tage over competitors. Since you do not have a
staff that can develop and implement the soft-
ware, you decide to approach a software com-
pany. Other than the company’s technical
offerings, what additional company aspects
are desirable?
22. Some argue that an SIS gives a company an
unfair advantage and might even cause the
demise of smaller, weaker companies that cannot
afford to build similar systems. Is this good or
bad for customers? Explain your opinion.
23. Why is the web the arena of so much competition
today?
24. Information systems play a major role in almost
every reengineering project. Why?
25. Accounting and payroll ISs have never become
SISs. Why? What other types of ISs are unlikely
to ever provide strategic advantage for their
owners?
26. Give two examples of products or services whose
delivery time could be cut from days to minutes
with the aid of IT.
27. What is the role of ISs in alliances such as airlines
and credit-card issuers? Why would such alli-
ances be practically infeasible without IT?
28. JetBlue used new software that had not been
tested by other companies. If you were a CIO,
would you use software that is still in beta
(untested with live data) in your organization?
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
61
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
29. You are an executive for a large organization that
provides services to state and federal agencies.
A software development firm approached you
with an offer to implement new software that
might give your organization a strategic advan-
tage by reducing the service delivery cycle by
several days. What would you do to avoid putting
your organization on the “bleeding edge” while
still considering the new software?
30. When a software developer creates a de facto
standard (i.e., not the official standard, but some-
thing so widely used that it becomes a standard),
it has monopolistic power. Should governments
intervene to prevent this practice? Explain your
opinion.
31. Suppose you are a venture capitalist considering
a proposal to invest millions of dollars in a new
online business. What questions would you ask
the enthusiastic young people who have
approached you for funds?
32. What are the potential risks of a single organiza-
tion controlling much of the market for essential
software?
33. Can you think of any other first movers/technolo-
gies that might replace satellite radio?
Applying Concepts
34. Although Apple Computer Inc. introduced a per-
sonal computer and software that was superior to
those produced by IBM and other companies, it
failed to capture the lion’s share of the PC market.
However, it did capture a large share of several
markets: the digital music player, cell phone, and
tablet. Complete some research. What was the
difference in the company’s approach to the two
types of products? What is your conclusion
regarding the proper approach when developing
a new digital product?
35. Prepare a brief essay that includes an example
of each of the following strategic moves: raising
barriers to entrants (Hint: intellectual property),
establishing high switching costs, creating a new
product or service (Hint: the web), and establish-
ing alliances. The examples do not necessarily
have to involve IT. Do not use examples already
presented in the text. You may use examples
from actual events or your own suggestions,
but the examples must be practical.
36. A publishing company wants to publish electronic
books that can be downloaded and read on both
tablets and electronic readers. At least two firms
have developed e-book technologies that the
publisher can adopt. The publisher hires you as a
strategic consultant. Write a report explaining the
strategic moves you suggest. What would you
advise the company to do: try to develop its own
e-book reader or purchase a license for existing
technology? Who should be the initial target
audience for the product? What should be the
company’s major goal in the first two or three
years: profit, market share, user base, technolog-
ical improvement, or perhaps having the largest
sales force in this industry? Should the company
give anything away? Prepare a detailed report
enumerating and explaining your suggestions.
37. You are a software-marketing expert. A new soft-
ware development firm has hired you to advise it
on pricing and marketing strategies of its new
application. After some research, you conclude
that the firm can be successful either by selling at
a high unit price (in which case, probably only
businesses would purchase licenses to use the
application), or at a very low price, which would
be attractive to many individuals and companies.
You estimate that by the end of the sixth year of
the marketing effort competing software will be
offered, which will bring the number of units sold
to zero. For alternative A, the price would be $350
per license, and you expect 600 adopters in the
first year and an annual growth of adopters of
50 percent. For alternative B, the price would be
$25, and you expect 25,000 adopters in the
first year and an annual growth of adopters of
5 percent. Use a spreadsheet application to cal-
culate revenue, and tell the firm which strategy is
expected to bring in greater revenue. Enter the
prices and number of first-year adopters for each
alternative only once, each in a single cell, and
use absolute referencing to those cells.
62
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Hands-On Activities
38. Use PowerPoint or other presentation software
to present the ideas you generated in Question 34
or 35 of “Applying Concepts.” Use the program’s
features to make a convincing and visually
pleasing presentation.
39. Research business journals and magazines
such as the Wall Street Journal, BusinessWeek,
Forbes, or Fortune. Find a story on a business’s
strategic use of data, information, or information
systems. Be aware that the writer may not have
specifically identified the system as strategic in
nature. Gain an understanding of the new sys-
tem’s goals and determine whether it is strategic.
Prepare a report explaining the opportunity
seized. Did the organization create a new product
or service, improve one, or manage to capture a
significantly greater market share of an existing
product or service? How did the data, informa-
tion, or information system play a major role in
the strategic move?
40. Consider the information provided in the “Ethical
& Societal Issues” box of this chapter. Prepare
extensive lists of pros and cons. The pros should
aim to convince an audience why Microsoft, or a
similar company, should be left alone to practice
its business maneuvers. The cons should aim to
convince an audience why governments should
intervene in how corporations such as Microsoft
behave and explain what such interventions are
meant to accomplish. How has the global market
for software changed the legal issues?
Team Activities
41. Brainstorm with your team to answer the ques-
tion: “Which information technology over the
past two years has epitomized a unique product
or service that was ‘ahead of the curve’ for a sig-
nificant amount of time?” This might be a physi-
cal product using IT or an online service that was,
or still is, unique. List the reasons each of the
team members liked this product or service.
42. Some information technologies had a certain
original purpose but were creatively used to serve
additional purposes. For example, companies
have used caller ID to retrieve customer records
as soon as a customer telephones. This saves
labor and increases service quality. You and your
teammates are consultants who work with many
businesses. Offering your clients original ideas
will increase your success. Select an information
technology or an IT feature that can be leveraged
in ways not originally conceived. How can your
clients (in manufacturing, service, or any other
business sector) use this feature to gain strategic
advantage? Prepare a rationale.
43. Sirius and XM Radio had the first mover advan-
tage in the satellite radio industry. They had radio
stations dedicated to celebrities, music stars, and
most major sports including the NFL, NHL, and
MLB. By 2006, they had close to 14 million users.
They merged in 2008 to cut operating costs. The
barriers to entry in the Internet radio industry are
relatively low because it is simple for a webcaster
to pay royalties for a song and broadcast it. iPods,
cell phones, and Internet radio are all competing
for time in the customers’ ear. Do you think the
Sirius-XM merger was a business move to elimi-
nate competition between each other and defend
against other upcoming forms of radio? What are
some other reasons to explain their merger? Pro-
vide an analysis and rationale for your position.
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
63
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART1
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Finish Line Finishes First
Finish Line is a clothes and shoe retailer with over 640
locations in malls across the United States. In late
2012, Finish Line was about to unleash its new in-
store POS technology to engage more shoppers.
Although Finish Line was initially criticized for the
timing of the roll-out, director of store applications
and delivery, Rob Baugh, knew from the start it was
going to be a home-run. From previous research
conducted by the National Retail Federation, Finish
Line
knew
an
astounding
95
percent
of
retail
purchases were still occurring in physical stores.
Thus, an opportunity awaited retailers that could
engage
more
customers
to
make
more
in-store
purchases. Baugh knew the goal of the POS system
was to provide service to the customer, when the
customer needed it.
Before Finish Line could make any technological
improvements, it required network upgrades and
additional wireless access points. Mobile receipt
printers were placed throughout stores to aid sales
associates
performing
mobile
POS
transactions.
To leverage the opportunity at hand, Finish Line
implemented a mobile POS system to aid and
engage
shoppers
through
their
entire
in-store
shopping experience. To enable mobile payments,
it upgraded its POS system to a platform from
MICROS
Systems
and
implemented
a
customer
engagement
solution
from
VeriFone.
Their
new
electronic
payment
options
included
magnetic
stripe
and
PIN-based
debit/credit
cards,
chip-
enabled
smartcards,
and
mobile
payments.
The
multimedia processors were high-speed, color, and
supported full-motion video for additional shopper
appeal. iPod Touch devices used Micros’ MyStore
application
and
VerFone’s
PAYware
Mobile
Enterprise
software,
which
supported
all
device
transaction functionality.
High confidence in the success of the new system
led to a 36-store, 3-month pilot program from May to
August. Each store featured five mobile devices that
could
process
a
variety
of
business
activities.
Customers appreciated using the mobile POS units
to interact with sales associates. The overall results
of the pilot were very positive and one month later,
the positive results led to a companywide roll-out,
right before the crucial holiday season. Finish Line
issued five devices per store and added barcode
scanners to allow users to conduct price checking
and inventory management processes. Transactions
completed on the mobile units are sent through the
retailer’s centralized system to consolidate its sales
and inventory data.
Finish
Line’s
new
POS
system
and
mobile
payments
acceptance
has
changed
its
in-store
shopping experience. Finish Line did its research
and
pursued
an
opportunity
to
change
in-store
consumers’
shopping
experience
and
put
the
customer first.
Source: Amato-McCoy, D. M. (2012). Perfect Timing. Chain
Store Age, 88(7), 28–28.
Thinking About the Case
1. Why do retailers want to provide customers with
more product/service information when they
come into a retail store?
2. How does Finish Line put the customer first?
3. Why is it important to monitor the results of
newly implemented technology, even when it is
previously deemed successful?
4. Would you be more inclined to shop at Finish
Line or one of their competitors, and why?
Realizing the Goal Helps Reach Results
Businesses aiming to expand, gain a larger market
share, or compete with competitors can accomplish
these goals through reducing costs, raising barriers to
market entrants, or creating new products or services.
Additionally, each of these goals can be accomplished
through the use of innovative technologies. When
companies explore uses for innovative technologies
with a specified goal in mind, they can experience
tremendous
results
in
their
attempts
in
shaping
consumer
behavior,
changing
their
shopping
experience, or even altering the backhouse operations.
Other times, when technology reaches maturity, it has
other unforeseen uses. In both of the following short
case
examples,
the
exhibited
company
uses
technological innovations to either differentiate itself in
the market place, attract new customers, lock in
customers, offer a new product or service, or some
combination of the previous.
Peapod is an online grocery ordering service
provider
whose
goal
was
to
use
branding
as
a way to promote an innovative product-service
combination.
Peapod
placed
virtual
walls
in
commuter rail stations and other public locations
that looked like products on a grocer’s shelves.
These virtual walls offered branding and advertising
which attracted customers and served as a reminder
of Peapod’s innovative service which is online grocery
ordering and delivery. Shoppers can use the Peapod
app on their smartphone to order groceries and have
them
delivered
the
next
day.
Although
their
technology is changing the way consumers approach
64
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
grocery shopping, the added conveniences soothe the
transition. The goal is to allow customers to see the
branding, use the app, and have groceries delivered
the next day; all while waiting for a train home. The
ultra-modern shopping experience is just another
way retailers are altering consumers’ expectations of
how shopping should be conducted.
This idea has been expanded further by other
companies such as Sears Holdings Corp. Sears and
Kmart used QR code-driven “toy walls” to produce a
wall-driven shopping experience. Toy walls were
featured
in
high-traffic
locations
such
as
malls,
airports, and movie theatre lobbies. This shopping
approach is cost efficient because the virtual walls
do not require any floor space. Shoppers then could
simply scan the wall’s QR code to order toys while on
the run.
One of Amazon’s keys to financial success is not
the sales revenue collected by their e-reader, the
Kindle,
but
the
sales
that
the
Kindle
provokes
subsequently. Digital sales of books, movies, and TV
shows
are
where
Amazon
expands
its
revenue
sources. To encourage more Kindle sales to hesitant
buyers, Amazon opened a physical store location in
Seattle, Washington so potential customers could
come in and tryout a Kindle before purchasing one.
The idea of opening a brick-and-mortar location will
increase Kindle sales which would then create more
demand for digital content and additional sales for
Amazon. After a customer has purchased the Kindle,
the digital sales expand and the customer is locked in
for future sales.
The innovative technologies aforementioned had
incredible
results,
primarily
because
they
were
implemented with a specified goal in mind. Peapod
is
utilizing
game-changing
virtual
walls
to
turn
passersby into shoppers and Amazon is locking in
future customers by easing their initial purchase; the
most important one. There are a number of different
ways to attract new customers, lock in customers, and
produce differentiation with a new product/service
combination when utilizing innovative technologies.
In doing so, the most important key to success is to
realize a destination early, plan the course of action,
and adjust for adversities.
Source:
Anonymous.
(2012).
What
is
Game-Changing
Innovation? Chain Store Age, 88(5), 2–4A, 5A.
Thinking About the Case
1. What benefits are provided to the shopper by
Peapod’s services? How does their innovative
product/service combination provide additional
benefits beyond the average grocery store with
delivery service?
2. “Toy walls” could be found in malls, airports, and
movie theater lobbies during the 2011 holiday
season. Why were they featured in these loca-
tions and what additional locations would be
ideal? Explain why.
References
Anonymous. (2011). FordDirect Dealer News. Retrieved
May 22, 2013, from http://forddirect.xpsitehost-
ing.com/FD1106/
Anonymous. (2012a, 2012-02-09). FordDirect
Launches DealerConnection Elite Service for
Dealers. Travel & Leisure Close-Up.
Anonymous. (2012b). The 2012 Gartner CIO Agenda
Report (pp. 10). Stamford, CT.
Anonymous. (2012c). Why Operations Take the
Tablets. Flight Evening News (3), 3–3.
Anonymous. (2013a). App will aid advance towards the
paperless cockpit. Flight International, 183, 22–22.
Anonymous. (2013b). JetBlue Announces 2012 Annual
Profit.
Anonymous. (2013c). Number of active users at Face-
book over the years. Retrieved May 22, 2013, from
http://news.yahoo.com/number-active-users-
facebook-over-230449748.html
Anonymous. (2013d). Twitter Statistics. Retrieved May
22, 2013, from www.statisticbrain.com/twitter-
statistics/
Anonymous. (2013f, 2013-05-15). United Airlines;
United Airlines Introduces 200th Aircraft With
Live Television. Entertainment Newsweekly, 112.
Foo, Y. C. (2013, Mar 07). EU slaps $731 million pen-
alty on Microsoft, Chicago Tribune, p. 1.
Goldberg, A. (2011). US to end antitrust oversight of
Microsoft, McClatchy-Tribune Business News.
Hazel, B., Stalnaker, T., & Taylor, A. (2012). Airline
Economic Analysis (p. 41). New York, NY.
Waurzyniak, P. (2012). PLM Systems Further Extend
Reach to the Shop Floor. Manufacturing Engineering,
149(5), 67–70, 72–75.
Winkler, R. (2012). Facebook, Twitter: Space Invaders,
Wall Street Journal, p. B.16.
CHAPTER 2
Strategic Uses of Information Systems
65
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
 
CHAPTER
PART
Jupiterimages/Photos.com 
three
BUSINESS FUNCTIONS AND
SUPPLY CHAINS
Learning Objectives
In an economy that produces and consumes so much information, professionals must know how to use information
systems in virtually every business activity. Managers must have an overall understanding of all elements of a
system, so that they know what options are available to control quality, costs, and resources. Modern information
systems encompass entire business cycles, often called supply chains.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Identify various business functions and the role of ISs in these functions.
●
Explain how ISs in the basic business functions relate to each other.
●
Articulate what supply chains are and how information technology supports management of supply chains.
●
Enumerate the purposes of customer relationship management systems.
●
Explain enterprise resource planning systems.
66
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: The New Location
Liz and Michael carefully reviewed the marketing, finan-
cial, and operational forecasts for expanding their busi-
ness to the new lakeside location and closing the
current location. They felt that their forecasts were rea-
sonable. In January, they agreed to leasing terms with
Shaun to move the restaurant into the former camp-
ground location. They planned to take several months
to complete the design and renovations and prepare
for opening “Kimball’s by the Lakeside” in late May.
Tyler had convinced his parents to take their advi-
sors’ advice and focus on operating their business
more profitably before the move. This focus would
also benefit them in their expansion, because they
would need additional management to create efficiency
in operations and build a more effective strategy for the
restaurant. The increased number of customers at the
new location would also require more employees, food
purchases, and coordination with suppliers. If the back-
house operations were not managed and controlled
properly, the expansion could create more problems
than it solved. If they can’t operate more efficiently in
the new location, their profits could evaporate, even
with the additional clientele.
Currently, Kimball’s marketing activities were lim-
ited to small advertisements in a local newspaper.
Although they had a solid clientele at the current loca-
tion, it would be important to extend their reach to the
nearest metropolitan city, about 12 miles away. Tyler
hoped to use the four months before opening the new
location to develop new marketing and promotions to
build their customer base.
Planning the Transition:
Operations and Marketing
Liz, Michael, and Tyler met to discuss the transition
plan. Tyler had several thoughts about the operational
changes that needed to be implemented. The company
that sold Kimball’s the point-of-sale software used by
the servers had additional software available, although
additional research needed to be completed. He won-
dered, “If reliable software was available, when would
be the right time to install and use the new system?”
Since the expansion decision was behind them, he
wondered if additional software to help the business
could be installed before the move. Using this approach,
the employees and management could use the system in
the current location and gain more experience with it. Liz
asked, “If we installed the software now, wouldn’t that be
twice as much work to then reinstall it in the new loca-
tion?” Tyler responded that the current hardware and
software would need to be shut down, packed, trans-
ported, and installed in the new location anyway. The
purchase of any new software would be “carried over”
to the new location without any additional expense.
Michael and Liz thought about the alternatives that
Tyler presented. Liz recalled the planning process for
their current location, and how issues arose at the start
of the business, even with their careful planning. Expe-
rience told her that similar issues could come up at the
new location. Michael said, “Maybe it’s not a bad idea to
install the new software now. We can train people in a
familiar and established operation for a month or two.”
Liz believed that the new location might need more
hardware based on the larger dining and kitchen area.
They all agreed that if a suitable system to help with
the backhouse operations could be installed in their cur-
rent location, it should be purchased and implemented.
Michael and Tyler then focused their attention on
marketing. They agreed that they needed to expand
their clientele to include people in the nearby metropol-
itan area. They also wanted to keep and increase their
local clientele and to continue hosting “after work” cus-
tomers from local businesses. The additional seating at
the new location could be promoted for breakfast,
lunch, and dinner meetings for businesses as well.
Michael, Liz, and Tyler agreed that it was important for
them to retain Kimball’s “local” feel while promoting
the new location to a wider audience.
Effectiveness and Efficiency
In customer service departments, the ringing tone from telephones was a common occurrence.
Major business organizations would receive millions of calls from customers to ask a variety of
questions on their accounts. Telephones at the offices of Capital One Financial Corp., a leading
credit-card issuer and a Fortune 500 company, probably do not ring as often as they did two or
three decades ago. Cardholders who once called to ask about their balance or to ensure that the
company received their recent payment now have other alternatives such as smartphones,
websites, or directly entering their account information into an automated phone service.
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
67
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
If you do connect with a customer service agent, technology is still involved in your call.
Information technology uses the caller’s telephone number to search the company’s huge
databases. Inferring from previous calls and numerous recorded credit-card transactions of the
caller, the computers may predict the reason for calling. Based on the assumed reason, the
computers channel the call to an employee who can best handle the situation. Important
information about the caller is brought up on the employee’s computer monitor without having
to ask or enter the caller’s account number. Although callers usually do not contact the company
to make purchases, the computer also brings up information about what the caller might want to
purchase. As soon as the customer service representative provides the caller with satisfactory
answers, he or she also offers the cardholder special sales. Many callers do indeed purchase the
offered merchandise. All of these steps—accepting the call, reviewing and analyzing the data,
routing the call, and recommending merchandise—take the computers a mere tenth of a second.
Because of Capital One’s effective operations and efficient response, they were recognized by J.D.
Power and Associates for their outstanding customer service in 2012.
It is often said that the use of information technology makes our work more effective, more
efficient, or both. What do these terms mean? Effectiveness defines the degree to which a goal
is achieved. Thus, a system is more or less effective depending on (1) how much of a particular
goal it achieves, and (2) the degree to which it achieves better outcomes than other systems do.
Efficiency is determined by the relationship between resources expended and the benefits
gained in achieving a goal. Expressed mathematically,
Efficiency ¼ Benefits
Costs
One system is more efficient than another if its operating costs are lower for the same or better
quality product, or if the product’s quality is greater for the same or lower costs. The term
“productivity” is commonly used as a synonym for efficiency. However, productivity
specifically refers to the efficiency of human resources. Productivity improves when fewer
workers are required to produce the same amount of output, or, alternatively, when the same
number of workers produces a greater amount of output. This is why IT professionals often
speak of “productivity tools,” which are software applications that help workers produce more in
less time. The closer the result of an effort is to the ultimate goal, the more effective the effort.
The fewer resources spent on achieving a goal, the more efficient the effort.
Suppose your goal is to design a new car with fuel economy of 60 miles per gallon. If you manage
to build it, then you produce the product effectively. If the car does not meet the requirement, your
effort is ineffective. If your competitor makes a car with the same features and performance, but uses
fewer people and resources, then your competitor is not only as effective as you but also more
efficient. ISs contribute to both the effectiveness and efficiency of businesses, especially when
serving specific business functions, such as accounting, finance, and engineering, and when used to
help companies achieve their goals more quickly by facilitating collaborative work.
One way to look at business functions and their supporting systems is to follow typical
business cycles, which often begin with marketing and sales activities (see Figure 3.1). Serving
customers better and faster, as well as learning more about their experiences and preferences, is
facilitated by customer relationship management (CRM) systems. When customers place
orders, the orders are executed in the supply chain. Often, information about the customer is
collected as orders are taken. This information may be useful down the road. Customer
relationship management continues after delivery of the ordered goods in the forms of customer
service and more marketing. When an organization enjoys the support of CRM and supply
chain management (SCM) systems, it can plan its resources well. Combined, these systems are
often referred to as enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems.
68
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
F I G U R E 3.1
Business activities consist
of customer relationship
management, supply
chain management, and
supporting functions
Customer Service
Marketing
Sales
Enterprise Resource Planning
Customer Relationship
Management
Supply Chain Management
Marketing & Sales
Human Resource
Management
Accounting
Financial Management
Technology Services
Other Support
Services
Develop Plans and
Schedules
Develop Material
Requirements and
Purchase
Pay for Supplies
Bill and Collect
Pack and Ship
Produce Goods
Support Activities:
BANK
Receive Supplied
Raw Materials
and Parts
Figure 3.2 shows some of the most common business activities and their interdependence.
For example, cost accounting systems are linked to payroll, benefits, and purchasing systems to
accumulate the cost of products manufactured by a company; and information from purchasing
systems flows to both cost accounting and financial reporting systems. The following discussion
addresses the role of information systems, one business function at a time.
F I G U R E 3.2
Information systems
in different business
functions are
interdependent
Marketing and Sales
Financial Management
Human Resources
Engineering
Manufacturing and
Inventory Control
Accounting
1
2
3
4
5
6
Computer-aided
Design
Targeted Marketing
Salesforce
Cash Management
Investment Analysis
Product
Specifications
Simulation
Computer-aided
Manufacturing
Evaluation
Training
Promotion and
Recruitment
Benefits Management
Cost Accounting
Manufacturing
Resource Planning
Purchasing
Market Research
Production
Requirements
Financial Reports
Payroll
© Cengage Learning 2015
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
69
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Accounting
The purpose of accounting is to track every financial transaction within a company—from a few
cents expenditure to a multimillion-dollar purchase, from salaries and benefits to the sale of
every item. Without tracking the costs of labor, materials, and purchased services using a cost-
accounting system, a company might discover too late that it sells products below what it costs
to make them. Without a system of accounts receivable, managers might not know who owes
the company how much money and when it is due. Without an accounts payable system, they
cannot know how much money the company owes suppliers and when payments are due.
Without a system that records and helps plan cash flow, managers cannot keep enough cash in
the bank to make payments on schedule. At the year’s end, the company cannot present a
picture of its financial situation—called a balance sheet—and a profit-and-loss report, unless it
maintains a general ledger to record every transaction with a financial impact. Accounting
systems are required by law and for proper management. General ledger, accounts receivable,
accounts payable, and cash-flow books conveniently lend themselves to computerization and
can easily generate balance sheets and profit-and-loss statements from records (see Figure 3.3).
The word “books” in this reference is now a relic of former times. Accounting ISs are, of course,
fully electronic.
F I G U R E 3.3
Accounting information
systems include features
that reflect up-to-date
performance of the
organization in financial
terms
Cost Accounting
Accounts Payable and
Accounts Receivable
Sales Information
from TPS
Other Accounting Functions
Labor:
Materials:
O/H:
Total Cost:
$ 3,042
$ 1,569
$    282
$ 4,893
ANNUAL
REPORT
Financial
Reports
Accounting
Information
Systems
Typically, accounting ISs receive records of routine business transactions—such as the
purchase of raw materials or services, or the sale of manufactured goods—from transaction
processing
systems
(TPSs),
which
include
point-of-sale
(POS)
machines.
Such
a
system
automatically routes every purchase of raw materials or services to the accounts payable system,
which uses it to produce checks or transfer funds to a vendor’s bank account. Whenever a sale is
recorded, the transaction is routed to the accounts receivable system (which generates invoices)
and other destinations. Totals of accounts receivable and accounts payable can be automatically
transferred to a balance sheet. Data from the general ledger can be automatically compiled to
generate a cash-flow report or a profit-and-loss report for the past month, quarter, or year.
Accounting ISs can generate any of these reports on demand, as well as at scheduled times.
© Cengage Learning 2015
70
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Know About Business Functions and Supply Chains
Today’s professionals are expected to be knowledgeable not
only in their specific line of work but also in other areas. And
since practically every business process involves information
technology, new hires are expected to know, or quickly learn,
how to use the proper ISs in their respective positions. Many
employers look for generalists rather than specialists and
focus on the techno-manager, a manager well-versed in infor-
mation technology as it relates to the entire supply chain.
Because many ISs serve multiple functions and interface
with other systems, it is extremely important for a professional
to be familiar with the way ISs facilitate work in areas
outside his or her expertise. If you work for a commercial
organization, you are bound to be part of a supply chain or
work for a unit that supports a supply chain. Knowledge of
systems in different business areas helps you cooperate
with your peers and coordinate efforts that cross depart-
mental
boundaries.
Because
professionals
often
have
opportunities to be promoted to positions in other disci-
plines, the more you know, the better your chances of being
“cross-promoted.”
When a company develops and manufactures a new product that has never been available
on the market, how can it determine a price that covers costs and generates a decent profit? It
must maintain a system that tracks the costs of labor, materials, consulting fees, and every other
expense related to the product’s development and manufacture. Cost-accounting systems, used
to accumulate data about costs involved in producing specific products, make excellent use of IT
to compile pricing data. ISs also help allocate costs to specific work orders. A work order is an
authorization to perform work for a specific purpose, such as constructing a part of an airplane.
When interfaced with payroll and purchasing ISs, a cost-accounting system automatically
captures records of every penny spent (and originally recorded in the payroll and purchasing
systems) and routes expenses to the appropriate work order. Because work orders are associated
with specific products and services, the company now knows how much each product or service
costs, or how much making a part of a final product costs. This can help the company in future
pricing of products or services.
Accounting ISs are also used extensively for managerial purposes, assisting in organizing
quarterly and annual budgets for departments, divisions, and entire corporations. The same
systems help managers control their budgets by tracking income and expense in real time and
comparing them with the amounts predicted in the budget. Budget applications are designed
with proper controls, so that the system does not allow spending funds for a specific purpose
beyond the amount that was budgeted.
Finance
A firm’s health is often measured by its finances, and ISs can significantly improve financial
management (see Figure 3.4). The goal of financial managers, including controllers and
treasurers, is to manage an organization’s money as efficiently as possible. They achieve this
goal by (1) collecting payables as soon as possible, (2) making payments at the latest time
allowed by contract or law, (3) ensuring that sufficient funds are available for day-to-day
operations, and (4) taking advantage of opportunities to accrue the highest yield on funds
not used for current activities. These goals can be best met by careful cash management and
investment analysis.
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
71
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
F I G U R E 3.4
Financial information
systems help manage
cash and investment
portfolios
Cash
Management
Investment
Analysis
Other Financial Information Systems
Budgeting and Forecasting
..IBM 85 1/2...GM 35 1/2...OZ 1
Financial
Information
System
1980
1985
1990
1995
10 20 30 40
Revenue
Expense
Cash Management
Financial information systems help managers track a company’s finances. These systems record
every payment and cash receipt to reflect cash movement, employ budgeting software to track
plans for company finances, and include capital investment systems to manage investments,
thus balancing the need to accrue interest on idle money against the need to have cash
available. The information on expected cash receipts comes from sales contracts, and the
information on cash outlays comes from purchasing contracts as well as payroll and benefits
schedules. Systems that deal specifically with cash are often called cash management systems
(CMSs). One common use for a CMS is to execute cash transactions in which financial
institutions transfer huge amounts of money using electronic funds transfer (EFT). EFT is
the electronic transfer of cash from an account in one bank to an account in another bank.
More than 80 percent of all payments of the U.S. government are made using EFT systems.
Investment Analysis and Service
Every investor’s goal is to buy an asset and later sell it for more than it cost. When investing in
securities, such as stocks and bonds, it is important to know the prices of securities in real time,
that is, right now. The ability of financial ISs to record millions of securities prices and their
changes over long time periods, coupled with the ability to manipulate numbers using software,
puts powerful analysis tools in investment managers’ hands. Within seconds, an investment
analyst can use a financial IS to chart prices of a specific stock or bond over a given period, and
then build or use preprogrammed models to estimate what might happen to securities prices in
the future.
Even the smallest investment firm can provide clients with an inexpensive online service for
buying and selling securities, providing on-demand statements listing the stocks they own (called
a portfolio), periodic yield, and the portfolio’s current value. Clients serve themselves through
the websites of brokerage firms to place, buy, and sell orders. Execution of orders takes only a
few seconds.
Nearly instantaneously, ISs provide subscriber brokers and their clients with financial news,
stock prices, commodity prices, and currency exchange rates from multiple locations across the
world. Consider what happens when a foreign currency’s exchange rate fluctuates a fraction of a
percent. A brokerage house can make a profit of several thousand dollars within two minutes of
buying and selling several million dollars’ worth of the foreign currency.
Financial managers need to consider many factors before they invest in a security. Some of
the most important factors to consider are (1) risk, measured as the variability (degree of change)
of the security’s past yield; (2) expected return; and (3) liquidity, a measure of how fast an
investment can be turned into cash. Special programs help calculate these factors and present
the results either in tables or graphs to allow timely decision making.
© Cengage Learning 2015
72
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
POINT OF
INTEREST
Government Swipes Away Paper
The federal government made plans in 2010 to distribute all benefits payments through direct deposit or
the government’s Direct Express Debit MasterCard program if no bank account information was provided
by the recipient. Americans who enrolled on or after March 1, 2011 were automatically put into this sys-
tem while previous users would make the switch by March 1, 2013. The federal government’s plan to dis-
tribute all benefits payments through electronic funds transfers (EFT) will cut paper and postage costs and
save taxpayers about $400 million in the first five years.
Source: O’Keefe, E. (2010, Apr 19). Federal benefits payments to go electronic. The Washington Post.
Engineering
The time between generating an idea for a product and completing a prototype that can be mass-
manufactured is known as engineering lead time, or time to market. As discussed in Chapter
2, business organizations offering a new product or service can create a first-mover advantage.
This competitive advantage requires a rapid, efficient product design and development strategy.
Collaterally, it is imperative to ensure products are more “leading edge” than “bleeding edge” by
integrating quality in a rapid development environment.
Engineering includes brainstorming (the process of a group of colleagues meeting and
working collaboratively to generate creative solutions and new ideas), developing a concept,
creating mock-ups, building prototypes, testing, and other activities that require investments of
time, labor, and money. Minimizing lead time is key to maintaining a competitive edge: it leaves
competitors
insufficient
time
to
introduce
their
own
products
first.
ISs
can
contribute
significantly to this effort. Over the past two decades, automakers have used engineering and
other ISs to reduce the time from product concept to market from 7 years to 18 months.
IT’s greatest contribution to engineering is in the area of computer-aided design (CAD)
and rapid prototyping (creating one-of-a-kind products to test design in three dimensions).
Engineers can use computers to modify designs quickly and store drawings electronically. With
collaborative software, they perform much of this process over the Internet: engineers can
conduct remote conferences while viewing and developing plans and drawings together. The
electronic drawings are then available to make rapid prototypes.
Rapid prototyping allows a model of a product to be produced within hours, rather than
days or weeks. The model required is often a mock-up to show only the physical look and
dimensions of a product, without the electronics or other components that are part of the full
product. First, an image of the object is created on a computer. The computer is connected to a
special machine that creates a physical, three-dimensional model by laying down hundreds or
thousands of thin layers of liquid plastic or special resin. The model can be examined by
engineers and marketing managers in the organization, or shown to clients.
When the prototypes are satisfactory, the electronic drawings and material specifications can
be transferred from the CAD systems to computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) systems.
CAM systems process the data to instruct machines, including robots, how to manufacture the
parts and assemble the product (see Figure 3.5).
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
73
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
F I G U R E 3.5
Engineering information
systems assist engineers
in designing new products
and simulating how they
operate
Material
Specifications
Computer-aided Design
Simulation
Other Engineering Information Systems
Rapid Prototyping
Engineering
Information
System
As we mentioned, automakers needed years to turn a concept into actual vehicles rolling out
for sale. Now, thanks to CAD, CAM, rapid prototyping, and collaborative engineering software,
the lead time has been reduced to months. The digital design of vehicles saves not only time but
also the cost of cars crashed in tests; many of the tests can be performed with sophisticated
software rather than with real cars. Similar benefits have been accomplished in aerospace and
many other engineering and manufacturing industries. The illustration below shows the use of
SolidWorks CAD software to design a blender.
Computer-aided design
systems significantly
shorten the time
necessary to produce
drawings and complete
the design for new
products
Courtesy of Solidworks
© Cengage Learning 2015
74
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Rapid prototyping
shortens time to market;
with 3-D printers like this
one, engineers can
quickly create plastic
models of parts
Supply Chain Management
In its fundamental form, a supply chain consists of three major phases: procuring raw
materials, processing the materials into intermediate and finished goods, and delivering the
goods to customers. Processing raw materials into goods is manufacturing. Supply chain man-
agement (SCM) consists of monitoring, controlling, and facilitating supply chains, as depicted
in the right side of Figure 3.1. Supply chain management (SCM) systems are information
technologies
that
support
SCM.
SCM
systems
have
been
instrumental
in
reducing
manufacturing costs, including the costs of managing resources and controlling inventory (see
Figure 3.6). In retail, the manufacturing phase does not exist, so the term “supply chain” refers
only to the purchasing of finished goods and the delivery to customers of those goods. In the
service industries the term “manufacturing” is practically meaningless, because no raw materials
are purchased and processed.
Courtesy of Stratasys, Inc.
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
75
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
F I G U R E 3.6
Manufacturing and
inventory control
information systems help
reduce cycle times and
the cost of maintaining
inventory
Computer-aided Manufacturing Systems
Other Manufacturing
and Inventory Control
Information Systems
Manufacturing Resource
Planning
Material Requirements
Planning
Manufacturing
and Inventory
Control
Information
Systems
As is clear from the previous discussion, much of the data required for manufacturing
processes can flow directly from CAD systems to CAM systems as well as to inventory control
systems and other systems that support planning and execution of manufacturing. While CAM
systems participate in physical activities such as cutting and welding, other information systems
help to plan and monitor manufacturing.
Information technology helps in the following manufacturing activities:
●
Scheduling plant activities while optimizing the combined use of all resources—machines,
personnel, tooling, and raw and interim materials.
●
Planning material requirements based on current and forecasted demand.
●
Reallocating materials rapidly from one order to another to satisfy due dates.
●
Letting users manage inventories in real time, taking into consideration demand and the
responsiveness of all work centers.
●
Grouping work orders by characteristics of items ordered, such as color and width of products.
●
Considering the qualifications of each resource (such as qualified labor, set-up crews, and
specialized tools) to accomplish its task. For instance, people and raw materials can be
moved from one assembly line to another to respond to machine breakdown or customer
emergency, and design changes can be implemented quickly to respond to changes in cus-
tomer wishes.
Material Requirements Planning and Purchasing
One area of manufacturing that has experienced the greatest improvement from
IS
is
inventory
control,
or
material
requirements
planning
(MRP).
Traditional
inventory-control
techniques
operated
according
to
the
basic
principle that future inventory needs are based on past use: once used up,
inventory was replaced. By contrast, replenishment in MRP is based on future
need, calculated by MRP software from demand forecasts. MRP programs take
customer demand as their initial input. The main input to MRP programs is the
number of product units needed and the time at which they are needed; the
programs then work back to calculate the amounts of resources required to
produce subparts and assemblies. The programs use long-range forecasts to put
long-lead material on order.
Other important input to MRP applications includes a list of all raw
materials and subcomponent demands (called the bill of materials, or BOM)
© Cengage Learning 2015
MRP systems help reduce inventory
costs while ensuring availability of
product to fulfill customer demand
© Vasily Smirnov/Shutterstock.com
76
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
and the economic order quantity of different raw materials. The economic
order quantity (EOQ) of a specific raw material is the optimal quantity that
allows a business to minimize overstocking and save cost, without risking
understocking and missing production deadlines. A special program calculates
EOQ for each item. It considers several factors: the item’s cost, the discount
schedule for large quantities, the cost of warehousing ordered parts, the cost of
alternative uses of the money (such as the interest the money could earn had it
not been spent on inventory), and other factors affecting the cost of ordering
the item. Some MRP applications are tied to a purchasing IS, to produce
purchase orders automatically when the quantity on hand reaches a reorder
level. The purchase order includes the economic order quantity.
Manufacturing Resource Planning
Manufacturing resource planning (MRP II) combines material requirements planning
(MRP) with other manufacturing-related activities to plan the entire manufacturing process, not
just inventory. (The “II” in MRP II is simply to distinguish this term from material requirements
planning, another term with the same acronym.) MRP II systems can quickly modify schedules
to accommodate orders, track production in real time, and fix quality slippage. The most
important input of MRP II systems is the master production schedule (MPS), which
specifies how production capacity is to be used to meet customer demands and maintain
inventories. Virtually every report generated by an MRP II package starts with, or is based on,
the MPS. Purchases of materials and internal control of manufacturing work flow, for example,
start with the MPS, so the MPS directly affects operational costs and asset use.
MRP II systems help balance production economies, customer demands, manufacturing
capacity, and inventory levels over a planning horizon of several months. Successful MRP II
systems have made a significant contribution to just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing, where
suppliers ship parts directly to assembly lines, saving the cost of warehousing raw materials,
parts, and subassemblies.
MRP and MRP II systems gave ERP systems their name. MRP II modules are now integrated
into ERP systems. While MRP and MRP II were, indeed, used mainly for planning, the “P” in
ERP is somewhat misleading, because ERP systems are used mainly for daily operations, in
addition to planning.
Ideally, the ISs of manufacturing organizations and their suppliers would be linked in a
way that makes them subsystems of one large system. The MRP II application of an
organization that manufactures a final product would plan and determine the items required,
their quantities, and the exact times they are needed at the assembly lines. Suppliers would
ship items directly to assembly lines just before they are incorporated into the final product
(hence the term just-in-time manufacturing). Manufacturing organizations have not yet reached
the point where JIT is accomplished with every product, but they have made great progress
toward this ideal.
The Internet facilitates such system linking. Companies that were quick to link their
systems to their suppliers’ systems attained strategic advantages. One such company is Cisco
Systems, a world leader in design and manufacturing of telecommunications devices. The
company used to maintain many manufacturing plants. In 2001, it had sold all but two. The
company’s ISs are linked through the Internet to the ISs of its suppliers, some of whom
purchased the very plants that Cisco sold. Managers can track orders using these systems. They
can tell Cisco clients the exact status of their orders and the time of delivery. Cisco managers
keep track of the products they order and know at what phase of manufacturing and delivery
each item is—as if they were running the manufacturing plants. More than 80 percent of what
Cisco orders never passes through the company’s facilities; the manufacturers ship the
products directly to Cisco’s clients.
Computer-aided manufacturing systems
control costs
REUTERS/Rebecca Cook/Landov
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
77
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Monitoring and Control
Information systems have been designed to control manufacturing processes, not just monitor
them. Controlling processes is important to ensure quality. For example, Ford Motor Company
implemented software that it calls Project Execution, which combines bar-coding and wireless
technology to ensure quality. Since each vehicle is assembled on a chassis, each chassis is
tagged with a unique bar code. A bar-code sensor is installed in each stop of the assembly line.
The sensor transmits wireless signals to computers and electronically controlled gates. The
“gates” are not physical ones, but points where the vehicle is checked. The purpose of the
system is to ensure that no assembly steps are skipped, and that each vehicle passes a series of
performance and quality tests along the way. If a step is missed, the gate does not let the
vehicle leave the plant. Mazda North America also implemented information technology to
assist with monitoring its manufacturing process. In 2009, Mazda North America implemented
a system that manages its vehicle logistics network in the United States and Canada. This
system maintains and tracks various performance measures and estimated delivery dates for all
of their supply partners.
Shipping
When the process of manufacturing products is complete, the next link in the supply chain is
shipping. Shipping is performed either by the manufacturer or by a hired shipping company.
The variables that affect the cost and speed of shipping are numerous: length of routes,
sequence of loading and unloading, type of shipped materials (e.g., perishable, hazardous, or
fragile), fuel prices, road tolls, terrain and restricted roads, and many more. Therefore, the use of
sophisticated software to optimize shipping time and the cost of labor, equipment use, and
maintenance helps companies stay competitive.
Today’s trucks are equipped with computers, global positioning systems (GPS), and satellite
communication devices. You might have seen small antennas on trucks. The antenna receives
real-time orders from a central shipping office, especially when routing changes are necessary,
and transmits information about the truck, such as current location, the previous point of
loading or unloading, and the next point of loading or unloading. Truckers rarely visit shipping
offices. These systems allow them to be on the road doing productive work all the time, thanks
to constant communication with the office.
The GeoBase mapping system (Figure 3.7) was released in 2009 by Telogis, a global
platform for location-based services for the enterprise. The system allows organizations to use
traffic
and
commercial
vehicle
turn
restrictions
to
design
dispatching
and
navigation
solutions, as well as custom routes. Real-time updates can be accessed by laptops and mobile
operating systems. The flexibility of the new system allows drivers to edit maps and routes in
the field, which can be incorporated into the back-end database of the enterprise. Software
like this allows workers to quickly adjust to accidents and closed roads and best utilize time
and resources.
78
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
F I G U R E 3.7
GeoBase optimizes
transportation routing,
navigation, and mapping
along with real-time traffic
data
Supply chain management software in transportation helps load trucks, ships, and airplanes
in an optimal manner both in terms of space utilization and sequence of unloading. Figure 3.8
provides a visual description of an optimal loading of boxes on a truck before its dispatch using
CargoWiz software from Softtruck. Figure 3.9 illustrates how information is communicated
between a truck and a shipper’s office.
F I G U R E 3.8
CargoWiz is truck and
container loading
software that optimizes
shipping space to
transport cargo
Courtesy of geobase
Courtesy of Softtruck
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
79
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
F I G U R E 3.9
How data is transferred
between a truck and a
shipper’s office
Communications
Satellite
Customer Fleet
Management
Landline
Connection
Network
Management Center
Mobile
Communications Unit
RFID in SCM
The most important development in hardware to support SCM has been a technology called
radio frequency identification (RFID). We discuss the technology itself in Chapter 6,
“Business Networks and Telecommunications.” RFID tags contain circuitry that allows recording
of information about a product. When attached to a product, it contains an electronic
product code (EPC), which provides much more information than the universal product
code (UPC). The tag can include the date of manufacturing, the plant in which the product
was made, lot number, expiration date, destination, and many other details that help track
its movement and sale. The information can be read and also revised by special RFID
transceivers (transmitter-receiver devices). Figure 3.10 shows an example of an RFID product
and its small size. Figure 3.11 shows an example of how RFID is used in a supply chain. Items
with rewritable tags can contain maintenance history of products, which helps optimize
maintenance of the items.
© Cengage Learning 2015
80
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
F I G U R E 3.10
An example of an RFID
device in relation to the
size of a grain of rice
F I G U R E 3.11
An example of how RFID
technology is integrated
into a supply chain
The same technology can also be used for other purposes, including detection of items that
should be recalled because of hazardous components and accurate condemnation of expired
items, such as drugs and auto parts. When a pattern of defects is discovered in a product, RFID
helps pinpoint the plant at which it was produced and the particular lot from which it came.
Only products from that lot are recalled and replaced or fixed. It does not take too long to
determine the particular manufacturing phase in which the defect was caused. When the
expiration date of an item arrives, a transceiver detects the fact and alerts personnel to remove
the item from a shelf. Packaging of drugs and other items contain RFID tags with unique
identifiers. Transceivers can detect whether the products are genuine.
Don Farrall/Photographer’s Choice RF/Getty Images
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
81
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Customer Relationship Management
No commercial organization can survive without selling its products or services. Thus, businesses
seek to provide products and services that consumers want—and to entice them to buy what the
business produces. Businesses exert marketing efforts to pinpoint demographic groups that are
most likely to buy products, to determine features that consumers desire most, and to provide
the most efficient and effective ways to execute a sale when a consumer shows interest in the
product or service. Because these efforts depend mainly on the analysis of huge amounts of data,
ISs have become key tools to conceiving and executing marketing strategies. When marketing
succeeds, ISs support the sales effort; to entice customers to continue to purchase, ISs support
customer service (see Figure 3.12).
F I G U R E 3.12
Customer relationship
management systems
help marketing, sales, and
customer service
departments target
interested and profitable
customers
Market Research
Salesforce
Automation
Targeted Marketing
Other CRM Systems
Customer
Relationship
Management
Systems
Customer Service
Customer relationship management (CRM) systems are designed to support any and all
relationships with customers. Mostly, they support three areas: marketing, sales, and customer
service. Modern CRM systems can help capture the entire customer experience with an
organization, from response to an online advertisement to automatic replenishment of products to
proactive service. With growing competition and so many options available to consumers, keeping
customers satisfied is extremely important. Many executives will tell you that their companies do
not make money (and might even lose money) on a first sale to a new customer because of the
substantial investment in marketing. Thus, they constantly strive to improve customer service and
periodically contact anyone who has ever purchased something from them to ensure repeat sales
and to encourage customer loyalty. Any information technology that supports these efforts is
considered a CRM system, but in recent years the effort has been to combine applications that
support all three areas—marketing, sales, and customer service—to better understand what
customers want, to be able to collect payment sooner, and to ensure timely shipping.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Too Much, Too Little, or Just Right
Bars and clubs are inherently known for having high shrinkage costs due to spilled drinks, overpouring, not
charging, and theft. However, the use of RFID can limit those costs significantly. LiquorInventory.Net’s Liquor
Inventory System is a replacement pour spout in the end of a liquor bottle that is equipped with an RFID
transmitter. Every time the bartender pours a drink the RFID registers it in real time and tracks it over the
Internet. This allows managers and bar owners to increase customer satisfaction by more closely monitor-
ing their inventory levels and accurately charging patrons the correct amount.
Source: Kaplan, A. (2011). Tag! you’re it! Beverage World, 130 (1818), 49.
© Cengage Learning 2015
82
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
CRM systems also provide an organization with an important element: all employees of the
company who directly or indirectly serve a customer are “on the same page.” Through their
individual computers, everyone has immediate access to the status of an order for an item, a
resolution of a buyer’s complaint, or any other information that has to do with the customer.
All who serve the customer are well-informed and receive the information from the same source.
This is especially important in a long, complex sales cycle, because it minimizes response time
and improves the quality of service for customers.
Market Research
Few organizations can sell their products and services without promotion; fewer still can
promote successfully without market research. Market research systems help to find the
populations and regions that are most likely to purchase a new product or service. They also
help analyze how a new product fares in its first several months on the market.
Through interviews with consumers and retailers, market researchers collect information on
what consumers like and dislike about products. When the researchers collect sufficient data, the
marketing department uses statistical models to predict sales volumes of different products and
of
different
designs
of
the
same
product.
This
critical
information
aids
in
planning
manufacturing capacities and production lines. It is also extremely important for budgeting
purposes. When questionnaires are involved, many companies offer web-based forms instead of
paper questionnaires. In some cases, respondents use telephones to answer questions after a
purchase, usually for a chance to win money prizes. The entered data is channeled into
computer databases for future analysis. Dunkin’ Donuts utilizes the data gained from its guest
satisfaction survey to continually monitor the performance of its stores and the quality of its
products. The chain gathers customer feedback by promoting the completion of a web-based
survey at the bottom of a receipt.
A portion of a sales
receipt showing Dunkin’
Donuts invitation for a
customer to participate
in market research at its
website
Courtesy of Dunkin’ Donuts
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
83
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Targeted Marketing
To save resources, businesses use IT to promote to people most likely to purchase their products.
This activity is often referred to as targeted marketing. Great advances in database
technology enable even the smallest low-budget business to use targeted marketing. The
principle of targeted marketing is to define the prospective customer as accurately as possible,
and then to direct promotional dollars to those people most likely to purchase your product.
Perhaps the best evidence of how much companies use ISs for targeted marketing is the use of
the Internet for mass communication of unsolicited commercial email, a practice called
spamming. Many people loathe spamming, but it is certainly the least expensive method of
advertising. Another controversial, but apparently effective, method is pop-up advertising, in
which a small window pops up either in front of or behind a web browser’s window.
To define their target markets, businesses collect data everywhere they can: from sales
transactions and warranty cards, or by purchasing databases with information about organizations
and individuals. Using database management systems (DBMSs)—special programs to build and
manipulate data pools—a company can sort and categorize consumers by age, gender, income,
previous purchase of a related product, or any combination of these facts and other demographic
information. The company then selects consumers whose characteristics match the company’s
customer profile and spends its promotional dollars to try to sell to those select customers.
The massive amount of personal information that corporations collect and purchase lets them
prepare electronic dossiers on the interests, tastes, and buying habits of individuals. The
information they possess lets them target “a market of one,” namely, an individual rather than a
group. Online purchase transactions and online product registrations by consumers provide a
wealth of information to corporations. Vendors sort the information to send promotional material
via ground mail or email only to those customers whose profiles indicate potential interest.
Aetna faced the challenge of targeting small business owners interested in health insurance.
They wanted to identify the sole proprietorships that did not have coverage while ensuring that
the target list did not include small business owners who had coverage through employers or
other sources. Aetna targeted a direct mail campaign, which integrated search keyword buys
(purchased from search engines) and display ads from various networks. Their efforts resulted in
more than $1M annually while reducing their cost per acquisition by 10 to 25 percent.
For decades, organizations have integrated the use of data to implement marketing
initiatives. However, recently, the flood of marketing data from websites, affinity cards, smart
phones, and social media has overwhelmed business organizations. The new term “big data” not
only quantifies the amount of data stored by businesses, but the challenges of mining large,
complex databases.
Telemarketing (marketing over the telephone) makes extensive use of IT. The telemarketer
uses a PC connected to a large database, which contains records of potential or existing
customers. With a retrieved record displayed on the screen, a marketer dials the number by
pressing a single key or clicking the mouse. The telemarketer speaks to the potential buyer while
looking at that person’s purchasing record with the organization or other organizations.
Universities and charitable organizations use the same method to solicit donations.
Computer telephony integration (CTI) is a technique enabling a computer to use the digital
signal coming through a telephone line as input in a computer system. It has been used often in
marketing, sales, and customer service. For example, mail-order firms use caller ID to better serve
their customers. Caller ID was originally intended to identify the telephone number from which
a person calls, but mail-order businesses quickly found a new use for the gadget. They connect it
to their customer database. When you call to order, a simple program searches for your number,
retrieves your record, and displays it on a PC monitor. You might be surprised when the person
who receives your call greets you by name and later asks if you want to use the same credit-card
number you used in your last purchase. Many credit-card issuers utilize CTI to activate a new
credit card sent to a customer. A label affixed to a new credit card asks the customer to call an
800-number to activate the card. CTI gains the caller’s phone number to validate that the call is
originating to the customer’s phone number in their account. The use of this technology not
only reduces the customer’s time to activate the card, but also increases the security of the
transaction.
84
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
POINT OF
INTEREST
Not So Shy Anymore …
The financial services industry is warming up to being more social. Despite heavy industry regulations,
firms are increasingly utilizing social media outlets as a way to create effective social CRM systems. An
effective social CRM system should help companies stay informed, respond quickly, and record customer
service issues. Financial service firms should track these four business activities through social CRM: ser-
vice issues, corporate announcements, relationships and leads, and their markets. Companies can stay
informed and track conversations with customers over social media tools. Therefore, they can easily
learn about customer complaints or issues and quickly adjust to fix them. Firms such as TD Bank, Van-
guard, and American Express already use Twitter for customer service purposes. Being a social firm
means staying involved in the market community and focusing on customer service. A social CRM system
helps firms serve current customers and engage potential customers.
Source: LeClaire, Jennifer. (July 9, 2012). Salesforce Offers Tips on social CRM Tracking. www.newsfactor.
com/story.xhtml?story_id=01000156ZCJW
Techniques such as data mining take advantage of large data warehouses to find trends and
shopping habits of various demographic groups. For example, the software discovers clusters of
products that people tend to purchase together, and then the marketing experts promote the
products as a combination, and might suggest displaying them together on store shelves. You
will learn more about data mining in Chapter 11, “Business Intelligence and Knowledge
Management.”
With the proliferation of set-top boxes (devices that allow for personal
programming and recording for digital televisions), several software companies
have developed applications that may allow television networks to transition
from the wasteful and expensive 30-second commercial to more personal
advertising. Relying on information provided by households through these
interactive boxes, they can select and transmit to each subscriber commercials
only for products in which the subscriber is interested. For example, you will
not receive commercials about pet food if you do not have pets, but you will
receive commercials for gardening products and services if this is your hobby.
Use
of
information
technology
for
targeted
marketing
has
taken
sophisticated
forms
on
the
web.
More
than
just
targeting
a
certain
demographic group, web technologies enable retailers to personalize marketing
when shopping and buying are conducted online. Special software used by
online retailers tracks every visit consumers make and captures their “click
streams” (the sequence of selections they make) and the amount of time they
spend viewing each page. The retailer’s software combines this information
with data from online purchases to personalize the pages whenever consumers
revisit the site. The reconstructed page introduces information about the
products that the individual visitor is most likely to purchase. For example,
two people with different purchasing records at Amazon.com who revisit the
company’s home page will find that they are looking at slightly different
versions of the page. Amazon’s software custom-composes the elements for
each person according to his or her inferred interests in products. The ones
that the software concludes might be of the highest interest are displayed or
linked on the page.
Location-Based Services
Marketing personnel continue to design new methods of targeting customers by gathering more
effective information about them. Location-based services offer the ability to accurately and
efficiently gather various dimensions of consumer information, such as when and where they
shop and what they buy, in a real-time environment. With location-based services, location and
Location-based services using a smart phone
allow customers to find businesses based on
their current location
cloudnumber9/Photos.com
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
85
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
time data can be recorded when an action is performed. Smart phones with GPS (global
positioning service) technology, combined with mobile apps and social media, can offer a
significant new element for marketing strategy. About half of the people equipped with a GPS-
enabled device have enabled location-based services.
Pepsico has tested a new initiative by rewarding consumers for purchasing their products in
grocery and convenience stores. Location-based social networks such as Foursquare and
CheckPoints provide incentives for users and their friends to purchase products from nearby
vendors, then gather real-time data on the purchases. Ultimately, the location-based services on
smartphones are “leading” prospective customers to their businesses thereby increasing sales and
promoting their location.
Customer Service
Companies have saved millions of dollars per year by shifting customer service from employees
to their website. Web-based customer service provides automated customer support 24 hours per
day, 365 days per year. At the same time, it saves companies the cost of labor required when
humans provide the same service. For example, letting customers pay their bills electronically
not only provides convenience but also saves (both customers and companies) the cost of
postage and paper and saves the company the time required for dealing with paper documents.
Online billing costs only a small fraction of paper billing. The business research firm Gartner
estimates the average invoice-to-payment cycle at 41 days, while online invoice and payment
shortens the period by at least six days. Customers appreciate the discounts that many
companies offer for accepting statements and paying bills online.
A 2009 Forrester Research study states that the top business drivers are those that improve
customers’ website experiences and reduce the cost of web operations (63 percent). Business
drivers are focused initiatives or activities that provide direct, substantial influences on the
business. Many businesses are focusing their technology and organizational strategy on expanding
and improving the customer experience while driving down costs. United Illuminating’s new
online system increases customer engagement as well as reduces their energy costs. The use of UI’s
portal increased by over 400 percent during the first four years of operation.
Some companies are using online chat to help customers. Snapfish, currently owned by HP,
is one of the world’s largest online photo retailers with over 90 million members in 20
countries. The company provides unlimited online storage for photos, and provides tools to
make photos into gifts and novelties. Customers sometimes need help while designing a photo
book or other item. Snapfish had integrated software developed by LivePerson (see figure) to
provide real-time customer interaction for customer service and to answer technical questions.
Snapfish expanded its use of the live-chat technology to deepen the engagement with
customers, assisting them with more complex products and design tasks. Using LivePerson
Enterprise technology, Snapfish was able to target and connect with customers during their
shopping cart and check out process and to provide quick responses for customers. The strategic
use of this technology significantly increased the average order value by 33 percent while
increasing customer satisfaction scores to 87 percent. Ultimately, Snapfish achieved the grand
prize by simultaneously increasing revenue, delivering quality customer service, and increasing
agent productivity by 14 percent (Anonymous, 2009).
86
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Online chat software
integrated into a
company’s webpage can
provide a convenient and
cost-effective approach
to customer service
Online customer service applications have become increasingly sophisticated. They help
track past purchases and payments, update online answers to frequently asked questions
(FAQs) about products and services, and analyze customers’ contacts with the company to
maintain and update an electronic customer profile. The FAQ pages of many companies have
been replaced with options for open-ended questions; instead of looking up a question that is
similar to what you would ask, you can simply type in your question. Employing artificial
intelligence software, the site will “understand” your question and provide a short list of links
where you can find an answer.
Salesforce Automation
Salesforce automation equips traveling salespeople with information technology to facilitate their
productivity. Typically, salespeople are equipped with laptop or tablet computers that store
promotional information for prospective customers, software for manipulating this information,
and computerized forms. Many salespeople carry laptop computers or smartphones that contain
all the information they need, and which allow them to connect to their organizational
information systems through the Internet. Salesforce automation can increase sales productivity
significantly,
making
sales
presentations
more
efficient
and
letting
field
representatives close deals on the spot, using preformatted contracts and forms.
Information technology lets salespeople present different options for products
and services on the computer, rather than asking prospective customers to wait
until the main office faxes or mails the information. At the end of the day or the
week, salespeople can upload sales information to a computer at the main office,
where it is raw input to the order-processing department, the manufacturing unit,
or the shipping and invoicing departments.
Using smartphones, laptops, or tablets that can establish a wireless or cellular
connection
to
the
Internet
enables
salespeople
to
check
prices,
confirm
availability of the items in which a customer is interested, and place an order
away from the office. The salespeople can then spend more time on the road,
increasing direct contact with prospective customers.
Courtesy of Snapfish
Salesforce automation increases the
sales and productivity of sales personnel
byryo/Photos.com
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
87
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Human Resource Management
Human resource management (HRM) has become more complex due to the fast growth in
specialized occupations, the need to train and promote highly skilled employees, and the
growing variety of benefits programs. Human resource management can be classified into five
main activities: (1) employee record management, (2) promotion and recruitment, (3) training,
(4) evaluation, and (5) compensation and benefits management (see Figure 3.13).
F I G U R E 3.13
Human resource
management information
systems help managers
optimize promotion and
recruitment, training,
evaluation, and
compensation activities
Promotion and
Recruitment
Training
Other Human Resource
Management Information
Systems
Compensation and
Benefits Management
Human
Resource
Management
System
Employee Record
Management
Evaluation
Employee Record Management
ISs facilitate employee record management. Human resource departments must keep personnel
records to satisfy both external regulations (such as federal and state laws) and internal
regulations, as well as for payroll and tax calculation and deposit, promotion consideration, and
periodic reporting. Many HR ISs are now completely digitized (including employees’ pictures),
which dramatically reduces the space needed to store records, the time needed to retrieve them,
and the costs of both.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Job Fishing? Start with Proper Baits
A growing number of companies require an electronic copy of your résumé when you apply for a position.
The résumé is added to a database. Human resource managers search the database by keywords. The
search yields a list of résumés containing words that match the keywords. Therefore, you can enhance your
chances of obtaining the position you want by including as many relevant keywords in your résumé as you
can. One effective way to find these keywords is to examine online and print ads for the position you are
seeking. Include these keywords—sometimes called “buzzwords”—and increase the chances of your résumé
coming up in the recruiters’ search. However, there are negative “buzzwords” as well. LinkedIn, a profes-
sional networking site, released a list of the top 10 most overused words job seekers use in résumés and job
applications. The list includes creative, organizational, and motivated, to name a few. Using these words can
make your résumé or application blend in with the many others that use the same words. In order for your
resume to stand out, it is important to use “buzzwords” so your resume is recognized by the database, as
well as unique words so it stands out and makes an impression on the potential employer.
Source: Olson, Lindsay. (December 13, 2011). 10 Buzzwords to Avoid on Your Resume. http://money.
usnews.com/money/blogs/outside-voices-careers/2011/12/13/10-buzzwords-to-avoid-on-your-resume
© Cengage Learning 2015
88
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Promotion and Recruitment
To select the best-qualified person for a position, a human resource manager can search a
database of applicants and existing employees’ records for set criteria, such as type and length of
education,
particular
experience,
specific
talents,
and
required
licenses
or
certifications.
Automating the selection process significantly minimizes time and money spent on recruitment,
but it does require that a current database be maintained.
Intranets (intraorganizational networks that support web applications) help HR managers
post position vacancy announcements for employees to peruse and consider from their own
PCs. This system is especially efficient in large organizations that employ thousands of workers,
and even more so at multisite organizations.
With the growing number of job applicants, many companies refuse to receive paper
applications and résumés. In 2011, Starbucks received 7.6 million job applications, while Proctor
& Gamble received almost a million. McDonald’s and its franchises received over one million
applications and hired 62,000 people on its national hiring day, April 19, 2011. Therefore, it is
no wonder that some companies may accept such documents via email, but that others accept
only forms that are filled out and submitted online. Using keywords, recruiting officers can then
use special software to scour a database for the most-qualified candidates. HR consultants say
that this process reduces the time spent on a typical search from several hours to several
minutes. Some software companies sell automated recruiting and selection software to support
such activities. For example, PeopleAdmin, Inc. offers software by the same name. HR managers
save the cost of publishing help wanted ads and can start reviewing résumés as soon as
applicants respond online instead of waiting the typical 6–8 days from traditional advertising.
Some companies use the entire web as a database for their search. Across industries,
companies using traditional recruiting systems experience a cost per hire of $5,000–$12,000,
depending on the set of skills required and the level of the position. Wonderlic, Inc. develops
web-based recruiting, assessment, and retention solutions. Early in 2010, they introduced their
Automated Staff Acquisition Platform (ASAP) designed to help home healthcare organizations
more
efficiently
hire
talented
employees
(Anonymous,
2010b,
2010c).
ASAP
for
Home
Healthcare is a web-based solution that automatically gathers candidates’ skills and information
and displays the findings in an easy-to-read style. This allows organizations to quickly compare
all findings and select the top candidates to interview. ASAP for Home Healthcare reduces the
time managers spend interviewing candidates by 75 percent and produces noticeably better
results than interviews alone. ASAP for Home Healthcare streamlines the process by eliminating
candidates who do not meet minimum requirements, which allows managers to quickly
determine which candidates are most likely to succeed. Wonderlic offers the ASAP tailored
to other industries as well. One company using ASAP for property management gained a
20 percent reduction in turnover for onsite positions. By 2010, 46 percent of U.S. firms were
outsourcing all or part of their human resource function. Large firms are more likely to
outsource HR. The average cost-per-hire in the United States for firms using modern recruitment
systems based on outsourcing and multichannel sourcing is between $2,500 and $3,500 with
smaller firms bearing the larger recruiting costs (Anonymous, 2010a). This cost-per-hire figure
has decreased significantly in recent years due to innovations in the recruiting process, such as
ASAP software.
Training
One important function of human resource departments is improving employee skills. In both
the manufacturing and service sectors, multimedia software training is rapidly replacing training
programs involving classrooms and teachers. Such applications include interactive, three-
dimensional simulated environments. Some applications contain sophisticated virtual reality
components. For example, one such application trains workers to handle wrought iron that
must be hammered manually. The worker wears special goggles and holds a hammer in one
hand and a piece of metal in the other, over an anvil. The worker “sees” the metal piece
through the goggles, “hears” the hitting sound through earphones, and receives a programmed,
realistic jolt every time he “hits” the metal. This safely prepares the worker for the dangerous
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
89
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
work instead of putting him at risk for injury before he has enough experience to do the actual
work. Although the initial investment in multimedia training systems might be high, human
resource managers find the systems very effective. Surgeons train using similar systems to
operate on virtual patients rather than risk injuries to human patients.
Training software emulates situations in which an employee must act and includes tests and
modules to evaluate a trainee’s performance. In addition to the savings in trainers’ time, there
are other benefits. The trainee is more comfortable because he or she controls the speed at
which the sessions run. The software lets the trainee go back to a certain point in the session if a
concept is missed. Also, the software can emulate hazardous situations, thereby testing employee
performance in a safe environment. And if training in a real environment involves destruction of
equipment or consumption of materials, virtual reality training applications accomplish the same
results in skill enhancement without destruction or waste.
Developments in IT enable organizations to reduce training costs dramatically. Aspect is an
internationally recognized software provider that focuses on unified communications for the
contact center. Their PerformanceEdge eLearning with integration to the Aspect© Unified IP©
platform allows for real-time monitoring of service levels and recognizes when agents need new
eLearning sessions. Managers can schedule eLearning sessions for agents without compromising
the overall quality of service. PerformanceEdge eLearning software improves training and
coaching by providing agents and supervisors with the appropriate content at the appropriate
time. For companies with limited hiring resources, especially smaller companies where the cost-
per-hire can be very high, eLearning sessions can help improve the skill sets of current agents
rather than recruiting new ones. By using the software, recruitment centers experience reduced
hiring costs and improved agent retention. This leads to improved customer service because the
best agents are hired.
Evaluation
Supervisors must periodically evaluate the technical ability, communication skills, professional
conduct, and general behavior of employees. While objective factors are involved in evaluation—
such as attendance rates and punctuality—employee evaluation is often very subjective.
Assessing performance and effort levels, and their relative weights of importance, varies
significantly, depending on who is evaluating. A supervisor might forget to include some factors
altogether or might inappropriately weigh a particular aspect of performance. Subjectivity is
particularly problematic when several employees are being considered for a promotion and their
evaluations are compared to determine the strongest candidate. By helping to standardize the
evaluation process across employees and departments, evaluation software adds a certain
measure of objectivity and consistency.
In an evaluation, a supervisor provides feedback to an employee, records the evaluation for
official records and future comparison, and accepts input from the employee. Software helps
managers standardize their employee evaluations by providing step-by-step guides to writing
performance reviews, a checklist of performance areas to include in the evaluation (with the
option to add or remove topics), scales to indicate how strong the employee is in each area, and
the ability to select the relative importance each factor should hold in the overall evaluation.
Performance areas include written and oral communication, job knowledge, and management
skills, with each topic broken down into basic elements to assist the supervisor in creating an
accurate evaluation. A typical application guides the supervisor through all necessary factors and
includes a help guide. When the evaluator finishes entering data, the application automatically
computes a subtotal for each category and a weighted grade, which can then be electronically
stored as part of the employee’s record.
Compensation and Benefits Management
ISs help HR officers manage compensation (salaries, hourly pay, commissions, and bonuses)
efficiently and effectively. Programs can easily calculate weekly, monthly, and hourly pay
according to annual salaries and can include federal, state, and local tax tables to assist in
complying with compensation regulations. This same system can also automatically generate
90
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
paychecks or direct deposits, which are the electronic transfer of funds from the firm’s bank
account to the employee’s.
Special software helps the HR department manage benefits such as health insurance, life
insurance, retirement plans, and sick and leave days, which are determined by seniority;
amounts individuals pay into plans; and other factors. To optimize benefits, some companies
use special software, incorporating expert systems (ISs that emulate human expertise) that
determine the optimal health and retirement plans for each employee based on factors such as
marital status, age, occupation, and other data.
Using intranets, many organizations allow their employees to access the benefits database
directly and make changes to their preferences, such as selecting another health-care insurance
program, or adding a family member as a beneficiary in a life insurance plan. When the
company engages a third party for managing pension funds or other benefits, employees can go
directly to the website of that company, not involving their own company resources at all.
St. Vincent’s Hospital in Alabama implemented a self-service system for employees to access
their compensation information and manage their benefits. The system expands their access to
information to 24/7 from a traditional 9-to-5 when human resource personnel are available.
Employees choose their benefits through this system during the open enrollment period,
eliminating manual entry of benefit elections. The system has reduced costs by $1 million
through eliminating printing and mailing checks as well as reduced paper and printing costs. By
making the changes directly from their PCs, employees reduce the amount of work of the HR
staff and decrease the company’s overhead costs. Ultimate Software is one company that
produces customized human resource software that allows employees to manage their own
benefits (see figure).
Human resource software
can provide employees
with self-service access
to manage their benefits
Courtesy of Ultimate Software
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
91
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
Consumer Privacy
CRM systems, and IT in general, help businesses serve us
better at lower costs. But in the process, we may lose some
privacy. Consider the following scenario: you agree to give
some financial information about yourself to a car dealership
to finance the car you have just purchased. At a later date,
you
provide
medical
information
when
you
purchase
a
prescription drug. Your credit-card company has enough
information
from
your
purchasing
activity
to
know
your
culinary and fashion tastes better than you do. Whenever you
interact with an organization online, information is recorded;
and if you provide personally identifiable information—which
is always the case when you make an online purchase—the
information is added to your record held by this organization.
It may also be recorded by a third party that contracts with
the vendor. Finally, without your knowledge or consent, yet
another organization gathers all this information and puts it in
one big record that is practically a detailed personal dossier.
Organizations collect huge amounts of personal information.
Every time you pay with your credit card you leave a personal
record; the few details of your purchase are often used to update
an already hefty dossier about your buying habits. Every time you
provide personal information at a website, you either help open a
new dossier with an organization or help other organizations
update their dossier about you. When you pass through a
highway toll booth, the electronic pass device in your car
tracks the date, time, and location of your travels. GPS and
location-based services monitor your movement in a similar
manner. In their zeal to market more effectively, businesses
often violate consumer privacy.
●
What Is Privacy? In the context of information, privacy is
your right to control information about yourself. For exam-
ple, you maintain your privacy if you keep to yourself your
college grades, medical history, or the name of the organi-
zation with which you interviewed for a position. Someone
who receives such information without your permission is
violating your privacy.
●
Business Arguments. Business leaders argue that they
must collect and use personal data. Without personal data,
they would have to waste time and money to target likely
buyers. They need to know the repayment histories of indi-
viduals to help make prudent decisions on extending loans
and credit. This ability to purchase and manipulate large
amounts of consumer information makes the business
world more democratic than it used to be. Small companies
now have the same chances of targeting prospective
buyers with good credit as big companies, creating more
opportunities and more competition, which eventually ben-
efit consumers.
●
Consumer Arguments. Consumers usually accept that
they must divulge some private information to receive ser-
vices, but many do not accept the mass violation of privacy.
They resent unsolicited mail and email sent by companies
who know much about them although they have never pro-
vided personal details to these companies. They hate tele-
phone calls from salespeople who obtained their records
from companies that were supposed to keep their records
confidential. And their greatest concern might be the “dos-
sier phenomenon.”
●
Losing Control. In many cases, you volunteer information
in return for some benefits, such as consumer loyalty points
or participation in a sweepstakes. In others, you simply
cannot receive the service or product unless you agree to
provide certain personal details. In such cases, you give
implicit or explicit informed consent to obtain information
about yourself. However, once you provide information,
you have little control over it. With some newer technology,
such as RFID, you might not even be aware of who and
when information is collected about you. You have just
stepped out of a department store with your new clothing
purchases. All are RFID-tagged. The store’s systems
recorded your visit and detailed what you purchased. Can
you be sure that nobody else has the proper device to read
and record what you purchased? Unless you removed the
tag, the serial number embedded in the EPC of the sweater
you purchased may uniquely identify you to a stalker when-
ever you wear it.
●
The
Eight
Commandments
of
Personal
Data
Collection and Maintenance. In a free, market-oriented
society, not allowing organizations to collect personal data
is inconceivable. What can businesses do to help protect
privacy? They can adhere to these rules to avoid misuse:
Purpose. Companies should inform people who provide
information of the specific, exclusive purpose for which
the company maintains its data, and only use the data for
another purpose with the subjects’ consent. For example,
this practice could protect people with a genetic proclivity
for
certain
diseases
from
higher
health
insurance
premiums.
Relevance. Companies should record and use only data
necessary to fulfill their own purposes. For example, an
applicant’s credit record should not contain membership
in political or religious organizations because that informa-
tion is irrelevant in credit considerations.
Accuracy. Companies should ensure that the personal
records they maintain are accurate. For example, many
loan applicants have had terrible experiences because
some of the data maintained by credit companies is errone-
ous. Careful data entry and periodic verification can
enhance accuracy.
Currency. Companies should make sure that all data about
an individual is current. If currency cannot be guaranteed,
then data should be discarded periodically. Outdated infor-
mation can create seriously negative repercussions. For
92
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Supply Chain Management Systems
U.S. Department of Commerce statistics show two important patterns over the past two decades:
the fluctuations in inventory as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) and the absolute
ratio of inventory to GDP have steadily decreased. In 2011, the ratio of changes of private
inventory to GDP was .243 percent. This means that the U.S. GDP is growing while less and less
money is tied to inventory. The smaller the inventory, the more money can be spent on other
resources. Much of this trend can be attributed to the use of ISs, especially SCM systems.
The organizational importance of supply chain management has clearly increased. According
to a survey by Tompkins Supply Chain Consortium, over half of several industries claimed they
employ a supply chain leader at the executive level: manufacturing (51 percent), apparel and
automotive (100 percent), and food and beverage (57 percent).
According to IBM, companies that implemented SCM systems have reduced inventory levels
by
10–50
percent,
improved
the
rate
of
accurate
deliveries
by
95–99
percent,
reduced
unscheduled work stoppages to 0–5 percent, reduced cycle time (from order to collection) by
10–20 percent, and reduced transportation costs by 10–15 percent. For example, while a
significant dialogue continues to focus on healthcare costs, two healthcare facilities have
addressed the issue by implementing supply chain management systems. Methodist Health
System in Dallas has automated the supply chain using a web-based system. Their system
improved workflow and increased service levels, cutting its staff by approximately one-half.
Management estimates that this system has saved $5.5 million; much of that saving was realized
by renegotiating lower product costs with its vendors with the new supply chain data. St. Joseph’s
Hospital Health Center in Syracuse, NY implemented a just-in-time supply chain initiative with
a distributor. The new materials management system reduced inventory size and storage space.
Several enterprise applications, such as ERP systems, also serve as SCM systems. As Figure 3.14
illustrates, many such systems enable managers not only to monitor what goes on at their own
units or organization but also to follow what goes on at the facilities of their suppliers and
contractors. For example, at any given point in time managers can know the status of the
following: an order now being handled by a contractor, by order number; the phase of
manufacturing the produced units have reached; and the date of delivery, including any delays
and their length. When purchasing parts, managers use the systems for issuing electronic purchase
orders, and they can follow the fulfillment process at the supplier’s facilities, such as when the
example, a person who might have been unemployable due
to past illness might not be able to get a job, even though
he or she might be healthy now.
Security. Companies should limit access to data to only those
who need to know. In addition to passwords, audit trails
(which identify every employee who accesses a personal
record and for what purpose) are also very effective tools
for ensuring security. Extra caution must be practiced when
personal data is accessible online by business partners.
Time Limitation. Companies should retain data only for
the time period necessary. For example, there is no reason
for a landlord to maintain your credit record after you
move out.
Scrutiny. Companies should establish procedures to let indi-
viduals review their records and correct inaccuracies.
Sole Recording. When using a recording technology, a
company should ensure that no other party can take advan-
tage of the technology to record the same information. For
example, if a store records an individual’s purchases using
RFID technology, it must ensure that the RFID tags
embedded in the packaging or items are disabled as soon
as the customer leaves the store.
Of course, many consumers will still feel that their privacy is
invaded even if every business adopts these “commandments.”
How can you protect your privacy? Do not furnish your name,
Social Security (or any other identifying) number, address, or
any other private information if you do not know how it will be
used. If you do provide detailed information, indicate that you do
not wish the data to be shared with any other organization or
individual. You can usually check a box to this effect on paper
or web forms. To avoid junk mail or junk email, again check the
proper box on web forms. Do not fill out any online or paper
forms with detailed data unless an opt-out option is available.
Of
course,
many
services
we
receive
depend
on
our
willingness
to
provide
personal
data,
so
at
least
some
organizations must have personal information, but you can be
selective. Always carefully weigh what you gain against the
privacy you might lose. And finally, always read and understand
the terms of service and privacy policies associated with social
media venues. Learn the various settings to protect yourself and
your information.
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
93
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
parts were packed, when they were loaded on trucks, and when they are estimated to arrive at the
managers’ floor or the floor of another business partner who needed the parts. You, as a
consumer, can get a sense of what SCM systems provide when you purchase a product on the web
and track its shipment status and delivery.
F I G U R E 3.14
A shared supply chain
management system
monitors the movement of
raw and finished goods
Supplier
Manufacturer
Retailer
Outstanding
orders from
manufacturer
· Inventory of raw
  materials and parts
Consumer
Outstanding
orders from
retailer
·Work in progress
·Partly assembled
 products
·Finished goods
·Estimated delivery
 dates
Outstanding
orders for
finished goods
·Inventory
·Receiving schedule
·Delivery schedule
 to consumer
Orders
·Receiving schedule
Supply Chain Management Applications
SCM applications streamline operations throughout the chain, from suppliers to customers,
lowering inventories, decreasing production costs, and improving responsiveness to suppliers
and clients. Harnessing the global network, managers can supervise an entire supply chain
regardless of the location of the activity—at their own facilities or another organization’s, at the
same location or thousands of miles away. Older SCM systems connected two organizations.
New ones connect several. For example, a distributor can reorder products from Organization A
and simultaneously alert Organization B, the supplier of Organization A. The systems let all
parties—suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, and customers—see the same information. A
change made by any organization that affects an order can affect a corresponding change in
scheduling and operations in the other organizations’ activities.
Companies that have adopted SCM systems have seen improvement in three major areas:
reduction in inventory, reduction in cycle time (the time it takes to complete a business
process), and, as a result, reduction in production cost. Companies can reduce their inventory by
communicating to their suppliers through a shared SCM system the exact number of units of
each item they need and the exact time they need them. In ideal situations, they do not need to
stockpile any inventory, saving warehouse costs. The management consulting firm Aberdeen
Group estimates that companies using SCM systems through the Internet reduce purchase order
processing cycles by 70–80 percent and pay 5–10 percent less for the items they purchase.
The Importance of Trust
SCM systems accomplish the greatest efficiencies when all businesses in the chain link their
systems and share all the information that is pertinent to planning, production, and shipment.
For example, BP PLC, Royal Dutch Shell PLC, Chevron Corp.’s Texaco, and other large oil
companies are requiring their franchises to update their convenience store checkout systems to
© Cengage Learning 2015
94
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
become more efficient. The proposed technological advances include a small, touch-screen PC
like those seen at restaurants or bars. The most sophisticated versions of the machines would be
able to track inventory and place orders when supplies run low on items in the store. The
increased efficiency will save gas stations money by monitoring sales and inventory in one
system.
However, not all organizations are willing to collaborate with their business partners. One
reason is the fear that when Organization A purchases from Organization B and has access to
Organization B’s demand figures, it might disclose the information to competitors in an attempt
to stir more competition and enjoy favorable prices. Another fear is that if Organization B
realizes that at a certain point in time Organization A is in dire need of its raw materials,
Organization B might take advantage of the situation and negotiate higher prices.
The first type of fear can be found in initial reluctance of suppliers to share information with
large buyers such as Wal-Mart. Only the bargaining power of Wal-Mart and its insistence on
sharing such information convinced suppliers to link their systems with those of Wal-Mart. The
second type of fear still exists between trading partners such as General Motors and its main tire
supplier. For example, Goodyear could enjoy lower inventories if it had GM’s demand schedule
for tires. It could then calibrate its own order for raw materials and its manufacturing capacity to
suit those of GM, save money, and pass at least some of the savings to its client in the form of
cheaper products. It could always replenish its client’s inventory of tires before GM ran out of
them. Better yet, it could deliver the tires directly to the assembly lines just when they are
needed, saving both GM and itself warehousing costs. Yet, GM is guarding its production
schedule as confidential.
Thus, effective supply chain management between companies is not only a matter of
appropriate technology but also a matter of trust and culture change. So far, most of the
successful collaborations have been between a large company and its business partners, whereby
the company uses its power to dictate collaboration. However, some large companies have
tied their SCM systems out of mutual understanding that this would benefit both companies,
even if the shared information reveals some unpleasant facts. For example, Procter & Gamble,
Inc., the giant supplier of household products, has had its systems connected to those of Wal-Mart
since 1987, when the term “supply chain management” was not even in use. By providing its
retail information to P&G, Wal-Mart ensures that it never runs out of P&G products. A culture of
sharing—you show me some of your information and I show you some of mine—is essential for
the success of both companies and creates a sense of mutual dependence and true partnership.
SCM systems can be taken a step beyond the sale. The systems can be used for after-the-sale
services. For example, Beckman Coulter, Inc., in Fullerton, California, makes blood analyzers and
other medical devices. After it sells a machine, the company uses the Internet to link the
machine from the client’s facility to a computer in its Fullerton factory. Software on the
computer runs 7 days per week, 24 hours per day to monitor the sold machine. When a
problem occurs, the computer alerts a Beckman technician, who can repair the machine before
it stops working. Beckman estimates that the system provides savings of $1 million annually,
because malfunctions are captured at an early stage, which avoids the higher cost of fixing a
more damaged machine. The added benefit is increased customer satisfaction. As business
partners see the benefits of sharing data, trust has grown, and the fear of linking IS to those of
other organizations is waning.
Continuous Attention to Inventory
Recall the wonderful trend cited in the beginning of this section: the dollar value of inventory
for U.S. businesses was growing at about 60 percent of the growth of GDP. However, much of
the trend took place in the 1981–1991 period. In the 1992–2004 period, inventory as a
percentage of GDP stayed fairly static at about 3.5 percent. Recently, in 2012, inventories
reduced real GDP by .39 percent and .46 percent in the first and second quarters respectively.
Apparently, while large corporations have the resources to install and run SCM systems to cut
their own inventory, the ratio of inventory to revenue in small enterprises is growing because
they do not use such systems. And sometimes, the companies that suffer the inventory ripple
effect are not small. They might be powerful, and they even might manage their own SCM
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
95
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
system, but their system might not be linked to their buyers’ systems, so they cannot plan their
production to reduce inventory.
For an example, let us return to the relationship between General Motors and Goodyear. The
world’s largest auto manufacturer improved “inventory turns” 55.2 percent between 1996 and
2001. Inventory turns is the number of times a business sells (or “turns over”) its inventory per
year. It is calculated by dividing the sales revenue by the average value of inventory. The greater
the inventory turns number, the better. During the same period, Goodyear, GM’s tire supplier,
experienced a 21 percent decrease in inventory turns. The likely conclusion is that GM avoided
purchasing tires from Goodyear until it needed them at the assembly line, but Goodyear did not
have enough information on when, exactly, those tires would be required, and therefore kept
overstocks. Had the SCM systems of the companies been linked, Goodyear could reduce
inventory and see its inventory turns rise rather than fall. It is also reasonable to assume that,
due to the cost savings, Goodyear would be able to sell tires to GM at a lower price. GM and
other companies have created a situation where each company tries to “sit” with a lean
inventory while, inadvertently, leaving another “standing” with an overstock. In order for all
involved in a supply chain to enjoy efficiencies, the musical chairs, or “hot potato” situation,
must stop.
Collaborative Logistics
The web enables organizations from totally different industries to streamline operations through
collaboration. In recent years an increasing number of businesses found a new way to cut
shipping costs: they combine freight with other businesses, sharing their own trucks or the
vehicles of trucking companies. The collaboration reduces partially empty trucks, or empty
trucks between stops. To this end, the companies connect their SCM systems to the site of a
company that specializes in optimization of logistics, such as Nistevo Corporation, now owned
by IBM. The company manages the site and uses sophisticated software to calculate the shortest
routes between departure and arrival points and the best combination of loads from two or more
companies to share trucks and routes. The SCM systems of subscribing companies provide daily
data into the shared system. The IS takes into consideration the type of freight to ensure safety
and adherence to regulations. For example, the software is designed not to combine chemicals
with food. Therefore, typical allies of food manufacturers have been paper manufacturers, for
instance. The cost savings have been impressive.
The spice maker McCormick & Co., Inc. has reduced freight costs by 5–15 percent, while
General Mills has realized savings of up to 7 percent of its overall logistics costs. Manufacturers
of household paper products such as Georgia-Pacific and International Paper Co. share about 80
long-distance routes with General Mills on a regular basis, cutting freight costs for those
shipments 5–20 percent. Because the success of collaborative shipping is so impressive, some
experts expect competitors to share trucks, leaving competition to some other areas of their
operations, such as development and manufacturing processes. A 2009 study by Transport
Intelligence found that 94 percent of businesses responding expressed a desire to engage in
supply chain collaboration with another company.
Another area where some companies have explored collaboration is warehousing. The
principle here is the same: try to maximize the use of warehouse space, and if you cannot use all
of it, allow other businesses to use the extra space. The way to accomplish this, again, is through
the web; a third party specializing in warehousing optimization combines warehousing needs
and availability from member companies to offer optimal solutions.
Some companies are also extending their collaboration with retailers. Coca-Cola initiated a
new collaborative store order program with Wegmans Food Markets. Coke optimized sales and
inventory by compiling a “perfect order” by using store sales data. The use of store-level POS
information provided value to production planning, forecasting, and inventory management as
well as order fulfillment and delivery.
96
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Enterprise Resource Planning
A growing number of organizations elect to replace old, disparate ISs with enterprise applications
that support all or most of the business activities we have described. As mentioned before, these
systems are often referred to as enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, although they
are used not only for planning but also for managing daily operations. Designers of ERP systems
take a systems approach to an enterprise. For example, the Manufacturing Resource Planning
component of the system uses the information recorded on a sale to retrieve product
specifications; the data is used to generate purchasing information such as items, quantities, and
the
timetable
for
suppliers
to
deliver
for
the
purchasing
department.
As
products
are
manufactured, the system tracks the stages of the work in progress. When items are ready to be
shipped, the shipping department can retrieve information on the items for its operations. The
system keeps shipping information such as content and destination, along with billing
information, to help produce shipping and billing documentation. The system also records
financial transactions involved in these activities, such as payment made from a bank account.
The accounting component records the transactions. In addition, ERP systems also provide
human resource modules for payroll, employee benefits management, and employee evaluation
software. CRM components are also available and are tied to other components through orders,
applications, and sales records. In terms of 2012 revenue, the ERP market was divided among
four vendors: SAP (25 percent), Oracle (13 percent), Sage (6 percent), and Infor (6 percent)
(Columbus, 2013). SAP and Oracle have been the leaders in this field for several years. Oracle’s
market share has increased mainly through acquisitions of other ERP developers, such as J.D.
Edwards and Siebel Systems.
Challenges and Disadvantages of ERP Systems
With successful ERP implementation, organizations can reap substantial rewards. However, ERP
systems pose many challenges. The software packages are quite complex. Because they are not
tailored to the needs of specific clients, they often require adjustment and fine-tuning for
specific organizations. Therefore, their installation and testing involve experts who are usually
employees of the software vendor or professionals who are certified for such work by the vendor.
Even with adjustments—often called “tweaking”—potential adopters must remember that
the system was designed for an entire industry, not for the way an individual organization does
business. If the organization has a competitive advantage thanks to a unique set of business
processes, this advantage may diminish or disappear when the system is installed, because to a
large degree the system dictates how business processes should be conducted. The system
requirements are quite rigid, and therefore customization of ERP systems is limited.
ERP applications are expensive; modules cost millions of dollars. Buyers usually must allocate
several more million dollars to pay for installation and modifications. Installation often takes
many months to complete, and budget and time overruns are common.
The greatest advantage of ERP systems, the integration of many business processes, may
become a challenge for the adopter. Because the operational lines between business units
become blurred, there may be arguments over responsibility and accountability when something
goes wrong. For example, the sales department may argue that the responsibility for an
erroneous invoice is the accounting department’s or even of a manufacturing unit that entered
incorrect costs for the order. Also, a process that becomes a weak link in the supply chain may
negatively affect other processes.
Implementation of ERP systems can fail because of formidable challenges: the gap between
system capabilities and business needs, lack of expertise on the consultant’s part, and
mismanagement of the implementation project. The business research firm Standish Group
found that only 10 percent of ERP implementation projects are completed as planned, on time,
and within budget. Fifty-five percent are completed late or over budget (which usually means
loss of business and revenue), and the other 35 percent of such projects are canceled because of
difficulties. At Hewlett-Packard, one of the world’s largest computer and IT equipment makers, a
$400 million loss in the third quarter of 2004 was blamed on poorly managed migration to a
new ERP system. Previous cases of difficult implementations of ERP systems are Hershey Foods
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
97
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
and Nike. In both cases, the adopters blamed losses of hundreds of millions of dollars on late
completions of ERP system installations. In one case, an industry leader was bankrupt as a result
of unsuccessful implementation of an ERP system.
In 2006, Shane, a jewelry company with $200 million in sales, spent $36 million on an ERP
project that was cancelled after three years. It is believed that the project was oversized and too
large for the company. Research calculates that the average business spends 9 percent of its
annual revenue on an ERP project; Shane spent twice as much. The failures associated with ERP
projects focus on hiring inexperienced consultants/integrators, ineffective project management,
and changing requirements.
Providing the Missing Reengineering
In our discussion of reengineering of business processes in the previous chapter, we noted that in
the 1990s, most reengineering projects failed. Interestingly, in the late 1990s and early 2000s,
ERP systems helped realize many of those reengineering ideas because the systems forced
changes
in
processes.
At
the
least,
ERP
systems
integrated
information
from
various
organizational units, resulting in less labor, greater accuracy, and shorter cycles.
ERP systems also help organizations move away from the traditional silos of functional units
to business processes, an approach that helps many of them operate better. Suppliers and
customers do not care whose responsibility it is to take care of their orders and payments.
Therefore,
organizations
are
better
off
planning
and
managing
processes
rather
than
organizational units. Despite the risks and the high costs involved, a growing number of
companies adopt ERP systems.
98
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Summary
●
Effectiveness is the degree to which a task is
accomplished. The better a person performs a job,
the more effective he or she is. Efficiency is mea-
sured as the ratio of output to input—the greater
the ratio, the more efficient the process. ISs can
help companies attain more effective and efficient
business processes. Productivity is the measure of
people’s efficiency. When people use ISs, their pro-
ductivity increases.
●
ISs have been integrated into almost every func-
tional business area. In accounting and payroll,
because of the routine and structured nature of
accounting tasks, the systems automatically post
transactions in the books and automate the gener-
ation of reports for management and for legal
requirements.
●
Financial ISs help managers track cash available for
transactions, while ensuring that available money is
invested in short- or long-term programs to yield the
highest interest possible. Investment analysis ISs
help build portfolios based on historical perfor-
mance and other characteristics of securities.
●
Computer-aided
design
(CAD)
systems
help
engineers design new products and save and
modify drawings electronically. Computer-aided
manufacturing (CAM) systems direct machines in
manufacturing parts and assembling products.
●
Supply chain management systems optimize work-
load, speed, and cost in the supply chains for
procurement of raw materials, manufacturing, and
shipping of goods. ISs, especially MRP and MRP II
systems,
facilitate
production
scheduling
and
material requirements planning, and shorten lead
time
between
idea
and
product.
Shipping
ISs
help speed up delivery and cut costs. RFID tech-
nology helps promote and operate supply chain
management (SCM) systems. Radio frequency iden-
tification (RFID) tags carry product information that
can be tracked and updated.
●
Customer relationship management (CRM) includes
the entire cycle of relationships with customers,
from marketing through sales to customer service.
CRM ISs collect information about shoppers and
customers and help target the most likely buyers of
a product or service. Online customer service sys-
tems help customers help themselves via the web
24 hours per day, 7 days per week, and save the
company labor and telephone expenses. Salesforce
automation allows salespeople to spend more time
with customers and less time in the office.
●
Human resource management systems expedite
staff selection and record-keeping. An increasing
amount of recruiting is done via the web. Managers
often use evaluation software to help assess their
subordinates’
performance.
Employees
can
use
expert systems to choose health care and other ben-
efits programs that best suit their situation.
●
Companies can link their SCM systems to monitor
the status of orders at their own facilities but also at
those of their business partners, usually their sup-
pliers. Such cooperation can create further efficien-
cies, but it requires a high degree of trust between
organizations.
●
Rather than use disparate ISs for business func-
tions, many organizations opt to install a single
system that encompasses all their business pro-
cesses, or at least the major ones. They employ
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems to sup-
port their supply chain management and customer
relationship management. Installation of ERP sys-
tems is expensive and challenging, and often
involves budget and time overruns.
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
99
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Michael understands that the expansion of the business
is dependent on two issues: (1) gaining efficiencies in
backhouse operations and (2) defining marketing and
promotional strategies to gain additional customers.
Help Michael and Tyler assess their current systems
and plan to address those issues.
What Is Your Advice?
1. Using the classifications in this chapter, identify
the business functions within Kimball’s. What
business functions could assist Kimball’s to gain
efficiencies
in
the
backhouse
operations?
List
those functions and their benefit to the business.
2. What software applications should Tyler research?
What questions could he ask his current software
vendor? What types of metrics and ratios could be
used to help monitor the business operations?
3. How would you develop a target market plan to
increase clientele for the restaurant? What types
of marketing data would you need for this effort?
Could social media be used as a component of the
target marketing plan? What information systems
could be utilized to assist with this marketing and
promotion effort? What data is necessary to gather
in order to track and monitor those efforts?
New Perspectives
1. Should Kimball’s develop any initiatives to gain
feedback from customers directly? Could social
media provide that feedback?
2. What information technology systems could help
Kimball’s to gather and store the important data
elements for the marketing?
Key Terms
bill of materials (BOM), 76
brainstorming, 73
cash management system
(CMS), 72
computer-aided design (CAD), 73
computer-aided manufacturing
(CAM), 73
customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM), 68
economic order quantity (EOQ),
77
effectiveness, 68
efficiency, 68
electronic funds transfer (EFT),
72
electronic product code (EPC), 80
enterprise resource planning
(ERP), 97
just-in-time (JIT), 77
location-based services, 85
manufacturing resource planning
(MRP II), 77
master production schedule
(MPS), 77
material requirements planning
(MRP), 76
productivity, 68
radio frequency identification
(RFID), 80
rapid prototyping, 73
supply chain, 75
supply chain management
(SCM), 75
targeted marketing, 84
time to market, 73
work order, 71
100
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Review Questions
1. What is a supply chain? What is the purpose of
supply chain management systems?
2. What is the purpose of cost accounting ISs?
3. What is the relationship between CAD and CAM
systems?
4. What are the concerns in cash management, and
how do cash management ISs help financial
managers?
5. What is time to market? How have ISs affected
time to market?
6. In brief, what is the purpose of customer rela-
tionship management systems?
7. What are the typical components of ERP systems?
8. Although technologically the full linking of the
SCM systems of suppliers and buyers is feasible,
many buyers are reluctant to do so. Why?
9. Why do the ERP installation and testing of sys-
tems require that experts be involved? Why does
the implementation of so many ERP systems face
severe challenges or totally fail?
10. What is EOQ? Which two problems do ISs that
calculate EOQ help minimize?
11. What is JIT? How do MRP and MRP II systems
help achieve JIT?
12. For the human resource managers of some orga-
nizations the entire web is a database of job can-
didates. How so?
13. What information technologies play a crucial role
in marketing?
14. Many sales reps have no offices, yet they have
access to huge resources, and their productivity is
great. Explain how that is possible.
15. What is RFID, and what role does it play in SCM?
16. In the supply chain, shipping software helps
mainly in two ways. What are they?
Discussion Questions
17. You established a small shop that manufactures a
single product that you sell by mail. You purchase
raw materials from several vendors and employ
five full-time employees. For which business
functions would you certainly use software?
18. Which of the ISs you listed for Question 17 would
you link to each other, and for what purpose?
19. Why is it so important to have a quick response of
online investment ISs? Give two examples of how
such systems are critical.
20. Some experts say that ISs have great potential in
manufacturing. Explain why. (Hint: Consider
business process reengineering.)
21. Over the past decade, banks and investment firms
have offered many services that would be
impossible without ISs. Describe three such ser-
vices and explain how IT makes them possible.
22. ISs in both the manufacturing and service sectors
often help to optimize. Give two examples of
what they optimize.
23. The web has significantly cut the cost of collecting
data about shoppers and buyers. Explain how.
24. Sellers of consumer products argue that targeted
marketing serves not only them but also their
consumers. How so?
25. If you had to evaluate your own subordinates,
would you prefer to evaluate them in written,
open-ended form, or would you prefer to use
employee evaluation software? Why?
26. As an employee, would you prefer that your
supervisor evaluate you with the aid of employee
evaluation software or without it? Why?
27. Try to remember the last time you gave
someone your personal data, such as an ID
number, email address, or a physical address.
What was the reason for asking for the data? Do
you know how the data will be used by the
receiver?
28. Some consumer advocates argue that organiza-
tions should pay every individual whenever they
sell data about him or her to another organization.
(They suggest 5 or 10 cents per sale.) Do you
agree? Why?
29. Examine the list of precautions suggested in
“Ethical & Societal Issues” for ensuring mini-
mum invasion of privacy when businesses use
personal data. Which steps can be taken with-
out, or with minimal, added cost? Which steps
would impose financial burdens on businesses?
Why?
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
101
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
30. RFID tags are increasingly embedded in almost
every type of good, from soda six-packs to cloth-
ing items. Consumer advocates fear that the
technology might cause massive violation of
privacy. Describe at least two ways in which this
can happen. What controls or limitations would
you impose on RFID tags and use to minimize the
fears of invasion of privacy?
Applying Concepts
31. You are the CEO of a company that runs 2 plants,
manufactures 12 different products, and sells
them in 15 world regions. List all the items of
information (totals, metrics, etc.) that you would
like to know at least on a quarterly basis. State
which information can or cannot be obtained
through company operated ISs and why.
32. Choose three distinct but related business func-
tions (e.g., inventory control, purchasing, payroll,
accounting, etc.). Write a short paper describing
how interfacing the information systems of these
three functions can improve an organization’s
performance.
33. Select a business process (possibly at a local
firm) not mentioned in this chapter. Write an
essay explaining how IS technology could make
the process (1) more efficient and (2) more
effective.
34. Write a three-page essay titled “Factory of the
Future.” Your factory will not require anybody in
the manufacturing organization to enter any data
into information systems. All the necessary infor-
mation will come from customers at one end and
suppliers at the other end. There will also be no
need to type in any data for payments and col-
lections. Explain how all this will work.
Hands-On Activity
35. Many companies use email to advertise their
products. Your company is trying to sell a new
product and is advised to use email. All the email
addresses are of people who have agreed to
receive promotional email about products such as
the one you try to sell. The profit on each unit
sold is $200. Developing the attractive email
message, use of 2,750,000 email addresses, and
sending the message would cost $25,000. Experi-
ence shows that 5 percent of the initial recipients
forward such messages to friends and family.
Experience also shows that 2 percent of all reci-
pients actually click the web address included in
the message and visit the commercial site. Of
these visitors, 0.5 percent end up purchasing the
advertised item.
Using Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet,
answer the following questions: (1) Would you
generate a profit if you used this advertising
opportunity? (2) Would you profit if you could
email only 1,000,000 people?
Develop a rationale for integrating social media
into the email initiative. How can the integration
of social media be used along with a direct email
campaign? Research the strategy of various
businesses as a model for your
recommendations.
102
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Team Activities
36. Form a team and design an IS for a small busi-
ness that sells manufactured parts to other busi-
nesses. The system must handle customer order
processing, sales, salesperson commissions, bill-
ing, and accounts receivable. Prepare a report
describing the system’s different components and
their points of interface. What files are necessary?
How will the business use data in each file? If you
have command of Microsoft Access, create the
tables for the above objects, and populate each
one with three to five records.
37. Assume that you and your teammates are about
to start a web-based business for sporting
goods. You wish to email information to poten-
tial customers. Determine the demographic
characteristics of your target audience. Search
the web for companies that sell consumer data
that can serve you. Prepare a report about three
such companies: their names, services, and
prices (if available).
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
103
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART1
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Winning the Bet
International Game Technology (IGT) is a leading
manufacturer of slot machines and lottery machines
for casinos and government lotteries. Headquartered in
Reno, Nevada, with sales headquarters in Las Vegas, the
company also maintains sales, manufacturing, and
service sites in Africa, Australia, Europe, and South
America.
Its
Reno
site
alone
produces
140,000
machines annually. It has been profitable for many
years. In 2005, it had a profit of $437 million on revenue
of $2.4 billion, apparently a situation that would lull
executives of other companies to think “If it ain’t broke,
don’t fix it.” Not IGT managers.
Until 2002, each business function had its own
information system. IGT had different systems for
handling sales, customer orders, manufacturing, and
accounting.
When
managers
wanted
to
receive
information about a specific customer order, they
had to go to each functional unit to receive a
different piece of the information: customer details
from the sales department, status of the machines
being manufactured from the manufacturing units,
and payment status from accounting. The accounting
department itself had several software applications
that
handled
different
books,
such
as
accounts
receivable, accounts payable, and the general ledger.
As business was growing, managers complained
that they could not get comprehensive information on
orders.
The
IT
department
developed
interface
software to connect the systems, but there were still
complaints that information was not coherent. The IT
specialists admitted that they were maintaining a
mishmash of software. The loudest complaints came
from the accountants. Every year it took them two
weeks “to close the books.”
The accounting department pressured manage-
ment to purchase a new system that would make their
work more efficient. The CIO understood their plea but
was afraid that satisfying this department’s request
would trigger similar requests from other units, such
as engineering and manufacturing. The result might
be a better information system for each department,
but disparate systems that still were not connected to
each other. On the CIO’s advice, IGT management
decided to implement an ERP system.
A steering committee and project team were
assembled.
Their
members
focused
on
business
functionality rather than the technology. After the
first selection, systems from three companies were
considered: SAP, Oracle, and J.D. Edwards (which
was
later
acquired
by
Oracle).
After
further
consideration,
SAP
won
the
contract,
and
IGT
embarked on a two-year effort. In 2003, the company
switched to using the R/3 ERP system. IGT did not
disclose the cost of the project, but analysts estimate
it was well over $10 million.
When the system was ready, three functions were
incorporated
into
one
enterprise
system:
product
development, manufacturing, and finance. Like other
ERP systems, R/3 is highly structured even when
modified for a particular customer. As often happened,
the new system forced IGT to change some of its
business processes. However, the company chose
SAP’s system because it found it less rigid than other
ERP systems. This was important to IGT, because it
builds machines to order.
The system afforded the company several benefits.
Price proposals are made based on more accurate
information and estimates. Managers on the manu-
facturing floor can view or print out manufacturing
process sheets at their own PCs. Employees can no
longer ignore specifications or “cut corners.” The
system does not allow a process to continue when an
attempt such as this is made. The products are made
more efficiently and with fewer errors. The system
connects all of the company’s sites around the globe.
One of the system’s modules is project management,
which enables managers to monitor design changes
and costs involved in new product development.
The new system replaced the old MRP (material
requirements planning) system, but the company still
uses its internally developed factory control system,
which has been successfully integrated into the SAP
system. The factory control system enables managers
to know which machines are built at which plant.
IGT reduced the average period of order to
shipping from 9−10 weeks to 7−8 weeks. When a
rush order is entered, IGT can now fulfill it in four
weeks instead of seven weeks. Between 2002 and
2005 the error rates in orders for raw materials
decreased from 10 percent to almost 0. Inventory
turn increased from 6.3 to 8.4 percent per year.
IGT’s CIO admits that the implementation was
challenging.
The
company
makes
a
variety
of
machines, which meant that many bills of materials
had to be entered into the system (and new ones will
have to be entered for new products). Adapting some
features to the way IGT operates was not easy.
However, the implementation was successful. The
CIO credits the success to strong support from
senior management, the establishment of a steering
committee with members from all affected units, a
capable
project
management
team,
a
training
program to help employees understand how to use
the
new
system,
and
the
rigorous
testing
the
system underwent before it was used.
Source: Bartholomew, D., “ERP: Gaming Company Hits
Jackpot,” Baseline, October 2, 2006; (www.igt.com), 2007.
104
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
Thinking About the Case
1. What problems did IGT face before the imple-
mentation of the ERP system?
2. How does the new system help control
processes?
3. Compared to the situation in 2002, what are the
benefits of the ERP system?
4. IGT decided to continue operating its older fac-
tory control system. Why do you think it did so?
Resting on Electronic Mail for Effective CRM
For service industries, providing the customer with
a great experience is key to success. Very often,
very small details are what surprise customers and
create a lasting positive impression. The foundation
of
CRM
methodologies
focuses
not
only
on
maintaining relationships with customers, but with
profitable customers.
When email adoption increased significantly in
the 1990s, many businesses shifted their marketing
and
communication
focus
from
direct
mail
to
electronic mail. This new technology was viewed as a
low-cost,
efficient
method
to
communicate
with
customers. However, the benefits of communicating
by email quickly became a “double-edged sword” to
consumers. Overusing email could quickly create
overcommunication with their customers that would
result in customers becoming turned off.
The combination of government regulation and
the popularity of social media have reduced the
reliance on electronic mail. A 2010 report by Nielsen
confirmed that the share of time relating to email has
declined to 28 percent, while time spent with social
media increased to 43 percent. Ironically, while social
media may be popular, consumers remain loyal (42
percent) to email as the source to obtain information
about specials and advertisements. An eConsultancy
study found that only 3 percent use social-networking
sites and 1 percent use Twitter. Forrester Research’s
2011 report found that consumers delete fewer emails
without reading them.
The
hotel
industry
continues
to
provide
properties
with
amenities
that
are
desired
by
customers. With over 7,000 hotels, Wyndham Hotel
Group has more than 8 million members in its
loyalty program. Wyndham wanted to use email
campaigns to increase revenue and occupancy at
their properties as well as promote their brand.
However, it would be important to balance their
campaigns so they did not overcommunicate with
members.
The
competitive
nature
of
the
hotel
industry creates a fickle customer. The promotions
offered by a hotel can often complicate the issue of
coordinating
email
campaigns.
However,
an
effective
email
campaign
requires
the
same
approach as for any other business: discipline.
Although Wyndham implemented many email
promotions, they were not receiving the results that
they planned. Coupled with the effort needed to
implement these campaigns, they knew that a new
approach was needed. Working with a marketing firm,
Acxiom, a more targeted approach was developed.
With
the
outside
consultants,
they
applied
best
practices to determine the timing and sequences of
messages. They created webpages and various email
versions along with custom Subject text. These emails
would be sent to a subset of their rewards members in
the United States.
It
was
important
to
tailor
future
emails
to
customers based on their past actions. Wyndham
developed an automated email engine that operated
based on such data. For example, a confirmation
email
was
sent
based
on
the
completion
of
a
registration. A variety of emails would be sent to
rewards
members
based
on
a
specific
purpose,
ranging from free nights to vacation specials to
reward
point
specials.
With
the
focus
on email
distribution, Wyndham continued to offer members
the ability to opt out of receiving emails.
Their strategy and use of email technology was
successful
compared
with
their
previous
email
campaigns. Wyndham’s total revenue linked directly
from email solicitations increased by 187 percent.
Various other metrics showed positive gains as well.
The
rate
of
emails
that
were
opened
by
users
increased by 8.2 percent while registration rates for a
summer promotion increased by 43 percent over a
previous campaign.
Sources: Aquino, J. (2012). Don’t count out email yet.
Customer
Relationship
Management,
16-19.
Aquino,
J.
(2012). Wyndham hotels’ targeted emails break records.
Customer
Relationship
Management,
16,
37.
Rubel,
S.
(2010).
Hot
or
not:
Email
marketing
vs.
social-media
marketing. Advertising Age, 81(29), 16.
Thinking About the Case
1. Why was it important for Wyndham to re-
examine their email campaign approach rather
than just abandon it?
2. What do you believe was the turning point for this
effort?
3. Why have marketing professionals approached
email campaigns differently than other promo-
tional methods?
4. Consider the emails that you receive from busi-
nesses. Contrast and compare the approach of
these businesses versus Wyndham’s approach.
CHAPTER 3
Business Functions and Supply Chains
105
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
PART
References
Anonymous. (2009). Success Story — SnapFish. www.
liveperson.com/sites/default/files/pdfs/Snap
fish_CaseStudy.pdf
Anonymous. (2010a). Recruiting Still the HR Function
Most Likely to Be Outsourced. Staffing Manage-
ment, 6, 9–9.
Anonymous. (2010b). Wonderlic Launches ASAP for
Home Healthcare(TM) A Web-Based Solution That
Helps Home Healthcare Firms to Quickly Hire
Capable, Service-Oriented Staff, Business Wire.
Anonymous. (2010c). Wonderlic Rolls Out ASAP for
Property Management Hiring. Professional Services
Close-Up.
Columbus, L. (2013). 2013 ERP Market Share Update:
SAP Solidifies Market Leadership. Forbes.com.
www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2013/05/12/
2013-erp-market-share-update-sap-solidifies-market-
leadership/
106
The Information Age
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

two
PART
Keith morris/Alamy
PART
2
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
CHAPTER 4 Business Hardware 108
CHAPTER 5 Business Software 148
CHAPTER 6 Business Networks and Telecommunications 183
CHAPTER 7 Databases and Data Warehouses 220
BUSINESS CHALLENGES
Liz and Michael understand the strategic and func-
tional uses of information technology for their res-
taurant business. Now they need to analyze and
assemble the hardware, software, and networking
requirements that will support their strategic and
operational decisions. In addition, Liz and Michael
will need to determine what information is needed
to support their business operations.
●
In Chapter 4,“Business Hardware,” you learn how
to evaluate hardware needs and determine what
hardware will support the daily operations of a
business entity.
●
In Chapter 5, “Business Software,” you learn how
to determine the types of software needed to
provide the functions for an organization’s staff
and management.
●
In Chapter 6, “Business Networks and
Telecommunications,” you learn about the
network and telecommunications strategies that
various businesses use to support the technology
and business functions.
●
In Chapter 7, “Databases and Data Warehouses,”
you learn the importance of an organization’s
significant asset—databases—and understand
how database technology can be leveraged for
both strategic advantage and operational
efficiency.
Information Technology
107
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
 
CHAPTER
© Korn/Shutterstock.com
PART
four
BUSINESS HARDWARE
Learning Objectives
At the core of any modern information system stands at least one computer. Few machines have changed human
life as radically as the computer, and few such complex machines have become so affordable to so many
businesses and individuals in such a short time. Because computers and other hardware devices are central to
information systems and to business, to successfully implement ISs, you need to understand them. Businesses
have many hardware choices, ranging from computers and mobile devices to input and output devices.
Understanding the capabilities of hardware and the options available can save companies millions of dollars. This
chapter provides you with the knowledge to make intelligent decisions about computer hardware in your
professional career.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
List major hardware components of computers and explain their functions.
●
Classify computers into major categories, and identify their strengths and weaknesses.
●
Identify and evaluate key criteria for deciding what computers or related devices to purchase.
●
Discuss the possible health hazards of computer use.
108
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Hardware for the Appetite
Tyler and Michael have worked on the marketing plan
for the new location. They believe that it will be success-
ful in expanding their marketing reach to gain new cus-
tomers for Kimball’s lakeside location. Now it was time
to turn their attention to improving the operational
aspect of their business. At the top of their list was
determining what restaurant software would best fit
their needs for the new location, and if their current
computer hardware could handle it.
Talking Technical
Tyler and his parents agreed that upgrading their informa-
tion system would help create a more efficient operation
at the existing restaurant, and provide a solid base for
launching their new location. They also were excited
about having access to additional data and reporting capa-
bilities to help them evaluate and plan more efficiently and
effectively. What they didn’t know was what hardware and
software they needed to achieve their goals.
Tyler contacted Clark Howard at PosiDining Systems
(PDS), the software company that installed their current
POS system. They selected PDS’s entry-level version several
years ago as a low-cost option to automate the operations.
Since the installation of the PDS system, some of the
issues have been reduced (see previous chapter cases for
additional explanation). However, he is concerned that
the version of the system they are using may not be
enough for the new location. He was concerned that the
servers manually entered orders into the system based
on notes taken at the table. There could be mistakes in
either the writing or entry of the customer orders.
Tyler explained the estimated volume that was antici-
pated at the new restaurant as well as some of the man-
agement issues that were anticipated at the new location.
Clark and Tyler reviewed the number of workstations
needed by the wait and kitchen staff as well as the dining
and bar area seating chart. Clark told Tyler that the more
robust version of PDS’s product would be able to operate
the new location effectively, provide more data for man-
agement, and avoid some of the problems they’re cur-
rently experiencing with the POS system.
Although Tyler wanted an information system that
could help his family operate and manage the restaurant
effectively, he was also concerned about the cost and the
learning curve associated with a new system for both staff
and management. Clark understood his concerns. Tyler
asked if it would be possible to install the upgraded system
at the current location for 2-3 months while the lakeside
location was being prepared. Although there might be
some additional cost to install and reinstall the hardware
and software, they could train people at the current location
so the transition to the new location would be less stressful.
Clark said he would prepare a proposal for this
phased-in approach that would detail the associated
costs for the restaurant.
Computer Hardware Components
eBay, the world’s largest auction business, sold $4.0 billion of electronics in the first quarter 2013
and serves more than 116 million active users worldwide. The influence of mobile computing has
been significant, 33 percent of all eBay transactions are mobile-based. These activities require a
huge amount of hardware. The company uses 50,000 servers. (eBay, 2012, 2013; Sverdlik, 2013).
The company’s computers are spread all over the world, and are connected through the Internet.
Hardware, in computer terms, refers to the physical components of computers and related
digital devices such as tablets, scanners, and smartphones. (Software, covered in the next
chapter, refers to the sets of instructions that direct the hardware to perform particular tasks.) In
corporate decision making, managers should consider software first, not hardware. Businesses
need to first identify the tasks they want to support and the decisions they want to make, and
therefore the information they need to produce. This information will help them determine the
appropriate software, and they can then purchase the best hardware to run the software. A new
organization can often make software-related decisions first. However, in a great majority of
cases, established organizations already have a significant investment in hardware and, therefore,
must often consider adopting new software within the constraints of their existing hardware.
Regardless of size, age, function, or capability, most computers have the same basic components
(see Figure 4.1) and operate according to the same basic principles. A computer must handle four
operations: (1) accept data, (2) store data and instructions, (3) process data, and (4) output data
and/or information. In recent years, data communication over a network has become an
essential aspect of input and output for almost every computer, whether stationary or portable.
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
109
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
F I G U R E 4.1
Most computer systems
have the same basic
components
Input Devices
Output Devices
Central Processing Unit
(Microprocessor Chip)
Storage
(Hard Disk)
Internal Memory
(RAM and ROM Chips)
Storage
(CD/DVD Drive)
Cloud Storage
In general, every computer has these components:
●
Input devices receive signals from outside the computer and transfer them into the com-
puter. Common input devices are computer keyboards, mice, and touch screens, but some
input devices accept voice, image, or other signals.
●
The central processing unit, or CPU, is the most important part of any computer. The CPU
accepts instructions and data, decodes and executes instructions, and stores results (output) in mem-
ory for later display. In technical terms, a CPU is a chip made of silicon, transistors, and numerous
tiny soldered wires that form complex circuitry. The circuitry is built and programmed so that it can
interpret electrical signals to run computers. Some computers have several CPUs. The increase in the
power of computers and decrease in their prices have in large part been the result of engineers’
ability to increase the number of transistors on these chips without increasing the chips’ size.
●
Internal memory, also called primary memory, is located near the CPU and stores data and
instructions just before and immediately after the CPU processes them. This includes programs
currently running on a machine, intermediate results of arithmetic operations, intermediate ver-
sions of documents being word processed, and data elements that represent the pictures displayed
on a computer screen and the sounds played by the speakers. Most of a computer’s internal
memory is RAM (random access memory), and a smaller amount is ROM (read-only
memory). RAM holds data and program instructions, and is volatile by design, that is, its con-
tents are cleared when the computer is turned off or when a computer program is allowed to
replace the data in it. ROM is nonvolatile. It contains data and instructions that do not change,
mostly instructions the computer uses to load programs when it is powered on. The amount of
RAM—often simply called memory—and the speed at which it operates are two of the properties
that determine the power of a computer. The CPU and primary memory are usually plugged into
a circuit board in the computer case called the motherboard or system board.
●
Storage is different types of media—such as magnetic disks, magnetic tapes, optical discs,
DVDs, and flash memory—that store data and information; however, unlike RAM, external
memory allows for permanent storage. Thus, many external storage media are portable and can
be moved from one computer to another. Online or cloud storage (storing data on remote stor-
age devices over the Internet or a private network) is an increasingly popular form of storage.
●
Output devices, most commonly computer monitors and printers, deliver information from
the computer to a person. Additional output devices include speakers and digital audio
players for audio output and specialized output devices such as digital scoreboards.
Recall the explanation of digital information in Chapter 1, “Business Information Systems:
An Overview.” Computers and other digital devices use two states to represent zeroes and ones.
Representing only two states is easier than representing many states, and two states can be more
accurately detected—that is, received—than many states.
© Cengage Learning 2015
110
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Understand Information Systems Hardware
Business majors and other non-IT professionals often ask:
“Why do I have to study computer hardware?” The answer
is threefold. You must know enough about hardware to be
able to communicate your needs to IT professionals who can
provide you with the devices you need for your work. If you
are in a position to choose among various options and make a
decision on certain hardware pieces, you must be sufficiently
knowledgeable about hardware to make informed decisions.
Finally, since you are or will be a professional, you will have
to purchase hardware for your personal use. Keeping abreast
of developments in hardware will make you an informed con-
sumer, and you will be able to optimize your purchases.
In addition, knowledge of new technologies might give you
ideas about how to develop new products and services to
improve your organization’s competitive position. Throughout
history, necessity has been the mother of invention, but this
is not so with information technology. Time and again inven-
tions have been available long before business puts them to
use. Professionals who realize that a certain development can
give their companies an advantage will be rewarded for their
vision. Specifically, start-up entrepreneurs need to understand
how technology can build or transform their operation. While
IT professionals design, develop, and build technology compo-
nents, the entrepreneur must have a high-level vision that can
use the integration or convergence of technology in creative
ways.
The amount of data that computers process and store is measured in bits and bytes. A bit
is a binary digit, a 0 or 1. A byte is a combination of eight bits. All data stored and processed by
a computer, including text, images, video, and audio, is represented by bits and bytes. Computer
memory and storage capacity are measured in megabytes (MB, millions of bytes), gigabytes (GB,
billions of bytes), and terabytes (TB, trillions of bytes) and beyond, as shown in Figure 4.2.
F I G U R E 4.2
Measuring amounts of
digital data
1 KB (kilobyte) = 1,000 bytes
1 MB (megabyte) = 1,000,000 bytes
1 GB (gigabyte) = 1,000,000,000 bytes
1 TB (terabyte) = 1,000,000,000,000 bytes
1 PB (petabyte) = 1,000,000,000,000,000 bytes
1 EB (exabyte) = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 bytes
1 ZB (zettabyte) = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 bytes
1 YB (yottabyte) = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 bytes
Classification of Computers
Computers come in a wide variety of classes, from supercomputers to handheld smartphones.
Computers are classified by their power, which is determined mainly by processing speed and
memory size. However, the lines between the classes have become blurred, and the class names
have changed over the years. In general, the more powerful the computer, the higher its price.
Supercomputers
Supercomputers are the most powerful computers at any given time, but are built especially
for assignments that require arithmetic speed. They would be overly expensive and impractical
for most business situations. Usually, supercomputers are also the largest in physical size and the
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
111
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
most expensive. Universities, research institutions, government agencies, and
large corporations engaged in research and development are most likely to use
them. Supercomputer manufacturers include IBM, Cray, Fujitsu, Hitachi, and
NEC. Supercomputers’ RAMs consist of billions of bytes, and their processing
speed is trillions of instructions per second. They usually cost at least in the
millions of dollars. The Titan supercomputer, discussed later in a point of interest,
cost $100 million (Munger, 2012).
Supercomputers contain multiple processors that let them perform parallel
processing and run at great speeds. For example, NASA uses a supercomputer
system for its scientific research and space exploration. Its Pleiades supercomputer
system, made by SGI, has 182 racks, 11,776 nodes, 23,552 processors and 233 TB
of memory (Anonymous, 2012e). However, even this machine is slow in
comparison to the Blue Gene used at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory. This IBM computer has 1.6 M processors capable
of processing 16 thousand trillion calculations per second with 1.6 PB of memory
(Brodkin, 2012). The size of its processing power is small compared to the 3,000
square feet required to house this computer system.
In parallel processing (sometimes called multiprocessing), several CPUs
process
different
data
at
the
same
time.
Uses
of
supercomputers
include
calculation of satellite orbits, weather forecasting, genetic decoding, optimization
of oil exploration, and simulated testing of products that cannot otherwise be
tested because of price or physical difficulty.
POINT OF
INTEREST
The World’s Most Powerful Computer
Oak Ridge National Laboratory turned on their newest supercomputer, Titan, for the first time in October
2012. The supercomputer is projected to be the fastest in the world and will be used to research and
develop biofuels, combustion engine efficiency, magnetics, astrophysics, climate studies, nuclear science,
and atomic-level materials science. Titan has 10 times the processing power of its predecessor, Jaguar,
and occupies the same amount of space. The speed of the Titan is equal to every one of earth’s 7 billion
people executing 3 million calculations per second.
Source: Hoover, J. N. (2012). Energy Dept.’s Titan Supercomputer: Record Breaker? Informationweek -
Online.
http://www.informationweek.com/government/enterprise-applications/energy-depts-titan-super
computer-record/240012478
In lieu of one large supercomputer, some organizations link a “cluster” of smaller computers via
networks to create and enjoy similar computing power. Instead of a single machine with multiple
processors, clustering uses the CPU power of multiple computers, with the same effect.
A computer cluster is comprised of a group of connected computers which complete computing
requests together to improve processing performance. This can be done with special software that
links the CPUs of servers via a private or public network such as the Internet, all or part of the time.
Mainframe Computers
Mainframe computers are less powerful in computational speed and significantly less
expensive than supercomputers. They cost several thousand to several hundred thousand dollars.
Businesses that must handle business transactions and store large amounts of data in a central
computer often use mainframes, which some IT professionals fondly call “big iron.” These
businesses include banks, insurance companies, large retail chains, and universities. Well-known
mainframe manufacturers include IBM, Fujitsu, and Unisys. While the processing speed of
mainframes is usually not higher than that of the fastest PCs, they often have multiple processors
Supercomputers are used predominantly
by research institutions and government
agencies for complex
calculations
Eimantas Buzas/Photos.com
112
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
and their memories are significantly larger, measured in terabytes. By some estimates, a significant
amount of the world’s business data resides on mainframes. Like supercomputers, these computers
are largely invisible to the public, although we access them often via the Internet.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Supercomputing for All
Accessibility of supercomputers has been a problem because of their enormous size and cost. They can
cost over $20 million to build and suck up millions more each year in power and cooling costs. However,
Jason Stowe, the CEO of Cycle Computing, has solved this problem for small businesses and researchers
desiring large-scale computations without the large price. Cycle Computing’s software communicates to
Amazon.com’s cloud-computing service and organizes over 50,000 of its computers to work on one prob-
lem. Cycle Computing divides up computing problems into small pieces that can be spread out over all the
machines and then puts the results back together. The low price, $1,000 per hour, makes the service
affordable even to someone with a modest research grant and challenging questions.
Source: Vance, Ashley. (2012). Supercomputers for Rent. BloombergBusinessweek. Retrieved from, http://
www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-07-26/supercomputers-for-rent
Servers
A midrange category of computers, often referred to as servers, are smaller than mainframes and
less powerful. They are usually used as a shared resource, connecting hundreds of users to a variety
of computers from desktops, laptops, and other servers. Therefore, these computers are used to
communicate to other computers and “serve” applications and data, both through the Internet and
locally within organizations. Like mainframe computers, servers sometimes use multiple processors.
Personal Computers
Personal computers (PCs) is the collective name for several types of computers: notebook
computers, desktops, netbooks, and handheld computers. More powerful personal computers are
sometimes called workstations. Workstations are typically used for computer-aided design
(CAD), computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), complex simulation, graphical rendering, and
scientific applications. As the performance of PCs steadily improves, computers that in the past
were classified as midrange computers are now marketed as PCs, and the lines between
computer categories continue to blur.
The power of PCs in terms of speed and memory capacity doubles about every two years.
Most PCs now sold to individuals and businesses cost less than $900. However, a growing
number of personal computers are not desktop PCs, but laptops and tablet computers.
Computers on the Go: Notebooks, Tablets, and Smartphones
Computers are increasingly used outside the home, office, or school. Notebook or handheld
computers are used to record and retrieve data for people on the go. The notebook computer
(also called a laptop) is a compact, light, personal computer that can be powered by a
rechargeable battery. These computers can operate for up to eight hours without recharging their
batteries. All recent notebook computers have internal circuitry that enables them to connect
wirelessly to networks and the Internet. (Wireless technology is covered in Chapter 6, “Business
Networks and Telecommunications.”) Notebooks have matched the power of desktop PCs in
terms of speed, memory, and hard disk capacity.
One highly popular class of computing machinery is the handheld computer. Handheld
computers called personal digital assistants (PDAs) appeared on the market in the early
1990s but became popular only toward the end of the decade. These devices were small enough
to fit in the palm of your hand, and typically a stylus (a pen-like pointing and drawing device)
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
113
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
was used to enter data through a touch screen, although some had a small keyboard or could
plug into a folding portable keyboard. By the mid-2000s, almost all new PDAs also served as
mobile phones, and were increasingly called by the new term, smartphone.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Is it a Phone, a Tablet, or Both?
The Samsung Galaxy Note II, released in 2012, eliminates the need to carry around a mobile phone, camera,
and tablet; it is all of those things and more. Its 5.3-inch screen sizes it in between traditional smartphones
and tablets. It can execute the tasks of the traditional mobile phone such as making calls and text messages,
as well as taking high quality pictures that can be instantly uploaded to social media sites. The “S pen” can
be used for notetaking and drawing. Sloppy handwriting? No worries. Your handwriting can be automatically
converted to text. The Galaxy Note II has great call quality and fast upload/download speeds. Samsung has
created a demand for their product by making one device that has the capabilities of many devices.
Source: Mies, G. (2012). Samsung Galaxy Note: Impressive, but Not for All. PC World, 30, 54.
Another mobile computing device is the tablet computer, often called tablet for short.
Instead of a mouse, you use your fingers or a stylus on a touch screen to execute commands.
Tablets can be laptop PCs with touch screens that can operate either in “traditional” monitor
mode with a keyboard, or swivel to operate in “slate” mode using the touch screen. Other
tablets are smaller in size without a built-in keyboard, such as the Apple iPad, Microsoft Surface,
and many others. Most tablets have high-definition displays and excellent audio and video
capabilities, as well as Wi-Fi and/or cellular network connectivity.
The applications for tablets have exponentially expanded in recent years. Users can surf the
web, read books, shop, video chat, watch movies, listen to music, play games, and much more.
Access to online “app” stores gives users instant access to songs, books, movies, and games.
Tablets are popular among people of all ages because of their wide range of applications. In
addition to their use for entertainment, one of the most beneficial uses for tablets is in schools,
where students use them to download electronic texts, take notes on lectures, and communicate
with teachers about assignments. The cost of supplying each student with a tablet can be less
than constantly replacing outdated textbooks.
Some tablets evolved from e-readers. For example, the original Kindle e-reader
offered by Amazon.com performed the basic task of displaying the pages of a book.
However, many e-readers have evolved to perform as many tasks as tablets. The
Kindle Fire HD has a tablet-size screen and can use high-speed cellular networks.
Users can download movies, songs, and books, as well as check email and surf the
web. It is becoming increasingly difficult to distinguish what is a tablet and what is
an e-reader because they are evolving to perform the same tasks.
The popularity of the Apple iPad, Kindle Fire, and other tablet computers has
created
an
alternative
to
traditional
desktop
and
laptop
computers.
The
combination
of
a
high
definition
display,
network
capabilities,
and
the
proliferation of application software provides a solid product. Tablet technology
offers business professionals the computing capability they need to perform their
jobs more efficiently on the go.
Converging Technologies
As you’ve seen in the previous section, in recent years, we have experienced an
increasing trend of technology convergence, building several technologies into a
single piece of hardware. Smartphones are a prime example. In the early 1990s, PDAs
became popular devices, placing computing power in a handheld-sized unit. Cell
phones were becoming popular at the same time. The rapid adoption of both cell
phones and PDAs converged to create a new product, the smartphone, which
Medical professionals can leverage the
portability of a tablet device to access
and update patient information
Hongqi Zhang/Photo.com
114
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
combined the computing power of a PDA with the calling functionality of cell phones. In addition,
smartphones integrated media technologies such as MP3 players, video recording, and digital
cameras. Smartphones also can connect to personal computers or networks to synchronize data
(calendars, contacts), connect to printers, and access cloud storage systems. The convergence of
several technologies—cellular telephone, data and networking, media, and cloud storage—in the
smartphone has significantly extended the ability of individuals to “take their computers on the go.”
POINT OF
INTEREST
Today the Mobile Way
In 2012, the number of Chinese who accessed the Internet via mobile phone outnumbered desktop Inter-
net users for the first time. The 388 million Chinese who used their mobile phone to surf the web was 22
percent more than in 2011. That leaves 380 million still accessing the Internet through a desktop com-
puter. About 50 percent of all new Chinese Internet users are from rural areas, and 60 percent of them
access the Internet from mobile phones. Tech companies are reacting by offering expanded services to
mobile phone users and by targeting the rural population.
Source: Tsuruoka, D. (2012). Mobile Phones Now Top Way To Access Internet In China, Investor’s
Business Daily.
A Peek Inside the Computer
It is not necessary to look under a car’s hood to drive it, but it is important to know
enough about how a car is built to know which car to buy. Similarly, professionals
must know enough about the major components of a computer to understand
what computing power and capabilities they buy or recommend for buying. The
following discussion introduces the computer’s most common parts and peripheral
equipment and describes in some detail how these devices work.
The Central Processing Unit
The CPU is the computer’s brain, where all processing takes place. The CPU consists
of two units: the control unit and the arithmetic logic unit (ALU). These
units store and process data. The CPU is a silicon chip with multiple circuits. It
carries signals that execute all processing within a computer. Because the chip is so
small, it is often called a microprocessor, or simply a processor. Most modern
computers use processors that combine two or more CPUs or “cores” on a single
chip,
called
multicore
processors.
Multicore
processors
are
capable
of
performing more than one task at a time. For example, they can carry out a
calculation in a spreadsheet and process a graphical design simultaneously. Processing more than
one program, or processing several parts of a program, at the same time is often called multi-
threading, whereby each process is a thread.
Microprocessors
Microprocessors are made of silicon embedded with transistors. A transistor is a semiconductor, a
component that can serve as either a conductor or an insulator, depending on the voltage of
electricity that tries to flow through it. This property is excellent for computer communications,
because it provides a means to represent binary code’s two states: a 1 (voltage conducted) or a 0
(voltage not conducted). Thus, transistors can sense binary signals that are actually encoded
instructions telling the computer to conduct different operations.
The greater the number of transistors that can be embedded in the chip—which means the
greater the number of circuits—the more powerful the microprocessor. Current processors can
contain several hundred million circuits. Current technology enables chip makers to print
Smartphones provide extensive comput-
ing, networking, and phone capabilities in
one small unit
Oleksiy Mark/Photos.com
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
115
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
circuits on silicon that is 0.1 micron thick, one thousand times thinner than a human hair. New
processor-making technologies let engineers increase the processing speed of computers while
enabling them to use less energy and give off less heat.
The Machine Cycle
When a program starts running in a computer, the CPU performs a routine sequence, illustrated
in Figure 4.3 for a simple arithmetic function. First, the control unit, one of the two parts of the
CPU, fetches an instruction from a program in primary memory and decodes it, that is,
interprets what should be done. The control unit transmits this code to the other part of the
CPU, the arithmetic logic unit (ALU), which executes the instruction. Usually, the operation’s
result is needed for further operations. Therefore, the control unit takes the result and stores it in
primary memory, or it leaves it in a memory location called register for a following instruction to
use. The control unit then fetches the next instruction, decodes it, and “puts” it in the ALU,
which executes the instruction. The control unit stores the result in primary memory, and so
on, until the entire program is executed, or something happens that stops the cycle. Anything
that stops the cycle is called an interrupt. It might be an instruction in the program itself, a
power failure, or any other event that stops the CPU.
F I G U R E 4.3
What happens inside the
CPU in one machine cycle
Input Devices
Output Devices
Storage Devices
Central Processing Unit
Internal Memory
1
4
Control Unit
Arithmetic Logic
Unit
Store
Fetch
ADD   7     5
2 Decode
3 Execute
12
As you can see, the CPU performs four functions in every cycle: fetch, decode, execute, and
store. Each cycle is called a machine cycle. CPUs can perform billions of machine cycles per
second. The sequence of CPU operations must be paced so that different tasks do not collide. To
this end, the control unit uses special circuitry called a CPU clock, which synchronizes all
tasks. The clock is programmed to run operations at the maximum rate allowable. The number
of pulses per second is called frequency, or clock rate. A machine cycle takes several clock
pulses. CPU frequencies are measured in megahertz (MHz, millions of hertz) or gigahertz (GHz,
billions of hertz). During the time it takes your eye to blink (about 0.2 second), a computer can
execute hundreds of millions of instructions. Therefore, timing of computer operations is
measured in very small fractions of a second (see Figure 4.4).
F I G U R E 4.4
The timing of computer
processing operations
1 millisecond = 1/1,000 (0.001) second
1 microsecond = 1/1,000,000 (0.000001) second
1 nanosecond = 1/1,000,000,000 (0.000000001) second
1 picosecond = 1/1,000,000,000,000 (0.000000000001) second
© Cengage Learning 2015
© Cengage Learning 2015
116
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Interestingly, many computers now have a lower clock rate than computers of several years
ago. This does not mean that such computers work more slowly. They have multicore
processors, which are more efficient. They execute more instructions per machine cycle than the
older single-core processors, and therefore are faster despite the lower clock rate. Therefore, both
the cycles per second and instructions per cycle (IPC) should be considered when comparing
speeds of processors.
The Word
The data word (or “word” for short) is the maximum number of bits that the control unit can
fetch from primary memory in one machine cycle. The word’s size is determined by the size of
the CPU circuitry that holds information for processing. Obviously, the larger the word, the
more instructions or data can be retrieved per second. Therefore, all other things being equal,
the larger the word, the faster the computer. Current microcomputers have words of 32 and
64 bits.
The Arithmetic Logic Unit Operations
The ALU is the part of the CPU where all arithmetic and logic operations take place. Arithmetic
operations include addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponentiation, logarithmic
calculations,
trigonometric computations,
and other
complex
mathematical
tasks.
Logic
operations compare numbers and strings of characters. For example, comparisons such as
greater than, less than, and equal to are logic operations. The ALU also compares character
strings that are not quantitative. For example, when you try to find a word in the text of a
word-processing document, the ALU compares all words in the text to that specific word until
it finds an identical word.
Computer Power
What makes one computer more powerful than another? The two major factors to consider are
processing speed and memory capacity. A computer’s speed is determined, among other factors,
by the CPU clock rate (measured in MHz or GHz), and the amount of information the CPU can
process per cycle (determined by the size of the data word and the capacity of internal data
communication). However, the architecture of the various computer components also plays a
significant role in determining processing speed. To mention one, consider the discussion of
multicore CPUs. When two computers are built with the same components except the number
of cores, the computer with the greater number of cores is faster.
All other things being equal, the greater the clock rate, the faster the machine. This is due to
the fact that it can fetch, decode, execute, and store more instructions per second. Similarly, the
larger the data word, the faster the computer. A larger word means that in each trip to the
primary memory, the control unit can retrieve more bits to process. Therefore, the CPU can
execute a program faster.
You might have seen advertisements promoting a “64-bit computer.” This means the data
word’s capacity is 64 bits. You must be cautious with regard to word size. A larger word does not
always mean a faster computer, because the speed at which the bits move between the CPU and
other components depends on the capacity of internal communication lines. The system bus—
also called simply the bus—which is the electronic lines or traces used for communication
inside the computer, might have a width of only 32 bits, while the word might contain 64 bits.
The number of bits is also referred to as the width of the bus.
Buses have their own clock rate. The bus that computer makers usually mention in ads is the
front side bus, which is the bus connecting the CPU to the memory. A typical front side bus
clock rate is 1600 MHz. The combination of bus width and clock rate determines throughput.
Throughput is the number of bits per second that the bus can accommodate. Considering
both factors, CPU clock rate (so many GHz) and bus throughput, enables you to compare
properly the speeds of different computers.
Computer speed is also measured in MIPS (millions of instructions per second), which is
not an accurate measure, because instructions have various levels of complexity. However,
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
117
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
computer speed expressed in MIPS is often used to indicate overall processing speed because all
factors that determine speed are considered: clock rate, data word size, and bus throughput, as
well as other speed factors that we do not discuss here. Computer speeds expressed in MIPS have
been used to indicate the dramatic reduction in the cost of computing; observers often divide the
MIPS by the cost of a computer and marvel how the cost of computer power has decreased
dramatically, from MIPS per dollar to MIPS per cent. In recent years, computer makers have also
used the term “transactions per minute” (TPM), referring mainly to database transactions, but
this ratio, too, is not an absolute measurement.
Input Devices
Computers must receive input to produce desired output. Input devices include all machines
and other apparatuses used to enter instructions and data into the computer. Popular input
devices include the keyboard, mouse, trackball, touch screen, microphone, and various types of
scanners. The most common input device is the keyboard.
Keyboard
The keyboard contains keys that users press to enter data into primary memory and instructions
for programs to run. All keyboards include the basic letters of the alphabet, numbers, and
punctuation marks—plus several function keys numbered F1, F2, and so on, that can be
activated to execute preprogrammed functions, such as copying a highlighted sentence in a text
file created with a word processor. With the growing use of the web and use of computers to
play music and video clips, keyboard manufacturers have added keys that facilitate web browser
commands such as Back and Forward, and music keys such as Volume and Play/Pause. On some
keyboards you can bring up your email application by pressing the Mail key or the calculator by
pressing the Calculator key.
QWERTY and Dvorak Keyboards
The standard keyboard layout is called QWERTY, an acronym based on the top row of letter keys
from left to right. Interestingly, the QWERTY keyboard was originally designed to slow down
typing, because early mechanical typewriters jammed when users typed too fast. Today’s
electrical devices make this layout counterproductive. Other keyboard designs facilitate faster
typing. On the Dvorak keyboard, the most frequently used keys are in the home, or central, row.
Using this keyboard can increase typing speed by 95 percent. Some operating systems, such as
Windows, let users map QWERTY keys into a Dvorak layout. Most computer users are reluctant
to retrain themselves for the Dvorak map. In France and some other European countries, the A
and Q keys are swapped, and the Z and W keys are swapped. These keyboards are
known as AZERTY keyboards.
Ergonomic Keyboards
One of the most prevalent computer-related work injuries is carpal tunnel syndrome,
the pain or numbness caused by holding the forearms in an unnatural position for
long periods. The repetitive motion of typing exacerbates this problem, causing
repetitive-stress injuries (RSIs). In response, ergonomic keyboards are gaining
popularity. Ergonomics is the study of the comfort and safety of human beings in
their working environment. Ergonomic keyboards are split in the middle, and the
two parts are twisted outward to better fit the natural position of the forearms.
Mouse, Trackball, and Trackpad
A mouse is an input device that controls an on-screen pointer to facilitate the
point-and-click approach to executing different operations. It is most commonly
used with a keyboard, although some programs use it exclusively. Mice have one
Many people prefer to use ergonomic
keyboards for additional comfort while
typing
Hemera Technologies/Photos.com
118
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
to five buttons that let the user place the pointer anywhere on the screen,
highlight portions of the screen, and select items from a menu.
When the user moves the mouse on the surface of a desk or a pad, the
computer detects the movements, translates them into digital coordinates on the
screen, and moves the pointer to imitate the mouse’s movement. The buttons are
used for clicking, locking, and dragging displayed information. A trackball is
similar to a mouse, but the ball moves within the device, rather than over a
surface. With a trackpad, a user controls the cursor by moving his or her finger
along a touch-sensitive pad. Many notebook computers have built-in trackpads.
Many mice and trackballs have a built-in wheel that scrolls pages displayed on the
monitor.
Mice, trackballs, and keyboards are also available as wireless units that use
infrared or radio technology. These units give users more flexibility, especially in
software-based presentations, in which the presenter may move around holding
the mouse.
Touch Screen
Sometimes a single device, such as a touch screen, may serve both as an input
and output device. A touch screen lets the computer user choose operations by
touching the options on the computer screen. Some common public applications
use touch screens to provide advice to tourists, select lottery numbers, and ring in
grocery items at self-serve supermarket checkouts. On handheld computers, the screen serves as
both a display (output) and input device. The user enters commands and data either by
touching a stylus on icons and menu items, or by touching the screen with the fingers.
More and more, computers and other information devices are operated through touch screens.
Microsoft Windows 8 was designed specifically to utilize touch screen technology. Global positioning
systems (GPSs) have offered this convenience for some time. Smartphones and tablets have touch
screens. Touch screen technology is available in larger varieties such as walls, tablets, transparent
touch screens, and interactive systems. The Hawaii Five-0 and CSI television shows use DoubleTake
Technologies or FlickIt technology to transfer graphics or other content from a table-top monitor to
other displays on the walls surrounding the actors (Anonymous, 2012c).
Integrating computer
software with touch
screen hardware
Trackpads have become popular on
laptop systems
Szymon Mazurek/Photos.com
Courtesy of WordPress
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
119
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Source Data Input Devices
In some businesses, the speed of data entry is a top priority. These businesses use machine reading
devices, such as bar-code scanners, known as source data input devices. They copy data directly
from the source, such as a bar code or magnetic-ink characters, without human intervention.
They can also record data directly from other sources, including checks and credit cards. Source data
input technologies are widely used in banking, retail, credit-card processing, and shipping.
Source Data Technology
Mark-recognition devices are essential to successful source data entry. Special devices use optical
mark recognition to detect the positions of marks on source documents, such as standardized test
response forms. Optical bar recognition senses data encoded in the series of thick and thin black
bars in bar codes.
A less accurate technology used for source data entry is optical character recognition (OCR).
Unlike optical mark recognition, OCR technology is often used to try to interpret handwritten
and printed texts not originally designed for source data entry. A special scanner scans the page
and translates each character into a digitized representation. Software then tries to correlate the
images with characters and stores interpreted text for further processing. Postal services around
the world have experimented with OCR to replace human eyes and hands in the tedious job of
mail sorting.
Note that OCR is not optical mark sensing. In optical mark sensing, the scanner senses a
mark’s position, not what the mark actually is. The mark’s position determines the input. Because
the mark’s position rather than its shape determines the input data, mark sensing is far more
accurate than OCR.
A new optical mark format that uses a two-dimensional bar code (matrix) has become
popular, especially for marketing and consumer advertising. These Quick Response Codes, or QR
codes, were originally developed in Japan and used by automobile manufacturers due to their
increased storage capacity as compared to traditional UPC barcodes. The QR code matrix consists
of black- and white-squares. The convergence of smartphone, digital camera, and mobile
technologies and applications has facilitated the use of QR codes. Prospective customers can use
their smartphones to scan QR codes on a billboard or in a magazine to access additional
information about a product. Home shopping channels show a QR code as a product is being
introduced. The customer can simply scan the code to see more information and link to
purchase options.
The fastest growing source data technology is radio-frequency identification (RFID).
It uses a device known as an RFID tag along with an RFID reader, an efficient and cost-effective
data entry method. RFID transfers data without physically touching the hardware device. In fact,
unlike bar code technology, RFID tags can be embedded in an object, and does not require a direct
line of sight. It transmits data in the kilohertz, megahertz, and gigahertz frequency ranges. The
tags gain their power either from batteries or from the radio frequency waves emitted from the
reader.
RFID technology differs from standard barcode technology. When you are in a grocery store,
each product has a bar code, called a Universal Product Code (UPC), which is scanned by the
cashier to identify the product and its price. However, this value identifies only the product, but
not a specific unit of the product. In contrast, an RFID tag contains an Electronic Product Code
(EPC) that uniquely identifies each unit. For example, an RFID tag could be attached to each
carton of vaccine to identify its specific manufacturing date and origin. This level of information
could help the pharmaceutical company track the distribution of specific products as they are
transported to their final destinations.
A QR code can be used
to easily access a web
site by scanning through
a smartphone app
© Cengage Learning 2015
120
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
POINT OF
INTEREST
QR Codes Give Consumers a Quick Response
While UPC codes are used for identification, QR codes have expanded the identification concept to the
web. The commercial use of QR codes has increased drastically in recent years, mostly from the
increased usage of smartphones. Although QR codes have existed since the ‘90s, companies are using
them today to improve consumer knowledge. By scanning a QR code with their smartphone, airline custo-
mers can check in for flights without the traditional paper boarding pass. In Best Buy stores, QR codes
are linked to promotional trailers for video games and customer reviews. QR codes connect the physical
world and the infinite digital world.
Source: Stock, S. (2010). Creative marketers find new uses for QR codes, McClatchy - Tribune Business
News.
OCR has recently been integrated into mobile devices. For example, Samsung sells a cellular
phone that can help save time entering information into the phone’s address book. When you
use the phone’s digital camera to photograph a business card, the built-in character recognition
software captures the information from the picture and enters it into the address book.
Banking
Sometimes the development of new technology removes the reliance on older technology. In the
past, commercial banks and the Federal Reserve Bank processed millions of checks daily. Entering
check data manually would make the process extremely expensive and slow. The bank
identification number, account number, and check number are printed in special magnetic ink
at the bottom of each check, as shown in Figure 4.5. A device called a magnetic-ink reader uses
magnetic-ink
character
recognition
(MICR,
pronounced
MIKE-er)
to
detect
these
numbers. A person at the bank enters the amount of the check, also in magnetic ink. The bank
then records its check deposits by placing a large number of checks in a MICR device, which
records check amounts and accounts from which the money is drawn.
Because of the convergence of scanning technology with existing ATM devices, banking
customers at some ATMs are able to insert a check directly into an ATM, which reads the
pertinent information (check amount, account, and bank information) and immediately
processes the check without any additional processing by the bank (see POI below).
However, the greater trend is toward eliminating or reducing the use of paper checks in favor
of a process that is mostly or entirely electronic. Increasing numbers of people are paying their
bills through electronic banking using a bank’s website, significantly reducing labor and
increasing operational efficiency.
F I G U R E 4.5
Banks use magnetic-ink
character recognition
(MICR) to automate part of
the check clearing
process
2014
FOR
DOLLARS
PAY TO THE
ORDER OF
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
121
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Credit and Debit Cards
Credit and debit cards, too, facilitate source data entry. Card number and holder information
are coded on the magnetic strip on the card’s back. When you charge a purchase with your
credit card, the card is passed through the reader at the point of sale (POS) to record the
account number and your name and address. The total amount charged is either keyed
manually or recorded automatically from the cash register (often from a bar code on the item
purchased).
One of the newest input devices available to consumers and merchants is the
Square card reader. In late 2008, a frustrated glass artist lost out on a $2000 sale
because he could not accept credit cards, and the idea of Square was born. Square is a
small, square device that plugs into the audio jack of a smartphone with a slit to slide
credit cards through. The device reads the card information and converts it to an
audio signal. Software on the phone decodes the information before sending it over
the cell phone network to be authorized by Square’s servers. Customers can sign by
drawing their signature on the smartphone screen, and credit card information is
deleted from the phone after the purchase goes through. Square was introduced for
iPhones, and has expanded to offer software for the iPad and Android phones. This
revolutionary point-of-sale input device allows even the smallest of merchants to
easily accept credit and debit cards and keep track of customer purchases. As the
popularity of cashless payments continues to rise, the ability for small merchants to
accept debit and credit cards will lead to increased sales.
Shipping and Inventory Control
You might have noticed that every package you receive through shipping companies such as UPS
and FedEx has a bar code on it. Bar codes use the optical bar recognition techniques described
earlier to represent information for both inventory control and shipment tracking. A package is
scanned before it leaves the shipping facility, and the information is channeled into a computer
that stores information such as the recipient’s name and address. Whenever the item reaches a
station, the bar code is scanned again. This information is combined with the identification
information of the station. So, anyone with access to the shipping company’s database can see
exactly where the item has been and when, right up to the point of delivery. You can track an
item by logging on to the shipping company’s website and entering the item’s tracking number.
Since quick delivery is essential, source data input is extremely important in the shipping
industry, because it is highly accurate and saves much labor and time. As discussed in Chapter 3,
“Business Functions and Supply Chains,” bar codes are being replaced with RFID tags for both
shipping and inventory control.
Imaging
A growing number of organizations are imaging, or image processing, their documents. Doing
so allows not only the storage of enormous amounts of data in less space than paper, but also
much more efficient retrieval and filing. By scanning and indexing images, many companies
have already reduced millions of paper documents to digitized pictures. They use the technology
to store invoices, shipping documents, insurance policies and claims, personnel files, checks, and
many other document types. The images are indexed and linked to relevant records in large
databases, from which they can be retrieved and displayed on computer monitors. This
technology is particularly useful when documents include signatures and graphics.
Once scanned, the original document can be destroyed because an exact copy can be
generated on demand. Since it is in electronic form, it can be indexed. Indexing enables you to
search a document by keywords and numbers. This reduces the average time of searching a
document from several hours to about five seconds. In the United States, checking account
holders receive one or two sheets of imaged canceled checks from their banks instead of a stack
of their original checks. Customers who do their banking online can retrieve these images at any
time. This system saves banks millions of dollars in paper, space, and handling costs. The images
are often stored on DVDs. Because imaging reduces the amount of paper in organizations, some
The Square card reader hardware can
process sales on a mobile phone
Courtesy of Squareup.com
122
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
of the most enthusiastic adopters of imaging are companies in paper-intensive fields such as law,
retail, insurance, banking, health care, and shipping.
Imaging technologies continue to progress. A global financial services company saved $56–
$80 million in paper costs. Another financial services firm claims a 100 percent return on
investment in eight months and saved $3.6 million in paper and copying costs over a one year
period. A property insurance company focused on long cycle times for processes based on
hardcopy documents. The insurer implemented technology to capture, archive, and retrieve
documents and reduced the cost of issuing new policies by 33 percent with a savings of over $6
million per year (Anonymous, 2012a; Medina & Andrews, 2009). These examples prove that
substantial cost savings are realized through document imaging technology. The efficiency of
several business processes, such as invoicing, customer service, collections, and purchasing, can
be affected positively with the use of this technology.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Deposit Your Check in a Flash
The banking world has found another solution to make standing in line for the next available teller a thing
of the past. Banking customers can download an app on their iPhone, Android, or Windows smartphones,
sign in, and snap a picture of the front and back of the check to deposit it. Wells Fargo, Bank of America,
Chase, and Citibank have already implemented ways for customers to deposit checks using their smart-
phones. The innovation saves customers time because they do not have to visit a bank branch. The finan-
cial institution saves money because the check is immediately scanned into the system, eliminating the
need for bank personnel to process the check as well as reducing transactions processed by a teller.
Source: Avalos, G. (2012). Checks Go Cellular, Providence Journal.
Speech Recognition
The way we communicate with computers is changing. We already mentioned touch screens.
However, in some work environments, using manual input devices is either impossible or
inconvenient. In other situations, such as customer service, using a computer to respond
automatically to spoken customer queries can save labor costs. Instructing machines by speech
can help in these instances. Speech recognition—also called voice recognition—is the process
of translating human speech into computer-readable data and instructions. Although speech
recognition systems vary in sophistication, all receive voice input from a microphone or
telephone and process it with software.
Since help-desk labor is an area of great potential for reducing costs, several companies
have developed speech recognition software. Nuance Communications, Inc. offers Dragon
Naturally Speaking for dictating text in word processors and email. Microsoft’s Tellme software
provides voice services for automated 411 (telephone directory) services and enterprise
customer service. The convergence of smartphone and voice recognition technologies has
made possible applications to assist with dialing contacts, text and email messaging, as well as
initiating a search.
Navigation systems have become a standard feature in many vehicles. Toyota installs
VoiceBox software in the navigation systems of its new cars as well as car voice innovations;
IBM’s Embedded ViaVoice is used in General Motor’s OnStar and other dashboard command
systems. So far a GPS system is capable only of providing voice directions; with the new system,
you will be able to verbally ask the GPS system for directions, and it will speak them back.
Apple’s Siri is used on iPhones and iPads to receive voice commands as input to GPS.
Currently, the customer service departments of many companies use interactive voice
recognition (IVR) to understand simple commands from telephone callers, who can utter
answers to questions and receive recorded responses. IVRs can provide the most efficient method
for customers to get assistance. Some companies can direct up to 90 percent of their incoming
calls to IVR systems (Fluss, 2012). However, customer complaints prod companies to employ
more sophisticated voice recognition systems. A recent study of consumers indicates that most
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
123
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
still prefer speaking to a live agent rather than using an IVR system (Gray, 2012). However,
updating the organization’s IVR application will realize a cost-effective investment to increase its
performance (Fluss, 2012).
POINT OF
INTEREST
A Commanding Voice
Emerging as the most common scene for voice recognition systems is mobile phones. Many mobile
phones offer some type of speech recognition system that allows users to issue basic voice commands.
Android-powered smartphones are taking it a step further. Users of newer Android smartphones can
download an app that allows Google to recognize the pattern of their speech. The service gradually
becomes accustomed to the user’s voice and over time will more accurately understand voice com-
mands. Accurate speech recognition in mobile phones is extremely convenient for people without a free
hand or who are driving.
Source: San Jose Mercury, N. (2010). Google launches next phase of speech-recognition service, The Salt
Lake Tribune.
Output Devices
Output devices include all electronic and electromechanical devices that deliver results of
computer processing. We receive most information in visual form, either on screen or on paper.
Therefore, this discussion focuses on the most popular output devices: monitors and printers.
Output also includes audio signals, received through speakers and earphones, or downloaded to
digital audio players. Soon we might also be able to enjoy smell output using digital technology.
Monitors
The most common output device is the computer monitor, which looks like and uses technology
similar to a television screen. The two major types of monitors are cathode-ray tube (CRT) and
flat-panel display. CRT is an older technology, and most monitors today are flat-panel. Images
on a monitor are made up of small dots called pixels (picture elements, with the addition of an
x for easier pronunciation).
In a CRT (cathode-ray tube) monitor, the inner side of the screen has a layer of tiny
phosphoric dots, which make up the pixels. These dots respond to electronic beams by
displaying different colored light. An electron gun receives instructions from the computer and
sweeps the rows of pixels, spraying a ray of electrons. When electrons hit a pixel, the pixel
emits light for a limited time. The electronic gun bombards some pixels and skips others,
creating a picture on the screen. This type of monitor has rapidly vanished as a means of
displaying data.
Flat-panel monitors have gained popularity for personal computers and handheld
computers, after years of use in notebook computers. The advantages of flat-panel monitors are
their slim profile, sharper images, and lower power consumption. The most common type of
flat-panel monitor is the liquid crystal display (LCD). The price of LCD monitors has
decreased sharply over the past several years, making them the most popular type of monitor. In
addition, the lower cost of flat-panel monitors has made it possible and popular to use two
monitors on one personal computer, increasing the number of active applications at any one
time. In LCD, a conductive, film-covered screen is filled with a liquid crystal, whose molecules
can align in different planes when charged with a certain electrical voltage. The proper voltage
applied to segments of the screen disrupts the crystal’s regular structure in those areas, causing it
to block light. Light continues to pass through the rest of the liquid. This combination of light
and dark areas produces images of characters and pictures.
124
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Flat panel displays have
replaced CRTs in business
organizations and
households
Any type of high definition television (HDTV) set can be connected to a computer (if it has
the proper socket) and serve as a computer monitor.
The price of a monitor depends primarily on its size, measured as the diagonal length of the
screen. Other price factors include brightness (the brighter the better), contrast ratio (the higher
the better), and pixel pitch (how close the pixels are to each other; the closer the better).
The greater the number of pixels per unit area on the screen, the sharper the picture. Picture
sharpness is called resolution. It is expressed as the number of pixels that fit the width and
height of a complete screen image. Monitors come in various resolutions. If you multiply these
numbers, you get the total number of pixels on the screen. Common resolutions are 1024  768,
1280  1024, 1366  768, 1600  1200, 1920  1080, and 2560  1600.
Good color monitors can display more than 16 million colors and hues. The number of
colors and the overall quality of pictures also depends on the quality of the video card used
inside the computer. The video card contains memory and circuitry to manipulate and display
two- and three-dimensional images.
Printers
Printers can be classified into two basic types—nonimpact and impact—based on the technology
they use to create images on paper.
Nonimpact Printers
The printer most commonly used today in businesses is the laser printer, which is a nonimpact
printer because it creates images on a page without mechanically impacting the paper.
Nonimpact printers include laser, ink-jet, electrostatic, and electro-thermal printers. Laser
printers are also page printers, because they print one whole page at a time. Laser and ink-jet
printers produce very high-quality output, including color. Laser printing technology can create
typeset quality equal to what you see in magazines and textbooks. Ink-jet printers can be used
for photo-quality output, and therefore are often used to print pictures captured by digital
cameras. All nonimpact printers have fewer moving parts than impact printers and are,
therefore, significantly quieter. They are also much faster. The excellent quality of their output
makes laser printers the choice of many individual and corporate users for desktop publishing.
Two qualities to check when purchasing a laser or ink-jet printer are speed, measured in
pages per minute (PPM), and density, measured in dots per inch (DPI). The higher the density,
the sharper the output. Desktop printers produce output at 300, 600, and 1200 DPI or more.
Ink-jet printers are capable of producing output at much higher density, such as 4800  1200
DPI. The speed of desktop laser printers is 17 to 60 PPM. Color laser printing is somewhat slower
due to the time it takes the printer to compose the image. Larger, commercial laser printers reach
speeds of more than 400 PPM.
Oleksiy Mark/Photos.com
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
125
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
The low prices of laser and ink-jet printers might be misleading. Over the life of the printer,
the buyer will spend much more money for the cartridges than for the printer. For example, a
color laser printer that costs $200 typically requires four cartridges, each costing about $40. Just
a single set of new cartridges costs almost as much as a new printer. If a new printer is to be
used for high-volume printing, the initial larger expenditure on a laser printer makes business
sense because the per-page cost of laser cartridges is lower than the per-page cost of ink-jet
cartridges. However, ink-jet printers are more suitable for photo-quality prints because of their
higher resolution, that is, a greater DPI density.
Impact Printers
Printers are considered impact printers if they reproduce an image on a page using
mechanical impact. Of this type, the only printers you might still encounter are dot-matrix
printers. The printhead of dot-matrix printers consists of a matrix of little pins. When
certain pins strike the ribbon against the paper, they mark the shape of a character or another
form on the paper. Thus, each character or other image is made up of tiny dots. Dot-matrix
printers produce low-quality output but are still in use in many businesses, because they can
print multi-copy forms.
Storage
To maintain programs, data, and information for later use, data must be stored on a nonvolatile
medium, that is, a medium that retains data even when not connected to electric power. Often,
we also want to move stored data to a computer that is not part of a network, and we need to
back up important programs and data as well. For these purposes, we use storage media.
Although media are the materials on which information is stored, and the storage device is the
media and the mechanism that stores and retrieves the information, the terms “storage media”
and “storage devices” are often used interchangeably.
Storage devices come in different forms and use different materials, each with strengths and
weaknesses. Cost, capacity, access speed, and access mode should all be considered when
evaluating storage devices. Capacity is the amount of data the medium can hold, access speed is
the amount of data that can be stored or retrieved per time unit, and access mode refers to the
organization of data on the medium, either random or sequential.
Storage devices differ in the technology they use to maintain data (such as magnetic or
optical) and in their physical structure (disks, tapes, or other forms). Physical structure might
limit ways in which data can be organized on the medium. While disks allow any type of
organization, tapes allow only sequential organization. This section discusses modes of access,
looks at specific media and technologies, and considers the trade-offs that managers must
consider when evaluating what type of storage solution is best for a particular business.
Modes of Access
The two basic types of access modes for data storage are sequential and direct (random) access
(see Figure 4.6). In sequential storage, data is organized one record after another. With
sequential storage (the only option for magnetic tapes), to read data from anywhere on the tape,
you have to read through all the data before that point on the tape. Retrieving files from
sequential devices is slower and less convenient than on devices that utilize direct access. In
direct access, records are not organized sequentially, but by the physical address on the device,
and can be accessed directly without going through other records. Devices that allow direct
access storage are often called DASD (DAZ-dee), short for direct access storage device. They
include magnetic and optical disks as well as flash drives, small storage devices that connect to
a computer via a universal serial bus (USB) receptacle.
126
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
F I G U R E 4.6
Sequential and direct data
access
Sequential Data Access
Direct Data Access
1
01
7
32
58
1
D
o
e
J
oh
n
45
O
rc
hi
d
St
.
N.
Y.
1
1
3
52
7
8
0
4
N
o
r
d
A
la
n
2
C
h
e
n
R
d
1
4
0
0
2
7
5
2
2
B
o
b
J
o
ne
s
1
4
L
a
ke
S
t
1
38
2
17
8
5
5
K
e
n
M
o
re
2
M
a
in
S
t
1
2
3
5
5
8
8
0
3
S
a
r
a
W
o
o
d
8
P
o
n
d
R
d
101732581 Doe John 45 Orchid St. N.Y.
113527804 Nord Alan 2 Chen Rd 123558803 Sara Wood 8 Pond Rd 123558803 Sara Wood 8 Pond Rd 140027522 Bob Jone
Magnetic Tapes
Magnetic tapes similar to those used in tape recorders are also used to store
computer data. While some tape drives still use open reel tapes, most use tape
cartridges. Many of these cartridges look, in general, like the tapes used in audio tape
players. One of the most popular types of tape cartridges is the Linear Tape-Open
(LTO). In 2012, Quantum, a storage media manufacturer, offered tape cartridges with
a capacity of 3 TB (terabytes) that access data at a rate of 280 MB per second
(Anonymous, 2013). The cost of storage is measured in how much money is spent on
each byte of storage capacity. Tapes provide the lowest cost in terms of cents per GB.
The Quantum 3 TB LTO-5 tape (retailing at $35 each) costs 1.1 cents per GB.
Backing up all or a designated part of data from its original storage medium
needs to be done regularly. The entire hard disk of a PC can be backed up, or, in
organizations, large amounts of data are backed up in case a hard disk crashes or an incident occurs
that makes the original data irretrievable. Backing up can be done manually or automatically with
the help of software. When the backup is done for an organization, often the organization makes
use of a storage area network, a dedicated area where disk (and possibly tape) storage devices are
connected through communication lines to organizational ISs for the sole purpose of data backup.
Such networks are discussed later in this chapter. Backup and recovery procedures are discussed in
Chapter 14, “Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery.”
Tapes are inexpensive but they have two major flaws. It takes a long time to copy from a
tape. This is a serious concern when terabytes of data must be recopied to a disk from a tape.
Tapes are also unreliable after about five years. To extend this period, a magnetic tape must be
reeled back and forth every few months to maintain an even tension. Uneven tension, which
always develops over time, may render some of the stored data unreadable.
Magnetic Disks
The most widely used storage medium is the magnetic disk. Magnetic disks include hard disks
and floppy disks, though floppy disks are rarely found today. As with information on magnetic
tape, information on magnetic disks is coded in magnetized spots on the disk’s surface.
© Cengage Learning 2015
Tape cartridges are an inexpensive
method to back up data
Ray Johnson/Photos.com
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
127
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
PCs usually come with at least one hard disk built in. Hard disks are often mistakenly called
hard drives. The disk is the storage medium itself; the drive is the mechanism that stores data to
it and retrieves data from it. (However “hard disk,” “hard drive,” and “hard disk drive” are
commonly used to mean the combination of the two, because the drive and disk are sold and
installed as one unit.) A hard disk consists of one or more rigid platters installed in the same
box that holds the CPU and other computer components, or attached externally
to the computer, usually through a USB port. An external hard disk is portable; it
easily can be connected to or disconnected from the computer without opening
the computer box. External hard disks are usually more expensive than internal
disks with the same capacity. Hard disks for desktop computers are capable of
storing up to 3 TB of data. The cost of storing 1 GB has decreased to less than 5
cents.
The storage and use of corporate data has become a major IT initiative. In
recent years, the most important impetus for the acquisition of hard disks has
been the construction of data warehouses, large databases that maintain mainly
consumer purchase records. A 2011 study by McKinsey & Company projects that
the growth of global data will increase by 40 percent per year. The amount of
data stored by 15 out of the 17 sectors in the United States is greater than the
contents of the Library of Congress (235 TB in April 2011) (Manyika et al., 2011).
POINT OF
INTEREST
Tera Firma
An external hard drive with storage capacity of 3 terabytes can be purchased for less than $140. How
much information can a hard disk with a capacity of 1 terabyte hold? It would store about 300 hours of
good quality video. Ten terabytes could store the printed collection of the Library of Congress, approxi-
mately 155 million items.
Source: Anonymous. Fascinating Facts. Retrieved June 4, 2013, from http://www.loc.gov/about/facts.
html; Anonymous. (2013). Megabytes, Gigabytes, Terabytes ... What Are They? Retrieved June 4, 2013,
from http://www.whatsabyte.com/
The quickly decreasing cost of magnetic disks enables storage and streaming of thousands of
video clips on the web. McKinsey & Company estimates that a $600 disk drive could store all of
the world’s music. In just two years of operations, YouTube (now part of Google) amassed a
collection of video clips that required 45 terabytes of storage space. The company says it receives
and stores about 72 hours of videos every minute. Using the factor of 1 GB per hour of video
content, YouTube would require 172 TB per day to accommodate new uploaded videos by their
users (Anonymous, 2012f; Manyika et al., 2011).
Optical Discs
Optical discs are recorded by treating the disc surface so it reflects or does not reflect light. A
special detecting device detects the reflections or nonreflections, which represent ones and
zeroes of digital coding. The two basic categories of optical discs are compact discs (CDs) and
digital video discs (DVDs), also known as digital versatile discs. CDs come in several types:
CD-ROM (Compact Disc, Read Only Memory), CD-R (recordable), and CD-RW (rewritable).
Recordable DVDs come in a variety of recording options. The main advantage of optical discs is
their storage capacity and portability. CDs and DVDs are also less expensive than hard disks in
terms of bytes per dollar, although the cost gap is closing. Standard DVDs can store 4.7 GB per
side for a total of 9.4 GB. More advanced DVDs, using techniques called blue laser and double
storage, can reach capacities of 50 GB; a dual layer disc which is the industry standard for full-
length video discs. However, the disadvantage of all optical discs is that the speed of storage and
retrieval is currently slower than that of hard disks.
Magnetic disks are available in several
forms, such as the internal disk shown
here, or external USB or Firewire-
connected disks
franz pfluegl/Photos.com
128
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Solid-State Storage
Solid-state storage, also known as flash memory, is becoming popular for
both primary memory (memory inside the computer) and external storage. Solid-
state storage can be rewritten and hold its content without electric power. It
consumes very little power and does not need a constant power supply to retain
data when disconnected. It offers fast access times and is relatively immune to
shock or vibration. These qualities make solid-state storage an excellent choice for
portable devices such as MP3 players, digital cameras, and mobile phones, or as
independent portable storage. Unlike other types of memory, erasing data can
only be done in blocks of bytes, not individual bytes, and hence the name: a
whole block of bytes is erased in a flash.
As an independent memory device, flash memory takes two main forms: as a memory card
(often used in digital cameras and other portable devices), and as a USB drive, sometimes called
a thumb drive or USB flash drive. Many computers and some monitors and printers include
multiple built-in card readers that accommodate the most popular flash memory cards, such as
SD (Secure Digital) and CF (Compact Flash). USB drives are about the size of an adult’s thumb,
and act as portable storage. (The name “drive” is a misnomer; there are no moving parts or disks
in flash memory.) They plug into the computer through a USB port. As USB ports become
standard in most computers, it is easy to use a thumb drive to save data or transfer data between
computers. There is usually no need to set up any software once the USB drive is plugged in. The
device is recognized as an additional external storage device. USB drives come in storage
capacities of up to tens of gigabytes, and their cost is decreasing rapidly.
Flash memory cards are
ideal for portable devices
such as digital cameras
and portable voice
recorders
In addition to its use in USB flash drives and memory cards, flash memory is
used in solid-state disks. A solid-state disk (SSD) is an alternative to magnetic
disks. Again, the word “disk” is a misnomer, because this type of storage involves
no disk and no moving parts. SSDs are attached to computers in a similar way to
magnetic disks. The fact that there is no need to wait for a disk to rotate in order
to locate data—a period of time called latency—makes SSDs up to 250 times faster
than magnetic disks, especially if the SSD comes with its own CPU. The function
of such CPUs is specifically to speed up data processing. SSDs are used by
organizations to store frequently used software to prevent data processing
“bottlenecks.” SSDs are also becoming popular on high-end PCs.
Many computers have built-in USB ports
and flash memory card slots
karam miri/Photos.com
Solid state memory accesses information
without any moving parts
Chesky_W/Photos.com
Courtesy of Sandisk
Courtesy of Sandisk
Courtesy of Sandisk
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
129
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
DAS, NAS, and SAN
Organizations increasingly rely on storage systems that allow multiple users to share the same
storage media over a network. In direct-attached storage (DAS), the disk or array of disks is
directly connected to a server. The storage devices might also be tapes, especially if the storage is
for backup. Other computers on the network must access the server to use the disks or tapes.
DAS is relatively easy to deploy and manage, and involves relatively low cost. However, speed of
access to data might be compromised because the server also processes other software, such as
email and databases. Also, if the server is down, the other computers cannot access the storage
devices. DAS might be suitable for localized file sharing, which is typical in small businesses. It is
not easily scalable, because each additional server and its storage devices must be managed
separately. Scalability is the ability to add more hardware or software to accommodate
changing business needs.
Two other arrangements place the storage devices on the organization’s network so that they
can be accessed directly by all other computers. These approaches are known as network-
attached storage (NAS) and storage area network (SAN).
Network-attached storage (NAS) is a device or “appliance” especially designed for
networked storage. It comprises both the storage media, such as hard disks, and management
software, which is fully dedicated to serving (accessing) files over the network. NAS relieves the
server of handling storage, so the server can process other applications, such as email and
databases. Disks can store many terabytes of data in a small, centralized space, and managing such
large storage in one place saves money. NAS is highly scalable. While in DAS each server runs its
own operating system, NAS can communicate with servers running various operating systems, and
therefore allow much flexibility when adding computers and other devices to the network.
Storage area network (SAN) is a network fully devoted to storage and transfer of data
between servers and storage devices. The storage devices are part of this dedicated network,
which is managed separately from the organization’s local area network. (Networks are covered
in Chapter 6, “Business Networks and Telecommunications.”) A SAN may combine DAS and
NAS devices. The communication lines in this network are high-speed optical fibers. The data
transfer standards used in a SAN are different from those used by a NAS, and generally support
higher speeds. NAS identifies data by files, or, as professionals say, at the file level. SAN identifies
much larger quantities of data, called data blocks, and therefore can transfer and back up much
larger amounts of data at a time. This is important when high speed of data transfer is
important, such as in online business transactions that involve a large number of records in a
stored database. A large number of users can simultaneously access data without delays. SANs are
highly scalable. For these reasons, SANs are used by organizations that conduct business on the
web and require high-volume transaction processing. However, SANs are relatively expensive
and their management is complex. In recent years, the technical differences between NAS and
SAN have blurred.
DAS, NAS, and SAN often include RAID (redundant array of independent disks), whereby
data is replicated on different disks to enhance processing speed and fault-tolerance. Fault
tolerance is the ability of the system to sustain failure of a disk, because the same data also
appears on another disk.
Several companies specialize in NAS and SAN systems and the software that manages them,
including Hewlett-Packard, Hitachi, and IBM.
130
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Cloud Storage
The significant increase in the data storage needs of consumers and organizations, coupled with
the exponential increase in Internet and other network use, has created a new technology
product, cloud storage. Simply defined, cloud storage is the availability of network-accessible
storage from an off-site computer or technology device. Based on the 1970s model of application
service providers (ASPs), these systems are usually maintained by a third-party organization
through a subscription charge based on several factors and service models.
With cloud storage, consumers can store their personal files “in the cloud” and access them
with several devices. For example, a customer can purchase and upload MP3 files to their cloud
storage area. The music files can then be accessed and played through their smartphone,
personal computer, or tablet without the need to store the music on each device. The storage
location associated with the cloud provides an efficient single point of storage and access to
various files.
Business professionals can use cloud storage to centralize their file storage and access while
traveling and telecommuting.
As an alternative to storing data on multiple devices or
transporting data on USB flash drives, cloud storage maintains one version of a data file, which
can be accessed from various devices for editing and printing. In addition, the cloud offers a
more secure location for storing sensitive data than on flash drives and portable devices that can
be stolen.
Business organizations can also use cloud storage to reduce the cost of storing and managing
data. Although data storage costs are decreasing, the increased use of corporate data remains a
significant cost of information technology overhead. Cloud storage vendors, sometimes called
storage-as-a-service, offer corporations an alternative to on-site data storage by outsourcing
data storage services. Cloud storage can also provide an efficient alternative to store corporate
data for compliance and archiving purposes, leveraging additional internal storage infrastructure
for live and production data needed for operational business activities.
However, cloud storage has its disadvantages. The off-site storage of data increases the
reliance on networks, and has associated network costs. Even with all the assurances of cloud
storage vendors, that security of corporate data stored in the cloud remains a significant issue.
Off-site storage creates an additional point of failure that could risk the security of sensitive
corporate data. Therefore, the tradeoffs of on-site vs. off-site storage must be considered and
analyzed.
IBM and Iron Mountain Digital are two major players in the corporate SaaS market.
However, companies such as Amazon and Apple are capitalizing on the consumer demand for
cloud storage. Amazon provides 5 GB of cloud storage at no cost for its customers to store
videos, photos, music, documents and other digital files. The cloud storage is accessible through
its desktop application for the personal computer as well as its Kindle Fire tablets. Amazon’s
strategy is to offer Kindle Fire owners access to their cloud storage as an additional benefit. Apple
iCloud stores iOS and Mac device users’ content. Microsoft Office 2013 product offers more
cloud access features than previous versions; its Office 365 product is advertised as “Office in the
cloud” to access Office tools from any location.
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
131
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Business Considerations in Evaluating Storage Media
Before spending money on storage devices, professionals must consider several factors: the
purpose of data storage, the amount of data to be stored, the required speed of data storage and
retrieval, how portable the device needs to be, and, as always, cost.
Use of Stored Data
The first consideration before adopting storage media is how the data will be used, mainly,
whether it will be used for current operations or as backup. If it is to be used for backup only, and
not processing, magnetic tape, flash drives, external drives, CDs, or DVDs would be a proper
choice. Magnetic tape is less costly and holds more data per reel or cassette than a single CD; this
should be a consideration, too. If the users need to access individual records quickly, then
magnetic hard disks are the best choice. Thus, a business that allows customers to retrieve their
records online should use fast magnetic disks. If the information is archival, such as encyclopedias
or maps used by library patrons, the library should place the information on CDs or DVDs,
because the user needs fast, direct retrieval of specific information (records), and might not
Computers May Be Hazardous to Your
Health
As of 2010, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, about 77
million Americans use computers at work, at school, and at
home (Anonymous, 2012b). An increasing number of studies
show that working with computers threatens workers with a
variety of hazards. These risks include repetitive-stress injuries
(RSIs) due to long periods of repeated motions. According to
the
U.S.
Occupational
Safety
and
Health
Administration
(OSHA), RSIs cost American businesses an estimated $20
billion annually in workers’ compensation claims (Anonymous,
2012d). The U.S. Department of Labor reported that injuries
and illnesses attributed to repetitive motion tasks accounted
for three percent of all injury and illnesses in 2011. However,
these cases required a median of 23 days of work absences,
nearly three times as much as all types of injuries and illnesses
(Anonymous, 2012d). As computer-aided work has grown, RSIs
have grown, too, to the extent that some scientists call these
injuries an epidemic.
The most common computer-related type of RSI is carpal
tunnel syndrome. It is the result of repetitive use of a keyboard.
The injury causes pain in the forearms due to swelling and
pressure on the median nerve passing through the wrist. Carpal
tunnel syndrome may cause permanent disability. In rare cases
workers lost their ability to return to work due to this injury.
Our eyes, too, are strained from computer work. Studies
found that a programmer’s eyes make as many as 30,000
movements in a workday. These are movements up, down, and
to the sides, which strain the eye muscles. However, other
studies found that while staring at a computer monitor people
blink at one-sixth of the frequency that they blink normally.
Blinking is important for moisturizing the eyeball, which helps kill
harmful germs and eases eye strain. A study by The National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) found that
short breaks from work with computers that involve keyboards
and video displays reduce eye soreness, visual blurring, and
upper-body discomfort, while quantity and quality of work were
not compromised. The agency estimates that more than half of
computer users who stare at computer displays for long hours
develop a health problem called computer vision syndrome
(CVS), which is any combination of headaches, loss of focus,
burning eyes, double vision, or blurred vision.
The argument has been made that it is an employer’s moral
obligation to educate employees about such risks and to provide
an environment that minimizes them. Both factors, the economic
and ethical, have moved many employers to try to reduce the
increasing “injuries of the Information Age.” They do so by
purchasing
and
installing
ergonomic
equipment,
training
employees how to use computers in a way that minimizes
injuries, and enforcing periodic breaks from repetitive activities
such as typing. The breaks help prevent both RSIs and eye
strain.
OSHA
maintains
a
website,
www.osha.gov/SLTC/
computerworkstation, that provides useful tips on safe computer
work. As a professional, it is likely you will spend much of your
workday sitting in front of a computer. Read the tips and apply
them to maintain your good health.
To minimize these risks, you can download and install on
your computer one of several free programs such as Workrave
that prompt the user to take brief breaks and less frequent but
longer rest breaks. It also limits the daily total time a worker can
use a computer. When the computer is networked to other
computers in the office, it does not allow the worker to use
any of the others that are part of the network when a break
or daily time limit is enforced. Working times of all workers
whose computers are connected are recorded and tabulated
on a server for review and analysis. The application also
provides an animated exercise guide for the shoulders, arms,
and eyes.
132
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
tolerate sequential search on a tape. However, with the speed and low cost of external disk drives,
it is easy to justify the use of these storage devices (usually on servers) for instant information
access. Archival information that should not be changed should be stored on write-once media.
The use of cloud storage to access and store data should also be considered. The low cost and
availability of online servers eliminate the businesses oversight and management of data storage
functions. For example, as a business begins to approach its capacity of on-site storage, new disk
drives (or servers) must be purchased and installed. But when additional storage is needed in a cloud
storage environment, it simply is accessed without any active effort on the part of the business.
Amount of Data Stored
When storage volume is the most important factor, professionals must first consider price per
megabit or megabyte, that is, the ratio of dollars spent to storage capacity. If the medium is to
be used solely for backup, their low cost makes magnetic tapes and DVDs an ideal choice. If the
medium is to be used for fast retrieval, magnetic disks would be the best choice.
For some purposes, the capacity of the device is important. When a set of very large software
applications and/or data must be stored on a single device, a device with a large capacity must be
selected. For example, if a sales rep must be able to demonstrate applications totaling 4 GB, it
might be more economical to store the data on five CDs, but this would be impractical because
the rep would either have to first copy the content of all the CDs onto every PC where she makes
a demonstration (which for security reasons might be prohibited by the hosting party), or she
would have to swap the CDs throughout the demonstration. A small portable hard disk or USB
flash drive of at least 4 GB would be a more practical option, albeit significantly more expensive.
Speed
The speed of magnetic disks (also called spindle speed) is often measured in rotations per minute
(RPM). Current disks come with speeds of 5,400 to 15,000 RPM. For disks of the same size, a
higher RPM means shorter data transfer time and usually better performance overall. While the
great capacity and low cost of CDs and DVDs are appealing, the transfer rate of magnetic hard
disks is still significantly better. If very high speed is required, SSD is currently the best choice,
although its price is significantly higher than that of magnetic disks.
Accessing data in the cloud is heavily dependent on the network bandwidth (speed and
volume of data that can be transferred). With internal storage, businesses control the access to
servers containing storage devices. The speed of accessing data is faster because the connection is
local. The speed of accessing data in a cloud environment will be based on the network
(Internet) service and bandwidth purchased.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Don’t Place This Laptop on Your Lap
Defects in Sony batteries caused one of the largest recalls in computer history. The batteries in several
models of laptop computers overheated. Some exploded, and others burst into flames. Dell replaced the
batteries in 4 million computers, Apple in 1.8 million, and Lenovo in 0.5 million. In 2006, The Federal
Consumer Safety Products Commission (CPSC) issued this helpful advice: “Do not use your computer on
your lap.” The CPSC has offered several tips on notebook use including the placement of laptops on soft
surfaces as well as using appropriate batteries and chargers.
Source: Horowitz, A., Jacobson, D., McNichol, T., Thomas, O., “101 Dumbest Moments in Business,”
Business 2.0, January/February 2007, p. 100; CPSC Releases Tips on Notebook Computer Use, September
2006, http://www.cpsc.gov/CPSCPUB/PREREL/prhtml06/06271.html
Unit Space and Portability
Sometimes the cost of a gigabyte stored is not the most important consideration, but the
physical size of the storage medium is. A portable hard disk drive might be economical and fast,
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
133
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
but it might be more practical for a traveling salesperson to carry a CD rather than an external
hard disk. And even though a CD is significantly less expensive than a USB flash drive, the
salesperson might find it more convenient to carry a USB drive. CDs do not fit in shirt pockets,
while a USB flash drive can be attached to a key chain or clipped to a shirt pocket. Even if
storage cost is not as attractive as that of CDs, portability and the fact that USB ports are
ubiquitous in PCs might push one toward selecting a USB flash drive. Many business
professionals today who travel and need network connectivity and limited local disk storage are
opting to use tablet computers or even smartphones to access their applications and data.
Cost
Once professionals agree on the best type of data storage device for a particular business use,
they need to consider cost. The approach is simple: obtain the greatest storage capacity for the
smallest amount of money. In other words, for each proposed device, consider the ratio of cents
per gigabyte of capacity. The lower the ratio, the more favorable the product. It is easy to find
the ratio. If a 1 TB hard disk costs $80, the ratio is $80/1 TB, or 8 cents per gigabyte. The cost
per gigabyte of a 3 TB drive that costs $135 would be 4.5 cents. If a 32 GB thumb drive costs
$20, the cost per gigabyte is $20/32 GB, or 62 cents per gigabyte. Thus, if the convenience and
portability of a thumb drive is important to you, you will pay significantly more per GB of
storage capacity.
Use of cloud storage changes the cost curve of additional capacity as the business operations
warrant. As the internal capacity is approached, additional storage devices must be purchased
and installed. If the capacity of the server housing the storage reaches its capacity, the server
must also be upgraded. Therefore, the incremental cost is higher as each new capacity level is
added. With cloud storage, the additional cost of additional capacity is incrementally smaller as
more capacity is needed.
Reliability and Life Expectancy
Although this is usually not the highest priority, businesses must also consider the storage
medium’s reliability and life expectancy. For instance, optical discs are more reliable and durable
than magnetic disks. Magnetically stored data remains reliable for about 10 years, whereas CDs
and DVDs are expected to store data reliably for 50 to 100 years (although they have not been
around long enough to prove that).
While the management and oversight of managing off-site data storage through the cloud
eliminates costs for businesses, it also creates a potential issue. The reliability and availability of
the cloud data to business personnel and management is only as good as the vendor’s
management and operations. Therefore, it is crucial to research and analyze the various cloud
vendors for cost, reliability, and uptime statistics.
Trade-Offs
As you can see, several factors must be considered when purchasing storage media, and often
you must trade one quality of the device for another. For example, while USB drives are
convenient and fast, they are also expensive and unacceptable for storing large amounts of
transactional data, or even backing up large amounts of data, because of their relatively small
capacity. Figure 4.7 summarizes characteristics of the most popular storage media. Obviously,
terms such as “moderate cost” and “high capacity” are relative. Storage capacities and speeds of
almost all storage media have increased over the years, and costs have decreased. Thus, the
specific capacities, retrieval speeds, and costs change all the time. The table is presented for
general comparison and reference, whereby “high” and “low” for each medium are relative to
the other media.
134
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
F I G U R E 4.7
Characteristics of digital
storage media for
business purposes
Magnetic
Tape
Magnetic
Hard Disk
Recordable CD
Medium
Capacity
per
Device
Size
Recording
and
Retrieval
Speed
Cost
($/GB)
Very
High
High
High
Optical Tape
Very Fast
Slow
Very
High
Fast
Medium
High
Very
Low
Low
Very
Low
Ideal
for...
Capacity
per Device
Limitations
Immediate
Transactions
Backup
Backup
Backup,
Distribution
of software
Very
High
Very
High
Very
High
Low
Bulky,
Heavy
Not Suitable
for Immediate
Processing
Limited
Market
Low
Capacity per
Device
Flash
Memory
High
Fast
High
Backup,
Portability
Medium
Expensive
Recordable DVD
Very
High
Fast
Very
Low
Backup
Medium
Low
Capacity per
Device
Considerations in Purchasing Hardware
Decisions about purchasing computers are usually made by an organization’s IT professionals or
with the help of a consulting firm. But surveys show an increasing trend of involving other
employees in the decision-making process. More and more companies realize that effective use
of computers depends on whether their employees are satisfied with the computers and other
equipment installed in their workplace.
Before deciding what to purchase, consider the following variables:
●
The equipment’s power: Its speed, its memory size, and the capacity of its storage devices, such
as the hard disk installed in the computer. Increased internal memory (RAM) should always
be considered to increase processing and calculation time.
●
Expansion slots: Computers should have enough slots to add circuitry cards for additional pur-
poses, such as adding more powerful graphic cards and wireless cards on the motherboard
(the board on which the CPU and other circuitry are installed). Additional memory cards
increase the speed of processing by allowing more concurrent programs and data to run.
●
The number and type of external ports: Ports are sockets used to connect a computer to external
devices such as printers, hard disks, scanners, remote keyboards and pointers, and communica-
tion devices. More ports give more flexibility. Because so many external devices—hard disks,
printers, scanners, thumb drives, digital cameras, presentation “clickers,” and many others—
connect to the computer through a USB port, the greater the number of USB ports, the more
external devices can be added at the same time. Although USB hubs (devices that connect to a
single port and provide several) can be used, this may cause inconvenience and increased costs.
Built-in multiple card readers for flash memory make it convenient to read data from the cards
instead of connecting the device that houses them, such as digital cameras.
●
The monitor type and resolution: Higher resolution is more pleasing and less straining to the
eyes. Larger monitors allow viewing the windows of many software applications simulta-
neously and require less scrolling. Multiple monitors should be considered when applications
requiring large screens can increase the productivity of the computer user. Touch screens are
important where keyboard data entry is impractical and inefficient.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
135
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
●
Ergonomics: Ergonomic equipment does not strain the back, arms, and eyes. For example,
working with the keyboard must be comfortable. Traditional keyboards cause muscle pain
when used for long sessions. Consider purchasing an ergonomic keyboard. Consider a track-
ball instead of a mouse; it requires only moving fingers rather than the forearm or the entire
hand.
●
Compatibility: IT managers must ensure that new devices will integrate with existing hardware,
software, and networks. A new computer might have a different operating system or internal
architecture. If it is to be used to host an important application, care must be taken to ensure
that the application will run on the new machine. For example, commercial software vendors
guarantee that their applications will run on a list of processors and operating systems. Profes-
sionals must consider backward compatibility, in which newer hardware is compatible
with older hardware. (The same term applies to software.) For example, USB 2.0 devices are
backward-compatible with USB 1.1 ports (although the communication speed then deterio-
rates to the speed of the older port). Compatibility between hardware and networks is also
important. Newer handheld devices such as bar-code scanners might use an updated commu-
nication standard and no longer communicate with an existing warehouse network, because
the new devices are not backward-compatible with the older standard transceivers.
●
The hardware footprint: If space is scarce, you might want to consider the size of the computer
and its peripheral equipment. The footprint is the area that a computer occupies. A smaller
footprint leaves more desk space for other devices. All-in-one personal computer units have
become popular with computer users with minimal desk space.
●
The reliability of the vendor, the warranty policy, and the support given after the warranty expires:
Ask if the vendor provides a website and 24-hour help via telephone. Try to assess how soon
the equipment will be obsolete, a difficult task given the reality of fast development in com-
puter equipment.
●
Power consumption and noise: Computers that consume less power help save money on elec-
tricity and usually also give off less heat. Computers use fans to cool down the circuitry.
Quiet fans will make the work environment more pleasant.
●
Cost: All of the preceding factors must be weighed against cost. Careful study might yield
hardware with excellent performance for an affordable price. Perusing print and web-based
trade journals is helpful. Many periodicals provide tables evaluating comparable hardware,
based on laboratory tests by impartial technicians. You do not have to be an IT professional
to understand their evaluations.
Figure 4.8 summarizes the factors discussed in this chapter that you should consider when
purchasing hardware. When comparing computers from different vendors, it is useful to
establish a 10-point scale and score each category to indicate how well each computer addresses
each important item. Your organization’s, or even your department’s internal needs, may require
you to add some factors. The equipment receiving the highest score is the best in the evaluator’s
opinion.
136
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
F I G U R E 4.8
Example of an evaluation
form to assist with the
purchase of hardware
Greater frequency and word size
Larger
Greater number of board slots
for additional devices and memory
Greater number of ports for printer,
external hard disk, communication
devices, and other peripherals
Greater comfort and safety
Smaller area
Availability of telephone and online
support for troubleshooting
Supply of information on new
upgrades
Longer warranty period
Lower cost
Factor
Power
Speed
RAM capacity
Expandability
What to look for
Score
Ports
Ergonomics
Compatibility
Compatibility with many other
computers and peripheral devices
from the same and other
manufacturers
with hardware
Compatibility with many software
packages currently used and
potentially to be used
with software
Compatibility with network
infrastructure
with network
Footprint
Support
Warranty
Cost
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
137
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Scalability and Updating Hardware
IT managers try to extend the productive life of hardware by ensuring that any equipment they
buy is scalable. The principle of scalability implies that resources—in this case, hardware—can
accommodate a growing amount of work either with or without upgrading. A scalable system
can provide increased power as demands increase. For instance, many servers are designed to use
multiple processors—4, 8, or 16 is not uncommon. If the server is initially installed with only a
small number of processors, say two, then processors can be added over time to increase
computing power. This way the machine will not have to be discarded too soon, and this helps
protect the organization’s initial investment. The same can be done for memory, storage, and
other components.
However, some hardware is not scalable. Businesses tend to update their software, especially
operating systems (such as Windows), when a new version is available, but many still maintain
old hardware. While they avoid the cost of purchasing new hardware, this might actually cost
the companies in lost productivity: newer software cannot run as fast or as reliably on the old
machines. Often, excellent features of newer software are not available if it runs on older
machines. For example, although Windows Vista offered greater security, faster file management,
and superior visual effects over earlier Windows versions, most PCs at the time of its
introduction were not powerful enough to run the new operating system.
Hardware should be disposed of and new hardware should be installed to avoid performance
gaps between software and hardware. One rough formula to help determine when to replace
hardware is the ratio of the average age of hardware pieces to the average age of the operating
systems running on the machines. If the ratio is less than one, it might be time to replace some
or all of the hardware.
If you are concerned that the equipment’s useful life might be short because more powerful
computers might be available within months, you can lease your system instead of buying it.
Many vendors offer leasing programs. However, note that vendors are also aware of how quickly
hardware becomes obsolete and price the leases accordingly; thus, you might find that the lease
payment often covers the purchase price within a mere 18–24 months. Yet, many firms prefer
leasing their PCs and notebook computers to purchasing them.
As you will see throughout this book, hardware components are combined in many different
configurations to help businesses streamline operations and attain strategic goals. But hardware
is rarely the first consideration in acquiring a new IS. When planning a new IS, managers should
first determine their business needs and then consider which software can support those needs.
Only then should they select the hardware that supports the software. The next chapter focuses
on software.
138
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Summary
●
More professionals outside the IT field find them-
selves in the decision-making role regarding the
purchase and use of computer hardware. There-
fore, understanding hardware is important.
●
For ease of reference, computers are classified into
several categories according to their power. The
most powerful are supercomputers, used mainly
by research institutions for complex scientific cal-
culations. Somewhat less powerful, but more suit-
able
for
business
operations,
are
mainframe
computers; many organizations still use them to
process large databases and perform other tasks
that require speed and large primary memory. Mid-
range computers are less powerful than mainframe
computers and are often used as servers. Micro-
computers include PCs and smaller computers,
such
as
notebook,
handheld,
and
tablet
computers.
●
Regardless of their size and power, all computers
must have several components to function. The
“brain” of every computer is its central processing
unit (CPU), which consists of circuitry on a piece of
silicon wafer and controls four basic operations: (1)
it fetches instructions from memory, (2) it decodes
them, (3) it executes them, and (4) it stores the
results in memory.
●
The rate at which the CPU does all this is the com-
puter’s clock rate.
●
A computer’s data word is the number of bits that
can move through its CPU in one machine cycle.
●
Speed, memory size, and the number of processor
cores are among the determinants of a computer’s
power.
●
The larger part of a computer’s memory, RAM (ran-
dom access memory), is volatile; that is, it keeps
data only as long as electrical power is supplied.
ROM (read-only memory) is nonvolatile. Unlike
data in RAM, data stored in ROM stays in ROM
when you turn the computer off. Similarly, all sec-
ondary storage media, such as magnetic disks,
optical discs, and flash cards, are nonvolatile.
●
Imaging devices help process large amounts of text
and graphic data and have made the work of banks
and other industries more productive.
●
When evaluating storage media, factors to consider
are capacity, transfer rate, portability, and the form
of data organization that it allows. The latter deter-
mines the mode of access (sequential or direct).
●
Data stored on tapes can only be organized and
retrieved sequentially, therefore tapes are good
for backup but not for transactions. Direct access
storage devices, such as RAM, magnetic disks,
optical discs, and solid-state disks, allow random
organization and retrieval. Direct organization pro-
vides faster storage and retrieval of records that
must be accessed individually and quickly, such
as records in airline reservation systems. Only
direct-access devices are suitable for processing
databases.
●
When purchasing computers, professionals should
consider computer power and other factors in addi-
tion to cost. Professionals should consider expand-
ability of RAM, the availability of sockets (ports) for
connecting peripheral equipment, and compatibil-
ity with existing hardware and software.
●
Like many new technologies, information technol-
ogy may pose health risks to users. The most com-
mon problems computer users experience are
carpal tunnel syndrome and repetitive-stress inju-
ries caused by the repetitive use of the keyboard
over long time periods. Today, manufacturers of
computer equipment pay more attention to health
hazards and try to design devices ergonomically.
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
139
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
While Liz and Michael are focused on the marketing,
renovation, and grand opening projects for the new
location,
it
is
difficult
for
them
to
focus
on
information technology. They will need to rely on
Tyler’s knowledge from his college courses and the
business. Tyler needs some guidance to understand
the issues to make an informed decision.
What Is Your Advice?
1. Tyler wants to brand the new location with the
service-oriented
environment,
providing
timely
and quality service for its customers. He believes
that the use of technology would not only create
that environment, but also show customers a
well-managed business using technology. What
alternatives could fulfill this branding for a restau-
rant? Should they use handheld devices to process
customer orders at the tables? Would this be an
efficient method of entering orders? What types
of devices could be used?
2. The reliance on the new system will require some
type of backup of the production data. What advice
would you offer Tyler for this important function?
3. Consider the entire operation of a restaurant. Iden-
tify and discuss the various hardware devices that
Tyler should expect to install.
New Perspectives
1. Would it be appropriate for Kimball’s to solely rely
on the handheld devices for customer orders?
Analyze and discuss this point.
2. Review the marketing, promotional and social
media
discussion
from
the
previous
chapter.
What type of hardware should Tyler recommend
to assist with these initiatives?
Key Terms
arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 115
backward compatibility, 136
bit, 111
bus, 117
byte, 111
central processing unit (CPU), 110
clock rate, 116
cloud storage, 131
clustering, 112
compact disc (CD), 128
control unit, 115
CPU clock, 116
CRT (cathode-ray tube), 124
data word, 117
digital video disc (DVD), 128
direct access, 126
direct-attached storage (DAS),
130
dot-matrix printer, 126
ergonomics, 118
fault tolerance, 130
flash drive, 126
flash memory, 129
flat-panel monitor, 124
hard disk, 128
hardware, 109
imaging, 122
impact printer, 126
input device, 110
internal memory, 110
liquid crystal display (LCD), 124
machine cycle, 116
magnetic disk, 127
magnetic-ink character
recognition (MICR), 121
magnetic tape, 127
mainframe computer, 112
microprocessor, 115
MIPS, 117
motherboard, 110
mouse, 118
multicore processor, 115
multiprocessing, 112
multithreading, 115
network-attached storage (NAS),
130
nonimpact printer, 125
notebook computer, 113
optical disc, 128
output device, 110
parallel processing, 112
personal computer, 113
personal digital assistant (PDA),
113
pixel, 124
port, 135
radio-frequency identification
(RFID), 120
RAID, 130
RAM (random access memory),
110
resolution, 125
ROM (read-only memory), 110
scalability, 130
sequential storage, 126
server, 113
smartphone, 114
solid state disk (SSD), 129
solid state storage, 129
source data input device, 120
speech recognition, 123
storage, 110
storage area network (SAN), 130
storage-as-a-service, 131
stylus, 113
supercomputer, 111
tablet computer, 114
technology convergence, 114
throughput, 117
touch screen, 119
trackball, 119
trackpad, 119
universal serial bus (USB), 126
USB drive, 129
workstation, 113
140
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Review Questions
1. You have decided to buy parts and build your
own personal computer. At the minimum, what
are the components that you would need for this
device to be considered a computer?
2. Modern CPUs contain cores. What is a core?
3. Multicore CPUs facilitate multithreading. What is
multithreading?
4. Most people never get to see a supercomputer,
let alone use one. Why? What are the most fre-
quent uses of this type of computer?
5. News about the death of mainframe computers
has been greatly exaggerated. Explain.
6. IT professionals often speak of the merging of
technologies. Think of handheld computers and
cell phones. Give an example of such merging.
7. When a computer is offered for sale, one of its
advertised characteristics is something such as
“2.9 GHz.” What does this mean, and what does it
measure?
8. Why are computers said to be processing data
digitally?
9. What is the difference between volatile and non-
volatile memory? Give one example of volatile
memory and one example of nonvolatile
memory.
10. What are the main qualities to look for in an LCD
monitor?
11. Among the external storage devices discussed in
this chapter, all but one store data on the surface
of some material, and one in circuitry. Which one
stores data in circuitry?
12. What is DVD technology? How does it differ from
CD technology?
13. What does footprint mean in hardware? When is
a footprint important in the office?
14. What are the most important features to consider
before purchasing a PC?
15. On a continental tour, a traveling salesperson
makes software-based presentations at every
place he stops. He has ensured that there is a PC
and projecting equipment at every site he visits.
Occasionally, he needs to change the content of
his presentation. He wants to carry as small a
storage device as possible. What data storage
device would you recommend he carry?
Discussion Questions
16. Computers fail significantly less frequently than
copy machines and printers. Why?
17. Comment on this statement: large computers,
such as mainframes and supercomputers, have
no future.
18. Because information technology advances so
rapidly, business professionals find it difficult to
make informed decisions regarding computer
and peripheral equipment purchases. What fac-
tors cause this difficulty? What advice would you
provide to help with the decision?
19. End users’ role in making hardware purchasing
decisions is growing. Analyze the technological
and operational reasons for this trend.
20. Would you replace a PC with a tablet computer
for your studies or work? Why or why not?
21. Which storage medium would you use in each of
the following situations: (1) airline reservations
system, (2) information on employee benefits and
professional conduct, and (3) online answers to
customers’ frequently asked questions (FAQs)?
Explain your choices.
22. The miniaturization and merging of technologies
into highly portable devices has caused some
annoyances. Give some examples.
23. Comment on the following statement: the useful
life of a PC is about two years, therefore, it is not
important whether the vendor is still in business
in two or three years.
24. Thanks to DVD and other advanced technologies,
a PC can combine the functions of a computer,
telephone, fax machine, and television set. Would
you give up your home telephone and television
set if you could use your PC to make calls and
watch television? Why or why not?
25. Sometimes useful information might be lost, not
because the medium on which it was stored
deteriorated or was damaged, but because no
device was available to retrieve the information.
How could that happen? Can you give examples?
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
141
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
26. You might have heard of the e-reader, a handheld
device that allows readers to read a book from
internal memory or cloud storage. What are the
advantages and disadvantages of such devices
when compared with traditional books? Think in
terms of portability, text clarity, searching for spe-
cific words or pages, and so on. What would you
prefer: an electronic book or a paper book? Why?
27. Observers say that personal computers have
become a commodity. What does the term
“commodity” mean? How could this develop-
ment impact businesses and homes?
28. Try to count how many hours per week you use a
personal computer: at your home, in the PC lab,
in the library, or elsewhere. Do you consider
yourself “computer addicted”?
29. What do you expect will be the most popular
storage devices for personal use in five years?
What will be the most popular non-portable stor-
age devices for corporate use in five years? Why?
30. Almost daily a new electronic device, often one
that combines several technologies, is offered for
sale. People sometimes refer to these devices as
“gadgets,” which hints that they might be nice to
have but not really necessary or even useful. How
do you delineate the difference between a gadget
and a helpful device?
Applying Concepts
31. Analyze each of the business scenarios outlined
below. Recommend a hardware configuration for
each of the scenarios listed using the table. Develop
a rationale of your configuration selections.
Assume that the cost of the hardware configura-
tions will be approved based on your rationale.
a. An artist creates complex graphics. The soft-
ware required to develop these graphics
require large and complex programs. While
the quantity of their graphic printouts is not
substantial, they must be high quality.
b. The administrative personnel use a computer
for editing and printing documents and small
reports using word-processing software. These
employees will maintain the document files on
their computer system. These documents will
require professional and quality appearance.
c. The data analysts require access to corporate
databases to complete complex statistical
analysis. These queries and data analysis can
require significant time to complete the math-
ematical calculations. The analysts will print
reports consisting of the results of their data
analysis in reasonable quality and speed.
d. The corporation’s accountants need a computer
system that will be able to develop reports as
well as substantial spreadsheets. They will need
to access their software-as-a-service accounting
software through a browser as well as down-
load financial data. Their reports need to be
professional and or reasonable quality.
32. Assume you can choose among magnetic tapes,
magnetic hard disks, recordable optical discs
(CD-R: write once, read many), and flash mem-
ory USB drives. Consider each scenario inde-
pendently of the others. For each of the
following purposes, explain which one of the
media you would choose and why. Start by
saying which medium you have chosen. Then
explain why.
a. You need to store thousands of employee
records for several years. This is only a backup
procedure. The information will never be pro-
cessed from the backup medium.
D
C
B
A
Features
Processor
Speed (clock rate)
Internal Storage, RAM (GB)
Internal storage, hard disk
Monitor (size, resoluon)
Video Graphics (memory, resoluon)
Printer (type, PPM, DPI)
Computer Conﬁguraon
142
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
b. The storage medium is used as part of an air-
line reservation system.
c. Your business sells machines that must be
maintained well by your clients. You wish to
provide them with a digital version of the
maintenance manual. The manual includes an
index (like the one at the end of a book) with
links to the proper pages.
d. You are a sales manager who travels often.
You must store a large PowerPoint presenta-
tion that you show to prospective customers in
their office. You do not carry a laptop com-
puter, but there is a PC wherever you go. You
do not want to carry CDs, because you found
that the graphic-rich presentation moves too
slowly from CDs.
e. You have a business on the web. You maintain
your own server and site. You provide much
textual and graphical information from the site.
Customers can search products and make
purchases.
f. You want to store all the paintings of impres-
sionist painters for use by your local library
patrons. Patrons can search by artist name,
artist nationality, or the painting’s topic. The
library would like multiple copies of what you
store, and to be able to loan them to patrons
for viewing at home.
g. You use the medium for a large database that
your employees manipulate frequently.
h. You work for the IRS, and you need to archive
the tax records of millions of taxpayers for
several years. The archiving is done after all
processing of tax filings are complete and after
all refunds and payments have been made. IRS
employees must occasionally go back and
retrieve specific records from these files, and
when they need a record, they want to access
it directly.
Hands-On Activities
33. Your company is about to open a new branch.
You were selected to equip the office with 20
personal computers, 10 laptop computers, and 5
laser printers. Management has asked that you
purchase all the equipment from a single online
vendor. Each PC must be purchased complete
with a 20-inch LCD monitor. After interviewing
employees about their typical computing needs,
you developed the following scale:
PCs: Every 1 MHz of clock rate receives 1 point;
every 1 GB of RAM receives 10 points; every 1 GB
of hard disk storage receives 1 point. For CD-RW,
each 1X of reading speed receives 1 point (writing
and rewriting speeds are not essential, but the
capabilities are required).
LCD monitors: Every 1:100 of contrast ratio gets
10 points. Other features are not essential.
Laptops: The same scoring as for PCs.
Printers: Every 1 PPM receives 100 points; every 1
DPI receives 1 point.
Research three online vendor sites for this equip-
ment. Prepare a spreadsheet table with three col-
umns, one for each vendor, and enter the
information you found about each piece of
equipment for each vendor. Enter a formula to
add up the total number of points at the bottom of
each column. Do not consider any factor that is
not mentioned here. Find the vendor whose total
points per dollar is the highest.
34. Use a spreadsheet application to prepare a table
that clearly shows (both in text and numbers)
how to calculate the following. A music CD con-
tains 750 million bytes. How long does it take to
play all the music on it, assuming the disc plays at
1X? If the CD contains data, how long would it
take to retrieve all the data from it into a compu-
ter’s RAM, if you used a 60X CD drive?
35. Imagine you are the head of the sales department
for a regional paper company. As part of your
responsibility, you must select new hardware for
your department, which consists of two adminis-
trative personnel, ten inside salespeople, six
outside salespeople, and four inside sales
executives. While selecting the new hardware, it
is important to remember the types of employees
that make up the office:
●Administrative
personnel
who
create
office
memos and take care of paper work
●Inside salespeople who use a software as a
service (SaaS) for sales and marketing software
for customer contacts
●Outside salespeople that need access to customer
contact information on the road (through the SaaS
application) and send memos, emails, etc.
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
143
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
●Inside sales executives who are mostly internal
but sometimes travel
Headquarters has allowed you to choose from
the following new hardware: laptop computers,
desktop computers, and tablets. Administrative
personnel and inside salespeople will receive
one new piece of hardware and outside sales-
people and inside sales executives will receive
two new pieces of hardware. In a formal pur-
chase order proposal, determine which employ-
ees should receive what types of hardware and
why. Make sure you specify why the selected
hardware will fit the responsibilities of the
employee you choose it for. Include the follow-
ing items which would be presented to your
purchasing manager. Conduct online research to
determine the competing laptops, desktops, and
tablets and create three tables, one for each of
the three types of hardware being purchased,
that shows the features and costs of the hard-
ware. Record the cost per unit and total costs of
the new hardware purchases. Include in the pro-
posal features of the hardware that will make it
beneficial for the tasks it needs to perform. Do
not forget installation or transition costs if they
are applicable.
Team Activities
36. Your team has received $1,000 to purchase a
computer system. Assume you have no equip-
ment; everything needs to be purchased. Use the
evaluation form in Figure 4.8. Visit the websites of
three computer hardware vendors, and write
down specifications of three sets of equipment.
Include in each set a computer, a keyboard and
mouse (or trackball), a compatible 22- or 24-inch
LCD monitor, and a color laser printer. Your team
should evaluate the features of each configura-
tion, on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 = worst; 10 = best),
and total the points. Which configuration (and,
therefore, vendor) would you recommend to your
fellow students? If you cannot spend your entire
$1,000, any surplus should be considered a ben-
efit. Be ready to explain your recommendation.
37. As in Activity 36, assume you have $1,000 avail-
able. You are to purchase your ideal PC, monitor,
and printer, while utilizing all or almost all of your
budget. Shop the web for these devices, list them
(item name, vendor, and capabilities) and their
prices, and rationalize why this is the ideal system
for your needs and desires.
144
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Better Storage for Our Best Friends
“At Petco animals always come first,” says the
website of Petco Animal Supplies, Inc. Established in
1965, the company is a leading retailer of pet supplies,
from cat collars to aquariums to pet food. It operates
more than 1150 stores nationwide. To accommodate
customers, it also operates an online store.
Because Petco maintains thousands of products in
its warehouses, and because receiving and shipping
takes place often, it must track in real time the
location of each item. In its three main warehouses,
workers use handheld devices equipped with both
barcode and RFID capabilities. They are used to scan
product barcodes, record inventory receipts, and track
shipping instructions and execution. Because of the
large number of stores and the huge variety of items,
Petco is highly sensitive to disruptions and downtime
of its information systems. Downtime may cause
significant financial damage due to lost sales.
All this data must be recorded and backed up.
Petco used magnetic tapes to back up data every few
hours, but the approach was far from ideal. Tape
backup is reliable, but the latency of a few hours
posed a risk. If electric power was lost, so was
several hours of data that could not be recorded.
Also, recording on tape is labor-intensive, because
tapes must be manually mounted and dismounted.
Rewinding tapes is time-consuming, and therefore
delays availability of new tapes for recording.
Another issue with data storage was that the
company
used
the
DAS
(direct-attached
storage)
approach:
each
computer
backed up to
its
own
magnetic disk. The data could not be shared by all
computers. This created two problems. Many of the
disks
were
underutilized;
much
space—up
to
50
percent—was never used. As the company grows, the
total
underutilized
disk
space
grows
as
well.
In
addition, sharing the stored data was challenging.
To overcome these problems, Petco IT staff tried
mirroring.
In
disk
mirroring,
the
entire
disk
is
automatically copied to a backup disk. While this
reduces labor and makes data available immediately
from the mirror disk, it also presents a problem. If the
original disk is corrupt, such as infected with a virus, so
is the mirror disk.
The IT staff examined SAN (storage area network)
and NAS (network-attached storage)
solutions.
It
found that SAN would require much maintenance,
while NAS required much equipment to handle data
communications. Petco opted for a system called
iSCSI provided by Network Appliance, Inc., better
known as NetApp. The system of backing up to DAS
was replaced with backing up the Petco computers to
NetApp servers over the Internet. iSCSI (pronounced
“eye scuzzy”) utilizes the existing Internet standards
and network, and provides very fast data transfers.
The adopter does not need to incur the typical
expense of optical fiber networks associated with
SAN. The magnetic disks and the software that
manages them were implemented in the three main
warehouses.
Compared to the DAS approach, using such a
system reduces the total amount of required storage
capacity, because much of the capacity of directly
attached disks is never used. The new arrangement
does not require as much storage planning as was
required with DAS. The company can add storage
capacity whenever data management needs require
it. This eliminates wasted money spent on excess
capacity. Thus, the storage system is scalable. It is
easy and inexpensive to add more disks at any of
the three warehouses.
Another benefit of using this technology was that
the system could be installed without interruption to
warehouse operations. In fact, warehouse workers did
not notice the change. They left work on Friday, and
when they returned on Monday morning everything
looked the same to them.
Source: Pettis, A., “Petco’s New Storage Gear is the Cat’s
Meow,” eWeek, March 13, 2006; (www.petco.com), March 2007.
Thinking About the Case
1. What were the data backup problems when Petco
used tapes?
2. What were the data backup problems when Petco
used mirroring?
3. What are the disadvantages of using DAS, and
how are these disadvantages compounded when
a company grows?
4. What benefits did Petco acquire when adopting
the current technology for backing up warehouse
data?
Food in Transit
As you sit to eat a meal, you may wonder how many
processes and activities must be completed before the
product gets to your table. Consumers want quality,
fresh food products at a reasonable price. Each of
those characteristics requires food manufacturers to
operate efficiently to remain in business and stay
competitive.
Consider Texas-based Mission Foods, one of the
largest manufacturers of Mexican food products in the
U.S. Their operations consist of 16 plants and 50
distribution centers. Mission’s distribution model uses
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
145
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
a network of independent distributors to deliver their
products over 2,300 routes. The distributors deliver
directly to supermarkets and retail locations. Mission
used an antiquated paper-based, batch methodology to
manage its route delivery operations. Some of their
distributors
communicated
invoicing
and
receipt
acknowledgement information to Mission via modems.
The remainder of the invoices was processed through
the original hard copies, which required scanning for
processing. On any given day, Mission could process
about 30,000 documents nationwide. These processes
were inefficient and labor intensive, extending the time
to
process
invoices
accurately by
the
company’s
information systems.
A 2010 survey completed by ARC Advisory Group
determined that the top four mobile technologies used
for
supply
chain
management
are
smartphones,
handheld computers, cellular networks, and mobile
bar code scanners. Mission’s management believed
that the technology advancements in networking and
mobile
computers
could
help
end
the
inefficient
picking
and
packing
processes.
Their
analysis
determined that a device was needed that would be
able to enter and store information and be able to
transmit information using a variety of methods:
●Wide area wireless connection in the field
●Wireless 802.11b standard within Mission’s facilities
●Bluetooth capabilities at a customer site
Mission was able to procure one hardware unit
that
was
capable
of
the
three
communication
methods.
The
distributor
can
gain
a
customer’s
signature on the handheld device in real time when
the product is accepted. At this point, the invoicing
data is immediately transmitted and processed by
Mission’s information systems over AT&T’s cellular
network. As always, network connections can be
disrupted. However, if the network is unavailable at
the
time
of
delivery,
the
system
will
store
the
information on the handheld and attempt to resend
the data. Any transactions that have not been sent
during
the
day
will
be
transmitted
when
the
distributor returns to Mission’s distribution center
through their wireless LAN.
Several years later, the success of this initiative
led Mission to look inside its warehouses to gain
additional efficiency using handheld devices. Their
warehouse activities still used paper order picking
lists to gather full cartons of a product and place
them onto a delivery pallet. Their current system
created two problems: incorrectly picked products
and improper selection of recently manufactured
products before older products.
With the first problem, the incorrect product is
shipped. With the second, employees selected boxes
that did not have the oldest expiration date, which
caused the company to scrap expired products.
Misson’s solution consisted of implementing special
handheld devices capable of scanning barcodes directly
from the product cartons. The devices included special
terminal emulation software that mimicked the data
entry terminals used by Mission’s information system.
As an employee scanned the pick location and the
product in the warehouse, the system would ensure
that the accurate product and quantity was being
selected. Any discrepancies would be immediately
communicated to the warehouse employee.
Source: Napolitano, M. (2011). Mission foods’ wireless
evolution. Logistics Management (2002), 50(4), 46–48, 50.
Thinking About the Case
1. Is there any benefit for Mission to deploy this
technology for its independent distributors? For
the consumer?
2. What types of handheld devices could be used
today for a system like this? Compile some research
on the hardware solutions for a similar product.
3. Why would it be important for Mission to know
that a customer acknowledged the receipt of pro-
ducts delivered from the independent
distributors?
4. These information technology initiatives required
capital investments by Mission for the hardware,
software, and networking costs. What would you
expect the benefits to be gained by Mission?
What cost savings and other benefits would be
needed to justify the investment?
146
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
References
Anonymous. (2012a). 10 Ways Imaging Systems
Deliver Strong ROI to AR. IOMA’s Report on Man-
aging Credit, Receivables & Collections, 12(3), 12-13.
Anonymous. (2012b). Adult Computer and Adult
Internet Users by Selected Characteristics: 2000 to
2011 (pp. U.S. Census Bureau). Washington, D.C.
Anonymous. (2012c). DoubleTake’s new FlickIT Tech-
nology makes Hawaii Five-O and CSI TV fake
touch screen photo flicking a reality! Retrieved
May 30, 2013, 2013, from http://doubletaketech.
com/2012/03/07/doubletakes-new-flickit-techno
logy-makes-hawaii-five-o-and-csi-tv-fake-photo-
flicking-a-reality/
Anonymous. (2012d). Nonfatal Occupational Injuries
and Illnesses Requiring Days Away From Work,
2011.
Anonymous. (2012e). Pleiades Supercomputer.
Retrieved May 30, 2013, 2013, from http://www.
nas.nasa.gov/hecc/resources/pleiades.html
Anonymous. (2012f). Youtube Statistics. Retrieved
September 8, 2012, 2012, from http://www.you
tube.com/t/press_statistics
Anonymous. (2013). Quantum LTO-6 Drives. Retrieved
June 4, 2012, 2013, from http://www.quantum.
com/products/tapedrives/ltoultrium/lto-5/index.
aspx
Brodkin, J. (2012). With 16 petaflops and 1.6M cores,
DOE supercomputer is world’s fastest. Information
Technology. http://arstechnica.com/information-
technology/2012/06/with-16-petaflops-and-1-6m-
cores-doe-supercomputer-is-worlds-fastest/
eBay. (2012). Who We Are Overview. from http://
www.ebayinc.com/who
eBay. (2013). 1eBay Marketplaces Fast Facts At-A-
Glance (Q4 2013).
Fluss, D. (2012). IVRs Get a Bad Rap. Customer
Relationship Management, 16, 8-8.
Gray, P. (2012). Just Getting the Job Done is Not
Enough. Customer Inter@ction Solutions, 30(9),
24-24, 26.
Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R.,
Roxburgh, C., & Hung Byers, A. (2011). Big data:
The next frontier for innovation, competition, and
productivity.
Medina, R., & Andrews, L. (2009). New Impetus for
Going Paperless. Infonomics, 23(3), 40-42.
Munger, F. (2012). The cost of Titan. Retrieved from
http://blogs.knoxnews.com/munger/2012/11/the-
cost-of-titan.html
Sverdlik, Y. (2013). An eBay server’s worth. Datacenter
Dynamics. http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/
focus/archive/2013/03/ebay-servers-worth
CHAPTER 4
Business Hardware
147
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
 
CHAPTER
MicroWorks/Photos.com
PART
five
BUSINESS SOFTWARE
Learning Objectives
Hardware, as powerful as it might be, is useless without software. Software consists of instructions that tell the
computer and its peripheral devices what to do and how to do it. These instructions are called programs or
applications. Many IT professionals refer to computer programs as “systems” because they are composed of
components working to achieve a common goal. As a professional, you must be able to make educated decisions
regarding software selection. To do so, you need to understand the factors involved in developing, selecting, and
using software.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Explain the difference between application software and system software.
●
Enumerate the different generations of programming languages and explain how they differ.
●
Cite the latest major developments in application and system software.
●
Identify and explain the roles of web programming languages.
●
Explain the types and uses of website design tools.
●
Clarify the differences between proprietary software and open source software.
●
List characteristics that are important in evaluating packaged software applications for business use.
●
Understand the problem of software piracy and how it affects businesses and consumers.
148
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Software Added to the Bill
Michael knew that the “front house” operations were
important for customer service and efficient functioning of
the restaurant. However, he knew that the restaurant could
not survive on the efficiency of its front-house operations
alone. He remembered their accountant’s emphasis on
the need to pay more attention to the purchase of food.
The profits of a restaurant depend significantly on ordering
and forecasting, reducing spoilage by not ordering more
product than they need. Michael has learned that there is
a careful balance between ordering too much and running
out of food. He wondered also if he could manage his sup-
pliers better with more accurate data on the restaurant’s
needs. Could he reduce his deliveries from a supplier to
ask for a larger discount? Negotiate better prices by consol-
idating orders to specific suppliers?
Accounting for Success
As he thought about these questions, he wondered how
he could collect and access better data. The new point-
of-sale system recorded the sales of each menu selection
and type, from appetizers, entrees, and desserts to side
orders. The management information from the new sys-
tem surely could help him to project the number of
patrons on any given night and the sales of individual
menu items. How could he use that information? Would
he need input from Liz and the kitchen operations?
He decided to discuss it with both Tyler and his wife.
Michael asked Liz to provide some details on her order-
ing process. She said that she gives a standard order to
the suppliers for the main components of the menu
items. She then used those order quantities as a basis
for her next order. “Sometimes I may order more or
less based on what I see in the food storage areas, free-
zers and refrigerators,” she said. “It’s just a guess, but I
think it is working pretty well.” She also said that she is
meticulous about marking the delivery dates of perish-
able items so that she does not use spoiled materials.
Tyler then asked, “How do we know what is thrown
out because of spoilage? Or when we run out of a prod-
uct?” Michael also explained that he wants to make sure
they are ordering efficiently based on accurate forecasts
rather than just by guess. Food costs are a significant
percentage of their total operating costs. He did not
want to ask, but he believed that Liz did not ask or negoti-
ate prices with the suppliers. He asked Tyler to complete
an inventory of the food for a week to gain more under-
standing of the situation. Tyler wondered if he could
design a simple spreadsheet to develop an order list for
the various suppliers in order to simplify the process.
As Michael considered basing their food purchases
on a forecast, he also wondered if scheduling their serv-
ing, kitchen, and busing personnel could be done in a
similar manner. Also, they are currently using a payroll
service to pay employees and generate all the necessary
regulatory reporting; maybe there is a better way to man-
age the labor costs to gain efficiency and reduce costs.
Putting Software to Work
Most of the menu and promotional materials for the res-
taurant have been created using a local graphic artist
and print shop. This service added costs to their opera-
tion as well as increased turnaround time to complete
the materials. Tyler wondered if they might be able to
purchase some software for their new computer system
that would allow them to create and print some of the
promotional, marketing, and menu materials on their
own color laser printer. For the grand opening, they
will need additional materials for the marketing, promo-
tion, menus and other administrative functions.
As another important part of the promotional pro-
cess, moving to the new location could be a perfect
opportunity to upgrade their website. Currently, the
website consists of a few simple pages containing a
few pictures of the restaurant, their location and direc-
tions, and a sample menu; the website had not been
changed in the last two years. They want to give it a
new “look” and presentation to match the new location,
and add some dynamic content for specials and updates
to create more interaction with customers. Tyler knows
a little about building a website from his college
courses, but he has no graphical or web design skills.
He wonders if there are any software tools out there
that could help him “kick up” their website in order to
prepare for the new location and draw new customers.
Software: Instructions to the Hardware
If you have ever walked to the back of a restaurant, you might have seen a touch screen
computer station where servers bring your check. The computer runs software that collects front-
house information and sends it to back-house operations. The specialized computers can
calculate check totals, keep track of inventory, and save historical records of purchases. This data
allows managers to monitor customer trends or patterns and keep track of supplies.
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
149
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
You use software all the time, not just when you use your computer. You use software when
you drive a car, upload a video from your smartphone, and when you use the self-checkout station
at a store. The purpose of much of the software used by organizations is to increase productivity.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Apps Help Battle Hurricane Sandy
In the days preceding the landfall of Hurricane Sandy, the American Red Cross advertised and encour-
aged mobile phone users to download two of their free apps, Hurricane by American Red Cross and First
Aid by American Red Cross. Available through the Apple App and Google Play stores, the Hurricane app
provided useful information on the storm’s location, strength, and direction, as well as step-by-step
instructions on precautions to take before, during, and after the storm (assuming your mobile device had
service). The app also used location software to list the nearest shelter locations. The First Aid app
pushed safety tips for specific occurrences, such as hurricanes or floods, and preloaded content ensured
usefulness, even without cellular reception. Together, the apps provided those affected by Hurricane
Sandy with vital information and instruction during a time of disaster and chaos.
Source: Anonymous. (2012). Red Cross Responding to Hurricane Sandy Across Multiple States, U.S.
Newswire.
When executives talk about productivity tools, they really mean computer programs,
commonly known as software applications. Word processors, electronic spreadsheets, web
browsers, project management tools, collaborative work programs, and many other types of
productivity tools are software that runs on computers and enables workers to produce more
products and services in a given amount of time. This chapter discusses the differences between
system software and application software, programming languages that are used to write
software, and the types of business software tools currently available.
Software is a series of instructions to a computer or other digital device to execute any and all
processes, such as displaying text, mathematically manipulating numbers, or copying or deleting
documents. Digital devices only understand instructions made up of electrical signals alternating
between two states, which eventually close or open tiny electrical circuits. Different sequences of
signals represent different instructions to the computer. In the early days of computers, programming
a computer meant actually changing the computer’s wiring by opening and closing switches or
moving plugs from one circuit to another. Because programs today consist of instructions that require
no hardware reconfiguration, the skill of composing software programs is independent of building or
directly manipulating hardware. Software is executed not only on computers, but in every device that
uses microprocessors, such as motor vehicles, digital cameras, and mobile phones. However, in this
chapter we will focus mainly on computer software that serves organizations.
The two major categories of software are application software and system software. Application
software enables users to complete a particular application or task, such as word processing,
investment analysis, data manipulation, or project management. System software enables
application software to run on a computer, and manages the interaction between the CPU, memory,
storage, input/output devices, and other computer components. Both types of software are discussed
later in the chapter.
Programming Languages and Software Development Tools
Programs are needed for absolutely every operation a computer conducts. An operation can be as
simple as adding 1 + 2, typing a word, or emitting a beep—or as involved as calculating the
trajectory of a spacecraft bound for Mars. The process of writing programs is programming,
also known as “writing code” and “software engineering.”
Remember, the only language that computer hardware understands is a series of electrical signals
that represent bits and bytes, which together provide computer hardware with instructions to carry
150
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
out operations. But writing programs in this language—called machine language—requires a
programmer to literally create long strings of ones and zeroes to represent different characters and
symbols, work that is no longer required thanks to programming languages and other software
development tools. Assembly languages made programming somewhat easier because they
aggregated common commands into “words,” although many of the “words” are not English-like.
Higher-level programming languages enable the use of English-like statements to accomplish a
goal, and these statements are translated by special software into the machine language.
Software development kits (SDKs) are even easier to use because they require
practically no knowledge of programming languages to develop software. An SDK typically offers
a set of software development tools for a particular hardware system (like a video game console
or the Apple iPhone), operating system, or programming language. SDKs provide several
software tools that integrate together to increase the productivity of software development
professionals and reduce software costs. Adobe’s Creative Suite includes a portfolio of software
including Photoshop, Illustrator, and InDesign to assist with print design and digital publishing.
Programmers have at their disposal literally thousands of different programming languages,
such as Visual Basic, Java, and C++. Programmers and nonprogrammers alike can use webpage
development tools such as Adobe Dreamweaver or Avanquest WebEasy Professional, which
provide menus, templates, and palettes that the developer can select or click to create intricate
webpages, forms, animation, and links to organizational information systems. To develop the
software development tools themselves, and to develop highly specialized software, programmers
still have to write code in programming languages.
Figure 5.1 shows how programming languages have evolved dramatically over the years. The
different stages of development are known as generations. First-generation (machine language)
and second-generation (assembly) languages were quite inefficient tools for code writing. They
required lengthy written code for even the simplest procedures. In third- and fourth-generation
languages, shorter, more human-friendly commands replaced lengthy code. Ultimately, it would
be nice to be able to program using the daily grammar of your native language—English,
Spanish, Hebrew, or any other language. But even then, the so-called natural language would
have to be translated by another program into machine language.
F I G U R E 5.1
The evolution of
programming languages
Human Language:
Future
• Use natural
   language
• No need to learn
   new syntax
Fourth Generation:
1980s
• More English-like
• Many preprogrammed
   functions
• Includes data management
   features
 
• Easy to learn and use
1990s – 2010s
• Object-oriented programming
• Visual programming tools
• Software development kits
• Mobile applications development
Third Generation:
1950s
• English-like
• Problem oriented
• Easier to learn
   and use
Second Generation:
1950s
(Assembly Languages)
• Shorter codes than
   machine language
• Machine dependent
First Generation:
1940s
(Machine Languages)
• Difficult to learn and use
• Long instructions
• Machine dependent
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
151
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Third-generation languages (3GLs) are considered “procedural” because the programmer has
to detail a logical procedure that solves the problem at hand. Third-generation languages
reduced the programmer’s time spent producing code. One 3GL statement is equivalent to 5–10
assembly language statements. Some common procedural languages include FORTRAN, COBOL,
BASIC, RPG, Pascal, and C. Some of them, such as RPG and COBOL, are no longer in use or in
limited use.
Fourth-generation languages (4GLs) make application development even easier. They are
built around database management systems that allow the programmer to create database
structures, populate them with data, and manipulate the data. Many routine procedures are
preprogrammed and can be recalled by including a single word in the code. A single 4GL
statement is equivalent to several 3GL statements, and therefore to dozens of assembly
statements.
4GL commands are more English-like than commands in 3GL procedural languages. In fact,
4GLs are significantly less procedural than 3GLs. With 4GL commands, the programmer often
only needs to type what is to be done, but doesn’t need to specify how the procedure
accomplishes the task. For example, if one column in a database is AGE, the programmer can
simply use the preprogrammed command LIST AVERAGE(AGE) to display on the screen the
average age, which is calculated from the age values in all the records. Similarly, preprogrammed
functions are provided for total, standard deviation, count, median, and many more tasks. The
list of preprogrammed functions in electronic spreadsheets such as Microsoft Excel has become
so comprehensive that some people refer to them as 4GLs.
Structured Query Language (SQL) is a 4GL used by many database management software
packages. SQL is a nonprocedural language that consists of simple commands and keywords to
manipulate, extract, and update data in a relational database. For example, the following SELECT
statement in SQL will list six fields (customer number, name, street, city, state, and balance due)
from a database table (tblCustomer) for all customers whose balance due is greater than $1000.
SELECT CustNumber, CustName, CustStreet, CustCity, CustState,
BalanceDue
FROM tblCustomer
WHERE BalanceDue > 1000;
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Be Software Savvy
As a professional, you should regard software as a tool to further
your productivity and education. Software can automate many
processes that professionals must accomplish. Even the simplest
of software applications, such as electronic spreadsheets, can
be used to build decision support applications. Electronic
spreadsheets are extremely useful for organizing and comparing
data, and database software allows users to efficiently sort
through large amounts of client information. Software vendors
offer a huge variety of programs with various functions and fea-
tures. While it is challenging for individuals to be knowledgeable
about all available software, an understanding of the types of
software and some particular applications lets you make
informed comparisons and suggestions for improving your orga-
nization’s software portfolio and your own library of personal
software. In addition, the various categories and uses of soft-
ware tend to follow the trends in hardware innovations. For
example, the integration of mobile computing applications has
created a market for mobile development software. The more
knowledge you have about software trends, the more valuable
you will be to your organization.
4GLs speed up the programming process. They are relatively easy to use by people who are
not professional programmers, and therefore enable non-IT employees in many companies to
produce applications on their own. The produced code is usually easy to change, which reduces
the cost of software maintenance. Because 4GLs are very English-like, debugging—locating and
fixing programming errors—is relatively easy.
Higher-level programming languages have their advantages, but also some disadvantages (see
Figure 5.2). Therefore, programming languages are chosen based not only on programming
productivity but also on the amount of control over the resulting software that is desired.
152
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
F I G U R E 5.2
Advantages and
disadvantages of using
higher-level programming
languages
Advantages of Higher-Level Programming
Ease of learning the language
Ease of programming
Significantly shorter code
Ease of debugging
Ease of maintenance (for example, modification of a procedure)
Disadvantages of Higher-Level Programming
Less control over hardware
Less efficient memory use
Program runs more slowly
Visual Programming
To accelerate their work, programmers can use one of several visual programming languages,
such as Microsoft Visual Basic, Embarcadero Delphi, Micro Focus COBOL, ASNA Visual RPG, and
Visual C++. These languages let programmers create field windows, scroll-down menus, click
buttons, and other objects by simply choosing the proper icon from a palette. They can then use
a flexible tool to shape and color these objects. (Note that here the term “object” is used loosely,
not with its special meaning in the context of object-oriented languages, as discussed in the next
section.) Seeing exactly and immediately how boxes and menus look on screen reduces the
chance of bugs and helps programmers finish their jobs faster than if they had to write code. The
appropriate code is written automatically for them when they click on elements. However,
the programmer can always go back to the code and add or change statements for operations that
cannot easily be accomplished by using the visual aids. Thus, knowledge of the programming
language is still required. Visual Basic software from Microsoft is used to develop forms that can
allow users to enter data and click on a button to process the data.
Using Visual Basic,
programmers develop
a form that includes a
clickable button to
execute a command
such as Print
© Cengage Learning 2015
Courtesy of Microsoft, Inc.
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
153
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Object-Oriented Programming
An increasing amount of software is developed using object-oriented programming (OOP)
languages. These languages use a modular approach, which offers two great advantages: ease of
maintenance
and
efficiency
in
applications
development
(see
Figure
5.3).
In
traditional
programming, programmers receive specifications of how a program should process data and
how it should interact with users, and then they write code. If business changes and the
program must be modified, the programmer must change the code. In traditional programming,
data and the operations to manipulate the data are kept separate from each other. In object-
oriented programming, on the other hand, operations are linked to the data. For example, if the
operation is to calculate an employee’s gross pay, taxes, and net pay, selecting and clicking the
record triggers the calculation. Routine, frequent operations are kept with the data to be
processed. Thus, OOP’s primary emphasis is not on the procedure for performing a task, but on
the objects involved in the task.
F I G U R E 5.3
Advantages of object-
oriented programming
(OOP) over procedural
languages
OOP Advantages
Requires less code than other languages
Requires less time than programming in other languages
Enhances program modularity and reusability
Makes code maintenance easier
Enhances ability to create user-friendly interface
Appropriate for graphic- and sound-enhanced applications
What Is an Object in OOP?
Figure 5.4 illustrates how an object in OOP encapsulates a data set with the code used to operate
on it. Data elements in the object are called data members. They might be records, whole files, or
another type of data structure. Data members have attributes that define the nature of the data,
such as Social Security number, last name, and hourly rate. The code elements of the object are
called methods. These procedures operate on the data, such as calculating an employee’s gross
pay for the week. In object-oriented software, there is no direct access to data members of an
object; they can be accessed only through the methods, which are part of the object. In our
example, the object includes four methods: Hourly Rate, Weekly Pay, Overtime Pay, and Age.
Weekly Pay calculates each employee’s gross and net pay, Overtime Pay calculates each
employee’s overtime gross pay, and Age computes all employees’ average age.
© Cengage Learning 2015
154
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
F I G U R E 5.4
A representation of the
object EMPLOYEE
Ease of Maintenance and Development
Typically, about 80 percent of all work associated with software is spent on maintaining it.
Maintenance primarily involves modifying programs to meet new business needs, but also
debugging errors that were not detected when testing the developed code. In object-oriented
programming, software developers treat objects as parts, or standardized modules that work
together and can be used and reused. Instead of creating large, complex, tightly intertwined
programs, programmers create objects. Objects are developed in standard ways and have
standard behaviors and interfaces. These modules enable software to be assembled rapidly rather
than written laboriously.
OOP also makes creating programs easier for nonprogrammers. The inexperienced developer
does not need to know how an object does what it does, only what it does. Thus, the developer
can select and combine appropriate objects from an object library, which is a repository of
developed objects, to build a desired application.
Object-Oriented Programming Languages
The most popular OOP languages are Java, C++/C#, and Visual Basic. Smalltalk, developed by
Xerox, was an early object-oriented programming language. C++ has become the major
commercial OOP language because it combines traditional C programming with object-oriented
capabilities. Java, developed by Sun Microsystems, is a popular object-oriented language designed
to be platform independent, that is, to run on any computer regardless of the CPU or operating
system. Another popular language, Visual Basic, enables the programmer to use graphical
objects, but does not fulfill all the requirements of a true OOP language. For example, moving
an icon to another application does not move the code associated with it. Some OOP languages
are designed specifically for use in developing graphical user interfaces (GUIs). Elements of
GUIs include windows, icons, scroll boxes, and other graphical images that help the user interact
with the program with minimal effort.
Languages for the Web
Because an increasing amount of software is developed for websites and to link applications via
the Internet, special software languages and tools have been developed for these tasks. Such
programming languages include Java, JavaScript, and PHP. The main advantage of Java and
JavaScript is that the code produced—often called applets—can be executed well regardless of
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
155
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
the operating system that the computer uses. Therefore, the same applet will be executed the
same way on a computer running Windows or one running Mac OS X. This is a significant
benefit, especially when the applets are developed to be posted at a website.
The use of web-based applications can reduce costs for an organization. Consider a
municipality that maintains a fleet of vehicles for public services and safety. The total cost of
ownership of the fleet (purchase and operational costs) has a direct impact on municipal budgets
and taxes paid by property owners. Using fleet management software, management can monitor
the maintenance of vehicles. Management Reporting Suite, developed by Chevin, provides a
web-based fleet management system necessary for organizations to gather and aggregate real-
time data to improve key business areas such as total cost of ownership, fuel cost, mobility, and
carbon dioxide reduction (Geoghegan, 2013).
In recent years an increasing number of applications have been developed in Microsoft’s
.NET “environment.” .NET is software that supports building and linking applications that can
“talk to each other” on the Internet and enable web browsers to invoke information resources,
such as databases. Applications developed using .NET tools run on Microsoft operating systems,
such as Windows. IBM’s WebSphere is another application software portfolio designed to
integrate enterprise-wide web applications across various technology platforms. As technology
offerings have become decentralized consisting of different operating systems and hardware,
WebSphere provides the development environment to develop applications for various business
processes in an agile technology infrastructure (Anonymous, 2013a, 2013c). We discuss
operating systems later in this chapter.
Development for Mobile Applications
In the late-1990s, the proliferation of web-based applications exploded with the integration of
e-commerce technology. The rapid technological evolution of cell phones into smartphones has
created a huge demand for mobile applications. The same consumers who adopted the use of
web-based applications for purchasing, business transactions, and information gathering were
the perfect audience for mobile applications. Consequently, the market for mobile software
development kits increased based on the demand for these new software applications.
The specific platform that will be used to implement the mobile application needs to be
considered. The most popular mobile platforms are Android, Apple, Windows, and Blackberry.
Each of these mobile technology platforms uses specific variations to develop its applications.
For instance, Apple’s Developer provides a software development environment to create mobile
applications for its iPhone product. For Android-based products, there are several alternatives.
Language Translation: Compilers and Interpreters
Recall that computers understand only machine language. Just as assembly languages need
assemblers, procedural languages need special programs to translate source code, which is the
program as originally written, into object code, which is the same program in machine
language. (Unfortunately, the word “object” is used for several different contexts. In the context
of this section it has nothing to do with object-oriented languages.) The two types of
programming language translators are compilers and interpreters. Compilers translate the
higher-level code into an equivalent machine language code, but do not execute the code; the
translated code must be run to check for programming errors. Interpreters translate each
program statement and execute it.
A compiler (see Figure 5.5) scans the entire source code, looking for errors in the form
(syntax) of the code. If it finds an error, it does not create the object code; instead, it generates
an error message or a list of error messages. If the compiler finds no syntactic errors, it translates
source code into object code, which the computer can execute. At this point, the programmer
can save the object code. From now on, the user can simply run only the object code. This saves
translation time.
156
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
F I G U R E 5.5
A compiler converts
higher-level language
code (source code) into
machine language (object
code), which the
computer can execute
00110110
01100011
10011000
11100011
11010110
00110110
01100011
10011000
11100011
11010110
00110110
01100011
10011000
11100011
11010110
Source Code
Object Code
Compiler
total = 0
cases = 0
perform average_them
  until cases = 100
Display “That is the End!”
An interpreter checks one statement at a time. If the first statement is free of syntactic errors,
it interprets the statement into object code and makes the computer execute it. If the statement
is erroneous, the interpreter issues an error message. In some environments, the programmer can
immediately correct the statement. The computer then executes the corrected statement, and the
interpreter
moves
on
to
check
the
next
statement.
Error-free
statements
are
executed
immediately.
Code written in interpreted programming languages can run only on machines whose disks
store the interpreter. In contrast, compiled code is ready to run because it is in machine
language and does not need to be translated. Most Visual Basic and Java translators are
interpreters. Translators of FORTRAN, COBOL, C, C++, and most other 3GLs are compilers.
When you purchase an application, whether a computer game or a business program, you
purchase a compiled version of the code, that is, the object code. There are three reasons for
this. First, the application is executed immediately because there is no need to compile the code.
Second, most users do not have the compiler for the source code. Third, the vendor does not
wish buyers to modify the code. If the program is sufficiently modified, the modified copies may
be sold without violating intellectual property laws such as patents and copyrights. Source code
can be modified by anyone who knows the programming language in which it was written;
modifying object code is very difficult.
While testing code, programmers can use programming language translators to find syntactic
errors. When they execute the program, they can find execution errors—also called runtime
errors—such as division by zero or an excessive use of memory (memory leak). However, only
the programmer can detect and prevent logical errors, because the logic relies, and should rely,
solely on the way the programmer translated a way to produce a result into code.
Application Software
As noted earlier, an application is a program developed to address a specific need. An application
can also be software that lets nonprogrammers develop such programs. Most programs that
professionals use are application programs, such as word-processing programs, spreadsheet
programs, payroll programs, investment analysis programs, and work-scheduling and project
management programs.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
157
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Programs designed to perform specific jobs, such as calculating and executing a company’s
payroll, are collectively called application-specific software. Programs that serve varied purposes,
such as developing decision-making tools or creating documents, are called general-purpose
application software. Spreadsheets and word processors are general-purpose applications.
General-purpose applications are available as packaged software; that is, they come ready to
install from an external storage medium such as a CD or a file downloaded from a vendor’s website.
Application-specific software is not always so readily available. Managers must decide whether an
off-the-shelf software package meets all of their needs. If it does, the company can simply purchase
it. But if off-the-shelf or other ready-made software cannot address an organization’s specified needs,
managers must have a program developed, either within the organization or by another
organization specializing in that type of software. Therefore, it is important to clearly define the
business’s functional and information requirements before acquiring software. We discuss
alternative ways to acquire ready-made software in Chapter 13, “Choices in Systems Acquisition.”
Office Productivity Applications
The purpose of business software is to make the work of people more productive and businesses more
efficient in the processing of their daily operations. However, applications that help employees in
their routine office work often are called simply “productivity tools.” They include word processors,
spreadsheets, presentation tools, file and database management software, graphics programs, personal
information managers, desktop publishing tools, and project management applications, as well as
many others for more specialized purposes. Web browsers are also included in this group, because
they help so many employees to find and communicate information in their daily work. These tools
were developed to support home and office users on their personal computers.
While word processors are used mainly to type letters, articles, and other text documents, they
also automate otherwise laborious tasks such as creating tables of contents and indexes. Some
enable users to plan the binding and look of books up to the point of handing files to a high-
quality printer for the production of the physical book. Examples of word processors include
Microsoft Word or Corel WordPerfect.
Spreadsheets such as Microsoft Excel no longer limit users to entering numbers and
performing basic arithmetic calculations. They include a long list of complex mathematical,
statistical, financial, and other functions that users can integrate into analysis models. These
functions are so powerful that statisticians often use them. Executives can build their own
decision-support models with this robust tool. Spreadsheets also provide a large array of
preformatted charts from which the user can select for presentation purposes.
Presentation tools such as Microsoft PowerPoint enable professionals and salespeople to
quickly develop impressive presentations. One does not need to be a graphics expert, because
the tools provide wide selections of font types and sizes and allow users to embed almost any art
that they find (with permission!) or have created in graphics programs. Animations, sound, and
video clips can be integrated into presentations and slide shows that can be posted to run on
the web as videocasts.
POINT OF
INTEREST
10/20/30 Rule
Guy Kawasaki was the chief evangelist of Apple and is the author of ten books including Enchantment and
How to Drive Your Competition Crazy. In another one of his books, The Art of the Start, he teaches readers
how to become a successful entrepreneur through his experiences. One of the most important and easily
remembered lessons from his book is the “10/20/30” rule for PowerPoint presentations in a business setting:
10 slides, 20 minutes, 30 point font. His reasoning is that the presenter should do most of the talking by using
the slides as reference points and 30 point font provides sufficient white space to keep the audience’s atten-
tion. He gets his point across through his humorous tone; “I don’t care if you’re selling dog food, permanent
life, nano particles, optical components, or the cure to cancer: Ten slides and twenty minutes is all you get.”
Source: Kawasaki, Guy. (n.d.). “Official” Bio. http://www.guykawasaki.com/about/; Kawasaki, Guy.
(2004). The Art of the Start: The Time-Tested, Battle-Hardened Guide for Anyone Starting Anything.
New York, New York: Penguin Group (USA) Incorporated.
158
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
File management and data management tools enable the creation and manipulation of local or
shared databases. Popular database management systems such as Microsoft Access are relatively
easy to learn and create simple databases. They often include features that professional
developers can use to create more complex databases.
Graphics
programs
make
it
easy
to
create
intricate
images
and
manipulate
digital
photographs. They are often used to create graphics to be placed on webpages. The large
selection of these tools includes Adobe’s Illustrator and Photoshop, Corel Paint Shop Pro, and
Xara Designer Pro, as well as the free IrfanView and Gimp.
Desktop publishing tools, such as Microsoft Publisher, Adobe InDesign, and Serif PagePlus,
enable both expert and novice to easily create professional looking pamphlets, newsletters, cards,
calendars, and many other items for publication on paper or as webpages. More professional
tools, such as Quark, by a company of the same name, have significantly increased the
productivity of the publishing industry.
Project management tools, such as Microsoft Project, Basecamp, or free software alternatives
such as Open Workbench and OpenProj, help managers of any type of project—such as building
construction, product development, and software development—to plan projects and track
their progress. Project managers enter information such as tasks and their expected completion
dates, milestones, and resources required for each task: labor hours, materials, and services.
The software alerts planners when they enter illogical information, such as scheduling a worker
to work 120 hours in one week, and when tasks violate interdependencies. The latter
happens when, for instance, planners schedule the start of Phase D before the completion of
Phase C, though they had previously indicated that Phase D depends on the completion of
Phase C.
Project management
software facilitates the
planning, execution and
monitoring of projects
Software developers often create suites of productivity tools. For example, most versions of
Microsoft Office suite include a word processor (Word), spreadsheet (Excel), presentation
application (PowerPoint), and an email application (Outlook). Microsoft added OneNote into its
Office suite. OneNote allows users to consolidate various links, videos, webpages, and other files
into their notes. Other examples of suites are IBM Lotus SmartSuite, and the free Apache
OpenOffice.org. When productivity tools are integrated into a software suite, the documents
created can be interdependent using technologies such as object linking and embedding (OLE).
You can create tables in a spreadsheet, copy them into a word-processed document or a
presentation, and ensure that when you modify the tables in the spreadsheet they also change
in the document or presentation. A Microsoft Word document can link various objects with
additional information, spreadsheets, and charts, embedded within the text to present a report
more effectively.
Courtesy of Microsoft, Inc.
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
159
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Linking various objects
from different office suite
products can provide a
professional and
complete report
You can also embed links to websites in your documents. Linking among documents
involves hypermedia technologies, and embedding information such as sound and video clips in
documents uses multimedia technologies. These technologies are discussed in the next section.
A growing number of web-based office applications are offered free of charge; all one needs is a
web browser. Typically, all the documents the user creates are saved at the application’s server.
This way, both the applications and documents can be accessed from anyplace with an Internet
link. For example, ThinkFree, offered by the company of the same name, is an online suite that
includes a word processor, spreadsheet, graphical application, and a presentation application in a
cloud office environment. It is promoted as a free online alternative to Microsoft Office
implemented within a collaborative, multi-device environment (desktop, laptop, tablet, and
smartphones). Google offers Google Drive (formerly known as Google Docs) an environment
similar to ThinkFree. Microsoft Office itself now offers WebApps. The new environment of office
productivity tools offers cloud storage and access to data files, along with applications such as
calendaring and contact managers across all hardware platforms and devices. The world of
application software has broadened by offering quality alternatives to off-the-shelf software.
Hypermedia and Multimedia
Hypermedia is a feature that enables a user to access additional information by clicking on
selected text or graphics. Hypermedia is the web’s most essential ingredient. When first
conceived, the concept was limited to text and was called hypertext. Now, hypermedia is very
common, used widely in various types of software, and essential to web-based documents as well
as documents, charts, and presentations created using productivity tools. Any text or icon that
© Cengage Learning 2015
160
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
can be clicked to jump to another place in a document or open a new document is called a link,
whether on the web or not. Often, we say that a word or icon is “clickable.” Hypermedia enables
linking text, pictures, sounds, animations, and video.
Hypermedia features are enabled by webpage authoring tools. They are also part of other
applications, such as some word processors and presentation tools. You can easily create a
PowerPoint presentation with marked text or an icon that calls up a picture, a sound, or an
animation, or one that takes you to another slide. Programs that can handle many different
types
of
data
are
called
multimedia
software.
Multimedia
is
a
powerful
means
of
communicating, because it does not limit the method of communication. A natural extension of
the computer’s capabilities, it provides flexibility that lets people work the way they think,
integrating
all
types
and
forms
of
information.
Multimedia
is
tightly
associated
with
hypermedia, because it often uses embedded links. These links are the essence of hypermedia
and are used to communicate pictures, sounds, and video as part of the same message in a way
that is similar to an educational lecture or a product manual. A few examples of the uses of
multimedia are described in the following sections.
Multimedia in Education and Research
One of the most common uses of multimedia is in education. A student taking a multimedia-
based lesson can view a scenario in one window and view text in another while listening to a
recording or webcast of his or her professor. The student might then be asked to answer
questions interactively, providing responses in another window on the screen. The same
program might be designed to provide the student with feedback on her performance. With
voice recognition software, multimedia programs used in language training can ask a student to
pronounce certain words and evaluate the student’s performance.
Another common use of multimedia is in compiling and integrating data from research. For
instance, a researcher might use multimedia programs to view written articles and television
news footage and to listen to radio clips.
Multimedia in Training
In many industries, multimedia is commonly used to simulate real-world situations for training
exercises. For example, multimedia products that use video and voice and allow users to respond
to questions about various situations have been used to teach workers for an electric utility
company how to solve high-voltage wire problems. If they attempted to solve the same cases in
the field, their lives would be jeopardized. Flight simulators use extensive multimedia software to
simulate takeoff, landing, and other flight situations when training pilots before they fly real
planes.
Multimedia in Business
Multimedia can be very useful in business situations as well. Consider this example: one
manager writes a document that includes digitized photographs or video clips and possibly a
“live” spreadsheet, which lets the user enter numbers and execute calculations. The manager
sends the document to a colleague for review; the colleague tacks on a video and voice clip
requesting clarification of a certain point. The compound document can be filed electronically,
retrieved, altered, and communicated as appropriate, without ever being transformed into a
paper document. In fact, multimedia by its very nature cannot be transferred to a paper
document. Many websites include multimedia because of its interactive nature.
Mashups
Many companies, including Amazon.com, eBay, Flickr, Google, and Yahoo!, have opened their
applications so that the applications, or some of their features, can be integrated with other
software to create new useful applications. These integrated applications are called mashup
applications, or simply mashups. For example, an amateur programmer can combine a
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
161
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
mapping application from one website—such as Mapquest, Apple Maps, or Google Maps—with a
local database of charity associations to show the locations and details of the associations on a
map. The mapping application continues to provide its regular features, such as directions to
and from the organizations’ locations.
The programmer uses software elements from different applications and combines them, or
some of their features, into a hybrid application. Since these software elements are constantly
available on the web, users of the mashup can enjoy it whenever their computers are connected
to the Internet.
One of the most educationally useful mashups on the web is Khan Academy. Khan Academy
is a not-for-profit online institution designed by a graduate of Harvard and MIT, which offers
lessons on a broad range of subjects from arithmetic to calculus to molecular science to the
French Revolution. The website has delivered over 200 million lessons by embedding YouTube
videos into their webpages. In the YouTube videos, the instructor talks students through lessons
and problems using the mouse pointer arrow and uses different colors on a black background to
help students visualize what’s going on. After watching the video, students can post comments
and questions, similar to other YouTube videos. Khan Academy’s strategy of combining a
traditional website with embedded YouTube videos has created an effective mashup that is more
valuable than the sum of its parts. The YouTube videos allows students to work at their own
pace and the comments section lets them get help from other students, just as if they were
sitting in class. It’s not just a lecture; it’s an interactive, social learning experience.
Website Design Tools
As a growing number of organizations established websites, and many needed to change the
content of the webpages daily or even hourly, the need for web design tools grew. Popular
webpage development packages include Microsoft SharePoint Designer and Expression Web,
Avanquest WebEasy Professional, and Adobe CS2/Dreamweaver. Many Internet service providers
(ISPs) and website hosting companies also provide online tools and templates to design and
implement personal and commercial websites.
Webpage development packages expedite development of webpages. Like other visual tools,
they provide menus, icons, and other features from which the developer can select. Therefore,
developers have to write code only when a feature is not readily available. When using ready-
made options, such as fill-in forms and animation effects, the code is automatically added. Since
much of the code is in nonproprietary languages such as HTML and XML (which we discuss in
Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise”), a programmer can start work with one development
tool, such as WebEasy Professional, and continue the work with another, such as Dreamweaver.
Developers alternate if they find one tool is easier to use for quick development of icons, for
example, whereas another offers a more appealing way to develop animations.
Recently, a new method of developing websites has become popular. Small businesses and
individuals have implemented websites using a blog environment, such as Wordpress. The blog
environment can then be tailored using an automated web design program such as Artisteer.
Products such as Artisteer give users who have limited web design experience the ability to
customize a blog to operate as a website. The example shown here illustrates a website design for
a cake and coffee shop that could be developed through Artisteer.
162
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Artisteer web design
software assists users
to develop customized
websites exporting to
Wordpress and Blogger
formats
Groupware
Multimedia technologies are any applications that allow sharing of ideas and information
resources
among
group
members.
Most
of
these
applications
are
integrated
with
web
technologies. Groupware applications are programs that enable workers to collaborate in real
time over the web. They not only eliminate the need to travel and sit in the same physical room
but also facilitate expression of ideas by demonstrating them through the combination of text,
images,
drawings,
sound,
animation,
and
video.
Collaboration
software
includes
various
productivity tools used for team-based environments and projects where human interaction
(either synchronous or asynchronous) is necessary. The specific functions vary by software
application
but
can
include
project/task
management,
shared
calendars,
video/audio/text
chatting, email, voice messages, and file sharing. Wiggio is an example of collaboration software.
With over 1.1 million users, the software provides an environment to connect a group of people
working on a project or initiative. A project representative (group leader) begins the process by
creating a group and then adding members. Members can be assigned or prohibited from various
functions within the group environment. The revision of this textbook was completed using
Wiggio between the author and research assistant.
Google Drive, formerly called Google Docs, is a cloud-based feature that allows users to work
with others on a document, presentation, spreadsheet, form, or drawing and save it online. You
can upload an existing file or create a new one using Google’s software. While working on a file,
the user can see who else is working on that file and what changes they are making. Files are
saved to the cloud so they can be opened by those granted access. Using Google Drive saves
businesses time and transportation costs while providing an accessible medium for team
collaboration.
3-D Geographic Software
An increasing number of applications are being developed to create 3-D models of geographic
areas and whole cities, down to every hydrant and shrub. The raw materials are land and aerial
photographs that cover the targeted area. The digital photographs are “sewn” together to allow a
Courtesy of artisteer.com
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
163
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
continuous “walk” or “travel” on a city street or university campus. This helps with navigation,
whereby one can recognize buildings and landmarks by their similarity to the software images.
This type of information can be delivered through the web. When tied with a global positioning
system (GPS), the software helps people who have never been to a place to navigate easily. In
the near future, 3-D software such as this will help property rental companies manage their
assets. For example, a manager will be able to click on an apartment on the 12th floor of a
building and check information about the unit and let a potential renter have a view from the
windows or balcony. Maintenance staffs will be able to virtually go into the walls and check
pipes and electrical wiring, and fire companies will be able to navigate quickly and locate
hydrants on their way to put out fires.
Trimble SketchUp is a type of 3-D geographic software that is also used to create virtual cities
and areas, though it is effective on a smaller scale as well. Inventive business owners use the
software to create their own machines or products rather than creating virtualizations of already
existing buildings or places. The potential for SketchUp is endless. Users can start by creating a
small component such as a two-by-four piece of wood and eventually design an entire house
and the rest of the block it’s on. For those less inventive, the SketchUp library allows users to
download components created by other users. Examples of these components include anything
from pallets and framed walls to train stations and skyscrapers. SketchUp even connects to
Google Maps, which allows the option for users to place a house where it is in real life. 3-D
geographic software is important in the business world because of its capacity to virtualize
existing tangible items and create new ones.
Model of the Old Salem
Town Hall developed
using SketchUp, a 3-D
modeling tool
System Software
System software includes programs that are designed to carry out general routine operations,
such as the interface between user and computer, loading a file, copying a file, or deleting a file,
as well as managing memory resources and operating peripheral equipment such as monitors
and printers. The purpose of system software is to manage computer resources and perform
routine tasks that are not specific to any application. On one hand, system software is developed
to work in partnership with as many applications as possible; on the other, applications can
work with system software only if they are developed to be compatible with that software.
The following discussion covers major types of system programs. Note that compilers and
interpreters, which were discussed earlier, are also classified as system software.
Beryl Reid
164
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Operating Systems
The operating system (OS) is the single most important program that runs on a computer and
the most important type of system software. As Figure 5.6 illustrates, operating systems perform
basic tasks, such as recognizing input from the keyboard and mouse, sending output to the
computer display, keeping track of files and directories (groups of files) on disks, sending
documents to the printer, and interfacing with network devices. Without an operating system,
no application can run on a computer. An operating system is developed for a certain
microprocessor
or
multiple
microprocessors.
Programmers
know
which
operations
each
microprocessor can perform and how it performs them. The OS must address technical details
such as CPU circuitry and memory addresses. Therefore, OSs are usually developed with the aid
of low-level programming languages, such as assembly languages, or with a language that can
access low-level machine functions, such as C.
F I G U R E 5.6
The operating system
mediates the computer
system’s resources and
application software as
well as controls
peripheral and network
devices
Operating
System
User
Keeps track of
files and
directories
Sends
documents to
the printer
Receives input
from the keyboard
and the mouse
Sends images
to the
monitor
Application
Receives information
from a network card
The OS is sometimes called the “traffic cop” or the “boss” of computer resources. Indeed, it
is charged with control functions such as optimally allocating memory locations for an
application program, copying the application from an external storage medium into memory,
passing control to the CPU for execution of program instructions, and sending processing results
to output devices. Operating systems are also often referred to as “platforms,” because they are
the platform on which all other applications “ride” when interacting with the hardware.
When application developers write code, they use the application program interfaces
(APIs) for the operating system on which the application will run. APIs are software included in
the operating system. A good API makes it easy to develop an application. Applications using the
same API have similar interfaces.
From User to OS to CPU
Figure 5.7 shows the OS’s position in the logical operation of a computer. The user interacts with
the user interface using menus, icons, and commands provided by the application. The
application converts some of the user’s input into commands the OS understands, and the OS
commands the CPU to carry out the operation. (Some commands are not delivered to the OS
but directly from the application to the hardware.) The OS ensures that applications can use the
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
165
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
CPU, memory, input and output devices, and the file system. The file system is software that
stores, organizes, and retrieves files.
F I G U R E 5.7
Computer systems
operate on a number of
layers, beginning with the
user interface and moving
into the computer’s
hardware
System Software
Hardware
OS, Language Translators,
Communication Programs…
Procedures and Functions
User Interface (Menus, Icons…)
Application Software
For example, assume that you are using a word processor. You select a paragraph you wish to
copy and paste. You select Copy from the menu. The word processor converts your choice into
an appropriate command for the OS, which then instructs the CPU to copy the paragraph. A
similar action takes place when you select Paste from the menu. Assume that you like a picture
on a webpage and have permission to copy it. You right-click the picture and choose to copy it.
The web browser’s menu might not look the same as the word processor’s menu. However,
when you select Copy Image, the operating system receives a command from the application
that is identical to the one it received when you used the word processor. And when you paste,
the Paste command that the OS receives from the browser is the same one it received from the
word processor. Thus, developers of these two applications did not need to program the copy
and paste operations; they only needed to know how their programs must call up these
operations from the OS.
In addition to performing input and output services and controlling the CPU, many OSs
perform accounting and statistical jobs, including recording times when a user logs on and logs
off, the number of seconds the operator used the CPU in every session, and the number of pages
a user printed. Some OSs also perform utilities such as hardware diagnostics, file comparison,
file sorting, and the like. However, not all OSs provide all the utilities that might be necessary,
in which case special utility programs must be used. Operating systems also include a number of
security functions, such as the ability to set user passwords and restrict access to files and
computer resources.
Operating System Functions
Operating systems provide several services, the most important of which is system management.
System management refers to the efficient allocation of hardware resources to applications and
includes tasks such as prompting the user for certain actions, allocating RAM locations for
software and data, instructing the CPU to run or stop, allocating CPU time to different programs
running at the same time, and instructing co-processors and peripheral equipment.
User Interface
An important part of the OS is the user interface. A graphical user interface (GUI)
makes the use of the computer intuitive and easier to learn. The interface takes the form of easy-
to-understand frames, icons, and menus. Users find it helpful to have most of the interface
features identical regardless of the application they use, unless the application requires an
interface element for a unique feature.
Memory Allocation
One of the most important functions of an operating system is memory
management, especially for RAM—the memory where data and program code must reside before
being executed. Ideally, an entire application and all the data it processes reside in RAM until
© Cengage Learning 2015
166
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
processing ends. However, when many applications are open concurrently, or when applications
and data pools exceed the computer’s RAM capacity, the operating system may use virtual
memory. Virtual memory lets the user proceed as if significantly more RAM were available
than really exists. Virtual memory uses the hard disk as an extension of RAM. A special module
of the OS continually detects which parts of the application program are used frequently. The
OS keeps these parts in RAM while leaving on the disk the least frequently used parts.
Professionals call this activity “page swapping”—“pages” are program parts of equal size that the
OS swaps between RAM and the disk, and the space on disk used as memory is called “swap
space.” Because hard disks are slower than RAM, opening many applications at the same time
may reduce the speed at which programs are running. However, virtual memory enables
concurrent use of many and large programs without need to purchase more RAM, which is
significantly more expensive than disk memory.
Plug and Play
A good operating system should also facilitate fairly simple changes to hardware
configuration. When a new device, such as an external hard disk, DVD burner, external
communication device, or joystick, is attached to a computer, the operating system’s job is to
recognize the new attachment and its function. If the OS can do so (without your intervention)
immediately after you attach the device, it is a plug-and-play (PnP) OS, and the device, too,
is referred to as a plug-and-play device. To do so, the operating system must have access to the
attached device’s driver. A driver is the software that enables the OS to control a device, either
one installed inside the computer (such as a second video card) or an external device such as a
flash memory drive. Thus, a true PnP OS, such as Windows 8 or Mac OS X, includes the drivers
for many devices, or at least is fully compatible with a driver that is installed either from a disc
or after it is downloaded from the web. In recent years, almost all external devices have been
built to attach to a computer through a USB port. (USB ports were discussed in Chapter 4,
“Business Hardware.”)
Increasing Services from OSs
The trend in OS development is to incorporate more and more
services that used to be provided by separate software. These services include database
management, networking, and security. For instance, users now expect an OS to perform such
security measures as tracking account numbers and passwords, controlling access to files and
programs, and protecting the computer against viruses. OSs also check for access codes to ensure
that only authorized users can access the computer. Modern operating systems provide
networking functions previously handled by separate programs.
Current Operating Systems
As mentioned earlier, operating systems are designed to work with
a particular microprocessor; consequently, different computers and types of microprocessors
use different OSs. While specific operating systems exist for supercomputers, mainframe
computers, midrange computers, and handheld computers, most people use a personal
computer (PC) operating system. Popular operating systems for PCs include Windows, Linux,
and Mac OS. Smartphones and tablets have their own operating systems geared toward
the mobile environment, such as Apple iOS, Google Android, and Microsoft Windows RT.
Figure 5.8 provides a list of popular operating systems. Some may come bundled with other
applications. For example, i5/OS (formerly, OS/400) comes with powerful DB2 database
management systems.
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
167
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
F I G U R E 5.8
Popular operating
systems for various
hardware platforms
Typically run on…
Mainframe
Name
OS Developer
z/OS (zSeries)
Clearpath OS2200
IBM
Unisys
Midrange
i5/OS
Solaris
IBM
Sun Microsystems
Personal
Computers
Windows
Linux (Fedora, Red Hat, Smallfoot)
OS X
BSD
Microsoft
Various
Apple
FreeBSD
Servers
Microsoft Server 2012
HP‐UX 11i
Unix
Microsoft
HP
Bell Labs (original
developer) with various
Unix‐like OSs derived by
others
Tablets
iOS (iPad)
Microsoft RT (Surface)
Android (various)
Apple
Microsoft
Google
Smartphones
Blackberry OS
iOS
Windows Phone
Jelly Bean, Ice Cream Sandwich
Blackberry
Apple
Microsoft
Android, Inc (original
developer, now Google),
licensed under Apache
license
One OS that has grown in popularity is Linux, which can be obtained free of charge. Linux
is based on UNIX, an operating system developed by AT&T Bell Labs in 1969 to run on
midrange computers, and for 10 years was distributed free of charge. Different companies and
individuals modified UNIX, developing variations of the OS such as Linux (developed by Linus
Torvalds and others) and Solaris (developed by Sun Microsystems). Linux and other “open
source” software is discussed in the next section.
One of the most important qualities of an OS is its stability. A stable OS does not cause the
computer to freeze or produce error messages. It is expected to continue to function even if the
user makes a mistake, in which case it should gracefully notify the user what happened and give
an opportunity to resolve the problem, rather than stop functioning. Early versions of Windows
were notoriously unstable. Although mishaps do occur with later versions of Windows, they are
significantly more stable. OSs based on UNIX are known to be highly stable, and their stability
is the main reason for their popularity, especially for running servers. Mac OS X versions are
based on UNIX. Linux, too, is considered to be very stable.
Although Mac OS is installed on fewer than 10 percent of the world’s computers, its share is
growing (Anonymous, 2013b). From the start, Mac operating systems have been more intuitive
and user-friendly than Windows operating systems. In many respects they set the standards that
Windows OSs later followed. Many current popular applications, such as Excel, were first
designed for the Mac OS, and only later adapted for Windows, when the latter provided user
interfaces similar to those of the Mac OS. Mobile operating systems are also steadily increasing
their share of the OS marketplace.
© Cengage Learning 2015
168
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Other System Software
While operating systems are the most prevalent type of system software, other types of system
programs include compilers and interpreters (discussed previously), communications software,
and utilities. Some people also include in this class database management systems, which are
discussed in Chapter 7, “Databases and Data Warehouses.”
Communications software supports transmission and reception of data across computer
networks. We discuss networking and telecommunications in Chapter 6, “Business Networks and
Telecommunications.” Utilities include programs that enhance the performance of computers,
such as Symantec’s Norton 360, which checks PCs for inefficiencies and fixes them. It also
includes online backup facilities. Utilities also include antivirus programs, firewalls, and other
programs that detect and remove unwanted files and applications, such as cookies and spyware,
or block data from being transmitted into or out of a networked computer. We discuss these
topics in Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise,” and Chapter 14, “Risks, Security, and
Disaster Recovery.”
Open Source Software
The great majority of business and individual software is proprietary, that is, software that is
developed and sold for profit. The developers of proprietary software do not make the
source code of their software public. The developer retains the rights to the software. In most
cases you do not actually own the copies of applications that you purchase; you only
purchase licenses to use those applications. In contrast to proprietary software, some
programmers freely contribute to the development of a growing number of computer
programs not for profit. The developers of open source software can obtain the source code
free of charge, usually on the web. Anyone who can contribute features or fix bugs is invited
to do so. Anyone who wishes to download the latest version can do so free of charge. An
open source program can be developed by a random group of programmers, rather than by a
single company. Programmers share an application’s basic code, find its weaknesses, debug it,
and contribute new pieces. This process might yield better results than the traditional
“closed” process of proprietary software, because so many talented programmers continuously
try to show their prowess in improving the program. Some historians find the beginning of
the open source “movement” in people such as Richard Stallman and his allies in the Free
Software Foundation, who believe that software should be as free as the air we breathe and
never sold for money.
The advantages of open source software over proprietary software are clear: the software has
fewer bugs because thousands of independent programmers review the code, and it can offer
more innovative features by incorporating ideas from a diverse set of experts from different
countries and cultures who collaborate. The motive for developing and improving open source
software is not monetary, but rather the satisfaction of solving programming problems and the
recognition of one’s contribution. Programmers who improve such software do it for fame and
recognition by their peers the world over. They collaborate mainly via the Internet. They post
patches of code that improve current code, or add extensions and plug-ins to enhance
functionality of an application. These extensions are free for all to download and use. The major
disadvantage is that development and support depend on the continued effort of an army of
volunteers.
A recent study conducted by BearingPoint reveals that the critical drivers for adopting open-
source software focus on competitive differentiation, reduced deployment cost, increased
customization agility, and avoiding software vendor lock-in (Anonymous, 2012). The pressure to
reduce costs in a competitive environment has forced banks and financial services businesses to
take a second look at open source software, driving IT costs downward (Yeaton, 2013).
The need for agile software development with the transition to consumer-focused platforms
such as the web and mobile, only heighten the popularity of open source software. The
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
169
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
expanding focus on customer engagement by businesses requires a development agility that can
be provided by open source software. Acquia believes that implementing social publishing using
open source technology provides that agility. Customer engagement functions such as blogs,
wikis, forums, and other user-generated content can be implemented more cost effectively using
open source software. A cost savings of 75-85 percent over proprietary software alternatives can
be realized (Anonymous, 2011).
For all of the advantages of implementing open source software, there are several issues to
consider
before
adoption.
The
advantages
of
reduced
costs
and
increased
return
on
investment (ROI) are losing relevance. A Computerworld study found that 42 percent of
organizations using open source software did not calculate ROI and total costs (Collett, 2011).
A 2010 study by Accenture found that quality, reliability, and security were rationales for
selecting open source software. Organizations are focusing on the value that can be achieved
by adopting an open source environment. Institutional issues such as training and help desk
costs
are
also
important
factors.
Open
source
software
includes
hundreds
of
useful
applications, such as the popular web browser Mozilla Firefox, the content-management
system Drupal, the relational database management system MySQL, and the powerful
programming language PERL (Practical Extraction and Report Language). The OpenOffice.org
suite, which can be freely downloaded at www.openoffice.org, provides an alternative to
Microsoft’s Office suite of productivity applications. With the OpenOffice.org suite, users can
create
3-D
graphical
designs,
multimedia
presentations,
documents,
spreadsheets,
and
databases.
OpenOffice.org provides
free application software
to complete various
productivity tasks
Linux is the best known open source operating system. A Finnish graduate student named
Linus Torvalds developed it for his own use, but he has never claimed rights to the software.
Hundreds of programmers have contributed code to Linux. Over time, Linux evolved into many
different variants, some of which are free, such as Ubuntu, Red Hat Fedora, and Smallfoot, while
others such as Red Hat Enterprise Edition and SUSE charge for additional interface features and
support services. Linux has become the OS of choice of many Internet service providers to run
their Internet servers. The major disadvantage of using Linux is the limited number of
applications that can run on it, compared with the Windows platform.
Reputable software and hardware companies including IBM, Intel, Hewlett-Packard (HP), and
Dell have committed to supporting Linux by developing applications that run on it. A growing
Courtesy of Microsoft, Inc.
170
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
number of corporations have adopted it, including Burlington Coat Factory, Tommy Hilfiger,
and Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A. Many major brokerage houses on Wall Street use Linux, including
the New York Stock Exchange. Linux is popular not only because it is stable, but because it is
versatile: it can run on mainframe computers, PCs, handhelds, and electronic devices. The oil
company Amerada Hess uses Linux on a supercomputer to help find oil and gas deposits. Pixar
Animation Studios has used Linux machines to render digital animated characters. TiVo, the
television recording device, runs on Linux. So do many game consoles and television sets that
are connected to the Internet. A version of Linux, Linux Mobile, operates on some handheld
computers and mobile phones.
While many versions of Linux can be downloaded free of charge from the web, most firms
prefer to purchase a packaged version. Companies such as Novell, Red Hat, and VA Software sell
the software and promise technical support. Usually, contracts also include software updates.
Companies such as IBM and HP have made millions of dollars by bundling Linux with other
system software and business applications, such as database management systems.
Software Licensing
The next time you “purchase” software, read carefully the “purchase” contract. You might be
surprised to learn that you do not own the software you have just obtained. As noted earlier,
most of the software that organizations and individuals obtain is not purchased; it is licensed.
The
client
receives a
software
license,
limited
permission
to
use
the
software,
either
indefinitely or for a set time. When the use is time-limited, the client pays annual license fees.
The only exceptions to this rule occur when an adopter uses its own employees to develop the
software, when it hires the work of a software development firm, or when the adopter uses
software developed by people who explicitly allow the user to change the software and sell the
product.
Software Licensing Models
Software licensing comes in several models. The permissive model allows anyone to use, modify,
and make the software into a product that can be sold or licensed for profit. The Berkeley
Software Distribution (BSD) UNIX operating system is an example of software under this model.
Another is the General Public License (GPL), which permits anyone to use, modify, and make
applications with the code, but not to use it in proprietary products for sale or licensing. This is
the approach taken by the Free Software Foundation. Much of the software we use is proprietary,
which means the code is owned by someone who has the right to sell or license it to us.
POINT OF
INTEREST
The eBay & Skype Licensing Battle
When Internet auctioneer giant eBay, Inc. bought Skype in 2005, some of the core software to run its
Internet-calling service remained with the Skype founders so the founders could keep leverage. So in
2009 when eBay began designing new software to run the service to avoid a licensing dispute with the
founders, the founders used their leverage and threatened to withdraw all the underlying technology.
eBay sued the founders to prevent them from pulling the technology. To complicate the matter, eBay put
Skype up for sale in the middle of this litigation. The final result gave 14 percent of Skype back to the
founders and spun Skype off into its own company, which owned the key technology that started the
whole litigation in the first place. In 2011, Microsoft bought Skype for $8.5 billion.
Source: Hartley, M. (2009). EBay builds its own software for Skype; Licensing dispute, National Post;
Stone, B. (2009, Nov 07). Founders Win a Piece Of Skype From eBay, New York Times, p. B.3.
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
171
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Microsoft, SAP, Oracle, and all other for-profit organizations that develop software own their
software and license it. Such licensing takes several forms, such as a fee per user per year, or a site
license for a limited or unlimited use regardless of how many users use the software. The latter
type of agreement is sometimes signed between a software vendor and a higher-education
institution.
Software as a Service
One alternative to software licensing is for organizations to develop their own software, either in-
house or outsourced to technical professionals. Such software would be owned by the company
free from licensing. However, as the strategic and operational needs of the organization change,
the application software used to process its activities also needs to be modified. Therefore, the
maintenance and support of the organization’s application software must be provided by
information technology professionals at a significant cost to the organization.
Recently, another variation of software licensing has become very popular with businesses
from small to large. The software as a service (SaaS) model provides application software
developed and maintained by a third-party provider and offered to organizations for a recurring
fee. In a manner similar to leasing a car, the third-party, sometimes called an application service
provider
(ASP),
develops
and
maintains
the
software
on
their
hardware.
All
software
maintenance, support, and hardware operations are provided by the ASP and included in the
monthly fee.
Businesses access SaaS through network connections between their locations and the SaaS
software provider. Instead of processing and storing the organization’s transactions on their local
computers, data processing and software execution is processed in a cloud environment through
a thin client using a standard web browser. The thin client is a low-level personal computer
system designed only to initiate the connection to the SaaS provider and operate the software
remotely.
This contemporary software delivery method reduces the organization’s application software
development cost by amortization in the monthly leasing fees. Therefore, the initial cost is
significantly reduced, and the software is operational immediately with SaaS. In addition,
maintenance and support of any software modifications are handled by the SaaS provider, not
by the business. One of the disadvantages of SaaS is that businesses are not able to customize
the software to their specific needs. Using the SaaS software delivery model requires the use of
the mainstream product. While SaaS can offer some customization, the inherent operation and
“mechanics” of the software have been developed to appeal to a mass market.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Wall Street’s Adoption of SaaS
The financial sector is the second largest industry user of software as a service or SaaS, only following
the technology sector. However, while many smaller firms have fully embraced SaaS, many larger firms
are hesitant to adopt. Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch, and Citibank use hosted customer relationship man-
agement (CRM). They are reluctant to rely on hosted software for more complex and time-sensitive appli-
cations because of the enormity of their databases and their security concerns. Larger firms do not
experience the same ease of adoption level as smaller firms because smaller firms have a much easier
time with the integration of data from different applications. Despite the fact SaaS offerings can integrate
data with other programs, they run more efficiently when data is stored by the SaaS provider’s data
center.
Source: Crosman, P. (2008, 2010-06-07). SaaS Gains Street Traction—Providers are pitching Software-
as-a-Service as a universal answer to application needs. But will Wall Street firms adopt SaaS beyond
CRM?, Wall Street & Technology, p. 37.
172
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Considerations for Packaged Software
When an application is developed especially for an organization, specific program goals and
custom requirements are considered during the development process. Such requirements include
business needs, organizational culture needs, the need to interface with other systems, and
performance issues, such as response time. However, organizations find ways to satisfy many
needs with ready-made software as well. Figure 5.9 summarizes important factors and outlines
what you should look for when purchasing software.
Software Piracy
The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department purchased a
license to install software offered by DataWall, Inc. The license
allowed the department to install 3,700 copies of the software,
but it installed 6,000 copies. The department claimed that the
number of employees using the software concurrently could not
exceed 3,700. The sheriff’s department was sued. An appellate
court did not accept the department’s argument. The defendant
ended up paying over $750,000 in fines and attorney fees.
Software piracy, the illegal copying of software, is probably
one of the most pervasive crimes. Software piracy has several
forms: making copies from a single paid copy of the software;
using the Internet to download software from a website without
paying for it, or copying software through use of peer-to-peer
applications; using one licensed copy to install an application on
multiple computers; taking advantage of upgrade offers without
having paid for a legal copy of the updated version; using for
commercial purposes copies that were acquired with discounts
for home or educational use; and using at home a copy that was
purchased by an employer under a license to use only on the
employer’s premises. The software industry established two
organizations
to
protect
software
developers
from
piracy:
Business Software Alliance (BSA) and the Software & Information
Industry Association (SIIA). The two organizations were established
by major software companies and are supported by the majority of
the world’s software development firms. Both organizations have
websites that encourage everyone to report pirated software.
Occasionally, the organizations sponsor studies that estimate the
proportion and financial damage that piracy causes in various
world regions.
As the amount of software sold on the market grows, so do
the estimated losses that the software industry suffers from
piracy. In the 1980s and 1990s, the global financial damage
was estimated at $10–$12 billion annually. A study completed
by the Business Software Alliance estimates the cost of
unlicensed software at $63 billion in 2011, up 8 percent from
2010. Bootleg software increased by 12 percent in the Asia
Pacific region to a record of $21 billion. The study reported
that there is a significant difference relating to the average
piracy rates between emerging and mature markets; 68
percent to 42 percent respectively. A spokesperson for BSA
explained that piracy deprives local governments of tax
revenue,
costs
jobs
in
the
technology
supply
chain
(developers, distributors, retailers), and cripples local software
companies.
While some people believe that software piracy saves
money, it can increase costs beyond litigation and fines. Pirated
software can be infested with malware or viruses. In a study
completed by IDC and commissioned by Microsoft, infected
software was found in 30 percent of businesses. The global
study studied 270 websites and networks and interviewed over
250 information technology managers. The study estimates that
consumers could spend 1.5 billion hours and $22 billion while the
cost to businesses globally is $114 billion.
The cost of software piracy extends beyond the cost of
virus-embedded software. In May 2013, a U.S. company
agreed to pay a $115 thousand fine to settle a case of
unlicensed software copies from four software companies.
Unlicensed
software
can
subject
businesses
to
costs
associated with litigation, fines, and settlements,
not to
mention any adverse publicity that can arise from the offense.
Critics question the methods used to reach these estimates.
Furthermore, they say that even if the estimates of pirated
software are correct, the conclusions are exaggerated, because
not all who pirated software would necessarily acquire it if they
had to pay for it. Thus, if everybody was forced to pay for the
software, the software companies would not collect the entire
worth of installed software, but much less. Still, it is reasonable
to assume that many pirates actually needed the software, and
would pay for it had piracy not existed.
Laws in most countries treat software the same way as
they do books, DVD movies, and other types of intellectual
property: copies (except for one copy of the software for
archival purposes) may not be made without permission of the
copyright or patent holder. Yet, the crime is pervasive because
it is easy to commit and rarely is punished.
Sources: Anonymous. (2012, 2012-07-24). Software piracy tab sur-
passes $63 billion. Network World, 29, p. 10; Anonymous. (2013,
2013-03-13). Microsoft Corporation: Software Piracy Costs Billions
in Time, Money for Consumers and Businesses, Computer Weekly
News, p. 3933.
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
173
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
F I G U R E 5.9
Sample software
evaluation form
Factor
What to Look For
Score
Fitness for purpose
Try to maximize the number of needs satisfied.
_________
Ease of learning to use
The shorter the learning time, the better.
_________
Ease of use
The easier a program is to use, the better.
Try to minimize the number of commands that 
need to be memorized.
The more intuitive the icons, the better.
_________
Compatibility with 
Try to maximize compatibility with related software 
other software
and with other operating systems.
Try to maximize portability of data and output to 
other programs.
_________
Reputation of vendor
Use professional contacts and references to gather
background information on the vendor.
Be sure the vendor can deliver what it promises.
Be sure the vendor stands by its pricing.
_________
Ask references about their experience.
Look for knowledgeable staff on Web and
phone support.
_________
Networking
Try to maximize ability of many computers to
share the software.
_________
Cost
Seek detailed pricing information.
Seek the best price, while maintaining quality
and performance.
Consider the total cost of ownership: annual license
                                                  fees, support cost, necessary hardware upgrades, and
                                                  other costs associated with use of the software.
_________
Availability and quality
of telephone and
online support
While Figure 5.9 provides a general framework for evaluating ready-made software, each item
might be augmented with further inquiry, depending on the program’s main purpose. For
example, potential buyers often test a word-processing program for features such as availability
of different fonts, dictionary size, response time to search operations, ability to create tables of
contents and indexes, and other features. Electronic spreadsheet programs are tested for speed of
recalculation of formulas, charting, and other features typical of this type of software. Webpage
development applications are tested for ease of creating various layouts and graphical designs, as
well as the ability to maintain desired template appearance and integrity of links among related
pages and associated media. Many trade journals and websites, such as CNET, PC World, and PC
Magazine, maintain labs in which they test competing applications. Experts test different
applications on the same computer and report the results.
When considering the selection of packaged software, it is important for businesses to
differentiate their needs versus “nice to haves.” This process does not suggest that important
business functions should be disregarded for the sake of purchasing a particular software package.
However, in the fast-paced competitive environment of evolving business models, reducing the
time to implement information technology can have a positive effect on businesses and give them
a competitive edge. Just as the “time to market” is important in a new product release, so is the
implementation timeframe associated with new information technology initiatives.
The factors to be considered when purchasing large software packages such as ERP software
are significantly more complex. The purchasing organization must consider not only the cost of
the software, which is usually millions of dollars, but also the amount of time it will take to
implement the software, the cost of interrupting ongoing operations, the difficulty and cost of
modifying the software for the organization’s specific needs, and many other issues.
© Cengage Learning 2015
174
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Summary
●
“Software” is the collective term for computer pro-
grams, which are sets of instructions to computer
hardware.
●
Software is classified into two general categories.
System
software
manages
computer
resources,
such as CPU time and memory allocation, and carries
out routine operations, such as translation and data
communication. Application software is developed
specifically to satisfy some business need, such as
payroll or market analysis. Application software can
include programs that carry out narrowly focused
tasks,
or
general-purpose
applications,
such
as
spreadsheets and word processors.
●
To develop software, programmers use programming
languages and software development tools. Third-
generation languages (3GLs) are more English-like
than machine language and assembly languages,
and allow more productive programming, meaning
that they require less time to develop the same code.
Fourth-generation languages (4GLs) are even more
English-like and provide many preprogrammed func-
tions. Object-oriented programming (OOP) languages
facilitate creation of reusable objects, which are data
encapsulated along with the procedures that manipu-
late them. Visual programming languages help pro-
grammers develop code by using icons and other
graphics while code is developed automatically by
manipulating the graphics.
●
As an increasing amount of software is linked to the
Internet, many software tools have been created espe-
cially for development of webpages and the software
that links webpages with organizational information
resources, such as databases. They include program-
ming languages such as Java, JavaScript, and PHP,
and webpage development packages. Java and other
languages for the web produce code that runs on vari-
ous computers and therefore is very useful for the web.
●
All code written in a programming language other
than machine language must be translated into
machine
language
code
by
special
programs,
either compilers or interpreters. The translation
creates object code from the source code. Software
offered for sale is usually object code.
●
Some application programs are custom-designed,
but many are packaged. The majority of packaged
applications are purchased off the shelf, although
“off the shelf” might actually mean downloading
the application through the Internet.
●
Office productivity tools help workers accomplish more
in less time. The most pervasive of these tools include
word processors, spreadsheets, presentation tools, file
and database management software, graphics pro-
grams, desktop publishing tools, and project manage-
ment tools. Some of them are offered as suites.
●
Hypermedia and multimedia technologies are useful
tools for training, education, research, and business.
●
Groupware combines hypermedia and multimedia
with web technologies to help people in separate
locations collaborate in their work.
●
Three-dimensional
geographic
software
helps
model city blocks and campuses. Combined with
other information, it is useful in city service plan-
ning and real estate management.
●
A growing number of applications are developed
using web programming languages and software
tools such as those included in Microsoft .NET.
The applications support web services and access
to information resources from web browsers.
●
The most important type of system software is operat-
ing systems, also referred to as “platforms.” Operating
systems carry out an ever-growing number of func-
tions, and include networking and security features.
System software also includes utility programs.
●
Open source software is being adopted by a growing
number of businesses and governments. The source
code and its documentation are open to all to review
and improve. Open source applications and system
software can be downloaded from the web. Program-
mers continually improve the code, not for monetary
remuneration, but to prove their programming prow-
ess and gain the appreciation of the users. This prac-
tice yielded the powerful operating system Linux as
well as hundreds of useful applications.
●
Almost all software is licensed. The user purchases
or agrees that they have the right to use the soft-
ware for a limited time or indefinitely, but does not
own the software. Software as a Service (SaaS) is
an alternative to traditional software licensing in
which application software is developed and main-
tained by a third-party provider and offered to orga-
nizations for a recurring fee.
●
Businesses should follow a systematic evaluation to
determine the suitability of ready-made software to
their needs. Consideration of software includes many
factors, among which are fitness for purpose, ease of
learning to use, ease of use, reputation of the vendor,
and expected quality of support from the vendor.
●
While software prices have decreased over the
years, software piracy is still a problem. The latest
estimate of the cost of software piracy is $114 billion.
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
175
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Michael, Liz, and Tyler have been focused on the
renovations
and
the
move
to
the
new
location.
Currently, the computer systems are used to interact
with
the
restaurant
point-of-sale
system
for
management
reporting
and
system
administration
functions. With their new computer system, Tyler
believes that they can do more, especially in the area of
operations.
He
knows
that
the
operations
of
the
restaurant should focus on more than simply the
system that places the orders from customers, sends
the orders to the kitchen, and prints the guest checks. The
point-of-sale system must store important data that could
be used by other functions to operate the business.
What Is Your Advice?
1. What types of software are needed by Kimball’s to
assist them with their operations? What applica-
tion software do you believe would complement
their point-of-sale system?
2. Research various restaurant point-of-sale systems.
Can
Kimball’s
use
any
packaged
productivity
software or integrate with this software to help
manage the restaurant?
3. Tyler has heard a great deal about the differences
between Windows and Mac-based software for
graphics and artistic work. Now that you have
two new Windows-based personal computers for
the restaurant, should you consider additional
hardware components or software to work on
their graphs needs?
New Perspectives
1. Liz is very cautious about using past information
for ordering food from suppliers. She never has
done that and the restaurant seems to be doing
well. Discuss your rationale with her relating to a
better approach to this activity.
2. What advice would you give to Tyler to help him
with the development of the initial website for the
new location? What would you suggest to help
with the marketing and promotion of the new
location (from previous chapters)?
3. Can you use the initial website design to help the
restaurant? Or do you think you need to scale up
to a larger website solution to gain effectiveness?
Key Terms
applet, 155
application, 150
application program interface
(API), 165
application software, 150
application-specific software, 158
assembly language, 151
compiler, 156
debugging, 152
driver, 167
general-purpose application
software, 158
graphical user interface (GUI),
155
groupware, 163
hypermedia, 160
interpreter, 156
machine language, 151
mashup, 161
multimedia software, 161
object code, 156
object-oriented programming
(OOP) language, 154
open source software, 169
operating system (OS), 165
packaged software, 158
plug-and-play (PnP), 167
programming, 150
programming language, 151
proprietary software, 169
software, 150
software as a service (SaaS),
172
source code, 156
suite, 159
system software, 150
utilities, 166
virtual memory, 167
visual programming language,
153
webpage authoring tools, 161
176
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Review Questions
1. What are the most popular operating systems
for mainframe computers? Personal
computers?
2. If you were going to develop a new mobile
application for the Android, what are the various
software development kits that you would
consider?
3. The use of 4GLs is said to contribute to program-
mer productivity. How so?
4. What is multimedia? Give five examples of how
this technology can be used in training, customer
service, and education.
5. With so many ready-made software packages
available, why do some companies commission
software development projects?
6. Office applications are often called productivity
tools. Why?
7. Electronic spreadsheets are great tools for
modeling. Give an example of a model that
shows gradual growth of a phenomenon and
describe how you would implement it in a
spreadsheet.
8. What are the different media in multimedia?
9. What is the importance of 3-D geographic soft-
ware? For which types of organizations is it
useful?
10. What is the difference between system software
and application software?
11. What are the advantages of developing a website
using a tool such as Artisteer or Joomla? Are
there any disadvantages?
12. Linux is a free and stable operating system, which
is a great advantage. What are the disadvantages
of adopting it?
13. What is the difference between an interpreter and
a compiler?
14. To a compiler or interpreter any logic is legiti-
mate, even if it results in a bad program. Why
can’t compilers and interpreters detect logic
errors in a program?
15. What are the main elements to consider when pur-
chasing ready-made software for an organization?
16. What is open source software? To what does the
word “source” refer?
17. Give three reasons why Linux has become a
popular server operating system.
Discussion Questions
18. Why has the trend been to purchase software
rather than have it tailor-made for organizations?
19. Think of a standard application such as a payroll
system. What might drive an organization to
develop its own payroll application rather than
purchase a ready-made application?
20. Practically all operating systems that run on PCs
have graphical user interfaces. What additional
(or different) elements would you like to see in
operating systems and applications to make them
more intuitive?
21. A decision to adopt Linux or another open
source operating system is not an easy one for
IS managers. What are their concerns? (Hint:
Think of the relationships between OSs and
applications.)
22. Some companies sell open source software, such
as Linux. Companies and many individuals buy
the software rather than download it free of
charge. Why? Would you buy such software or
simply download it from the web?
23. Widespread free application software, such as
OpenOffice.org, that runs on a variety of OSs, as
well as web-based applications such as Google
Drive, threatens to eat into Microsoft’s potential
revenue. Why?
24. The more an application takes advantage of a
GUI, the more suitable it is for international use.
How so?
25. Increasingly accurate voice recognition software
and sophisticated software that can interpret
commands in natural language are bringing us
closer to the days of operating a computer by
speaking to it. Would you rather speak to a com-
puter than use a keyboard, mouse, or some other
input device? Why or why not?
26. Why is software piracy so pervasive? What are
your innovative ideas to reduce this problem?
27. Most pressure to legislate and enforce copyright
laws for software has come from North America
and Western Europe and not from other parts of
the world. Why?
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
177
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
28. Do you think open source software will proliferate
or disappear?
29. If you were so proficient in programming lan-
guages that you could improve open source code
(such as the Linux operating system, the Firefox
browser, or any of hundreds of applications),
would you do it for no monetary compensation?
Why or why not?
30. In what ways can young people who seek IT
careers benefit by participating in improving open
source software?
31. Some observers compare open source software
to water. Both the software and water are free,
but some companies manage to generate reve-
nue from selling them. How?
Applying Concepts
32. HeadHunter, Inc., is a new personnel recruiting
and placement company. The well-established
and cash-rich management consulting company
that founded HeadHunter is intent on providing
adequate financial resources for the new firm to
acquire information systems. HeadHunter has
opened offices in eight major U.S. cities and two
European cities.
Recruiting specialists exchange written corre-
spondence with prospective clients, both man-
agers looking for new positions and companies
that might hire them. Records of both recruits and
client companies must be kept and updated. All
10 branches should be able to exchange infor-
mation in real time to maximize the potential
markets on both continents. HeadHunter
professionals will often travel to make presenta-
tions before human resource managers and other
executives.
The majority of HeadHunter’s own personnel are
college graduates who lack programming skills.
HeadHunter management would like to adopt
software that is easy to learn and use.
a. List the types of software the firm needs, both
system software and applications.
b. Research trade journals and online sources.
Suggest specific software packages for the
firm.
c. Develop an evaluation matrix (as shown in
Figure 5.9) for each software package
alternative.
Hands-On Activities
33. Honest Abe and Cars R Us are two fiercely com-
petitive car dealerships. Recently, both started to
sell Sniper Hybrid, a new model from Green
Motors. Dealers’ cost of the car is $19,600. Green
Motors pays a dealership $300 for each car sold,
and the dealership also keeps whatever markup it
adds to the cost. Both dealers start selling the car
at the price of $20,600.
Immediately after the two dealerships started to
offer the car, each decided to lower the price until
the other dealership stopped selling the car.
However, their price reduction policies differed.
Honest Abe’s policy is as follows: at the end of
each day, the company sets the price for the next
day at the competitor’s price minus $50. Cars R
Us’s policy is the following: at the end of each
day, the company sets the price for the next day
at the competitor’s price minus one percent.
Each dealership decided to stop selling the car
as soon as it sells a car at a loss instead of a
profit.
Using a spreadsheet application, enter the initial
numbers and build a model that will help you
answer the following questions:
a. Which dealer will stop selling the car first?
b. How many days after it starts to sell the car will
this dealer stop selling it?
c. How much money will this dealer lose per car
on the first day it loses money on this car?
d. If the Honest Abe changes his price reduction
to $25, how will this change the results?
178
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Team Activities
34. Team up with other students from the class. Each
student must select a personal desktop computer,
tablet, or a laptop to analyze. Create a group on
Wiggio.com with yourself and your teammates.
Create a folder for each of the devices. Within
each folder create one spreadsheet and one doc-
ument. In the spreadsheet, create a table that
shows the price, specifications, brand, and fea-
tures. In the document, write a short rationale of
the device you chose (2-3 paragraphs) based on
the information from the spreadsheet.
Use Wiggio’s team environment to edit and
review your teammates’ work. Select a competing
device researched by one of your teammates.
a. Download and edit their spreadsheet. Create
additional columns to the right to provide your
evaluation of their device using the same
evaluation criteria. Upload your new version of
the spreadsheet to their folder.
b. Download and edit their document. Compile a
short narrative that compares your device to
their selection. Update your new version of the
document to their folder.
c. Add your professor to the group so he/she can
see the previous versions of the documents
and spreadsheets and grade your work.
At the end of the assignment, jointly write a
1-2-page response to the Team Assignment
answering the following questions:
a. How did Wiggio help your group during this
activity?
b. What features of Wiggio were most useful?
Least useful?
c. What did you think of groupware? How did
using groupware affect the completion of this
assignment?
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
179
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART2
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Less May Be More
Sometimes, the best is the worst enemy of the good.
In software, too much sophistication may alienate
customers instead of improve service. Managers at
one successful business learned this the hard way.
Citizens National Bank of Texas has a long history.
It was established in Waxahachie, Texas, in 1868, and
is still privately held. The bank has 16 offices. It does
not try to compete with big banks, but rather caters to
small communities of 500–25,000, and emphasizes
friendly customer service. The extra care has paid off:
the bank enjoys two to two and a half cross-sales per
customer, a ratio considered high in banking. This
means
that,
on
average,
each
customer
has
purchased
more
than
two
products,
such
as
a
checking account, savings account, or home loan.
Banks’ profitability is highly related to the number of
services the same customer purchases. Citizens’ best
customers use six or seven products.
For
many
years
the
bank
tracked
customer
contacts
manually.
Relationship
bankers—as
the
bank’s salespeople are called—wrote down on paper
the details of contacts. Every Monday, management
received a sales report covering the previous week
and the calls each banker was going to make that
week. With 50,000 customers and many prospective
ones, this information soon became reams of paper.
The documents contained good information, but the
information was difficult to glean and manage.
In
2001,
management
decided
to
install
a
customer relationship management (CRM) system.
The product chosen was a CRM package from Siebel
Systems
(which
was
later
acquired
by
Oracle).
Citizens National hoped to enable the CEO and the
16
relationship
bankers
to
improve
tracking
of
prospective customers and increase the number of
contacts the bankers made.
The bank hired a local consulting firm that
specializes
in
installing
software
for
small
businesses.
The
cost
of
the
new
software
was
$150,000. Installing it and adapting it to the bankers’
needs cost another $350,000. Siebel’s CRM software
is recognized as very good, but it was overkill for the
bankers,
who
were
typically
old-fashioned
sales-
people not keen on using technology. The system
has many features that the bankers did not need,
and lacked simple features that they did need. It was
too sophisticated for Citizens’ simple handling of
customers. Much of the adaptation time was spent
turning off unused features.
Large companies often use CRM systems to set up
customer support cases, which are files with details of
complaints
and
how
they
were
resolved,
from
beginning to end. The bank did not need this function.
When customers call to complain, the call center
handles the complaint immediately, or channels it to
the appropriate officer for immediate resolution. If a
customer needs a new checkbook, the call center sends
an email message to the proper bank worker who
handles checkbook orders. The request for the activity
is scheduled, and the bank worker handles such
requests in the order in which they come in. The new
system did not support this simple way of operation.
The bankers found navigating the new system
challenging.
Moving
from
a
window
to
another
relevant window was not intuitive, and the bankers
wasted much time. They expected to see the typical
opportunities to sell more services to a customer
listed in the record of the customer. For example,
they expected to see an opportunity to offer the
customer a business loan listed. However, such
opportunities must be entered by the system’s users
when the customer record is set up.
Different relationships with the same customer
might be on different screens. The bankers were
confused, and could not get a good sense of all the
relationships a customer might have with the bank
(such as which services the customer used or a
history of complaints the customer had). They had to
flip
screens
constantly.
The
relationships
were
organized in a manner inconvenient to the bankers.
A
consultant
that
specializes
in
CRM
systems
observed that Siebel’s system had everything, which
is typically too much for small businesses. These
clients, he said, usually lose the forest for the trees.
Another
challenge
was
integrating
Siebel’s
software with Citizens’ banking software. Like many
small and medium size banks, it uses Kirchman
Bankway. The
software helps
process and
track
deposits,
loans,
and
trust
accounts.
While
the
Kirchman software keeps customer last and first
name in a single field in its database, Siebel’s
systems keeps them in two separate fields. This and
other differences made integration of the systems
time-consuming. The bankers did not expect the
integration time to be so long. After three years,
Citizens’ management decided to abandon Siebel’s
system. The bank’s consulting firm was committed
to automating CRM at the bank.
As shown in the previous example, information
technology is not always a successful initiative for
business
organizations.
The
goal
of
customer
relationship management software (CRM) is to find,
attract, and convert prospects to business customers
of an organization. In addition, it must be able to
retain its current customers as well as attempt to win
back customers it may have lost. Ultimately, this
180
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
software application can leverage its functionality to
achieve its goal while reducing marketing costs and
maintain quality customer service.
Investments
in
information
technology
for
effective customer relationship management must
focus on its ability to target the right customers to
prospect and encouraging these customers to adopt
a set of principles and actions to retain them for a
lifecycle of profitability. Notice that it is not simply to
“win” customers, but to gain profitable customers. An
intensive
approach
to
gain
these
customers
is
imperative. Research has shown that customers will
open 73 percent of their accounts within the first 90
days of the relationship. To gain wallet share and
customer loyalty, it’s important to tailor the “pitch”
based on their expectations. An effective CRM will
provide that guidance to offer the best products to a
prospective customer at the correct time.
An article focused on information technology
solutions
for
financial
institutions
(credit
unions)
suggests three important considerations for CRM
implementations:
1) The solution must fit your banking-specific needs.
2) The software must be easy to use.
3) The software should be integrated with your core
system.
The article states that businesses are set in an
environment
exhibiting
constant
change.
CRM
software, along with sales force automation software,
are evolving along with the changes in business
strategy
and
operations.
The
suggestions
above
provide insight that the software solution must allow
customization to the business needs. While the goal of
CRM is to maximize the wallet and market share, a
system which is complex or challenging to use will not
achieve its purpose. The human factor associated with
the ability to use the system is always a significant
factor on how its users interact with a new system.
The data maintained by CRM systems needs to
maintain a “360-degree view” of your relationship
with your customers. Ultimately, data gathered from
third-party sources as well as your core information
system must all remain synchronized and integrated
for
your
employees
to
develop
an
accurate
relationship with customers.
Sources: Bartholomew, D., “Why Citizens National Bank Threw
Out Siebel in Favor of Intuit’s QuickBase,” Baseline, February
26, 2007 (www.cnbwax.com), April 2007; Buhler, A., “CRM
Selection,” Credit Union Management, April 2012.
Thinking About the Case
1. What were the goals of installing CRM software?
2. A Siebel executive commented that the com-
pany’s CRM system does not fit the needs of all
clients. He noted that the clients need to decide if
they want an application or a tool kit. Research
the term “tool kit.” Is Siebel’s CRM system an
application or a tool kit? Explain why.
3. The bank’s president said that management
learned a lesson, and that the $500,000 spent on
the abandoned CRM system was tuition for that
education. What would you have done in the first
place to avoid this “tuition”? Use the three con-
siderations as the foundation of your analysis.
Investing in Automation for Efficiency
In turbulent economic times and competitive markets,
businesses
that
can
reduce
operating
costs
and
increase
resource
productivity
are
the
corporate
version of an Olympic silver medalist. If a business
expands its market share and/or sales revenue as well,
they should be awarded a gold medal. Medco and
Staples are two such organizations, gaining positive
achievements through investment in automation and
software. In businesses that distribute or manufacture
hard goods, it is important to move products from
distribution centers as efficiently and economically as
possible. New strategies and tactics are needed to
realize these goals.
One of the largest health-care companies in the
United States, Medco was a spin-off of Merck with $60
billion in revenues in 2009. Its managed pharmacy
benefits product provides services to about 20 percent
of
Americans.
Various
employers,
unions,
and
governmental agencies contract with Medco to fulfill
prescriptions for employees to keep them healthy
while reducing costs. Not a simple goal.
Medco knew that they could not expand their
business simply by hiring more pharmacy technicians
to fulfill prescriptions. These employees are highly paid
and are capable of providing more value than just
counting pills and closing a cap. Management knew
that a strategy capable of scalability was an important
component of their expansion. The company embarked
on an initiative to automate the prescription fulfillment
process from order to shipment.
Their new system was developed with over 1 million
lines of software code, capable of processing 1,500
database transactions per second. The confluence
between the patient database management system and
automated pharmacy dispensing formed the strategy for
the information technology infrastructure. Their two
fulfillment centers handle approximately 2,000 stock-
keeping units (SKUs), focusing on high-volume and
most-prescribed
drugs.
In
2007,
their
successful
automated fulfillment system and expanding business
created the need for a third fulfillment center.
In 2009, Medco fulfilled 103 million prescriptions
annually. However, the success story does not revolve
solely on the revenue and transactions, but on the
astonishingly
little
time
that
Medco
requires
to
CHAPTER 5
Business Software
181
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
process an order. Prescription transactions (received,
dispensed, packed, and loaded for shipment) are
completed in less than 25 minutes. Each order is
required to pass through 100 automated control
checkpoints during the lifecycle of the fulfillment
process.
Efficiency
and
speed
without
quality
controls for prescription orders would create both
liability and loss of business. Their engineering chief
noted “The worst thing we could do would be to
automate an error.”
Staples has become the world’s largest office
products company, growing from $2 billion to $24
billion
in
annual
sales
over
15
years.
Their
management and operational successes have led the
industry in profitability and are one of only three top
office products companies to realize a profit.
Customer
satisfaction
with
Staples’s
delivery
business became problematic in 2005. Their analysis
of the issues determined a direct correlation between
orders with errors and loss of customers. The cost of
new customer acquisition was lost with the inaccurate
or late delivery of customer orders. Ultimately, the
cost of rework and fulfilling an order correctly has
“significant economic value.”
A
complete
“out
of
the
box”
method
was
considered.
Instead
of
the
fulfillment
personnel
moving
toward
the
product,
why
not
have
the
product be brought toward the fulfillment personnel?
The operators were placed at stations at the perimeter
of the warehouse. Control software transports the
products to the operators using mobile robots. The
cycle times and labor requirements were reduced
through the entire warehouse activity process, from
receiving to shipping. Their pilot implementation was
extremely successful, reducing the order fulfillment
time by half and lowering the picking error rate.
Like
Medco,
Staples’s
new
system
can
be
adjusted according to demand and capacity assigned
to jobs based on need. In addition, the new system is
less demanding on its workers, with less walking and
lifting necessary to complete an order.
Source: Manrodt, K. B., Ogle, M., & Harrington, L. (2011). The
Case for Infrastructure Investment: Lessons from Medco and
Staples. Supply Chain Management Review, 15(5), 40–46.
Thinking About the Case
1. Each of these systems needed significant invest-
ment in resources and capital. What do you
believe was the rationale to justify the costs of
these systems? What types of quantitative sav-
ings can be documented to support this
rationale?
2. It is rather simplistic to conceive the benefits to
automating business operations. What would be
the subjective factors and risks associated with
these initiatives?
3. The competitive pressures have become more
prominent. How would initiatives such as those
implemented by Medco and Staples change the
competitive environment in their respective
industries?
References
Anonymous. (2011). TCO for Open-Source Social
Publishing. Burlington, MA.
Anonymous. (2012). BearingPoint Study Updates on
Use of Free and Open Source Software in Auto-
motive Industry. Manufacturing Close-Up, Mar 31.
Anonymous. (2013a). New to WebSphere. Retrieved
June 8, 2013, from www.ibm.com/
developerworks/websphere/newto/
Anonymous. (2013b). OS Platform Statistics. Retrieved
June 10, 2013, from www.w3schools.com/
browsers/browsers_os.asp
Anonymous. (2013c). WebSphere Software. Retrieved
June 8, 2013, from www-01.ibm.com/software/
websphere/
Collett, S. (2011). Open Source Unchecked, Computer-
world, May 23, pp. 26, 28, 30.
Geoghegan, S. (2013). Fleet Management Software.
Law & Order, 61(4), 52-55.
Yeaton, T. (2013). Beyond Cost-Cutting: Why Open
Source Software Is Gaining Traction on Wall
Street, Wall Street & Technology - Online, Feb 8.
182
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
 
CHAPTER
© luchunyu/Shutterstock.com
six
BUSINESS NETWORKS AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Learning Objectives
Modern telecommunications technology allows businesses to send and receive information in seconds. Except when
a physical transfer of goods or performance of a local service is involved, geographical distances are becoming
insignificant in business transactions. When using computers and other digital devices, people can now work together
as if they were sitting next to each other, even when they are thousands of miles apart. Financial transactions and
information retrieval take seconds, and wireless technology enables us to perform these activities from almost
anywhere and while on the go. Understanding the technology underlying telecommunications—its strengths,
weaknesses, and available options—is essential in any professional career.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Describe business and home applications of digital telecommunications.
●
Identify the major media and devices used in telecommunications.
●
Explain the concept of network protocols.
●
Compare and contrast various networking and Internet services.
●
List networking technologies and trends that are likely to have an impact on businesses and
information management in the near future.
●
Discuss the pros and cons of telecommuting.
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
183
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: A New Look at Customer
Service and Technology
Tyler knew that the opening of the new location was
quickly approaching. The renovations were going well
and expected to be completed on time. The upgrade of
the computer system was installed at the current loca-
tion and functioned without any issues. The servers
were entering orders using the touch screen monitor
installed on a workstation in the restaurant. Michael
and Tyler observed the servers as they used the new
system. The servers seemed to readily accept the new
technology and used it to enter customer orders. Tyler
asked the servers for feedback.
They provided positive comments on how easy the
system was to use. They still had to take notes at the
table, although some were trying to remember the orders
and then enter them into the system. They thought that
the customers were impressed with the quality of service
without writing the orders on a pad. One of the servers,
Rick, said that when he placed the meals at the correct
customer without asking, it showed superior customer
service and saved time delivering the meals. At first, Rick
did not think the new system would work well, but now
sees its benefits.
Liz also saw the benefits. She noticed that the ser-
vers did not seem to be returning very many meals for
mistakes after they were served. That reduced the num-
ber of “rush” meal reorders that caused chaos in the
kitchen. The cooks have been pleased that they can pre-
pare a meal once and eliminate additional effort to re-
prepare a meal. Liz also noticed that she did not see
any order changes with the new system. She wondered
why. Customers could not suddenly stop changing their
minds about orders. She asked one of the servers about
this. Harriet, the most experienced server, said that cus-
tomers often changed their meal details. However, from
her experience, she said that these changes almost
always happened within a short period of time after the
server placed the order. Harriet believed that the change
was entered into the system so that the kitchen staff
probably was not aware of the change. Previously, she
had to go into the kitchen and change the guest check.
Clark, from PosiDining, contacted Tyler about a new
offering. They just completed the development of a soft-
ware application that allows servers to enter orders on a
tablet. Tyler thought that using tablets would be awe-
some, but wondered what it would cost. They already
purchased a touch screen workstation that they are
using in the current location and which would be
installed at the new location.
Clark said, “You’ll need additional workstations for
two reasons. First, because the size of your new location
is larger, you’ll have too many servers trying to enter
orders on one computer. Second, you should have at
least one additional unit in the event of a hardware
failure.”
Tyler
thought
that
was
reasonable.
Clark
explained that the hardware cost of the tablet is less
than the touch screen hardware unit. He suggested that
Tyler might want to use a combination of tablets and the
traditional entry units. This system would require a sim-
ple router capable of both wired and wireless access con-
nected to the current server. The PosiDining software
would work with both Android and Apple tablets.
Serving the Technology
Infrastructure
The new location was built over 50 years ago, when the
only networks anyone knew about were TV networks.
The building structure was not suited to adding net-
work cabling throughout the building, but Tyler was
thinking about where they would need networking
and cabling. In the old location, his parents had not
invested in an Internet connection for the restaurant.
They used a small POS unit connected to a phone line
to process credit transactions. Tyler knew that their
new business model required some more general con-
nections to the Internet.
In the renovation design, Tyler slipped in some
additional networking specifications just before the con-
tractors began their work. Using the floor plans, he was
able to identify specific locations that needed network
connectivity. These locations included the serving work-
stations, host station, bar, office, kitchen, banquet room,
and dining room.
In the final month of renovations, Michael questioned
the cost of these additions. Michael asked, “Tyler, why
do we need network connections in the walls of the din-
ing and banquet rooms? We only need it at the worksta-
tions for the servers. People are not going to be doing
Internet work at their tables, are they?” Tyler sighed.
“Dad, people want to be connected to the Internet for
their smartphones. Look in coffee shops and other res-
taurants. They advertise it as something the establish-
ment provides.” Michael started to understand, and
Tyler continued, “Think about it, Dad. If you book pre-
sentations and business meetings, the customer may
need Internet for their meeting. We could either charge
them for it or bundle it as an added service.” Michael
once again was grateful for Tyler’s young perspective
and recent business education, and how they would
help Kimball’s. He knew that the networking would add
more cost to the renovation, but it would be worth it.
184
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Telecommunications in Business
It is your first visit to Barcelona. You are standing at a bus stop, waiting for the bus that will take
you on the next leg of your vacation tour. You pull out your mobile phone, send a short text
message to a four-digit number, and receive a message with an accurate time when your bus will
arrive. You then use the device to receive directions and maps describing how to get from one
point to another. You use the time until the bus arrives to view a local TV program on your
phone. On the bus, you use the device to check your email. When you arrive at your destination
you use the phone to find one of the many hotspots where you can connect to the Internet. You
use the phone to email and call home. Since the call uses the Internet, it is free.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Looking to Create a Stir?
The best way to get your thoughts into the public’s hands in the modern era is through social media. With
500 million active Facebook users and more than 175 million Twitter users, it’s almost crazy for businesses
to not utilize these mass marketing devices. The hundreds of millions of social media users far surpass
the 46 million in the United States who still subscribe to a daily newspaper and the 7.6 to 12 million aver-
age daily prime-time viewers of the top four TV networks (ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox). Social media outlets
allow people and businesses to effectively and swiftly dispatch their messages to mass numbers of
friends or customers. In today’s business environment, getting your message out there first is key.
Source: Neuharth, A. (2011, Feb 25). Facebook and Twitter now are our triggers, USA TODAY, p. A.11.
Telecommunications, which is essential to smooth operations in today’s business world,
is the transmittal of data and information from one point to another. The Greek word tele,
which means “distance,” is part of such words as “telephone,” “teleconference,” and other
words
referring
to
technologies
that
allow
communications
over
a
distance.
Thus,
telecommunications is communications over a distance. When considering telephone, email, the
web—none of these essential business services would be available without fast, reliable
telecommunications. Telecommunications, made possible by networking technologies, has
brought several improvements to business processes:
●
Better business communication. When no physical objects need to be transferred from one place
to another, telecommunications technology can make geographical distance irrelevant. Email,
voice mail, instant messaging (IM), faxing, file transfer, mobile telephony, and teleconferenc-
ing enable detailed and instant communication, within and between organizations. Telecom-
munications can also be used by one person to monitor another person’s performance in real
time. The use of email, IM, and voice mail has brought some secondary benefits to business
communications by establishing a permanent written or electronic record of, and accountabil-
ity for, ideas. Web-based instant messaging is used to support online shoppers in real time.
The result is more accurate business communications and reduced need for manual recording.
●
Greater efficiency. Telecommunications has made business processes more efficient. Any infor-
mation that is recorded electronically can become immediately available to anyone involved
in a business process, even when the business units are located far apart. For example, as
soon as an order is placed, anyone in the organization who will be involved with it at any
stage can view the order: from the marketing people, to purchasing officers, to manufacturing
managers, to shipping workers, to billing and collection clerks. For example, if a store lacks a
certain item, a clerk can check the entire chain’s inventory and tell the customer the nearest
store that has the item available. If a customer wishes to return an item, she can do so at any
store of the chain because a sales associate can easily verify the purchase details. This may
also help retail chains discover “serial returners.”
●
Better distribution of data. Organizations that can transmit vital data quickly from one com-
puter to another can choose not to have centralized databases. Business units that need
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
185
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
certain data frequently might store it locally, while others can access it remotely. Only fast,
reliable transfer of data makes this efficient arrangement possible.
●
Instant transactions. The availability of the Internet to millions of businesses and consumers
has shifted a significant volume of business transactions to the web. Both businesses and con-
sumers can shop, purchase, and pay instantly online. Wireless technology has also made pos-
sible instant payment and data collection using small radio devices, such as electronic toll
collection tags. In addition to commercial activities, people can use telecommunications for
online education and entertainment.
●
Flexible and mobile workforce. Employees do not have to come to the office to carry out their
work as long as their jobs only involve the use and creation of information. They can tele-
commute using Internet connections. Salespeople, support personnel, and field workers are
more mobile with wireless communication.
●
Alternative channels. Services that used to be conducted through specialized dedicated chan-
nels can be conducted through alternative channels. For example, voice communication used
to be conducted only through proprietary telephone networks but is now also conducted
through the Internet using Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), which decreased its cost.
Radio and television broadcasts were conducted through radio frequencies and company-
owned cables. Newer technologies enable organizations to broadcast over the Internet and
provide telephone services over the Internet as well. Furthermore, Internet technologies allow
individuals to broadcast text, sound, and video to subscribers’ computers or to web-capable
mobile devices. (We discuss these technologies in Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise.”)
At the same time you enjoy the opportunities created by telecommunications technology, you must
recognize that it poses some risks. Once an organization connects its information systems to a
public network, security becomes a challenge. Unauthorized access and data destruction are
constant threats. Thus, organizations must establish proper security controls as preventive measures.
We discuss the risks and security measures in Chapter 14, “Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery.”
Telecommunications in Daily Use
We have grown so accustomed to telecommunications networks that we no longer think much
about them in daily life; however, they are pervasive. The most widespread telecommunications
uses are described in the following sections.
Cellular Phones
Cellular phones derive their name from the territories of service providers, which are divided
into areas known as cells. Each cell has at its center a computerized transceiver (transmitter-
receiver), which both transmits signals to another receiver and receives signals from another
transmitter. When a call is placed on a cellular phone, the signal is first transmitted to the
closest transceiver, which sends a signal through landlines that dial the desired phone number.
If the receiving phone is also mobile, the call is communicated to the transceiver closest to the
receiving phone. As the user moves from one area, or cell, to another, other transceivers pick up
the transmission and receiving tasks.
Using cellular phone networks, people can transmit and receive calls almost anywhere, freeing
them from a fixed office location. Many mobile phones today are “smartphones”; they can access
the Internet and web and include applications or “apps” to perform thousands of different
functions. People use their mobile phones for email, web surfing, online banking, shopping, and
keeping up with their friends. Many mobile phones include digital cameras, contact lists and
calendars, and GPS (global positioning system) circuitry. “My car is my office” is a reality for many
professionals who spend much of their time traveling. As technology advances and more capabilities
are squeezed into smaller casings, some professionals can say, “My pocket is my office.”
The major advantage of mobile phones is that they are attached to people, not offices. This
is why many companies have decided to discard landlines in favor of either mobile phones or
Internet-based (VoIP) phone services. In the U.S., people are replacing residential landline
186
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
telephone service with cell phones. According to the National Center for Health Statistics, in
2011, 32 percent of all households consisted of wireless only service (Zager, 2012).
Some companies make the switch to mobile phones when they move their offices. Moving
electronic switchboards and telephone lines to its new offices in Hawaii would have cost
NovaSol, a scientific research firm, $30,000. The company decided to equip its 80 employees
with cell phones. Other companies make the switch because so many employees already have
both landline phones in the office and a cell phone for their time with customers or on
manufacturing lines. For this reason, Dana Corp., a manufacturer of auto parts, removed most of
the phones from its offices in Auburn Hills, Michigan. The lines left are used mainly for
teleconferencing.
Videoconferencing
People sitting in conference rooms thousands of miles apart are brought together by their
transmitted
images
and
speech
in
what
is
called
videoconferencing.
Businesses
use
videoconferencing to save on travel costs and lodging, car fleets, and the time of highly salaried
employees, whether they work in different organizations or at different sites of the same
organization.
From
national
and
global
perspectives,
videoconferencing also reduces traffic congestion and air
pollution. The increasing speed of Internet connections
makes it easy for anyone with a high-speed link to establish
videoconferences by using a peer-to-peer link or the services
of a third party, a company that specializes in maintaining
videoconferencing hardware and software. In the latter case,
businesses pay a monthly fee for unlimited conferences or
pay a per-use fee.
The popularity of video-conferencing has created several
new application software pro-ducts used by individuals and
businesses. Some examples are Citrix GoToMeeting, Cisco
WebEx, Adobe Connect, ooVoo, and Skype. The increasing
popularity of telecommuting has increased the adoption of
videoconferencing. In addition to being a cost-effective alter-
native to travel, web-based meetings can be set up on an
impromptu basis and can be made more productive with
the tools provided in video-conferencing software.
Wireless Payments and Warehousing
Radio frequency identification (RFID) technology, mentioned in Chapter 3, “Business Functions
and Supply Chains,” and covered in more detail later in this chapter, enables us to conduct
transactions and to make payments quickly. An increasing number of drivers never approach a
cash register or swipe credit cards when paying for fuel at gasoline stations. If you use a speed
payment device such as ExxonMobil’s SpeedpassTM, an RFID tag communicates with a device on
the pump to record the details of the transaction. An antenna dish on the rooftop of the gas
station communicates these details and checks your credit through a link to a large database
located hundreds or even thousands of miles away and operated by the bank authorizing the
charge. In this transaction, you use telecommunications twice: once between the device and the
pump, and once between the gas station’s antenna and the database. Wireless toll payment
systems use a similar technology. A special transceiver installed at the toll plaza sends a signal
that prompts the tag installed in your car to send back its own signal, including the unique
owner’s code, entry location, and time the vehicle passes by. The information is used to charge
Videoconferencing saves time and travel expenses while increasing
organizational productivity
Comstock/Photos.com
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
187
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
the account associated with the owner’s number, and the information captured is transmitted to
a large database of account information.
RFID technology is also used in warehouses where employees can use handheld units to
check a central system for availability and location of items to be picked up from and stored in
shelves or bins. When storing, the handhelds are used to update inventory databases. Such
systems have made the work of “untethered employees” more efficient compared with older
systems that require physical access to a computer. Wireless communications have many other
uses, some of which are discussed in detail later in the chapter.
Another form of wireless payment that is becoming increasingly popular is mobile payment/
electronic wallet apps for mobile devices. Mobile payments have received mixed reviews due to
security concerns however; early investments from large banking institutions say otherwise. One
product gaining traction in a few U.S. cities is Isis™. Isis™is more than just a mobile payment
app for a smartphone; it is a complete electronic wallet. Included in the wallet are payment
cards, promotional offers, and loyalty cards. The app uses near-field communication to contact
checkout terminals at Isis Ready™merchants. Near-field communication (NFC) is a
standard communication protocol to create a radio connection between two devices. The
connection can be completed either by making contact between the two devices or by bringing
the devices into close proximity (within a few centimeters). Currently, Isis is compatible with
only American Express, Capital One, and Chase payment cards. Mobile payment and electronic
wallet innovations capitalize on the convergence of two items that most people have on them at
all times: their wallet and smartphone. (Leber, 2012; Anonymous, 2012b)
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Understand Telecommunications
As a professional, you will be responsible for ensuring that
your organization maximizes its benefits from fast and reliable
telecommunications. To do so, you might be involved in select-
ing from networking alternatives. To be a creative and produc-
tive contributor to these decisions, it is essential that you
understand the fundamental promises and limitations of net-
working and telecommunications.
Many tasks that used to be in the sole domain of highly paid
specialists are being performed by professionals whose main
occupation is not IT. For example, creating small networks in
businesses and homes used to be the responsibility of techni-
cians. Now any professional is expected to know how to cre-
ate hotspots and how to use a plethora of networks: wired,
wireless, and cellular.
Peer-to-Peer File Sharing
One of the most exciting features in worldwide telecommunications is peer-to-peer (P2P) file
sharing through the Internet: anyone with access to the Internet can download one of several free
applications that help locate and download files from any online computer. You might have heard of
some of these applications, such as LimeWire, BitTorrent, and Vuze. While the concept has effectively
served scientists who share scientific text files and application developers who exchange code, the
most extensive use has been in downloading artistic files, such as music and video files. Because
unauthorized duplication and use of such files violates copyright laws and deprives recording and
film companies of revenue, these industries have sued some violators in court, and the U.S. Supreme
Court ruled against organizations that provide file-sharing services. Security is also a significant
concern with peer-to-peer file sharing. Shared files may contain viruses and other malware.
Web-Empowered Commerce
Increasingly fast digital communication enables millions of organizations to conduct business
and individuals to research, market, educate, train, shop, purchase, and pay online. Entire
industries, such as online exchanges and auctions, have been created thanks to the web. Web-
based commerce is covered in detail in Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise” and is
illustrated with many examples throughout the book.
188
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Bandwidth and Media
While
people
can
enjoy
technologies
without
understanding
how
they
work,
educated
professionals often do need to understand some fundamental concepts to be able to participate
in decision making when selecting networking equipment and services. This section introduces
bandwidth and networking media.
Bandwidth
A communications medium is the physical means that transports the signal, such as a copper
wire telephone line, a television cable, or radio waves. The bandwidth of the medium is the
speed at which data is communicated, which is also called the transmission rate or simply
the bit rate. It is measured as bits per second (bps). Figure 6.1 shows common bit rate
measurements. Bandwidth is a limited resource. Usually, the greater the bandwidth, the higher
the
cost
associated
with
the
communications
service.
Thus,
determining
the
type
of
communications lines to install or subscribe to may be an important business decision.
F I G U R E 6.1
Transmission speed
measurement units
bps
=
Bits per second
Kbps
=
Thousand bps
Mbps
=
Million bps (mega bps)
Gbps
=
Billion bps (giga bps)
Tbps
=
Trillion bps (tera bps)
When a line is capable of carrying multiple transmissions simultaneously, it is said to be
broadband. Cable television, DSL (digital subscriber line), fiber-optic cables, and most wireless
connections
are
broadband.
In
general,
broadband
offers
greater
bandwidth
and
faster
throughput, and in common usage the term “broadband” is associated with a high-speed
networking connection, which is required for fast transmission of large files and multimedia
material. In contrast, the term narrowband refers to lower speeds, although the speed under
which communication is considered narrowband has constantly increased. Dial-up connections
are generally considered to be narrowband.
Media
Communications media—the means through which bits are transmitted—come in several types.
Media can be tangible, such as cables, or intangible, such as radio waves. The most available
tangible media are twisted pair cable, coaxial cable, and optical fiber (see Figure 6.2). Intangible
media include all microwave radio technologies, which support wireless communication. The
electric power grid has also been added as a medium for communications. All can be used to
link a business or household to the Internet. Later in the chapter we discuss the various Internet
connection services and also refer to typical periodic cost of the services.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
189
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
F I G U R E 6.2
Networking media
Medium
Availability
Bandwidth
Vulnerability to
Electromagnetic
Interference
Twisted pair cable
High
Low to medium 
High
Radio waves
High
Medium to high
Low (but vulnerable
to radio frequency
interference)
Microwave
Low
High
Low
Coaxial (TV) cable
High
High
Low
Optical fiber
Moderate but
Highest
Nonexistent
growing
Electric power
Very High
High
High
lines (BPL)
Twisted Pair Cable
Twisted
pair
cable
is
a
popular
medium
for
connecting
computers
and
networking devices because it is relatively flexible, reliable, and low cost. The most
common types of twisted pair network cable today are Category 5 or Category 6
(Cat 5 or Cat 6), named for the cable standards they follow. Twisted pair cable
connects to network devices with RJ-45 plug-in connectors, which resemble the
RJ-11 connectors used on telephone wire, but are slightly larger.
Twisted pair cable is also used in telephone networks, but in the United States
and many other countries, twisted copper wires are now used only between the
telephone jack and the central office of the company providing the telephone
service. The typical distance of this link is 1.5–6 kilometers (about 1–4 miles), and
is often referred to as “the last mile.” The central offices themselves are connected
with fiber optic cables, but it is often the “last mile” media that determine the
overall speed of the connection. In recent years many “last mile” connections have
also been converted to optical cables. Most new buildings, including residential ones, are
equipped with fiber optic cables rather than copper wires.
Coaxial Cable
Coaxial cable is sometimes called TV cable or simply “cable” because of its common use for
cable television transmission. It is widely used for links to the Internet. Television companies use
the same networks they employ to transmit television programming to link households and
businesses to the Internet. Since telephone services can be offered on any broadband Internet
link, cable companies also offer telephone service through this medium.
Optical Fiber
Fiber optic technology uses light instead of electricity to represent bits. Fiber optic lines are made
of thin fiberglass filaments. A transmitter sends tiny bursts of light using a laser or a light-
emitting diode (LED) device. The receiver detects the period of light and no-light to receive the
data bits. Optical fiber systems operate in the infrared and visible light frequencies. Because light
is not susceptible to EMI (electromagnetic interference) and RFI (radio frequency
interference), fiber optic communication is much less prone to error than twisted pair
© Cengage Learning 2015
Twisted pair cables use an RJ-45 con-
nector similar to the RJ-11 telephone
connector
Bacилий Topoyc/Photos.com
190
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
and radio transmission. Optical fibers can also carry signals over relatively longer distances than
other media.
Optical fibers (left) and
coaxial cable (right)
The maximum speed attained with optical fibers has been 25.6 terabits per second (Tbps), enough
to transmit the content of 600 DVDs in one second. Some optical carriers support bit rates of up to
several Tbps. Such great bandwidth enables multiple streams of both Internet and television
transmission. Some telecommunications companies, such as Verizon, have laid optical fiber lines
to offer households both services, directly competing with TV cable companies such as Comcast. In
other countries, such as Japan and South Korea, a greater percentage of households are offered
broadband over optical fibers, and the bandwidth that subscribers can receive is significantly
higher than that in the United States. However, an increasing number of U.S. communities are
served with optical fibers, with speeds of several tens of megabits per second (Mbps). Such speeds
permit the telecommunications company to offer television service on the same fiber that provides
telephone and Internet service. The potential of optical fibers is usually much greater than
telecommunications companies actually provide.
Radio and Satellite Transmission
Radio frequency (RF) technologies use radio waves to carry bits. Several wireless
technologies can transmit through air or space. Some of the most popular for
personal and business networking, such as Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, are discussed later
in this chapter. Microwaves are high-frequency radio waves that can carry signals
over long distances with high accuracy. You have probably noticed the parabolic
antennas on the roofs of some buildings. They are so numerous on rooftops and
high antenna towers because microwave communication is effective only if
the line of sight between the transmitter and receiver is unobstructed. Clusters
of microwave antennas are often installed on high buildings and the tops
of
mountains
to
obtain
a
clear
line
of
sight.
Terrestrial
microwave
communication—so-called because signals are sent from and received by stations
on the earth—is good for long-distance telecommunications but can also be used
in local networks in and among buildings. It is commonly used for voice and
television
communications.
When
radio
communication
is
used
outside
buildings, it is vulnerable to weather conditions—thunderstorms, fog, and snow
might degrade communication quality.
Signals can also be transmitted using microwaves via satellite links. The two
major types of satellites are geostationary, also called GEO, and low earth orbit,
called LEO. Both types serve as radio relay stations in orbit above the earth that
receive, amplify, and redirect signals. Microwave transceiver dishes are aimed at the
satellite, which has antennas, amplifiers, and transmitters. The satellite receives a signal,
amplifies it, and retransmits it to the destination.
Microwave transceivers are used by
businesses
© WIANGYA/Shutterstock.com
Stockbyte/Photos.com
KATARZYNA ZWOLSKA/Photos.com
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
191
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
GEO satellites are placed in orbit 35,784 kilometers
(about 22,282 miles) above earth. At this distance the
satellite is geosynchronized (synchronized with the
earth); that is, once it starts orbiting, the satellite stays
above the same point on earth at all times, without
being propelled. Thus, a GEO satellite is stationary
relative to earth. Because they orbit at such a great
distance above the earth, three GEO satellites can
provide service for every point on earth by relaying
signals among themselves before transmitting them
back down to their destinations.
Because of the distance from earth to satellites, the
communication is fine for transmitting data because
delays of a few seconds make no significant difference.
However, a delay of even 2 or 3 seconds (due to the
trip
to
and
from
the
satellite
and
the
time
of
processing the data) might be disturbing in interactive
communication, such as when voice and pictures are
communicated in real time. You might have noticed such delays when reporters use devices that
communicate to a television station. When an anchorperson asks a question, the reporter on
location receives the question with a noticeable delay.
LEO satellites minimize this shortcoming. These lower-cost satellites are placed about 650–
2500 kilometers (400–1600 miles) above earth. The signals’ round-trip is short enough for
mobile telephone and interactive computer applications. Unlike GEOs, LEO satellites revolve
around the globe every few hours. Multiple LEOs are required to maintain continuous coverage
for uninterrupted communication.
Electrical Power Lines
One medium that had been available for years but has only recently been tapped for
telecommunications is the electric power grid. The bits in an electric power grid are represented
by electric impulses, but they must be distinct from the regular power that flows through the
grid. Engineers have succeeded in overcoming this technical challenge. In some regions of the
United States, broadband service is offered through power lines. The service is referred to as
Broadband over Power Lines (BPL) or Power Line Communication (PLC). BPL is covered in
more detail later in the chapter.
From the point of view of organizations, among the important factors in choosing a
networking medium are availability, current and potential bandwidth, and vulnerability to
electromagnetic interference (EMI) or radio frequency interference (RFI). Your business’s current
and future needs for data security, as well as compatibility with an already installed network, are
also factors. Cost is another important consideration. For example, one of the benefits of optical
fiber is that it is practically immune to EMI. However, it is more expensive than other options.
Another point to consider is the availability of a specific service on an available medium. For
instance, you might have a telephone line on a remote farm, but no company offers broadband
service to it.
Networks
In the context of data communications, a network is a combination of devices or nodes
(computers
or
communication
devices)
connected
to
each
other
through
one
of
the
communication media previously discussed. We will often use the word “computer” for a device
that is networked, but this is only for convenience. Any compatible device that can transmit and
receive on a network is part of it.
Large companies lease communication satellite frequencies to transmit data
around the globe
Comstock Images/Photos.com
192
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Types of Networks
Computer networks are classified according to their reach and complexity. The three basic types
of networks are LANs (local area networks), which connect computers, printers, and other
computer equipment for an office, several adjacent offices, an entire building or a campus;
MANs (metropolitan area networks), which span a greater distance than LANs and usually have
more complicated networking equipment for midrange communications; and WANs (wide area
networks), which connect systems in an entire nation, continent, or worldwide. Some people
also include a fourth category: PANs (personal area networks), which encompass connections
between personal digital devices such as a computer and its keyboard or mouse, or a mobile
phone and a hands-free headset.
LANs
A computer network within a building, or a campus of adjacent buildings, is called a local area
network, or LAN. LANs are usually established by a single organization with offices within a
radius of roughly 5–6 kilometers (3–4 miles). LANs are set up by organizations to enhance
communications among employees and to share IT resources. Households might set up LANs to
share a broadband link to the Internet and to transmit digital music, pictures, and video from
one part of a home to another.
In office LANs, one computer is often used as a central repository of programs and files that
all connected computers can use; this computer is called a server. Connected computers can
store documents on their own disks or on the server, can share hardware such as printers, and
can exchange email. When a LAN has a server, the server usually has centralized control of
communications among the connected computers and between the computers and the server
itself. Another computer or special communications device can also exercise this control, or
control can be distributed among several servers. A peer-to-peer LAN is one in which no
central device controls communications.
In recent years the cost of wireless devices has decreased significantly, and many offices as
well as households now network their computers wirelessly, or create networks in which some of
the computers are wired and some are not. Wireless LANs (WLANs) offer significant benefits:
installation is easy because there is no need to drill through walls to install wires, and
equipment can be moved to wherever it is needed. Wireless LANs are less costly to maintain
when the network spans two or more buildings. They are also more scalable. Scalability is the
ease of expanding a system. It is easy to add more nodes, or clients, to a WLAN, because all that
is needed is wireless circuitry in any device that comes within range of a wireless network.
However, wireless LANs have a significant drawback: they are not as secure as wired LANs
unless some measures are taken. On a wired network, one needs to physically connect a device
to access the network resources. On a wireless network, security measures must be taken to
prevent connection by unauthorized wireless devices within range of the network. Some of these
measures are covered later in the chapter.
MANs
A metropolitan area network (MAN) usually links multiple LANs within a large city or
metropolitan region and typically spans a distance of up to 50 kilometers (about 30 miles). For
example, the LAN in a chemistry lab might be linked to a research hospital’s LAN and to a
pharmaceutical company’s LAN several miles away in the same city to form a MAN. The
individual LANs that compose a MAN might belong to the same organization or to several
different organizations. The high-speed links between LANs within a MAN typically use fiber
optic or wireless broadband connections.
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
193
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
POINT OF
INTEREST
A New Type of House Calls
GE Healthcare and Intel have partnered in marketing Intel’s Health Guide patient monitoring and manage-
ment system. The system offers in-home services to patients with chronic illness or those recently dis-
charged from hospitals who still require healthcare attention. The technology allows patients to check
their vitals and track health while the data is sent to databases where patient records are updated, orga-
nized, and prioritized. Health Guide increases communication by gathering timely information on patient
conditions and offering two-way videoconferencing between nurses and patients. The system is intuitive
and easy to use so patients, with timely interaction from healthcare professionals, can provide relevant
self-care. Because the amount of “baby boomers” reaching senior citizenship is rapidly increasing, actual
face-to-face time in the existing healthcare model is no longer feasible. By closely monitoring patient con-
ditions and vitals without a visit to the doctor’s office, healthcare professionals can increase their
patients’ health quality and reduce hospitalizations.
Sources: Anonymous. (2009, Jul 16). Intel Corporation: Intel Health Guide Adds New Connectivity
Options, Customers; Intel Health Guide Enables Personalized Care Management at Home Through
Video Conferencing, Vital Signs Collection, and Customizable Content, M2 Presswire; Anonymous.
(2010, Jan 06). GE, Intel team up on health push, Investor’s Business Daily.
WANs
A wide area network (WAN) is a far-reaching system of networks. One WAN is composed of
multiple LANs or MANs that are connected across a distance of more than approximately 48
kilometers (or 30 miles). Large WANs might have many constituent LANs and MANs on
different continents. The simplest WAN is a dial-up connection to a network provider’s services
over basic telephone lines. A more complex WAN is a satellite linkup between LANs in two
different countries. The most well-known WAN is the Internet.
WANs can be public or private. The telephone network and the Internet are examples of
public WANs. A private WAN might use either dedicated lines or satellite connections. Many
organizations cannot afford to maintain a private WAN. They pay to use existing networks,
which are provided in two basic formats: common carriers or value-added networks.
A common carrier provides public telephone lines that anyone can access or dial up, and
leased lines, which are dedicated to the leasing organization’s exclusive use. The user pays for
public lines based on time used and distance called. Verizon and AT&T are common carriers.
Leased lines are dedicated to the leaseholder and have a lower error rate than dial-up lines,
because they are not switched among many different subscribers.
Value-added
networks
(VANs)
provide
enhanced
network
services.
VANs
fulfill
organizational needs for reliable data communications while relieving the organization of the
burden of providing its own network management and maintenance. Many businesses use VANs
for their electronic data interchange (EDI) with other businesses, suppliers, and buyers. However,
due to cost considerations, an increasing number of organizations prefer to conduct commerce
via the Internet rather than through VANs. VAN services cost much more than those offered by
Internet service providers (ISPs). (Many VAN providers also provide Internet links.) This
issue is discussed in Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise.”
PANs
A personal area network (PAN) is a wireless network designed for handheld and portable
devices such as smartphones and tablet or laptop computers, and is intended for use by only
one or two people. Transmission speed is slow to moderate, and the maximum distance between
devices is generally 10 meters (33 feet). For example, Maria and Simon meet at a conference and
exchange electronic business cards using their Bluetooth-enabled smartphones. Maria’s device
automatically synchronizes her office notebook computer and/or contact databases, updating her
address book on both devices to maintain accurate timely information. (Bluetooth and other
wireless technologies are covered later in the chapter.)
194
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Networking Hardware
Networks use a variety of devices to connect computers
and peripheral devices (such as printers) to each other,
and to connect networks to each other. Each computer
or device connected to a network must have a net-
work interface card (NIC) or proper networking
circuitry, which connects through a cable or a wireless
antenna to a switch, bridge, or router, which in turn
connects to a LAN or WAN. A switch is a common
device often used as a central location to connect
computers or devices to a local network. A bridge is a
device that connects two networks, such as a LAN, to
the Internet. A router routes data packets to the next
node on their way to the final destination. It can
connect dissimilar networks and can be programmed to
also act as a firewall to filter communications. Routers
keep tables of network addresses, known as Internet
Protocol (IP) addresses, which identify each computer
on the network, along with the best routes to other network addresses. You are not likely to see
a WAN router, but you might have seen a router used to support a LAN in a small office or in a
household. Cable providers usually provide a router for wireless and wired Internet access in a
household environment. A repeater amplifies or regenerates signals so that they do not
become weak or distorted.
Another type of networking hardware that might be familiar to home computer users is the
modem. A modem—a word contracted from modulator-demodulator—in traditional usage is a
device whose purpose is to translate communications signals from analog to digital, and vice
versa. For many years the only way to link to the Internet was to dial up, meaning connecting
over regular telephone lines. These lines were originally designed for analog—continuous—
signals rather than for digital signals, which consist of discrete bursts. An analog modem turns
the digital signal from your computer into an analog signal that can go out over the phone
lines. A modem on the receiving computer transforms the analog signal back into a digital signal
the computer can understand. The former transformation is called modulation and the latter is
called demodulation.
A dial-up connection with a modem is very slow (usually no faster than 56 Kbps), so
most users and small businesses have turned to faster connections that use digital signals
throughout the connection, such as DSL and cable connections. Even though the medium
transfers digital signals, the word “modem” is now used for the devices that connect computers
to the Internet with these technologies. Thus, for example, if you use a cable company to link to
the Internet, the device connecting your computer’s network card to the cable is called a cable
modem. If you use a DSL service, the device used is called a DSL modem, and if you use a power
line, the device is called a BPL modem.
Virtual Private Networks
A LAN is a private network, because it only provides access to members of an organization.
Though a firm does not own the lines it leases, the network of leased lines might be considered
a private network, because only members authorized by the organization can use it. Many
companies cannot afford or do not wish to pay for a private network. By implementing special
software (and sometimes also hardware) they can create a virtual private network (VPN).
Although the Internet is discussed in Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise,” VPNs are
important in the context of the current discussion.
A virtual private network (VPN) can be thought of as a “tunnel” through the Internet or
other public network that allows only authorized users to access company resources. The
“virtual” in VPN refers to the illusion that the user is accessing a private network directly, rather
than through a public network. VPNs enable the use of intranets and extranets. An intranet is a
Wireless LAN routers have become commonplace in offices and households
James Phelps/Photos.com
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
195
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
network that uses web technologies to serve an organization’s employees who are located in
several sites that might be many miles apart; an extranet serves both the employees and other
enterprises that do business with the organization. It is important to understand that once a
LAN is linked to a public network, such as the Internet, technically anyone with access to the
public network can obtain access to the LAN. Therefore, organizations that link their LANs to
the Internet implement sophisticated security measures to control or totally deny public access
to their resources.
AT&T’s Customer Service Centers utilize VPN technology to maintain operational continuity
for their call centers. If operations are disrupted due to disaster or inclement weather, call center
employees are able to access their contact center technology from their homes using the VPN.
They are able to access all of the tools, data, and applications as if they were working at the
service centers. VPN technology allows AT&T to establish business continuity for its customers
while maintaining employee safety (Read, 2011).
Protocols
A communications protocol is a set of rules that govern communication between computers or
between computers and other computer-related devices that exchange data. When these rules
govern a network of devices, the rule set is often referred to as a network protocol. If a device does
not know what the network’s agreed-upon protocol is, or cannot comply with it, the device
cannot communicate on the network.
Some protocols are designed for WANs, others are designed for LANs, and some are designed
specifically for wireless communications. This discussion addresses only some of these protocols.
Protocols, often called “standards,” do not necessarily compete with each other. They often work
together or serve different purposes. The most important and pervasive set of protocols for
telecommunications and networks today is called TCP/IP.
TCP/IP
Communication on the Internet follows mainly TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/
Internet Protocol), which is actually a set of related protocols. TCP ensures that the packets
arrive accurately and in the proper order, while IP ensures delivery of packets from node to node
in the most efficient manner.
A
computer
connected
directly
to
the
Internet
backbone—the
highest
speed
communication channels—is called a host. IP controls the delivery from one host to another
until the message is received by the destination host. The host forwards messages to devices
connected to it. Often, we call hosts servers. For example, your school has at least one email
server; it forwards to your computer email messages addressed to you.
Every device on the Internet is uniquely identified with a numerical label known as an
Internet protocol address, or IP address. There are currently two versions of IP addresses.
Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) addresses consist of a 32-bit numeric address, presented in four
parts separated by periods, such as 146.186.87.220. Each of these parts can be a number between
0 and 255. This structure allows for 4.3 billion unique IP addresses. However, with the explosive
growth in Internet-connected devices such as smartphones, home security devices, tablets, and
home computers, it became obvious that IPv4 was reaching its limits. The Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF) deployed Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) in June 2012. IPv6 uses a 128-bit
address consisting of eight groups of four hexadecimal digits separated by colons. An example of
the IPv6 address is 2001:0bc8:85f3:0042:6334:7a2a:0360:5025. The new structure supports 340
trillion trillion trillion (yes, you read that right) unique addresses, a number that should not run
out anytime in the foreseeable future (Captain, 2012).
If you know the IP address of a website, you can enter those numbers in the address box of a
web browser. However, it is easier to remember names and words, and therefore most
organizations associate their IP addresses with names. The process of associating a character-
based name such as cengage.com with an IP address is called domain name resolution, and the
196
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
domain name resolution service is DNS (Domain Name System). DNS servers are maintained
by Internet service providers (ISPs) and other organizations. In large organizations, a server can
be dedicated as a DNS server.
If a LAN is linked to the Internet through a router, the entire network has an IP address
unique on the Internet. This number is stored in the router. To uniquely identify devices on the
LAN, the router assigns local IP addresses to individual computers and devices. These IP
addresses identify the computers only within the LAN. Only the router is identified uniquely on
the Internet.
Servers and many other computers and devices are assigned permanent IP addresses, called a
static IP address. A computer connected to the Internet intermittently might be assigned
a temporary IP address for the duration of its connection only. Such a number is called a
dynamic IP address. It is assigned by the host through which that computer is connecting to
the Internet. Dynamic IP addresses give an organization flexibility with its limited number of
assigned IP addresses: only devices seeking a connection to the Internet are assigned IP
addresses. The number is disassociated from a device that logs off, and the server can then
reassign the IP address to another device that has just logged on. Some broadband providers
assign static IP addresses; others assign only dynamic IP addresses.
Ethernet
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) sets standards for communication
protocols. IEEE 802.3, known as Ethernet, is the only LAN protocol of significance. Ethernet
uses either coaxial cable or Cat 5 or 6 twisted pair cable. Different generations of Ethernet
support speeds from 10 Mbps (10Base-T) to 100 Mbps (100Base-T or Fast Ethernet) to over 1
Gbps (Gigabit Ethernet and 10 Gigabit Ethernet).
Wireless Protocols
All wireless devices use radio transceivers (transmitter-receivers). The radio waves carry the digital
signal, the bits. Depending on the protocol followed, the devices use different radio frequencies
for their work.
IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi
IEEE 802.11 is a family of wireless protocols, collectively known as Wi-Fi (for Wireless Fidelity).
The term originally applied to the IEEE 802.11b standard that supports wireless communication
within about 100 meters (300 feet) of a wireless router at a maximum speed of 11 Mbps. The
later 802.11g standard supports speeds of up to 54 Mbps for the same range. The 802.11a
standard supports similar speeds to 802.11g, but in a different frequency range that is less
susceptible to interference from cell phones and microwave devices. The 802.11n standard was
approved in 2009. 802.11n supports maximum speeds of 248 Mbps and has about twice the
range of 802.11b and g, about 70 meters (230 feet) indoors and 160 meters (525 feet) outdoors.
The g standard is backward-compatible with the b standard, meaning that you can add b devices
to a g network. The n standard is backward-compatible with the b, g, and a standards. However,
in a mixed network, throughput will likely be at the speed of the lowest-speed device. The b and
g standards use a radio frequency in the 2.4–2.5 GHz range, the 802.11a standard operates in the
5 GHz frequency, while the n standard can operate in either frequency. These radio frequency
ranges do not require government licenses (referred to as “unlicensed”), and therefore are used
for wireless communication. A new protocol, 802.11ac, has been developed and was released in
late 2012. Broadcom has stated that its 802.11ac chip structure provides faster throughput,
higher capacity, broader coverage and longer battery life (Anonymous, 2012).
A single Wi-Fi router can be connected to an access point (AP), which in turn is
connected to a wired network and usually to the Internet, allowing tens to hundreds of Wi-
Fi-equipped devices to share the Internet link. A direct link to a wireless router or AP creates a
hotspot. Hotspots allow Internet access to anyone within range who uses a wireless-equipped
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
197
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
device, provided logging in is not limited by controlled access codes. Figure 6.3 illustrates a home
wireless LAN (WLAN).
F I G U R E 6.3
An example of a home
using a wireless network
Cable
Modem
Internet
Wireless
Router
Phone
10:10 AM
Menu
As mentioned earlier, security has been a concern for Wi-Fi networks. The earliest 802.11
standards had serious security flaws; 802.11n has improved security by offering the Wi-Fi
Protected Access (WPA) and WPA2 security protocols. These protocols offer encryption, the
ability to scramble and code messages through encryption keys that are shared only between the
sender and receiver. Of course, to receive the protection of these protocols, they must be enabled
on your wireless computer or device. Experienced “hackers” can break the codes of WPA. WPA2
is a preferred measure.
Wi-Fi hotspots are appearing everywhere, from airports and restaurant chains to the local
library and barbershop. Businesses also use wireless LANs for many types of operations. You will
find a WLAN in almost every warehouse. Workers holding smartphones or specialized electronic
units communicate with each other and receive information about the location of items by
section, shelf, and bin. For example, General Motors equipped the forklifts in all its warehouses
with Wi-Fi transceivers to help their operators locate parts. On sunny days retailers place
merchandise and cash registers on sidewalks. The cash registers are linked to a central system
through a WLAN. Airports, conference centers and schools use WLANs to help guests, students,
and staff to communicate as well as link to the Internet through a hotspot.
Many new airplanes are equipped with WLANs. Boeing started equipping its large airplanes
with Wi-Fi in 2003. Lufthansa, British Airways, Japan Airlines, Scandinavian Airlines System, and
other airlines have equipped their long-range jetliners with the technology to allow paying
passengers to use a hotspot 12 kilometers (7.5 miles) above ground. Gogo provides Internet
access on nine commercial airlines. Customers can purchase passes to access the Internet to
work on their laptop or watch a feature movie on their tablet.
Utility companies have converted manually read electric, gas, and water meters to wireless
meters. An employee need only pass by the client’s building in a motor vehicle to record the
© Cengage Learning 2015
198
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
reading. Newer meters use networks that relay the signal to the utility company’s office and
automatically update each customer’s account in the company’s computers. Wireless meters save
millions of labor hours and overcome common problems, such as meters enclosed in locked
places, inaccurate readings, and, occasionally, an aggressive dog.
A growing number of electronic devices, such as smartphones, digital cameras, and video
game consoles, are equipped with wireless circuitry. This rids their owners of the need to
physically connect a device to a computer or a router for communication. For example, with a
wireless-enabled digital camera you can send digital pictures from your camera to your PC, or
directly to a friend via a hotspot over the Internet.
IEEE 802.15 Bluetooth
Named after a Scandinavian king who unified many tribes, the Bluetooth
standard was developed for devices that communicate with each other
within a short range of up to 10 meters (33 feet) in the office, at home,
and in motor vehicles. It transmits voice and data. Bluetooth was later
adopted by IEEE as its 802.15 standard. Typical Bluetooth devices include
wireless keyboards and mice, wireless headsets for hands-free mobile phone
use, and increasingly, digital entertainment devices. For example, you can
purchase a wrist-worn MP3 player that uses Bluetooth to transmit the
music to earbuds or headphones, avoiding the wires that typically connect
a portable player to headphones. Bluetooth is considered a personal area
network (PAN) technology, because it typically supports a network used by
only one person. Bluetooth uses the 2.4–2.5 GHz radio frequency to
transmit bits at a rate of 1 Mbps.
IEEE 802.16 WiMAX
IEEE 802.16, Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX),
increases the range
and
speed of
wireless communication.
It might
potentially reach up to 110 kilometers (about 70 miles) with a speed of 100
Mbps; however, it typically reaches 13–16 kilometers (8–10 miles). Experts
say that with an investment of no more than $3 billion, WiMAX can cover 98 percent of
American homes. This is a much lower investment than required for laying fiber optic cables.
WiMAX
uses
licensed
radio
frequencies
of
2–11
GHz.
This
standard
can
cover
entire
metropolitan areas and provide Internet access to hundreds of thousands of households that
either cannot afford an Internet service or for some reason cannot obtain access. Many
municipal governments wanted to establish such service for a fee or for free. However, this has
created a threat to the business of ISPs, who count on subscriber fees for revenue, because an
entire metropolitan area can become one huge hotspot, and the fees, if any, are collected by the
local government rather than an ISP. Therefore, several states in the United States legislated
against municipality-sponsored networks. However, some cities are using the technology, which
enables households that cannot afford Internet connectivity to have access to this important
resource. Philadelphia was the first American metropolis to do so. The city was exempt from a
Pennsylvania law forbidding municipal networks.
WiMAX is a metropolitan area network (MAN) technology. Figure 6.4 shows how WiMAX
works. A household, office, or public hotspot can use a router to link multiple devices either by
linking directly to a WiMAX base antenna that is linked to the Internet, or by using a relay
antenna that receives the signal and retransmits it to the Internet-linked antenna. If a mobile
user’s
equipment
included
the
proper
WiMAX
communication
device,
the
user
could
communicate with the Internet moving at speeds of up to 150 Km/H (about 94 MPH), which
enables convenient use of the Internet while sitting in a moving vehicle (though the driver
should not be going that fast!). An extension of this standard, 802.16e, supports mobile Internet
communication.
Bluetooth technology supports a personal network
enabling the hands-free use of mobile phones
Stockbyte/Photos.com
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
199
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
F I G U R E 6.4
How a WiMAX network works
Long-Term Evolution
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), also known as 4G LTE, is a standard method of wireless
communications, specifically for high-speed data transmission for mobile phones. It was
developed through the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), a collaborative effort of six
telecommunication associations (referred to as the Organizational Partners) from various
continents (Anonymous, 2013a). In 2010, the first organization to fully implement an LTE
network in North America was Verizon Wireless. As an evolution of GSM (global system for
mobile communications) standards, the objective of the new communication standard was to
increase the speed and capacity of data transmission. It is currently capable of high upload and
download transmission speeds, up to 170 and 300 Mbit/s respectively (Anonymous, 2013b).
Figure 6.5 summarizes relevant features of the various 802.xx wireless protocols.
F I G U R E 6.5
Wireless networking
protocols
Protocol
Max. Range
Max. Speed
Main Use
802.11a
75 meters (250 feet)
54 Mbps
LAN
802.11b 
100 meters (330 feet)
11 Mbps
LAN
802.11g
100 meters (330 feet)
54 Mbps
LAN
802.11n
160 meters (530 feet)
248 Mbps
LAN
802.15 Bluetooth
10 meters (33 feet)
1 Mbps
PAN
802.16 WiMax
50 km (31 miles)
100 Mbps
MAN
802.11ac
90 meters (300 feet)
349 Mbps
LAN
WiMAX Base Station
Internet
WiMAX Base Station
WiMAX
Ethernet
Wi-Fi
Ethernet
Wire
Wi-Fi
Access
Point
WiMAX Subscriber
Station
(Home, Business or Public Hotspot)
© Cengage Learning 2015
© Cengage Learning 2015
200
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Generations in Mobile Communications
Networking professionals often refer to generations of mobile communication technologies. Each
generation refers to a communication protocol or a combination of protocols. The differences
among generations are mainly in capabilities (e.g., enabling a mobile phone to access additional
resources) and transmission speed. The first generation, 1G, was analog and used circuit
switching. Then 2G protocols became the first to provide digital voice encoding, and they
worked at faster transmission rates. They include the GSM (Global System for Mobile) and
CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access) protocols, the details of which are outside the scope of
this discussion.
The 3G protocols support transmission rates of 1 Mbps. The protocols support video,
videoconferencing, and full Internet access. 4G protocol devices operate only digitally and with
packet switching, increased at bandwidths, and include tighter security measures. In the U.S.,
Sprint, AT&T, Virgin Mobile and Verizon all have adopted LTE technology. The high speed of
the technology enables mobile phone users to watch a video, listen to music files, browse the
web, and make a telephone call at the same time.
POINT OF
INTEREST
We Want It Now!
The increased demand for and reliance on the Internet, no matter one’s location, has driven the improve-
ment of mobile networks in past years. Internet providers have continuously responded by releasing gen-
eration after generation of mobile networks, each faster than the previous. Near the end of 2012, AT&T,
one of the United States’ top service providers, released the fastest wireless technology yet: 4G LTE. 4G
LTE coverage is capable of delivering Internet speeds up to 10 times faster than 3G. Devices can upload,
download, game, and stream faster than ever. People want Internet access, they want it now, and they
want it faster. That’s what 4G LTE does.
Source: Anonymous. (2012, Dec 13). AT&T 4G LTE Expands in Little Rock; More customers to benefit
from ultra-fast mobile Internet on the latest LTE devices, M2 Presswire.
In a way, 3G and 4G cellular technologies compete with Wi-Fi, but it seems that generally
the technologies complement each other: we use 3G and 4G on the go and Wi-Fi in stationary
locations. Wi-Fi is significantly less expensive to use than 3G and 4G, because mobile phone
services involve a monthly fee for each phone, while using the Internet through a hotspot is
sometimes offered at no cost. In addition, most cellular service providers have changed their
data plans to meter data service. To eliminate over-limit smartphone data charges, customers
may be required to use Wi-Fi networks at their home and office.
Internet Networking Services
Both organizations and individuals can choose from a variety of options when subscribing to
networking services. Figure 6.6 summarizes the major services offered by telecommunications
companies. Note that the bit rates shown are for downstream, which is the speed of
receiving from the network; upstream speeds, the speeds of transmitting into the network,
are usually much lower. Also be aware that these are typical speeds in the United States. They
might be different in other countries. Monthly costs, too, are typical but vary from region to
region. For some services, such as T1 and T3, companies also offer fractions of the speeds for
lower fees.
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
201
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
F I G U R E 6.6
Typical features and costs
of Internet services
Service
Dial‐up 
BPL
Cable
DSL
T1
T3
Satellite
Fixed Wireless 
Fiber to the Premises 
OC‐3 
OC‐12 
OC‐48 
OC‐192 
OC‐255 
Downstream Speed
56 Kbps 
0.25–3 Mbps 
0.5–3 Mbps 
0.25–1.5 Mbps 
1.544 Mbps 
45 Mbps 
0.5–10 Mbps 
100 Mbps
5–30 Mbps 
155.52 Mbps 
622.08 Mbps 
2.488 Gbps 
9.952 Gbps 
13.21 Gbps 
Availability
Universal
Limited availability 
Widespread; available 
nearly everywhere where 
cable TV service is offered 
More limited than cable, but
spreading faster; speed 
depends on distance from 
telco office 
Widespread
Widespread
Widespread; practical only 
with view to the southern 
sky
Limited, but spreading 
Limited, but spreading 
Limited availability 
Limited availability 
Limited availability 
Limited availability 
Limited availability 
Monthly Fee 
$9–11 
$20–40 
$30–50 
$30–50 
$250–500 
$4,000–16,000 
$50–70 
$30–50 
$350
$20,000–45,000K
$10,000–30,000K
Several hundred 
thousand dollars 
Several hundred 
thousand dollars 
Several hundred 
thousand dollars 
Several hundred 
thousand dollars 
For most individuals and businesses, a service that provides a much lower transmission rate
(upstream speed) than reception rate (downstream speed) is suitable. This is because they rarely
upload large files to websites or transmit large amounts of email that must arrive at its
destination in a fraction of a second. However, organizations such as online businesses and
media companies that must upload large files quickly must also have high upstream speeds.
Such organizations may opt for Internet communication lines that allow high speeds both
downstream and upstream.
The proliferation of high-speed connection services, also called broadband services, is mainly the
result of businesses’ and individuals’ rush to the Internet. Some of the services, such as cable, DSL,
and satellite links, are offered both to businesses and residences. Others, such as T1 and T3 lines and
the OC class, are offered only to businesses, largely because of their high cost. Note that some of the
services are actually groups of services that differ in speeds. For example, some DSL services designed
for businesses provide the same speed downstream and upstream, while options for households (see
later discussion of ADSL) always provide a greater downstream speed than upstream speed.
Cable
Internet service is also provided by television cable firms, mostly to residential customers. The
medium is the same as for television reception, but the firms connect the cable to an Internet
server. At the subscriber’s residence, the cable is split—one part is connected to the television
© Cengage Learning 2015
202
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
set, and the other is connected to the computer via a bridge that is often called a cable modem.
Both television transmission and data are transmitted through the same line. The cable link is
always on, so the computer is constantly connected to the Internet. More than 90 percent of
cable operators in the United States offer Internet access.
The major downside of cable is that cable nodes are shared by all the subscribers
connected to the node. Therefore, at peak times, such as television prime time (7–11 p.m.),
communication speed slows down. The speed also slows down as more subscribers join the
service in a given territory.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Broadband at Home
A 2012 poll conducted by the Leichtman Research Group concluded that 90 percent of those with a per-
sonal computer at home subscribe to broadband service. Three percent were unsatisfied while 65 percent
are very satisfied. The poll also noticed a direct correlation between increased income levels and having
a computer at home. Of those households polled with an income of less than $30,000, 41 percent do not
have a computer at home. On the contrary, 97 percent of those with incomes over $50,000 do have a com-
puter at home. It was also noted that 1.3 percent of those who would like to receive broadband service
cannot because the service is not available in their location.
Source: Krey, M. (2012, Sep 04). Broadband In 90% Of U.S. Homes With Computers: Poll, Investor’s
Business Daily.
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL)
With normal landline telephone service, the telephone company filters information that arrives in
digital form and then transforms it to analog form; thus, it requires a modem to transform the
signal back to digital form. This conversion constrains the capacity of the link between your
telephone (or computer) and the telephone company’s switching center to a low speed of 56 Kbps.
With
digital subscriber line (DSL),
data
remains
digital
throughout
the
entire
transmission; it is never transformed into analog signals. So, the telephone company can
transmit
to
subscribers’
computers
at
significantly
higher
speeds
of
up
to
300
Mbps
depending on distance (Quick, 2010). To provide DSL service, the telecommunications
company connects your telephone line to a DSL bridge (often called a DSL modem). At the
telephone company’s regional central office, DSL traffic is aggregated and forwarded to the
ISP or data network provider with which the subscriber has a contract. Often, the telephone
company is also the ISP.
The bit rates of DSL lines are closely related to the distance of the subscriber’s computer
from the regional central office of the telephone company. Telecommunications companies
might offer the service to subscribers as far as 6,100 meters (20,000 feet) from the central office,
but the speed then is usually no faster than 144 Kbps, unless the company has installed a DSL
repeater on the line. Some companies do not offer the service if the subscriber’s address is not
within 4,500 meters (15,000 feet) of the central office.
T1 and T3 Lines
T1 and T3 lines are point-to-point dedicated digital circuits provided by telephone companies.
A T1 line is made up of 24 channels (groups of wires) of 64 Kbps each. T3 lines are made up of
672 channels of 64 Kbps. T1 and T3 lines are expensive. Therefore, only businesses that must
rely on high speeds are willing to accept the high cost of subscribing to the service. Most
universities, as well as large companies, use T1 or T3 lines for their backbone and Internet
connections.
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
203
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Satellite
Businesses and households in rural areas and other regions that do not have access to cable or
DSL might be able to obtain satellite services, which use microwave radio transmission. In fact,
satellite service providers target these households. The service provider installs a dish antenna
that is tuned to a communications satellite. Satellite connections might reach a speed of 45
Mbps. The antenna for satellite communication can be fixed, as the ones you can see installed
in the yards of private houses, or mobile, such as those installed on the roofs of large trucks.
Most of the subscribers of fixed satellite dishes are households; most mobile dish users are
shipping and trucking businesses. Subscribers to fixed satellite service must purchase the dish
antenna, with a typical cost of $400, and pay a monthly fee of about $50. Trucking companies
must have an antenna installed on each truck.
Many people use a free satellite service, the global positioning system (GPS). While a proper
device is required to enable reception from the satellites (which were launched into orbit by the
U.S. government), anyone can communicate free of charge. The satellite transmits back to any
GPS device its location on earth by longitude and latitude.
Fixed Wireless
Another alternative for households and small businesses that cannot obtain cable or DSL
connections to the Internet is fixed wireless. Fixed wireless is point-to-point transmission
between two stationary devices, usually between two buildings, as opposed to mobile wireless, in
which people carry a mobile device. Companies such as Sprint, AT&T, and many ISPs offer the
service. ISPs that specialize in fixed wireless services are often referred to as WISPs, wireless ISPs.
They install microwave transceivers on rooftops instead of laying physical wires and cables.
Subscribers connect their computers to the rooftop transceiver. They can communicate at speeds up
to 2 Mbps. Repeaters are installed close to each other to enhance the signal, which can deteriorate in
the presence of buildings, trees, and foul weather. Transmission rates depend on the distance
between the receiver and the base station. Up to 14 kilometers (9 miles) from the base station, the
speed is 100 Mbps; speeds drop to about 2 Mbps at about 56 kilometers (35 miles) from the base.
Fixed wireless is highly modular—the telecommunications company can add as many
transceivers as it needs to serve a growing number of subscribers. Unlike cable service, the company
does not need franchise licenses. The technology is suitable for both urban and rural areas.
Fiber to the Premises
Fiber to the premises connects a building to the Internet via optical fiber. The service is widely
available in the United States and other countries, but at varying speeds. In Hong Kong and
South Korea, the maximum speed the providers of this service allow is 100 Mbps. In the United
States, Verizon provides the service, which it calls FiOS (Fiber Optic Service), but limits the speed
to 30 Mbps. While Verizon has deployed the service on a large scale, other companies such as
AT&T provide similar service to some communities. When the optical fiber reaches the
subscriber’s living or work space, it is referred to as Fiber to the Home (FTTH). Subscribers
simply connect their computer, or LAN’s router, to the optical fiber socket in the wall. In some
communities, Verizon has also provided television programming on the same optical lines.
Optical Carrier
Companies willing to pay high fees can enjoy very high connection speeds. These services are
denoted with OC, the acronym for optical carrier, because they are provided through optical
fiber lines. The number next to OC refers to data speed in multiples of 51.84 Mbps, considered
the base rate bandwidth. Thus, when available, the services are denoted as C-1, C-3, C-9, C-12,
C-18, C-48, and so on through C-3072. For illustration, OC-768 (40 Gbps) enables you to
transmit the content of seven CDs in 1 second. Typical businesses that purchase the services are
ISPs, providers of search engines, and businesses that wish to support content-rich websites and
204
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Telecommuting: Pros and Cons
When you are introduced to people, you usually mention your
occupation, and then you might be asked, “Where do you
work?” Many employed people now answer, “At home.” They
do not commute; they telecommute, or, as some prefer to call
it, they telework. They have the shortest commute to work:
from the bedroom to another room in the home that is equipped
with a PC and a broadband Internet link. For an increasing
number of workers, IT provides all that’s needed to create the
goods
their
employers
sell:
software,
analysis
reports,
literature, tax returns, and many other types of output. If they
need data from the office, they can connect to their office
intranet
using
VPN
software
and
retrieve
the
required
information. If they need to talk to supervisors or coworkers,
they use their computers to conduct videoconferencing. When
they complete their product, they can simply email it or place it
on a remote server.
●
Telecommuting on the Rise. Depending on whom you
count as a telecommuter, the number could range from 2.9
million to 33.7 million. A special tabulation calculated by the
U.S. Census Bureau’s annual American Community Survey
put the 2009 U.S. telecommuter total at 2.9 million. This is a
61 percent increase from 2005. Most of the growth is due to
teleworking federal and state workers. President of the
Families and Work Institute, Ellen Galinsky, counts telecom-
muters as employees who work from home at least occa-
sionally. This number is staked at 13.7 million, 10 percent of
the nation’s waged and salaried employees, and has not
significantly altered from 2002-2008. At the highest point,
33.7 million, a 2009 report from WorldatWork’s Telework
Trendlines counts all employees, contractors, and business
owners who work from home at least one day per month.
This statistic is 17 percent higher than the 28.7 million tabu-
lated in 2006. According to the 2011 Workplace Forecast by
the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM), 43
percent of HR professionals believe that the demand for
workplace flexibility will have strategic impact on opera-
tions in future years (Meinert, 2011).
●
Employment
Opportunities.
Telecommuting
offers
employment alternatives to those who wish to spend more
time with their families. Some employees value spending
time raising their children more than money. Eliminating
the morning and afternoon commutes can reduce stress
levels, giving employees a better work/life balance. In addi-
tion, reduced stress levels increase employees’ quality of
life and productivity levels. Offering telecommuting to
potential employees serves as an incentive in acquiring
the best talent for the firm. Eighty-two employers on For-
tune’s 2011 list of “100 Best Companies to Work For”
offered
telecommuting
as
an
employment
option
for
employees (Meinert, 2011).
●
Saving Time and Money. Organizations offer telecom-
muting because it saves the cost of office space. Deloitte
LLP has offered most of its 45,000 nationwide employees the
option to telecommute up to five days a week for the past
15 years. Deloitte has reduced office space as leases
expired and has saved an additional 30 percent on energy
costs. In 2008, they saved $30 million after redesigning their
facilities to eliminate permanent office spaces for mobile
employees who no longer needed a permanent desk.
As an alternative, Deloitte offers “hoteling” where employ-
ees who usually telecommute can reserve a workstation
when they come into the office. Instead of traveling on a
plane to meet with a client, employees can save their time
and the company’s money by using a “telesuite.” Employ-
ees can use these to hold a videoconference with clients
and fellow employees in different locations. Eighty-six per-
cent of Deloitte’s workers telecommute at minimum 20 per-
cent of the workweek, according to Fortune (Meinert, 2011).
Telecommuters like their arrangement because they save
the time and money they would spend on commuting. Tele-
commuting reduces millions of tons of pollutants, saves bil-
lions of gallons of gasoline, and frees billions of personal
hours for leisure time.
●
The Downside. However, not everyone is so enthusiastic
about telecommuting. Sociologists have mixed opinions
about the phenomenon. On one hand, telecommuting allows
people to work who would otherwise remain outside the
workforce, such as older professionals and many disabled
people. On the other hand, it has been found that employers
tend to pressure telecommuters to work harder than office
workers. In the office an employee works a set number of
hours, but the home worker has no defined workday; his or
her workday is, the employer often assumes, 24 hours per
day. In addition, telecommuters are more estranged from
their fellow workers. Some business cultures are built on
hallway conversations, and for employees working at
home, they are left out of the loop. There is no office in
which to foster new social ties and camaraderie.
Telecommuting might also foster isolation. Teleworkers
share fewer experiences with other people. In addition,
leaving the workplace behind means leaving behind one
more community that gives many people a sense of belong-
ing, even if this belonging amounts only to having a sand-
wich together at lunchtime and complaining about the boss.
At the same time, some managers might prefer to see their
employees in the office and keep them in their “line of
sight.”
From another standpoint, not all companies have the appro-
priate technology systems to allow employees to work
seamlessly from their homes. As gas prices have flirted
between three and four dollars per gallon within the last
three years, more and more companies have tried offering
telecommuting to their employees. Tech Data Corp. began
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
205
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
high-volume traffic. However, media companies have also purchased such services because the
high speeds support streaming video. Among companies that use OC-768, for instance, are
Deutsche Telecom, NBC, Disney, the U.S. Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (the agency that developed the Internet), NASA, and Nippon TV.
Broadband Over Power Lines (BPL)
As mentioned in the discussion of communications media, electric power lines are capable of
carrying digital signals. Subscribers simply plug their BPL modem into standard electrical wall
outlets. Usually, utility companies partner with telecommunications companies to provide
Broadband over Power Lines (BPL). For example, Cinergy, a Cincinnati-based utility company
that serves customers in Ohio, Kentucky, and Indiana, partnered with Current Communications
to provide broadband service. The service is offered for a monthly fee of $20–40, based on
transmission speed desired by the subscriber. Some experts estimate that the BPL market in the
United States will grow, while others expect only households that currently use dial-up to link to
the Internet to adopt this type of service. Dial-up service is still being used by 6 percent of
homes. AOL has more than 3.5 million dial-up subscriber accounts (Todd, 2012).
The Impact of Networking Technologies
This section takes a look at networking technologies and trends that are likely to have a significant
impact on businesses and the management of information in the near future: broadband
telephony, radio frequency identification, and the convergence of digital technologies.
Broadband Telephony
While regular long-distance telephone companies charge according to the number of minutes a
call lasts, Internet service providers (ISPs) charge customers a flat monthly fee for connection to
the Internet. With the proper software and microphones attached to their computers, Internet
users can conduct long-distance and international conversations via their Internet connection
offering telecommuting to 530 of their 1,500 employees in
2008. What they found out, however, was that they did not
possess an adequate telephone system to route calls to the
next available employee working at home.
On a national level, telecommuting could severely affect
some segments of the economy. Imagine the huge drop in
revenue of New York City restaurants during lunchtime if
only half of the 3 million or so commuters did not rush to
grab lunch between 12 and 2 p.m. Some cities’ dining
industries could crumble if the telecommuting trend con-
tinues at the current pace. Many people live in cities mainly
because of proximity to their offices, thus further movement
to suburbs and remote residential areas would gut many
other industries in central cities.
Many workers, given the option to work at home, have
decided to return to the office. Interestingly, this also hap-
pens in the very industries that are so amenable to tele-
commuting,
such
as
software
development.
These
returning workers claim they missed social interaction
with their peers, hallway chats, lunches with friends, and
direct communication with fellow workers and supervisors.
But telecommuting has grown, and will probably continue
to grow, especially thanks to greater availability of broad-
band services and their declining monthly fees. Fewer than
half of all Americans have broadband service at home.
Among telecommuters, the proportion is greater than 90
percent. If the trend continues, offices occupied by organi-
zations will be significantly smaller than they are now and
will serve as the symbolic rather than physical centers of
the organizations’ activities.
While many employers are now offering telecommuting, in
order for them to experience a return on investment, they
must be able to reduce space and energy costs. Taking
Deloitte as an example, they eliminated office spaces for
workers who did not need a permanent desk and allowed
them to reserve space for the days they were coming into the
office. If employees only telecommute one or two days per
week and still require a permanent desk, the employer will not
be able to experience that ROI, says Jack Phillips, chairman of
ROI Institute. Fifty-five percent of employers allow employees to
work from home but only 17 percent offer it full-time. In years to
come, look for strategic advancements in the evolution of
telecommuting in order to reduce space and energy costs
while increasing employee productivity (Meinert, 2011).
206
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
for a fraction of regular calling costs. The technology is called Internet telephony, IP telephony,
or VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol). VoIP is a standard for software that digitizes and
compresses voice signals and transmits the bits via the Internet link. Organizations can purchase
the proper software or use the services of companies that specialize in providing IP telephony.
Companies such as Vonage, Comcast, and many others offer inexpensive use of their VoIP
telephone-to-telephone voice communication.
Computer-to-computer calls can be conducted free of charge by using the service of a
company such as Skype or iCall. Phone-to-phone service requires an additional modem, but it
does not require a new phone or phone number, and it does not require routing calls through a
home computer. iCall offers two methods of free phone calling. You may initiate a call to any
telephone in the U.S. or Canada or call other iCall users for no charge.
VoIP provides flexibility for business organizations with multiple locations as well as mobile
employees. VoIP can include several services such as text translation that can be read through
email, instant messaging, virtual meetings and videoconferencing.
Google Voice provides telecommunication services by assigning a phone number that is not
linked to a device or location, but to a person. Their product allows the user to manage all of
their phones (mobile, home, office or VoIP lines) using the Google Voice phone number. For
example, you can specify that when someone calls your Google Voice number, your cell phone,
office, and home phones ring simultaneously. The service can also send email or text message
notifications when a voice mail is received, as well as call screening to listen to the caller’s voice
before deciding whether to accept the call or send it to voice mail.
PC-to-PC conversations
can be conducted over
the Internet at no cost
using services such as
Skype
VoIP can save companies and households money. Businesses are converting to VoIP systems
from conventional PBXs (private branch exchanges). According to the research firm In-Stat, 20
percent of U.S. firms used VoIP in 2006, and 80 percent were expected to use VoIP by 2010
(Wenzel, 2011). The global market for VoIP solutions is expected to grow to over $18.1 billion
by 2014 (Anonymous, 2011b).
JIG/MUIR, of Oakland California, used an aging PBX phone system. After implementing a new
system from Boxfl, it saved $1,200 per month while increasing the bandwidth of its system by 300
percent. The system provided many of the features described above (Wenzel, 2011). LA Fitness
needed to find a solution to link its 20,000 employees at over 370 clubs around the country. Their
expansion across the United States complicated its ability to interact, share information, and
provide customer service. LA Fitness deployed an enterprise-level communication system using
VoIP that was more cost effective and productive (Anonymous, 2011a).
As some experts have predicted, the future of telephony is in the convergence of the cell
phone and VoIP phone: you will use only one mobile phone. When outside the home or office,
SKYPE
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
207
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
you will use the cell phone network; when back home or in the office, the phone will
communicate through a VoIP service. This will reduce the higher cost of cell phone minutes.
Radio Frequency Identification
In Chapter 3, “Business Functions and Supply Chains,” you learned about the expanded
efficiency and business intelligence that companies, especially in manufacturing and retail, can
gain from one particular type of communications technology: radio frequency identification
(RFID). This section explains in more detail how RFID works. RFID tags can be very tiny, about
the size of a rice grain, or several square inches, depending on the amount of information they
need to contain and the environment in which they are used. They are not always flat; they can
be cylindrical. The tags need very little power. Passive tags use power from the reader that
queries them; active tags have their own tiny batteries, which increase the range of the reading
range. These tiny batteries last a long time.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Get Chipped
RFID chips have been utilized in many aspects of the business world including retail, transportation, and
pharmaceuticals. But want to know the newest place you can find an RFID chip? You. At a 2012 hacker
conference in northwest Washington, a do-it-yourselfer offered the chip installing service for only $30
and a signed waiver. The RFID chip was slipped underneath a layer of skin in the patients’ hands
between the thumb and forefinger. People with the RFID chip installed can use it to access their house,
unlock their cell phone, or even start their car. Although some hold privacy concerns, others are eager
to be on the forefront of RFID technology advancements.
Source: Greenburg, A. (2012). Want An RFID Chip Implanted Into Your Hand? Here’s What The DIY
Surgery Looks Like (Video). Forbes. Retrieved from http://www.forbes.com website: http://www.forbes.
com/sites/andygreenberg/2012/08/13/want-an-rfid-chip-implanted-into-your-hand-heres-what-the-diy-
surgery-looks-like-video/
An RFID system works as follows: objects are equipped, often embedded, with a tag that
contains a transponder. A transponder is a radio transceiver (transmitter-receiver) that is
activated for transmission by a signal transmitted to it. The tag is equipped with digital memory
that is given a unique code. If the tag is used to identify a product, it contains an EPC (elec-
tronic product code). The interrogator, a combination of an antenna, a transceiver, and a
decoder, emits a signal activating the RFID tag so the interrogator can read data from it and
write data to it. Although the interrogator also writes to the tag, it is often called a reader. When
an RFID tag enters the reader’s electromagnetic zone, it detects the reader’s activation signal. The
reader decodes the data stored in the tag’s memory, and the data is passed to a host computer for
processing.
Wal-Mart, British Tesco, and German Metro AG, three of the world’s largest retailers,
embarked on a project that might radically change supply chains. They required that suppliers
use RFID. Hundreds complied, among them Procter & Gamble, the world’s largest supplier of
consumer products. The companies use microchips that are embedded in products to replace the
ubiquitous bar codes for tracking and checkout at store registers. Each microchip holds a product
identification
number.
The
microchips
communicate
with
wireless
computers,
including
handheld and laptop computers, as they are moved in the production line, packed, picked,
shipped, unloaded, shelved, and paid for by customers. As the item moves, the information
about its location is communicated to a network of computers to which all businesses involved
in the production and sale have access. This is often a Wi-Fi network. The benefits are a just-
in-time (JIT) system that minimizes inventory throughout the supply chain to almost zero, and
shelves that are always stocked. JIT, or a situation that is close to JIT, can be accomplished
thanks to up-to-the-minute information about available inventory and when the next shipment
from a supplier is needed. “Smart shelves,” equipped with tiny wireless transceivers, alert
208
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
employees whenever the shelf is running out of units, so they can put more units on the shelf
immediately.
RFID is used for many other purposes as well, as Figure 6.7 shows. The investment in this
technology yields efficiency rewards almost immediately to large companies, but is expensive for
small suppliers. The average price of an EPC tag of the standard used by Wal-Mart, Tesco, Metro,
and the U.S. Department of Defense was 5 cents in 2007.
F I G U R E 6.7
Various examples of RFID
applications in businesses
Immigration
Access Control
Cards used to replace door keys.
Health Care
Tag people who enter and leave an epidemic zone.
Pharmaceuticals
Reduce drug counterfeiting.
Tracking products in pallets and on shelves.
Contactless payment.
Transportation
At airport, safety inspection of tagged luggage.
Antitheft Measures
Track life cycle of farm animals (e.g., feeding
and immunization).
Equip each cow with a unique ID to track diseases.
Animal Tracking
Track pets.
Keep children within school.
Track prisoners on probation and prevent fleeing.
People Tracking
Livestock Management
Retail
Transponders integrated into car keys. Only a legal
key can start the engine.
Use
Example
Several retailers have announced plans to implement RFID technology. The RFID technology
will provide EPC-enabled technology for the items sold by the retailers. Their adoption of RFID/
EPC technology is heavily dependent on whether suppliers will cooperate by adopting the
technology also. An October 2011 study by Accenture found that 58 suppliers and 56 retailers in
North America believe that this technology needs to be adopted by more than 50 percent of
retailers and suppliers. Item-level tagging is considered the most significant influence in
increasing RFID/EPC adoption. Previously, apparel transported in cartons needed to be scanned
manually, one item at a time. With the new technology, suppliers, distributors, and retailers can
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
209
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
identify and capture item-level information for an entire carton immediately by reading the RFID
tags (Napolitano, 2012).
The benefits of implementing RFID technology are clear. The American Productivity &
Quality Center (APQC) believes that RFID implementation will improve distribution processes,
reduce distribution center and warehouse costs, improve relationships with suppliers, and reduce
inventory. The traceability at the item-level is believed to also increase the safety of consumer,
pharmaceutical and food products (Partida, 2012).
The use of RFID can also improve the customer experience. Sibuya, a Japanese men’s store,
has tagged garment hangers. When a customer removes a garment from the rack, a display
begins to show details about the product and recommend accessories for the product. In
addition to providing customized advertising, it also tracks the number of times a garment is
removed by customers (Liszewski, 2011).
It is expected that the price of RFID tags will continue to decrease to a cent or a fraction of a
cent. When the price lowers sufficiently, you might begin to see many other uses of the
technology as businesses continue to focus on employee productivity and operational efficiency.
Converging Technologies
Recall the discussion of converging hardware technologies in the previous chapter. Convergence
occurs also in networking technologies. Cell phones used to be able to transmit and receive only
through a dedicated network of analog or digital transceiver towers. Now many are constructed
with dual technologies, so that they can serve both as a “traditional” cell phone and a wireless
web phone. When the circuitry detects that the phone is within the range of a hotspot, calling
switches to VoIP to save cost.
New home television sets are being designed to connect to cable, satellites, and the Internet,
not only alternately, but concurrently. Thus, we will be able to watch a sports game and chat
online about it at the same time through the same device, using two different networking
technologies. Tablets and smartphones can already function as television sets and phones. For
individuals, this means they can carry a single device that will connect them to any type of
network, erasing the lines between radio, television, telephone, and Internet surfing. Appliance
manufacturers are designing “smart appliances” that interact with their owners, alerting them to
issues such as a refrigerator door left open for more than a few minutes, or enabling them to
start a dryer remotely. Designers are working on a “smart fridge” that alerts the owner about
expiration dates on perishable items (Barclay, 2012). For businesses, converging technologies
offer an opportunity to provide new information services and manage a more effective and
efficient salesforce.
POINT OF
INTEREST
In the Future …
We have seen cellphones evolve from the size of a briefcase to smaller than the size of a playing card.
Their capabilities have expanded to the point where a smartphone may be the only device we need
when we leave the house. Users can now talk, text, surf, video chat, email, stream, shop, read, game,
tweet, navigate, take photos, and much more. So what’s next in technology convergence? What other
capabilities can be put in a smartphone to make our lives easier? Look for the screen quality and size to
increase to allow users to rely solely on their smartphone to watch their favorite news, sports, weather,
and TV shows. And why bring your camera or video camera when your smartphone will be able to take
high-quality photos and videos with professional features? Smartphones will continue to add capabilities
that will make us more reliant on them because they simplify and augment our busy day-to-day lives.
Source: Miles, S. (2012). What will your next mobile phone look like? Retrieved from http://articles.cnn.
com website: http://articles.cnn.com/2012-02-28/tech/tech_mobile_mobile-trends-mwc_1_mobile-phone
-qualcomm-phone-makers/2?_s=PM:TECH
210
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Wireless technologies can be combined in the same device to enhance functionality. For
example, a portable digital music and video player can use Wi-Fi to communicate with your PC
or another Wi-Fi device (possibly another music/video player) to download files. It can then use
Bluetooth to transmit the music to your wireless earphones. Local radio stations can broadcast to
listeners everywhere over the Internet. With proper software you can then select from the songs
to which you have just listened and downloaded to your portable player or home computer.
Currently, RFID technology can be used by your phone to read the electronic code of a
product in a store and compare its price to the prices offered online by other retailers. Instead
of asking for human help in finding an item in a supermarket, your phone may be able to
guide you to the right aisle after it identifies the EPC of the product. And, as is already done in
some countries, you will be able to pay for what you purchase by using your phone instead of a
credit card.
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
211
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Summary
●
Telecommunications is communication over dis-
tance, primarily communication of bits represent-
ing many forms of data and information. In the
past decade, telecommunications technology has
driven the major developments in the dissemina-
tion and use of information.
●
Telecommunications technology has changed the
business environment. Businesspeople are increas-
ingly more mobile; they can use cellular phones for
greater availability to their employers and custo-
mers, using the phone for both voice and data com-
munications.
Videoconferencing
brings
together
people who are thousands of miles apart. Peer-
to-peer file sharing enables sharing of research, soft-
ware code, and artistic works.
●
Different media have different bandwidths, meaning
that they are capable of carrying different numbers of
bits per second (bps) without garbling messages.
Wired media include twisted pair, coaxial cable, and
optical fiber. Wireless media rely on radio waves,
including terrestrial and satellite microwave.
●
Networks are classified according to their reach
and complexity. When computers are connected
locally within an office, a campus, or a home, the
arrangement is called a local area network (LAN). A
metropolitan area network (MAN) connects LANs
within a radius of about 50 kilometers (30 miles).
When computers communicate over longer dis-
tances, the network is called a wide area network
(WAN). Personal area networks (PANs) connect
individual devices at short range.
●
Although it uses the public Internet, a network can
be turned into a virtual private network (VPN) by
using advanced security measures.
●
Network protocols are sets of rules to which all
devices on a network must adhere. Communication
on the Internet adheres to a set of protocols called
TCP/IP. Ethernet has long been a popular protocol
for wired LANs. Wireless protocols offer many oppor-
tunities for more people to enjoy Internet links and for
mobility while communicating. The most important
are the IEEE 802.xx protocols, which include the pop-
ular Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and WiMAX standards.
●
Wireless technologies make it easy and affordable
to create wireless LANs (WLANs) and hotspots.
They allow workers mobility while retrieving infor-
mation in warehouses and other work environ-
ments. They enable airline and retail customers to
link to the Internet with portable computers, and
make the reading of utility meters much less labor
intensive and more accurate.
●
Organizations and individuals have a variety of
choices when subscribing to networking services.
They can choose among digital subscriber line
(DSL), cable, T1 and T3 lines, satellite links, fixed
wireless service, optical fiber to the premises, opti-
cal carriers (OC), and Broadband over Power Lines
(BPL).
●
As Internet links become faster, Internet telephony,
also known as Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP),
is gaining in popularity. Several companies offer
the service, which is significantly less expensive
than a landline service while providing significant
features
to
create
flexibility
and
employee
productivity.
●
Wireless
technologies
support
the
increasingly
popular RFID technologies. RFID supports a variety
of noncontact identification and payment mechan-
isms, from quick toll and gas payment to cattle
tracking to sophisticated supply chain manage-
ment, and many future uses are anticipated. This
adoption of this new technology has only begun
to influence the processes of distributing, tracking
and identifying hard good items. As the technology
matures and business innovation develops, RFID
will become part of everyday life.
●
Much like hardware, telecommunications technolo-
gies are merging. The same device can now use
several different networks simultaneously, such as
cellular telephone networks, the Internet, and tele-
vision broadcasts.
●
Increasing numbers of employees now telecom-
mute. Telecommuting has advantages, but it does
not serve some basic human needs, such as social-
izing during lunch break and the clear separation
between work and family obligations.
212
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
The contractors have installed the network cables to
the places that Tyler has specified. Now they need to
know what type of outlets to install. Tyler also needs
to know what additional equipment and services need
to be purchased. The number of server workstations
that should be installed needs to be determined,
especially if they are considering also using tablets.
The restaurant’s current use of the Internet and the
web is not extremely high. Tyler anticipates that he
will need to access the restaurant’s webpages for
redesign and maintenance as well as general web
access for the restaurant for research and purchases.
But he also wants to give Wi-Fi access to their
customers, and wonders if they should do it now,
and how that would affect the cost of equipment and
Internet service. He also needs to consider phone
equipment for the new location. What are their
options?
What Is Your Advice?
1. What type of network equipment would be needed
to provide wireless access for the servers’ tablets
as well as customers’ smartphones?
2. Tyler has convinced his father that Internet ser-
vices are needed for the new location. What
options should he consider for Internet access for
the new location?
3. What type of connections should Tyler tell the con-
tractors to install for personal computer devices?
Do you think they should install such connections?
Why or why not?
New Perspectives
1. Should the use of tablets be phased in? Should the
traditional
workstations
be
used
as
backup?
Should the workstations be used at the bar only?
What advice would you provide to Tyler and
Michael?
2. Michael is concerned about the cost of providing
Wi-Fi access to customers, and about wireless
security for the restaurant’s operations. Would it
be reasonable to purchase two routers, one for
customer access and the other for server tablets?
3. Michael and Tyler discussed the need for a phone
system for the new location. Tyler believed that an
Internet connection could be used to provide
phone service to the restaurant. What are the
costs, hardware/software requirements and issues
that they should consider?
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
213
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Key Terms
access point (AP), 197
backbone, 196
bandwidth, 189
bits per second (bps), 189
Bluetooth, 199
bridge, 195
broadband, 189
Broadband over Power Lines
(BPL), 192
coaxial cable, 190
dial-up connection, 195
digital subscriber line (DSL), 203
DNS (Domain Name System), 197
downstream, 201
dynamic IP address, 197
EMI (electromagnetic interference),
191
encryption, 198
EPC (Electronic Product Code), 208
Ethernet, 197
Fiber to the Home (FTTH), 204
fixed wireless, 204
Gigabit Ethernet, 197
host, 196
hotspot, 197
IEEE 802.11, 197
Internet service provider (ISP), 194
IP address, 196
local area network (LAN), 193
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), 200
metropolitan area network
(MAN), 193
microwaves, 191
modem, 195
near-field communication (NFC),
188
network, 192
network interface card (NIC), 195
node, 192
OC (optical carrier), 204
peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing, 188
peer-to-peer LAN, 193
personal area network (PAN), 194
protocol, 196
repeater, 195
RFI (radio frequency interference),
191
router, 195
scalability, 193
server, 193
static IP address, 197
switch, 195
T1 and T3 lines, 203
TCP/IP (Transmission Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol), 196
telecommunications, 185
transmission rate, 189
twisted pair cable, 190
upstream, 201
value-added network (VAN), 194
videoconferencing, 187
virtual private network (VPN), 195
VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol),
207
wide area network (WAN), 194
Wi-Fi, 197
WiMAX, 199
wireless LAN (WLAN), 193
Review Questions
1. If all the paths of data communications were
visible to the human eye, we might be over-
whelmed. Why? Give some examples.
2. What makes one medium capable of greater data
communication speed than another?
3. Which medium currently enables the fastest data
communications?
4. Repeaters are used on many communication lines.
What is their purpose? What does a repeater do?
5. Networking professionals speak of “the last mile.”
What is “the last mile,” and what is its significance?
6. Would an astronomy observatory 20 miles away
from a city or town likely be able to get DSL
service? Why?
7. What risks to organizations does the growing use
of networks pose?
8. What is a virtual private network? Why is it called
“virtual”?
9. What is a network protocol?
10. What are the technical advantages of optical
fibers over other communications media?
11. The same communication medium can transport
three different services. This is true of two media.
Which media? What are the three services?
12. What do you believe are the security and privacy
issues associated with placing RFID chips in cloth-
ing? How would you feel if the RFID chip remained
in your clothing while you were wearing it?
13. What is VoIP? If you were a business owner, what
factors would you consider to be important in
order to switch to VoIP for your phone system?
14. What is BPL? Why is the technology potentially
available to almost every home?
15. Explain the notions of WAN, LAN, MAN, and PAN.
16. What are hotspots, and how can they help
businesspeople?
17. What is the purpose of municipally provided
WiMAX, and why is it in competition with sub-
scriber broadband services?
18. Cellular phones are already wireless. Why should
companies be interested in equipping employees
with Wi-Fi-enabled mobile phones?
214
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Discussion Questions
19. Wi-Fi is all around us. Is there any downside to its
pervasiveness?
20. People express themselves differently when they
speak (either face to face or via the telephone)
versus when they send and receive email. What
are the differences? Which do you prefer when
communicating with someone you don’t know
personally? Which do you prefer when you know
the person?
21. Every home with access to the Internet can now
inexpensively become a hotspot. How? Are there
any risks in turning a home into a hotspot?
22. What are the implications of telecommunications
for group work?
23. As broadband services cover larger regions and
become less expensive, the number of small
businesses and home businesses grows. What is
the relationship?
24. Some organizations stopped allocating offices to
their sales representatives. Why, and is this a
wise move?
25. List and explain the benefits of videoconferencing
to an organization. List and explain the benefits to
society.
26. Anything that does not take space can be traded
solely via telecommunications networks. Do you
agree? Explain your answer.
27. Do you see any undesirable effects of humans
communicating more and more via computer
networks rather than in person or over the tele-
phone? What don’t you like and why? What do
you like about it?
28. List several jobs in which telecommuting would
be infeasible. Explain why.
29. Wi-Fi circuitry is now embedded in consumer
electronic devices such as digital cameras and
cell phones. Give an example of what you could
do with the Wi-Fi capability of a digital camera.
30. If you were given the opportunity to telecom-
mute, would you? Why or why not?
31. Suppose that you are a middle manager. Would
you allow the people who report to you to tele-
commute? Why or why not?
32. As a supervisor, would you be more inclined to
promote your telecommuting or nontelecommut-
ing subordinates, or would you be egalitarian?
Why?
Applying Concepts
33. James Marachio completed his book, How to
Become a Millionaire Upon Graduation. He used
a word processor to type the manuscript. He
saved the book as a file of 8.8 MB. James lives in
Charlotte. The publisher asked that he transmit
the book via the Internet to the publisher’s office
in Boston. James can transmit the file at a
guaranteed speed of 25 Mbps. Because each
packet of data transmitted must also contain
some non-data bits, assume the total number
of bits to transmit is equivalent to 9 MB.
How long (in minutes) does it take to transmit the
book? Ignore the distance between the cities.
Remember how many bytes make up 1 MB. Show
your calculations clearly using a spreadsheet. Use
measurement units throughout your calculation.
Email the spreadsheet file to your professor.
34. You use a cable modem to transmit a report from
your office to headquarters. Find a website
capable of testing upload and download speed
(like www.speedtest.net). Since the transmission
protocol adds additional bits to data bytes,
assume that, on average, there is 1 additional bit
for each transmitted byte. On average, a page
contains 3,000 characters, including spaces. You
are allotted only 3 minutes for the transmission.
How many pages can you transmit?
35. Of the residential telecommunications services
listed in Figure 6.6, find out which are available
where you live and how much they cost. You
might find several DSL and cable services, and
perhaps also satellite and BPL services. Calculate
the ratio of maximum bit rate per dollar (down-
stream) to monthly fee for each service. Which
service provides the “biggest bang for the buck,”
that is, the greatest speed per dollar of monthly
fee?
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
215
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Hands-On Activities
36. Broadband services provided in Japan, South
Korea, and Canada are usually faster and less
expensive than in the United States. Use the web
to research why this is so. Write a one-page
report discussing the reasons.
37. Search the web for a site that enables you to
check your high-speed (broadband) link: DSL,
cable, Fiber to the Premises, or (if you connect
from school) T1 or T3 line. Follow the instruc-
tions. Usually, you simply have to click one but-
ton. Do so and wait for the response. Print out the
response. Wait a minute, and repeat the process.
The speeds are likely to be different. Why? Type
up the answer, and submit with the two printouts
analyzing the speed of your connection.
38. You are a telecommunications guru and love to
help individuals and businesses. Assume that
dial-up, cable, DSL, T3 line, and satellite links to the
Internet are available everywhere unless the
particular scenario indicates otherwise. Consider
the following scenarios and suggest the best over-
all type of link (consider communication speed,
cost, and any other factor you believe is relevant).
Each scenario is independent of the others. For
each scenario, explain why you selected the option.
a. An author works at home writing articles for a
magazine. Once per week she must transmit
an article to her editor. She rarely uses the link
for any other purpose.
b. A large company maintains its own website for
online catalogs and purchase transactions by
its customers. Hundreds of customers visit the
sites daily and make purchases.
c. A small business uses the Internet for daily
research. Owners have heard that some links
are shared by other subscribers in the same
area, which might slow down the connection
or even pose security threats. Thus, they
would like to avoid such a service. They do
need a speed of at least 200 Kbps.
d. A farm in New Mexico needs a link of at least
200 Kbps. People on the farm can receive
television signals only through antennas. The
closest telephone central office is 12 miles away.
e. An Internet service provider specializes in
hosting websites of small businesses.
f. A cruise ship wants to provide Internet service
to vacationers on the third deck. The ship
cruises in the Caribbean. The link’s speed must
be at least 250 Kbps.
Team Activities
39. Team up with another student in class. Each team
member needs to find a person they know who
telecommutes and interview them. It could be a
parent, family member, friend’s parent, or a fam-
ily friend. Ask them if they were offered telecom-
muting when they were hired, if not then, when
was telecommuting offered? What made them
want to telecommute? How often do they tele-
commute? What technology does their employer
make available to them when working from
home? Do they still have a permanent workspace
at their office? Do they enjoy working from home?
Do they miss the office or the people there? Do
their colleagues telecommute as well? Ask other
questions you believe are pertinent as well.
40. After conducting your respective interviews,
download free videoconferencing software. Hold
a videoconference with your partner, from sepa-
rate locations, to compare answers and discuss
the pros and cons of telecommuting from an
employee standpoint, an employer’s standpoint,
and whether you would like to telecommute. After
your videoconference, separately write a two-
page reflection on your experience. Write the first
page on the interview on telecommuting, whether
you would like to telecommute, and why. Write
the second page on your experience with video-
conferencing with your partner and the benefits
and takeaways of videoconferencing in a profes-
sional setting.
216
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Food for Thought and Profit
People need food to survive. However, it is also a
commodity. High volume. Razor thin gross margin.
Aggressive competition. Food stores can gain market
share and profitability with efficient operations and
innovative,
competent
management.
That’s
how
Foley Food and Vending survives and also prospers.
A family-owned business based in Norwood,
Massachusetts, they began their operations in 1973
and now maintain seven routes managed by its
second generation. Similar to the “big players” in
the
food
retail
business,
the
integration
of
information
technology
is
at
the
core
of
their
profitability and operating efficiency. However, for a
small organization such as Foley, it also allows them
to carve out a market to remain competitive.
The company started its business by selling
canned soft drinks in vending machines. Over the
next six years, the company expanded its product
line into snack foods, coffee, and food over three
routes. During the 1980s, the business expanded
enough
that
a
10,000
square
foot
building
was
needed as a warehouse. Their routes and operations
grew through building new accounts as well as
acquiring some business from competitors. In the
mid-1990s with four routes, the owners decided to
invest in vending machine software in order to
support their growth. Their original software was
developed by Rutherford and Associates. Their DOS-
based (the pre-Windows, Disk Operating System for
personal computers) software tracked product sales
at the vending machine level.
A few years later, another technology company
introduced new Windows-based vending machine
management software. Streamware, also based in
Massachusetts, agreed to an arrangement with Foley
to track cash readings and item level sales from
vending machines using DEX handheld units. Drivers
used the DEX handheld units to transfer data from the
vending machines on all of Foley’s routes.
The early adoption of this vending machine
technology provided the foundation for advanced
products.
In
2005,
Foley
implemented
Internet-
connected vending machines equipped with video
touchscreens, named Quickstore24. Their successes
with
previous
technology
use
allowed
Foley
to
become
one
of
the
first
to
install
these
new
advanced
technology
vending
machines.
These
machines
integrated
the
use
of
thumbprints
to
identify a customer initiating a form of payment for
their purchases. In addition, the machines accepted
other forms of payment and printed coupons from
customers. The real-time reporting provided by these
vending machines through network connections with
the home office created another opportunity. Foley
now
could
initiate
pre-kitting
the
routes
in
the
warehouse. This process allowed the preparation of
accurate and efficient inventory restocking for the
route drivers. Management believed that pre-kitting
allowed the company to operate more efficiently,
especially during the recession in 2008.
The use of Quickstore24 has also helped the
company expand into a new model: self-checkout
markets.
This
new
business
model
allows
the
purchase of a large variety of products in open
shelves
and refrigeration
units.
Restocking
these
markets is much faster and more efficient than
stocking
vending
machines.
The
self-checkout
markets are equipped with a kiosk that allows the
customer to scan UPC bar codes for each product
they wish to purchase. The kiosk processes the
payment for purchases through cash, credit card, or a
stored-value card. The kiosk’s video touchscreen also
displays
advertisements
and
offers
promotions
including a chance to win market credit.
Source: Maras, E. (2011, May). Foley Food & Vending strikes
back
hard
in
Boston
with
TECHNOLOGY
SOLUTIONS.
Automatic Merchandiser, 53, 58-60, 62-64.
Thinking About the Case
1. When management said that pre-kitting helped to
support more efficient operations and inventory,
discuss what you believe they found.
2. The vending machines capable of Internet con-
nectivity are more expensive to purchase and
operate for the company. Discuss how the new
technology and connectivity benefit the
organization.
3. Technology adoption is often called either “lead-
ing edge” or “bleeding edge.” Do you believe
that the pre-Quickstore24 technology implemen-
ted by Foley had any benefit to the organization?
Or was it an inefficient use of funds and
resources?
Networks Take Importance in Health Care
A study by The Leapfrog Group, a Washington, D.C.
voluntary
organization
of
healthcare
product
purchasers,
concluded
that
better
information
technology could prevent more than 50 percent of
erroneous drug prescriptions. IT in general, and
networking technologies in particular, could save
lives and morbidity in hospitals. Most hospitals have
caught up with new networking technologies only in
recent years.
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
217
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Children’s Memorial Hospital in Chicago was no
exception
until
recently.
The
hospital
is
part
of
Northwestern
University’s
Feinberg
School
of
Medicine. It is now ranked as the best children’s
hospital in Illinois and one of the best in the United
States. In 2006, the 1,100 pediatric specialists treated
over 100,000 patients and had more than 365,000
outpatient visits.
For many years the hospital had a hodgepodge of
communications technologies: landline phones, a local
network to support cell phones, a wireless surveillance
system, pagers, a radio frequency system for tracking
the electronic tags that doctors wear, and a variety of
patient-monitoring systems. It did not have a way
to ensure accurate drug administration, and this was
one reason to reconsider the hospital’s communication
infrastructure.
Often, one signal interfered with another, creating
several areas where cell phones and pagers could
not function. Structural challenges also presented
problems. Hospitals are built from steel floors and
many concrete walls. Thick concrete and lead walls are
built around radiation rooms. All of these materials
weaken radio signals or block them out altogether.
The hospital’s Director of IT started to look for a
comprehensive solution. This would include not only
better
communications,
but
also
improved
technologies for the bedside staff and computerized
drug prescription entry. He preferred a single system
that would address their many challenges. After an
extensive
search,
he
selected
a
company
called
InnerWireless
to
deploy
a
broadband
system.
InnerWireless produces a system it calls Medical-
grade Wireless Utility.
The system uses passive wireless, which means
that
the
devices
the
staff
uses
activate
the
networking circuitry. In active wireless, electronic
devices must provide electric power to convert radio
signals. Passive systems do not need to be powered.
Therefore, with Medical-grade Wireless Utility, fewer
access points had to be installed and maintained.
Other systems would require more access points and
still would not totally eliminate dead spots. The
InnerWireless system requires few access points but
still
provides
uninterrupted
communications
throughout
the
building.
The
technology
also
includes a distributed antenna system. This allows
the
same
wireless
systems
to
support
cellular
phones, pagers, Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11), two-way radio
for facilities management, and first-responder radio
for fire, police, and emergency medical teams.
InnerWireless specializes in in-building wireless
communication,
and
has
installed
its
system
in
several hospitals. It customizes the deployment for
every
hospital
to
ensure
that
communication
is
available
throughout
each
building.
Typically,
a
wireless router is installed in the basement. From the
router a cable is run up through the building’s “spine,”
and a distribution system is located on each floor.
Now, physicians enter drug prescriptions into a
database for each patient. The hospital’s pharmacy
receives the transmitted prescription and prepares
the drug, then attaches the proper bar-code to it.
Nurses use carts equipped with a small networked
computer that is also equipped with a bar-code
scanner. On their rounds, before they administer
drugs to patients, they scan the bar-code. The data is
automatically
communicated
to
the
pharmacy
database, and the nurse can see if the drug and
dosage are the right ones for the patient. Nurses can
also use email through the same computers. The
error
rate
of
drug
administration
has
decreased
significantly.
Electronic
medical
records
(EMRs),
wireless
devices, and mobile technology have increased the
importance
of
hospital
information
technology
networks. Wi-Fi allows wireless blood pressure cuffs
to automatically store and transfer readings to a
patient’s records. Doctors can then view patient
records on their iPads. Radiology images have also
migrated from the use of film to electronic imaging.
These
images
can
now
be
stored,
viewed,
and
distributed by medical personnel without having to
find the traditional film images.
The reliance on technology networks becomes
more imperative. CIO Cathy Bruno from Eastern
Main Healthcare Systems says “To have a single
unified
electronic
patient
record
across
all
our
locations, so that information is available no matter
where our patients access are, we need network
connectivity.”
While
it
reduces
the
need
for
traditional hardcopy patient records, it also means
that network connectivity must be available without
downtimes or reduction in download speeds. The
introduction of portable tablets has promoted the
need for electronic patient recordkeeping. Medical
personnel can now “carry” the technology
with
them. The availability of wireless medical devices
such as blood pressure cuffs, must be able to ID a
patient
and
transmit
the
data
securely
and
accurately.
Sources: Anonymous. (2007). Children’s Memorial Hospital,
Chicago. from http://www.childrensmemorial.org; O’Connor,
F. (2012). Hospital networks take key role in healthcare.
Network World, 29(14), 11-11,16; Pettis, A. (2006). Patient
Care
Goes
Wireless;
Children’s
memorial
Hospital,
of
Chicago, is like many of the facilities that serve the critically
ill. eWeek, 23(15), 1-N1,N4.
Thinking About the Case
1. The hospital already had bar-coding before the
new networking system was installed. What can
be done now that could not be done before to
reduce drug administration errors?
2
PART
218
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
2. As the case explains, passive wireless ensures
full coverage of communications in an
entire building. Why is this so important in
hospitals?
3. The new communication network is more than
just an Internet hotspot. It supports several
modes of communication. What does this mean
from a maintenance perspective?
4. The benefits of EMRs are clearly positive for
medical facilities. What are the challenges for
maintaining patient care records electronically
versus the traditional paper hardcopies?
References
Anonymous. (2011a, November 2011). LA Fitness
Leverages Microsoft Lync Solution, Entertainment
Close-Up.
Anonymous. (2011b). VoIP is the Next Wave to Ride
On. Communications Today.
Anonymous (Producer). (2012a). World’s First 5G
WiFi 802.11ac SoC. Retrieved from http://
www.broadcom.com/docs/press/80211ac_for_
Enterprise.pdf
Anonymous. (2012b). What is Isis? Retrieved
12/13/2012, from http://www.paywithisis.com/
whatis.xhtml
Anonymous. (2013a). About 3GPP. Retrieved June 14,
2013, from http://www.3gpp.org/About-3GPP
Anonymous. (2013b). LTE Keywords and Acronyms.
Retrieved June 13, 2013, from http://www.3gpp.
org/Technologies/Keywords-Acronyms/LTE
Barclay, E. (2012). The ‘Smart Fridge’ Finds The Lost
Lettuce, For A Price. the salt. http://www.npr.org/
blogs/thesalt/2012/05/03/151968878/the-smart-
fridge-finds-the-lost-lettuce-for-a-price
Captain, S. (2012). Internet grows by trillions of
addresses, as IPV6 rolls out worldwide. Tech News
Daily. http://www.foxnews.com/tech/2012/06/06/
internet-grows-by-trillions-addresses-as-ipv6-rolls-
out-worldwide/
Children’s Memorial Hospital, Chicago. (2007). from
http://www.childrensmemorial.org
Inner Wireless. (2007). Retrieved April 2007, from
http://www.innerwireless.com
Leber, J. (2012). A Banking Giant Makes a Mobile Pay-
ment Bet. Technology Review, 3. Retrieved from
MIT Technology Review website: http://www.
technologyreview.com/news/428453/a-banking-
giant-makes-a-mobile-payment-bet/
Liszewski, A. (2011). RFID Clothing Hangers Sell
Harder than Sales Clerks. Gizmodo. http://
gizmodo.com/5850430/rfid-clothing-hangers-
sell-harder-than-sales-clerks
Meinert, D. (2011). Make Telecommuting Pay Off.
HRMagazine, 56(6), 33-37.
Napolitano, M. (2012, Apr). RFID surges ahead. Modern
Materials Handling, 67, S48-S50.
O’Connor, F. (2012). Hospital networks take key role in
healthcare. Network World, 29(14), 11-11,16.
Partida, B. (2012). No Easy Answers on RFID Strategy.
Supply Chain Management Review, 16(2), 78-80.
Pettis, A. (2006). Patient Care Goes Wireless; Children’s
memorial Hospital, of Chicago, is like many of the
facilities that serve the critically ill. eWeek, 23(15),
1-N1,N4.
Quick, D. (2010). Transmission speeds of 100Mbps
over 1km on existing copper networks. Gizmag.
http://www.gizmag.com/alcatel-lucent-dsl-
phantom-mode/14888/
Read, B. (2011). Continuing the Service. Customer
Inter@ction Solutions, 30(4), 18-20.
Todd, D. M. (2012). Plenty of Internet users cling to
slow dial-up connections. Post-Gazette.com. http://
www.post-gazette.com/stories/business/news/
plenty-of-internet-users-cling-to-slow-dial-up-
connections-85360/
Wenzel, E. (2011, Jun). VoIP Migration Leads to Sav-
ings and Employee Mobility. PC World, 29, 30-30.
Zager, M. (2012). Courting Data Roaming Customers.
Rural Telecommunications, 31(5), 25-26,28.
CHAPTER 6
Business Networks and Telecommunications
219
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
 
CHAPTER
© S.john/Shutterstock.com
PART
seven
DATABASES AND DATA
WAREHOUSES
Learning Objectives
As a professional, you will use databases and likely help design them. Understanding how to organize and use data
is a way to gain responsibility and authority in a work environment. Data is usually collected in a way that does not
make it immediately useful to professionals. Imagine building a model palace from a pile of building blocks. You
have a good idea of what you want to build, but first you have to organize the blocks so it is easy for you to find
and select only the blocks you need. Then you can combine them into substructures that eventually are integrated
into your model. Similarly, data collected by organizations must be organized and stored so that useful information
can be extracted from it in a flexible manner.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Explain the difference between traditional file organization and the database approach to managing digital data.
●
Explain how relational and object-oriented database management systems are used to construct databases,
populate them with data, and manipulate the data to produce information.
●
Enumerate the most important features and operations of a relational database, the most popular database
model.
●
Understand how data modeling and design creates a conceptual blueprint of a database.
●
Discuss how databases are used on the web.
●
List the operations involved in transferring data from transactional databases to data warehouses.
220
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: An Appetite for Data
Michael and Tyler visited the new location to look at the
progress of the renovations. Michael was anxious about
the grand opening that was only four weeks away. As
they walked around the new location, they inspected the
contractors’ work. Michael inspected every detail to see if
it fulfilled the plans and his requirements. Several times
Michael asked, “Is this going to be fixed?” … “Will this be
finished in time?” … “This does not look right, please fix it.”
Tyler sensed his father’s nervousness, so he sat
down with him at a table overlooking the lake. “Dad, it
will all be fine. The renovations are just about done. All
we have to do is monitor its progress. The place looks
great! Now we need to plan for the day when we open
the doors.”
Data Is the Main Course…
Tyler talked to his dad about two areas he thought they
should focus on now. First, the restaurant needed data to
help manage their food inventory and labor. They did not
know which menu items were selling and at what levels.
The new upgrades to the point-of-sale information system
would help to track this data. Having the data, Tyler and
Michael could work on reporting and analysis of the
information maintained by the system. The system was
operating at the current location and generating data.
Tyler proposed prototyping some analyses of the current
data that they could then use at the new location.
… With a Side of Promotion
The second area that Tyler wanted to focus on was pro-
moting the new location. As they sat at a table overlook-
ing the lake, Tyler said, “Dad, look out that window!
What better promotion could we have than that?” He
showed Michael some photos of the lake views at the
new location. “I know that the renovations are not com-
plete so we can’t show interiors, but the lake is not being
renovated!” He then showed his father the ads that he
had designed with the new software he had purchased.
Tyler had a list of each ad, where and when it would be
published, as well as the cost. Michael was impressed
with the thought and effort that his son had made. Tyler
continued, saying that advertising was only one piece of
the promotion strategy. Just as you have to have several
items on the plate for a balanced meal, the print adver-
tisements needed to be supplemented by other types of
promotion, something more active. Tyler knew that the
restaurant’s current customers would be an “easy” sell
and should be rewarded for their loyal patronage.
Tyler said, “Dad, what do you think about offering
our current customers a special deal for the grand open-
ing? Here is what I think we can do.” He showed Michael
a promotional campaign to invite current customers to
the new location with an incentive in the next few
weeks. However, Michael did not want to give discounts
that would either cut deeply into their profits or did not
gain the “word of mouth” advertising that was needed.
Tyler said he was absolutely right. There had to be a rea-
sonable balance of offering some goodwill to the steady
customers that would also help promote the new loca-
tion. Advertising is expensive, but needs to have a pay-
back to the business. Tyler showed Michael some printed
invitations that would be given to customers at the cur-
rent location. The invitation to “Dine with Us on the
Lake” would be given with guest checks to be redeemed
over a two-week grand opening period. Capturing the
data for marketing and operations would be crucial.
Tyler and Michael both knew that the challenge is
always in the details. However, they thought that this ini-
tiative was a great step in the right direction. They were
excited about implementing some new approaches to
managing the restaurant in the new location.
Managing Digital Data
You use your web browser for all kinds of activities from searching for information, to
communicating with others, to visiting your favorite online electronics store to search for high-
definition television sets. When visiting the electronics store, you enter a price range and screen
size. Within a few seconds, the screen is filled with details on available models complete with
product photos and specifications. Where did this rich, well-organized information come from? It
came from a database. A database management system responded almost instantly to your request.
Businesses collect and dissect data for a multitude of purposes. Digital data can be stored in a
variety of ways on different types of media, as discussed in Chapter 4. Data can be stored in what
can be called the traditional file format, in which the different pieces of information are not
labeled and categorized, but are stored as continuous strings of bytes. The chief advantage of this
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
221
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
format is the efficient use of space, but the data is nonetheless difficult to locate and manipulate.
By contrast, the database format, in which each piece of data is labeled or categorized, provides a
much more powerful information management tool. Data in this format can be easily accessed
and manipulated in almost any way desired to create useful information for decision making.
The impact of database technology on business cannot be overstated. Not only has it
changed the way almost every industry conducts business, but it has also created an information
industry with far-reaching effects on both our business and personal lives. Databases are behind
the successful use of automatic teller machines, increased efficiency in retail stores, almost every
marketing effort, and the numerous online search engines and web-based businesses. Combined
with interactive webpages on the Internet, databases have made an immense contribution to
commerce. Without them, there would be no online banking, consumer catalogs, search
engines, stock brokerages, or social media. Their impact on business has allowed fewer people to
complete larger tasks, and their power has enabled organizations to learn more about us, as
consumers, than we might realize. Imagine: every time you enter the address of a website, a
special program performs a search in a huge database and matches your request with one of
hundreds of millions of addresses. Every time you fill out an online form with details such as
your address, phone number, or credit-card number, a program feeds the data into a database,
where each item is recorded for further use.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Smart Money in 2012 Presidential Election
Data management played a crucial role in the U.S. 2012 Presidential election. President Obama and his
campaign strategy team had been collecting and analyzing data for the 2012 election since the 2008 elec-
tion. One of the key advantages of their data collection was to distill information on the habits for specific
demographic groups. Despite being outfunded by rival Mitt Romney, such data allowed Obama and his
team to spend their campaign money ‘smarter’ than Romney and his team. Obama was able to run a
more efficient campaign strategy and deliver the right information to the right people. Having access to
crucial and well-organized data can be the strategic tool that separates candidates or businesses from
their competitors.
Source: Rutenberg, J. (2012). Secret of the Obama Victory? Rerun Watchers, for One Thing, The New York
Times.
Retrieved
from
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/13/us/politics/obama-data-system-targeted-tv-
viewers-for-support.html
In virtually every type of business today, you must understand the power of databases. The
approaches to organizing and manipulating data presented in this chapter will help you gain
this important knowledge.
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Know About Databases
The amount of consumer data collected by direct marketers
has increased exponentially, to the point that it is now consid-
ered “Big Data.” With so much data at hand, it can be difficult
to determine what is useful and what is not. As a data man-
ager, you must know what data is necessary and what is not.
In order to have data that adds value to your firm, you have to
know what questions you want the data to answer–what
trends you are looking for or what reports need to be gener-
ated. Big Data is useful to users only when they can maneuver
in it and obtain desired outputs from it. Of the 500 billion mar-
keting dollars spent each year worldwide, $200 billion are sub-
optimally
invested
(Kuehner-Hebert,
2012).
Keeping
only
important data allows you to more easily see what the data
is trying to tell you; who your top customers are, what trends
you want to base your marketing plan on, or what marketing
plan will yield the highest ROI.
You will also be a more productive professional if you know
how databases and data warehouses are built and queried,
and what types of information can be extracted from them. In
any career you choose, you may be called to describe to data-
base designers how data elements relate to each other, how
you would like the data to be accessed, and what reports you
may need.
222
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
The Traditional File Approach
Data can be maintained in one of two ways: the traditional file approach—which has no
mechanism for tagging, retrieving, and manipulating data—and the database approach,
which does have this mechanism. To appreciate the benefits of the database approach, you must
keep in mind the inconvenience involved in accessing and manipulating data in the traditional
file approach: program-data dependency, high data redundancy, and low data integrity.
Figure 7.1 illustrates an example of a human resource file structured in traditional file
format.
F I G U R E 7.1
The structure and layout
of a human resource file
using a traditional file
organization
Position
Number:
Record 1:
Record 2:
Record 3:
.
.
.
0 2 8 3 4 5 6 7 7 R a p a p o r t
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
J o s e p h i n a 0 2 2 7 6 5 2 3 3 0
39
3 7 6 3 4 3 4 5 5 J o h n s o n
K e v i n
1 2 0 3 6 1 2 3 3 0
1 0 1 0 6 4 2 3 3 1
6 7 7 5 4 0 0 9 8 S t e p h a n
A n g e l
o p u l
o
Social
Security
Number
Last
Name
First
Name
Date
of
Birth
Department
Number
Other challenges with traditional file storage are high data redundancy and low data
integrity, because in older file systems files were built, and are still maintained, for the use of
specific organizational units. If your last and first name, as well as address and other details,
appear in the files of the department where you work as well as in the payroll file of the Human
Resource department, data can be duplicated. This data redundancy wastes storage space
(and, consequently, money) and is inefficient. When corrections or modifications need to be
performed, every change has to be made as many times as the number of locations where the
data appears, which takes time and might introduce errors. If the same data was entered
correctly in one place but incorrectly in another, your record is not only inaccurate, but might
appear to represent a different person in each place. Inaccuracies affect data integrity—the
characteristic that the data represents what it is supposed to represent and that it is complete
and correct. Businesses need accurate and complete data in order to make effective decisions,
operate efficiently, and provide value to its customers. Often, the traditional file approach to
storing data leads to low data integrity. It is difficult to ensure that data is correct in all locations
when there are myriads of places to insert data in files, as in the traditional approach.
The Database Approach
In the database approach, data pieces are organized about entities. An entity is any object about
which an organization chooses to collect data. Entities can be types of people, such as
employees, students, or members of fan clubs; events, such as sales transactions, sports events,
or theatre shows; or inanimate objects, such as inventoried or for-sale products, buildings, or
minerals. In the context of data management, “entity” refers to all the occurrences sharing the
same types of data. Therefore, it does not matter if you maintain a record of one student or
records of many students; the entity is “student.” To understand how data is organized in a
database, you must first understand the data hierarchy, described in Figure 7.2, which shows a
compilation of information about students: their first names, last names, years of birth, student
IDs, majors (department), and campus phone numbers. The smallest piece of data is a character
(such as a letter in a first or last name, or a digit in a street address). Multiple characters make
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
223
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
up a field. A field is one piece of information about an entity, such as the last name or first
name of a student, or the student’s street address. The fields related to the same entity make
up a record. A collection of related records, such as all the records of a college’s students, is
called a file. Often, several related files must be kept together. A collection of such files is
referred to as a database. However, the features of a database can be present even when a
database consists of a single file.
F I G U R E 7.2
The hierarchy of data
Data Level
Character
Field
Record
File
Database
Example
ACC   Dor           Avi        9-8776
MKT   Jenings      Rich     9-8776
FIN     Dor           Jim       9-8776
...       ...             ...         ...
Student ID
Year of Birth
Last Name
First Name
Campus Phone Number
First Name
Professor
File
Department
Student
File
Student
File
200987845
Jewel
Mark
1987
223287695
Doe
John
1987
349876587
Smith Justin
1986
410098456
Jones
Jose
1985
…
…
…
…
200987845
Jewel
Mark
1995
223287695
Doe
John
1995
349876587
Smith Justin
1994
410098456
Jones
Jose
1993
…
…
…
…
200987845
Jewel
Mark
1987
223287695
Doe
John
1987
249876587
Smith Justin
1987
Last Name
223287695
Doe
John
1987
223287695
Doe
John
1987
Once the fields are assigned names, including Last Name, First Name, ID, and the like, the
data in each field carries a tag—a field name—and can be easily accessed by the field name, no
matter where the data is physically stored. One of the greatest strengths of databases is their
promotion of application-data independence. In other words, if an application is written to
process data in a database, the application designer only needs to know the names of the fields,
not their physical organization or their length.
Database fields are not limited to holding text and numbers. They can hold pictures, sounds,
video clips, documents, and even spreadsheets. Fields can hold any content that can be digitized.
For example, when you shop online, you can search for a product by its product name or code,
and then retrieve its picture or a video clip about the product. When you select a video on
YouTube, you retrieve a video clip from a database. The video media file itself is a field in the
record stored in YouTube’s database. The database example shows a real estate property record.
The record includes several text fields as well as a picture of a home.
© Cengage Learning 2015
224
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Databases can include
many different types of
data. This property record
shows not only its price,
address, and sale status,
but pictures as well
While a database itself is a collection of several related files, the program used to build
databases, populate them with data, and manipulate the data is called a database management
system (DBMS). The files themselves are the database, but DBMSs do all the work—structuring
files, storing data, and linking records. As described previously, if you wanted to access data from
files that were stored in a traditional file approach, you would have to know exactly how many
characters were designated for each type of data. A DBMS, however, does much of this work (and
a lot of other work) for you.
If you are using a database, you want to be able to move rapidly from one record to another,
sort by different criteria, select certain records or fields, create different types of reports, and
analyze the data in different ways. Because of these demands, databases are stored on and
processed from direct access storage devices, such as magnetic disks or DVDs. They can be
backed up to sequential storage devices such as magnetic or optical tapes, but cannot be
efficiently processed off such media because it would take too long to access the records. Note
that storing databases on any device that is non-writable, such as non-rewritable CDs or DVDs,
may be suitable for a static database, such as a parts list used by car repair shops, but is
unsuitable for a database that must be updated.
Gathering Organizational Data
Many business professionals consider assets in a financial or accounting context. A building is an
asset that has a specific financial value. However, until recently, many business professionals did
not view data as an asset because they could not assess or understand its value. While data does
Courtesy of Microsoft, Inc.
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
225
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
not have financial value, its use can provide organizational value for the decisions, strategies,
and operations of a business. Data does not “magically” appear in corporate databases. There are
several sources and methods that can be used to populate organizational databases:
●
As outlined in Chapter 1, transaction processing systems record the basic activities of a busi-
ness operation such as sales, payroll, expenses, and inventory. The data stored from these
transactions provide context to both operational and strategic decisions for the organization.
●
Source data input devices, discussed in Chapter 4, provide an accurate, efficient, and consis-
tent approach to gathering data for storage. Hardware devices such as scanning and RFID pro-
vide the input to transaction processes.
●
In the early days of information technology, all data was entered and gathered within the
physical buildings of the business. Personnel entered data directly through internal systems
such as payroll or order entry. However, the web and mobile revolution have created addi-
tional sources and methods of transacting business with the organization’s stakeholders (sup-
pliers, customers, etc.). Therefore, the information processed and stored by activities from
these sources is a significant component of an organization’s data infrastructure.
●
External data can be purchased and stored by a business for use in its operations. Some exam-
ples of this category are credit reports, census data, or supplier information. For example,
credit report information purchased from a credit agency can be stored in a bank’s loan record
for historical purposes.
●
In recent years, nonoperational transaction data has increased significantly with the use of
social media by businesses. This data, from sources such as Facebook and Twitter, can be gath-
ered and analyzed to determine consumer behavior trends and patterns.
The source and storage of data for corporate databases is clearly a non-financial asset of a
business. It is an important component of managing operations and strategy for an efficient and
profitable business entity.
Queries and Reports
Data is accessed in a database by sending messages called queries, which request data from
specific records and/or fields and direct the computer to display the results. Queries are also
entered to manipulate data, including adding, deleting, and updating data. Queries can also
support sorting the order of the records. Usually, the same software that is used to construct and
populate the database, that is, the DBMS, is also used to present queries. Modern DBMSs provide
fairly user-friendly means of querying a database.
DBMSs are usually bundled with a programming language or report generation module.
Programmers can use this module to develop applications that facilitate queries and produce
predesigned reports. Nontechnical personnel can use report generation software tools to develop
ad-hoc
reports
based
on
their
individual
requirements.
Reports
that
include
data
from
organizational databases are an integral component to managing business operations. Various
types of reports can provide data in a format and structure to assist management. For example,
summary reporting can provide higher-level information showing the total sales by customer or
sales representative. The detail sales transactions are omitted to focus on the activity by a
particular group (customer, sales representative, or product). Alternatively, management can use
exception reports to extract only those transactions and activities that are outside specified
boundaries or norms. For example, a budget manager may want to see all expense accounts that
have spent more than the budget allocation.
Security
The use of databases raises security and privacy issues. The fact that data is stored only once in
a database for several different purposes does not mean that everyone with access to that
database should have access to all the data in it. Restricting access is managed by customizing
menus for different users and requiring users to enter codes that limit access to certain fields or
records. As a result, users have different views of the database, as abstractly illustrated in Figure 7.3.
The ability to limit users’ views to only specific columns or records gives the database
administrator (DBA) another advantage: the ability to implement security measures.
226
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
The measures are implemented once for the database, rather than multiple times for different
files. For instance, in the database shown in Figure 7.4, while a human resource manager has
access to all fields of the employee file (represented by the top table), the payroll personnel
have access only to four fields of the employee file (middle part of the figure), and a project
manager has access only to the Name and Hours Worked fields. Views can be limited to certain
fields in a database, or certain records, or a combination of both. We discuss security issues in
detail in Chapter 14, “Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery.”
F I G U R E 7.3
Using database views,
users may have different
structural pictures of a
database
Database
F I G U R E 7.4
Different views from the
same database
SSN
Name
D.O.B.
Hire Date
Marital Status
View of Human Resource Manager
Hours Worked
Benefits Code
Hourly Rate
SSN
View of Payroll Personnel
View of Project Manager
Name
Hours Worked
Hourly Rate
Benefits Code
Backup and Recovery
Businesses must strive to maintain continuous and uninterrupted operations in order to serve
their stakeholders (customers and suppliers) and preserve their financial well-being. With the
increased reliance on information technology in businesses, the continuity of a business’s
technology infrastructure is a crucial factor for its operational activities. Imagine an airline’s
reservation system failing to operate due to a hardware malfunction accessing its databases. The
entire operation would grind to a halt without the ability to reserve flights, check on flight
status, or conduct boarding activities at airport gates. On a different scale, a clerk in a
© Cengage Learning 2015
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
227
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
manufacturing company might accidentally delete some customers in its database. The need to
create data backups and redundant storage of transactions in the event of a disruption in
technology is required to resume and continue business activities. Several topics associated with
technology continuity planning are covered in Chapter 14, “Risks, Security, and Disaster
Recovery.”
POINT OF
INTEREST
Governments Under Cyber Attack
In 2012, it was reported that the South Carolina Department of Revenue’s website was hacked five times
between August and October of that year. 3.6 million Social Security numbers and 387,000 payment card
records were stolen. None of the Social Security numbers was encrypted, while the majority of payment
numbers were. This was only the latest case in an increasing trend of government hackings. Since 2005,
there have been 603 publicly disclosed cases of breached government and military networks. In these
hackings, at least 141 million records were taken, according to The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse Chronol-
ogy of Data Breaches. From a business standpoint, when private customer data is stolen, it not only can
lead to identity theft for your customers, but it stains your businesses reputation and can deter future cus-
tomers. Data security is ever-evolving. It is a task that requires constant attention and updating to combat
new hacker strategies.
Source: Anonymous. (2012, October 26). S.C. data breach just latest in hacker onslaught, USA Today.
Retrieved from http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2012/10/26/south-carolina-data-breach-36-million-
ssns-stolen/1661541/
Database Models
A database model is the general logical structure in which records are stored within a database and
the method used to establish relationships among the records. The several database models differ
in the manner in which records are linked to each other, which in turn dictates the manner in
which a user can navigate the database, retrieve desired records, and create reports. The oldest
models, the hierarchical and network models, are still used in some databases that were built in
the 1970s and 1980s, but are no longer used in newly constructed databases. Virtually all new
databases are designed following the relational and object-oriented models.
The Relational Model
The relational database model consists of tables. Its roots are in relational algebra, but you
do not have to know relational algebra to build and use relational databases. However, database
experts still use relational algebra terminology: in a relational database, a record or row is called
a tuple, a field—often referred to as a column—is called an attribute, and a table of records is
called a relation. This text uses the simpler terms, as do the popular software packages: fields,
records, and tables.
To design a relational database, you need a clear idea of the different entities and how they
relate. For example, in a database for a book rental business, the entities might be Customer,
Book, Rental, and Publisher. A single table is built for each entity (though each table can contain
from only a few to potentially millions of records). Rental is an associative entity; you can see in
Figure 7.5 that the Rental table associates data from the Customer and Book tables.
228
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
F I G U R E 7.5
A structural
representation of a
relational database
33091
35999
35999
36003
36025
CustID
1/15/2013
1/19/2013
1/19/2013
1/4/2013
9/3/2012
Date Rented
Rental Table
50
55
45
45
60
Rental Cost
12/19/2012
Date Returned
456-3X
632-7W
854-4E
854-4E
115-5G
BookID
115-5G
747-8T
456-3X
632-7W
854-4E
BookID
Marketing Research
Investment Strategies
IT Project Management
Database Mgmt Concepts
Business Communication
Title
412
254
254
254
129
PubID
129
254
412
PubID
Alpha
Cengage
Forrest
Pub Name
Publisher Table
Chicago
Boston
New York
City
1
4
6
7
10
Edition
Book Table
Primary key
Composite primary key
Part of composite key in Rental
relates to the primary key in Book
Primary key in Publisher relates to the foreign key in Book
CustID
33091
35999
36003
36025
Jim Marasco
Marcia Belvadere
Betsy McCarthy
Rick Green
CustName
Customer Table
322-4907
322-5577
342-0071
322-7299
CustPhone
121 Presidents Rd
32 Parentes BI
9 Barrington St
84 Shopping PI
CustAddr
Maintenance of a relational database is relatively easy because each table is independent of
the others, although some tables are related to others. To add a customer record, the user
accesses the Customer table. To delete a record of a Book, the user accesses the Book table. The
advantages of this model make relational database management systems the most popular in the
software market. Virtually all DBMSs currently on the market accommodate the relational model.
This model is used in supply chain management (SCM) systems and many other enterprise
applications as well as local, individual ISs.
To retrieve records from a relational database, or to sort them, you must use a key. A key is a
field whose values identify records either for display or for processing. You can use any field as a
key. For example, you could query the database for the record of Jim Marasco from the
Customer table by using the CustName field as a key. That is, you enter a query, a condition
that instructs the DBMS to retrieve a record with the value of CustName as “Jim Marasco.” A key
is unique if each value (content) in that field appears only in one record. Sometimes a key is
composed of several fields, so that their combination provides a unique key.
As you can see, database design requires careful forethought. The designer must include
fields for foreign keys from other tables so that join tables can be created in the future. A join
table combines data from two or more tables. A table might include foreign keys from several
tables, offering flexibility in creating reports with related data from several tables. The inclusion
of foreign keys might cause considerable data redundancy. This complexity has not diminished
the popularity of relational databases, however.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
229
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
If a database has more than one record with “Jim Marasco” (because several customers happen
to have that same name) in the CustName field, you might not retrieve the single record you
desire. Depending on the application you use for the query, you might receive the first one that
meets the condition, that is, a list of all the records with that value in the field. The only way to
be sure you are retrieving the desired record is to use a unique key, such as a Social Security
number, an employee ID, or, in our example, a customer ID (CustID). A unique key can serve as a
primary key. A primary key is the field by which records in a table are uniquely identified. If
your query specified that you wanted the record whose CustID value is 36003, the system would
retrieve the record of Betsy McCarthy. It will be the Betsy McCarthy you wanted, even if there are
more records of people with exactly the same name. Because the purpose of a primary key is to
uniquely identify a record, each record must have a unique value in that field.
Usually, a table in a relational database must have a primary key, and most relational DBMSs
enforce this rule; if the designer does not designate a field as a key, the DBMS creates its own
serial number field as the primary key field for the table. Once the designer of the table
determines the primary key when constructing the records’ format, the DBMS does not allow a
user to enter two records with the same value in that column. Note that there might be situations
in which more than one field can be used as a primary key. Such is the case with motor vehicles,
because three different fields can uniquely identify the record of a particular vehicle: the vehicle
identification number (VIN), its title number, and its state license plate number. Thus, a database
designer might establish one of these fields as a primary key to retrieve records.
For some business needs you must use a composite key, a combination of two or more
fields that together serve as a primary key, because it is impractical to use a single field as a
primary key. For example, consider flight records of a commercial airline. Flights of a certain
route are the same every week or every day they are offered, so the daily FlySousa Airlines’ flight
from Boston to Honolulu—FS5025—for instance, cannot serve us well to retrieve a list of all the
passengers who took this flight on May 3, 2013. However, we can use the combination of the
flight number and date as a composite primary key. To check who sat in a particular seat, a
composite key consisting of three fields is needed: flight number, date, and seat number.
To link records from one table with records of another table, the tables must have at least one
field in common (i.e., one column in each table must contain the same type of data), and that
field must be a primary key field for one of the tables. This repeated field is a primary key in one
table, and a foreign key field in the other table. In the Book Rental example, if you will ever
want to create a report showing the name of every distributor and all the books from that
publisher, the primary key of the Publisher table, PubID, must also be included as a foreign key in
the Book table. The resultant table (Figure 7.6) is a join table. Note that although PubID was used
to create the join table, it does not have to be displayed in the join table, even though it could be.
F I G U R E 7.6
A representation of a join
table from the Book and
Publisher tables
Publisher
Cengage
Alpha
Cengage
Forrest
Cengage
BookID
456‐3X
854‐4E
747‐8T
115‐5G
632‐7W
Title
IT Project Management
Business Communication
Investment Strategies
Marketing Research
Database Mgmt Concepts
Edition
6
10
4
1
7
Since the relationships between tables are created as part of manipulating the table, the
relational model supports both one-to-many and many-to-many relationships between records
of different tables. For example, a one-to-many relationship is created when a group of
employees belongs to only one department. All would have the same department number as a
foreign key in their records, and none will have more than one department key. There is one
department, linked to many employees. A many-to-many relationship can be maintained,
for instance, for professors and students in a college database. A professor might have many
students, and a student might have many professors. This can be accomplished by creating a
composite key of professor ID and student ID. In our example of the Book Rental store, there is a
© Cengage Learning 2015
230
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
many-to-many relationship between customers and the books they have rented. The Rental table
enables the bookstore manager to create a history report of customers and their rentals. It is clear
that more than one customer has rented a certain book, and the same customer has rented many
different books.
According to Gartner Research, the major vendors of relational DBMSs (RDBMSs) are Oracle,
IBM, and Microsoft, with worldwide 2011 market share in licensing revenues of about one-half,
one-fifth, and one-fifth, respectively (Fontecchio, 2012). IBM licenses DB2, Oracle licenses
DBMSs by the company name, and Microsoft licenses SQL Server and Access. MySQL is the
world’s most popular open source DBMS (Bridgwater, 2012). MySQL is used by Facebook,
Google, and Adobe to support their high-transaction volume websites. These DBMSs are an
essential part of enterprise applications such as SCM and CRM systems.
The Object-Oriented Model
The object-oriented database model uses the object-oriented approach, described in Chapter 5,
“Business Software,” to maintaining records. In object-oriented technology, an object consists of
both data and the procedures that manipulate the data. So, in addition to the attributes of an
entity, an object also contains relationships with other entities and procedures to manipulate the
data. The combined storage of both data and the procedures that manipulate them is referred to
as encapsulation. Through encapsulation, an object can be “planted” in different data sets.
The ability in object-oriented structures to create a new object automatically by replicating all or
some of the characteristics of a previously developed object (called the parent object) is called
inheritance. Figure 7.7 demonstrates how the same data maintained in a relational database
at the DVD rental store would be stored and used in an object-oriented database. The
relationships between data about entities are not managed by way of foreign keys, but through
the relationships of one object with another. One advantage of this approach is the reduction
of data redundancy.
F I G U R E 7.7
An object-oriented
database
Data:
BookID
Title
PubID
Edition
Procedures:
Order New Book from Publisher
Retrieve Book Data
Add New Book
Save Book Data
Book
Data:
CustID
CustName
CustPhone
CustAddr
Procedures:
Add New Customer
Retrieve Customer Data
Change Address
Save Customer Data
Customer
Data:
CustID
BookID
Date Rented
Rental Cost
Date Returned
Procedures:
Create New Book Rental
Calculate Rental Charge
Retrieve Rental Data
Return Book
Save Book Rental Data
Book Rental
Data:
PubID
Pub Name
City
Procedures:
Add New Publisher
Retrieve Publisher Data
Save Distributor Data
Publisher
Objects are related
because Book Rental
contains Customer
Objects are related
because Book Rental
contains Book
Objects are related
because Book
contains Publisher
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
231
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Some data and information cannot be organized as fields, but they can be handled as
objects, such as drawings, maps, and webpages. All these capabilities make object-oriented
DBMSs, also called object database management systems (ODBMSs) handy in computer-aided
design (CAD), geographic information systems, and applications used to update thousands of
webpages daily, because they can handle a wide range of data—such as graphics, voice, and text—
more easily than the relational model.
Similar to relational DBMSs, ODBMSs provide a graphical user interface (GUI) to manage the
DBMS. The user can choose objects from “classes,” which are groups of objects that share similar
characteristics. Elements of ODBMSs are often incorporated into relational databases, and such
databases are sometimes known as object-relational databases.
Object-oriented databases (ODBs) do not store records, but data objects, which is an
advantage for quick updates of data sets and the relationships among them. For instance, in the
example of the DVD store, in the ODB the relationship between a DVD and its distributor is not
established through a foreign key; it exists because the DVD class contains the Distributor class.
However, object-oriented databases also have some disadvantages, compared with relational
databases. For example, there is dependence between applications and data; they are simply
“wrapped” together. Changing the structures of tables in a relational database does not require
changes in applications that use the data in those tables, while it would require changes in
applications in an object-oriented database. This dependence also limits the ability to enter ad
hoc queries in an ODB, that is, to enter queries at will. While not as popular or as well
understood as relational databases, ODBs are gaining adopters.
Several software companies have developed popular ODBMSs. Among them are Objectivity/
DB (Objectivity, Inc.), ObjectStore (Versata), and Versant Object Database (Versant Corporation).
Relational Operations
As mentioned before, the most popular DBMSs are those that support the relational model.
Therefore, you would benefit from becoming familiar with a widely used relational database,
such as Access, Oracle, or SQL Server. To use the database, you should know how relational
operations work. A relational operation creates a temporary table that is a subset of the
original table or tables. It allows you to create a report containing records that satisfy a
condition, create a list with only some fields about an entity, or produce a report from a join
table, which combines relevant data from two or more tables. If so desired, the user can save the
newly created table. Often, the temporary table is needed only for ad hoc reporting and is
immediately discarded.
The three most important relational operations are select, project, and join. Select is the
selection of records that meet certain conditions. For example, a human resources manager
might need a report showing the entire record of every employee whose salary exceeds $60,000.
Project is the selection of certain columns from a table, such as the salaries of all the employees.
A query might specify a combination of selection and projection. In the preceding example, the
manager might require only the ID number, last name (project), and salary of employees whose
salaries are greater than $60,000 (select).
One of the most useful manipulations of a relational database is the creation of a new table
from two or more other tables. As you might recall from our discussion of the relational model,
the joining of data from multiple tables is called a join. We have already used a simple example
from the book rental database (Figure 7.6). However, join queries can be much more complex.
For example, a relational business database might have four tables: SalesRep, Catalog, Order, and
Customer. A sales manager might wish to create a report showing, for each sales rep, a list of all
customers who purchased anything last month, the items each customer purchased, and the
total amount spent by each customer. The new table is created from a relational operation that
draws data from all four tables.
The join operation is a powerful manipulation that can create very useful reports for
decision making. A join table is created “on the fly” as a result of a query and exists only for the
duration the user wishes to view it or to create a paper report from it. Design features allow the
user to change the field headings (although the field names are kept the same in the internal
232
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
table), place the output in different layouts on the screen or paper, and add graphics and text to
the report. The new table might be saved as an additional table in the database.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Personalized Promotion
Amazon was granted a patent in 2010 for its process of predicting what items are most attractive to spe-
cific shoppers. Every time a user clicks on an item, it is recorded and categorized in Amazon’s database.
Based on previous purchases and items looked at, Amazon develops trends and patterns about what
items specific users are most likely to purchase in the future. They then ‘push’ items by providing person-
alized recommendations to users. Amazon uses this now-patented process to micro-target individual
shoppers and present them with items they are most interested in based on what items they previously
clicked.
Source: Anonymous. (2010, Nov 17). US Patent Issued to Amazon Technologies on Nov. 16 for “Predic-
tive Analysis of Browse Activity Data of Users of a Database Access System in Which Items are Arranged
in a Hierarchy” (Washington Inventor), US Fed News Service, Including US State News.
Structured Query Language
Structured Query Language (SQL) has become the query language of choice for many
developers of relational DBMSs. SQL is an international standard and is provided with most
relational database management programs. Its strength is in its easy-to-remember intuitive
commands. For example, assume the name of the entire database is DVD_Store. To create a list
of all titles of thriller DVDs whose rental price is less than $5.00, the query would be:
SELECT TITLE, CATEGORY FROM DVD_STORE
WHERE CATEGORY ’Thriller’ and RENTPRICE < 5
Statements like this can be used for ad hoc queries or integrated in a program that is saved
for repeated use. Commands for updating the database are also easy to remember: INSERT,
DELETE, and UPDATE.
Integrating SQL in a DBMS offers several advantages:
●
With a standard language, users do not have to learn different sets of commands to create and
manipulate databases in different DBMSs.
●
SQL statements can be embedded in widely used programming languages such as COBOL or
C and object-oriented languages such as C++ or Java, in which case these languages are called
the “host language.” The combination of highly tailored and efficient statements with SQL
statements increases the efficiency and effectiveness of applications accessing relational
databases.
●
Because SQL statements are portable from one operating system to another, the programmer
is not forced to rewrite statements.
Some relational DBMSs, such as Microsoft Access, provide GUIs to create SQL queries; SQL
queries can be placed by clicking icons and selecting menu items, which are internally converted
into SQL queries and executed. This capability allows relatively inexperienced database designers
to use SQL.
The Schema and Metadata
When building a new database, users must first build a schema (from the Greek word for “plan”).
The schema describes the structure of the database being designed: the names and types of fields
in each record type and the general relationships among different sets of records or files. It
includes a description of the database’s structure, the names and sizes of fields, and details such as
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
233
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
which field is a primary key. The number of records is never specified because it might change,
and the maximum number of records is determined by the capacity of the storage media.
Fields can hold different types of data: numeric, alphanumeric, graphic, or time-related.
Numeric fields hold numbers that can be manipulated by addition, multiplication, averaging,
and the like. Alphanumeric fields hold textual values: words, numerals, and special symbols,
which
make
up
names,
addresses,
and
identification
numbers.
Numerals
entered
in
alphanumeric fields, such as Social Security numbers or zip codes, cannot be manipulated
mathematically. The builder of a new database must also indicate which fields are to be used as
primary keys. Many DBMSs also allow a builder to positively indicate when a field is not unique,
meaning that the value in that field might be the same for more than one record.
Figure 7.8 presents the schema of a database table created with the Microsoft Access DBMS.
The user is prompted to enter the names and types of fields. Access lets the user name the fields
and determine the data types. The Description section allows the designer to describe the nature
and function of the fields for people who maintain the database. In the lower part of the
window the user is offered many options for each field, such as field size, format, and so on. In
Access the primary key field is indicated by a little key icon to its left.
F I G U R E 7.8
A schema of the Employee
table in an Access 2010
database. The Field
Properties area on the
bottom shows the
properties of the attribute
(field) EmployeeID
The description of each table structure and types of fields become part of a data dictio-
nary, which is a repository of information about the data and their organization. Designers
usually add more information about each field, such as where the data comes from (such as
another system or entered manually); who owns the original data; who is allowed to add, delete,
or update data in the field; and other details that help DBAs maintain the database and
understand the meaning of the fields and their relationships. (Some people prefer to call this
metadata, meaning “data about the data.”) Metadata includes:
●
The source of the data, including contact information.
●
Tables that are related to the data.
●
Field and index information, such as the size and type of the field (e.g., whether it is text or
numeric), and the ways the data is sorted.
●
Programs and processes that use the data.
●
Population rules: what is inserted, or updated, and how often.
© Cengage Learning 2015
234
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Data Modeling
Databases must be carefully planned and designed to meet business goals. How they are designed
enables or limits flexibility in use. Analyzing an organization’s data and identifying the
relationships among the data is called data modeling. Data modeling should first be done to
decide which data should be collected and how it should be organized. Thus, data modeling
should be proactive. Creating data models periodically is a good practice; it provides decision
makers a clear picture of what data is available for reports, and what data the organization might
need to start collecting for improved decision making. Managers can then ask experts to change
the relationships and design new reports or applications that generate desired reports with a few
keystrokes.
Many business databases consist of multiple tables with relationships among them. For
example, a hospital might use a database that has a table holding the records of all its
physicians, another one with all its nurses, another with all the current patients, and so on. The
administrative staff must be able to create reports that link data from multiple tables. For
example, one report might be about a doctor and all her patients during a certain period.
Another might revolve around a patient, such as details of the patient, a list of all caregivers
who were involved in his rehabilitation, and a list of medications. Thus, the database must be
carefully planned to allow useful data manipulation and report generation.
Effective data modeling and design of each database involves the creation of a conceptual
blueprint of the database. Such a blueprint is called an entity relationship diagram (ERD).
An ERD is a graphical representation of all entity relationships, an example of which is shown in
Figure 7.9, and they are often consulted to determine a problem with a query or to implement
changes. ERDs are a main tool for communication not only among professional DB designers,
but also among users and between users and designers. Therefore it is important that
professionals in all of these fields know how to create and read them.
F I G U R E 7.9
An entity relationship
diagram (ERD)
College
Department
Course
Professor
Student
In an ERD, boxes are used to identify entities. Lines are used to indicate a relationship
between entities. When lines shaped like crow’s-feet are pointing to an object, there might be
many instances of that object. When a link with a crow’s-foot also includes a crossbar, then all
instances of the object on the side of the crow’s-foot are linked with a single instance of the
object on the side of the crossbar. A second crossbar would denote “mandatory,” which means
that the relationship must occur, such as between a book title and author: a book title must
have an author with which it is associated. A circle close to the box denotes “optional.”
●
In Figure 7.9, the crow’s-foot on the Department end of the Department/College relationship
indicates that there are several departments in one college, indicating a one-to-many relation-
ship between College and Department. In addition, the crossbar at the College end of the
College/Department link indicates that a department belongs to only one college.
●
A department has many professors, but a professor might belong to more than one depart-
ment; thus, the relationship between Professor and Department is many-to-many, represented
by the crow’s-feet at both ends of the link.
●
A course is offered by a single department, indicated by the crossbar at the Department end of
the Department/Course link.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
235
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
●
A professor might teach more than one student, and a student might have more than one
professor, thus the crow’s-feet at both the Professor and Student ends of the many-to-many
relationship between Professor and Student.
●
However, the circle at the Student end indicates that a professor does not have to have stu-
dents at all. The circle means “optional,” and is there for cases in which professors do not
teach.
A diagram such as Figure 7.9 provides an initial ERD. The designers must also detail the
fields of each object, which determines the fields for each record of that object. The attributes
are listed in each object box, and the primary key attribute is underlined. Usually, the primary
key field appears at the top of the field list in the box. Figure 7.10 is an example of possible
attributes of a Professor entity. Database designers can use different notations; therefore, before
you review an ER diagram, be sure you understand what each symbol means.
F I G U R E 7.10
Fields of the Professor
entity
Professor
Prof ID
Prof Last Name
Prof First Name
Prof Dept
Prof Office Address
Prof Telephone
The examples given here are fairly simple. In reality, the reports that managers need to
generate can be quite complex in terms of relationships among different data elements and the
number of different tables from which they are assembled. Imagine the relationships among
data maintained in libraries: a patron might borrow several titles; the library maintains several
copies of each title; a title might be a book, a CD, DVD, or a media file; several authors might
have published different books with the same title; librarians must be able to see availability and
borrowed items by title, by author, and by patron; they should also be able to produce a history
report of all the borrowing of each patron for a certain period of time; and so on. All of these
relationships and the various needs for reports must be taken into account when designing the
database.
Databases on the Web
The Internet and its user-friendly web would be practically useless if people could not access
databases online. The premise of the web is that people can not only browse appealing
webpages but also search for and find information. Most often, that information is stored in
databases. When a shopper accesses an online store, he or she can look for information about
any of thousands, or hundreds of thousands, of items offered for sale. For example, when you
access websites such as Wal-Mart, Target, or Amazon, you can receive database information
(such as an image of an electronics item, video, price, shipping time, and consumer evaluations)
for hundreds of items offered for sale. Entering a keyword at YouTube results in a list of all video
clips whose title or descriptive text contains the keyword. Many wholesalers make their catalogs
available online. Applications at auction sites receive inquiries by category, price range, country
of origin, color, date, and other attributes, and identify records of matching items, which often
include pictures and detailed descriptions.
Behind each of these sites is a database. The only way for organizations to conduct these
web-based businesses is to give people outside the organizations access to their databases. In
other words, the organizations must link their databases to the Internet. The database provides a
dynamic and organized collection of products and information to “report” back to the customer.
© Cengage Learning 2015
236
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
The Amazon.com webpage shown here, for example, displays several tablet products based on
the customer’s search criteria. The left of the webpage shows additional criteria (display size,
operating system, etc.) that customers can select to further refine their searches.
Amazon’s website
receives information from
its product catalog, which
is stored in a database
From a technical point of view, online databases that are used with web browsers are no
different from other databases. However, they require an interface designed to work with the
web. The user must see a form in which to enter queries or keywords to obtain information from
the site’s database. The interface designers must provide a mechanism to figure out data that
users insert in the online forms so that they can be placed in the proper fields in the database.
The system also needs a mechanism to pass queries and keywords from the user to the database.
The interfaces can be programmed in one of several web programming languages, including Java
servlets, active server pages (ASP), ASP.NET (the version of ASP processes within the .NET
framework) and PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor), as well as by using web APIs (application program
interfaces). The technical aspects of these applications are beyond the scope of this book. The
process is diagrammed in Figure 7.11.
F I G U R E 7.11
An example of how Active
Server Page technology
enables data queries and
processing via the web
1. Blank Search Criteria Form
2. Completed Search
Criteria Form
5. Requested Information
in Web Page
3. ASP Software
4. Requested
Information
User’s
Computer
.NET Server
Database
Server
To ensure that their production databases are not vulnerable to attack via the Internet,
organizations avoid linking their transaction databases to the Internet unless the databases are
dedicated to online transactions, in which case the organization must apply proper security
software through firewalls and authentication rules. Many organizational databases are used for
online, web- and mobile-based transactions to ensure all transactions are processed and
Courtesy of Amazon.com
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
237
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
centralized in one database source. For example, a hotel must update the same reservation
database regardless of whether it is processed through the web, mobile smartphone, or a
customer service representative. They must also be careful when linking a data warehouse
(discussed next) to the Internet.
Data Warehousing
The great majority of data collections in business are used for daily transactions and operations:
records of customers and their purchases and information on employees, patients, and other
parties
for
monitoring,
collection,
payment,
and
other
business
or
legal
purposes.
The
transactions do not stay in these databases long; usually only a few days or weeks. However,
many organizations have found that if they accumulate transaction data, they can use it for
important management decisions, such as researching market trends or tracking down fraud.
Organizing and storing data for such purposes is called data warehousing.
A data warehouse is a large, typically relational, database that supports management
decision making. The data warehouse is large because it contains data, or summaries of data,
from millions of transactions over many years and/or from national or global transactions rather
than from a short period or a single region. It might maintain records of individual transactions
or summaries of transactions for predetermined periods, such as hourly, daily, or weekly. The
purpose of data warehouses is to let managers produce reports or analyze large amounts of
archival data and make decisions. Data-warehousing experts must be familiar with the types of
business analyses that will be done with the data. They also have to design the data warehouse
tables to be flexible enough for modifications in years to come, when business activities change
or when different information must be extracted.
Data warehouses do not replace transactional databases, which are updated with daily
transactions such as sales, billing, cash receipts, and returns. Instead, transactional data is copied
into the data warehouse, which is a separate data repository. This large archive contains valuable
information for the organization that might not be evident in the smaller amounts of data
typically stored in transactional databases. For example, an insurance company might keep
monthly tables of policy sales; it can then see trends in the types of policies customers prefer in
general or by age group. Such trends are meaningful only if they are gleaned from data collected
over several years. Data from transactional databases are added to the data warehouse at the end
of each business day, week, or month, or it might be added automatically as soon as a
transaction is recorded in a transactional database. While a transactional database contains
current data, which is disposed of after some time, the data in data warehouses is accumulated
and might reflect many years of business activities.
Organizations often set up their data warehouse as a collection of data marts, smaller
collections of data that focus on a particular subject or department. If data marts need to be used
as one large data warehouse, special software tools can unify data marts and make them appear
as one large data warehouse.
From Database to Data Warehouse
Unlike data warehouses, transactional databases are usually not suitable for business analysis
because they contain only current, not historical, data. Often, data in transactional databases are
also scattered in different systems throughout an organization. The same data can be stored
differently and under other names. For example, customer names might be recorded in a column
called Name in one table and in two columns—First Name and Last Name—in another table.
These discrepancies commonly occur when an organization uses both its own data and data it
purchases from other organizations, or if it has developed more than one database that contains
the same data under a different label. When management decides to build a data warehouse, the
IT staff must carefully consider the hardware, software, and data involved in the effort.
238
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Every Move You Make
The widespread use of database management systems coupled
with web technologies allows organizations to collect, maintain,
and sell vast amounts of private personal data fast and cheaply.
Millions of credit-card transactions take place in the world,
each consisting of private information. Millions of personal
data items are routed daily to corporate databases through
sales calls and credit checks. Millions of consumer records
are collected and updated daily on the web. For businesses,
such data is an important resource. But for individuals, such
large data pools and the ways they are used threaten a
fundamental human right: privacy.
●
Out of Hand—Out of Control. You have just received a letter
from John Doe Investments. In the letter, the president tells
you that at your age, with a nice income like yours, the
company could provide you with innovative investment ser-
vices. How did the company know about your existence?
About your annual income? Could it be that some time
ago you applied for a credit card? The company receiving
the information sold part of it, or all of it, to John Doe
Investments. You now enjoy your credit card, but you paid
a hidden cost for it.
●
The Web: A Source of Data Collection. In the preceding exam-
ple, you were at least aware that you gave somebody informa-
tion. But many consumers provide information routinely without
being aware of it. A huge amount of personal data is collected
through the web. You might wonder why the home pages of so
many websites ask you to register with them. When registering,
you often provide your name, address, and other details. The
site asks you to create a user ID and password. If the pages
you are accessing contain private data such as your invest-
ment portfolio, a user ID and password protect you, but if you
are accessing news or other non-personal pages, a user ID
and password actually serve the site operator. From the
moment you log on to the site, the server can collect data
about every move you make: which pages you are visiting
and for how long, which icons you click and in which order,
and which advertising banners you click. In many cases, the
organization that collects the data doesn’t even own the site.
The site owner hires a business such as DoubleClick, FastClick,
and Avenue A to collect data. When you click an advertise-
ment, that information is channeled into one of these organiza-
tion’s huge databases. What does the firm do with the
database? It sells parts of it to other companies, or it slices
and dices the information to help other companies target
potential buyers belonging to certain demographic groups.
And, no, it does not bother to tell you. While the software of
such companies as DoubleClick can only identify the computer
or IP number from which you logged on to a site and not you,
personally, the information can be matched with you, person-
ally, if you also use your personal ID and password.
In addition to web cookies, companies also use web bugs to
track our web movements. A web bug, also known as a
“web beacon” or “clear GIF,” is a graphic image on a web-
site used to monitor a surfer’s activity. The image is usually
undetectable because it usually consists of a single pixel.
The bug links the webpage to the web server of a third
party, such as DoubleClick. Much as other ads appear on a
page you view from a server different from the site you
accessed, a web bug comes from a different server, the
server of a third party. This happens because the original
site’s page contains code that calls the bug (the same way
as some ads) from the other server. The same technique is
used in email. The third party’s server obtains the URL (web
address) of the user as well as the URL of the site from
which the user views the page. As long as the bug is “dis-
played” by the user’s computer, the third-party server can
request session information from the user’s web browser.
Session information includes clickstream and other activities
performed by the user while visiting the site.
●
Sharing What We Watch. A 2012 bill passed by the U.S.
House of Representatives enabled users of websites like
Netflix to share information about what movies and shows
they watch with their friends on social media sites like
Facebook. It amended the Video Privacy Protection Act
(VPPA), which previously prevented release of users’ view-
ing history without written consent. Users must opt in to this
sharing feature, will be asked to reconfirm their opt-in sta-
tus automatically every two years, and can opt out of the
sharing feature at any time.
The new wave of young consumers are more technologically
involved than their parents and want to be able to share
what they are watching with friends. Although the bill brings
VPPA up to speed with technological advancements of the
modern era, consumer privacy advocates were disgruntled
that the bill did not include a provision to update the Elec-
tronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA). The
update would have prevented law enforcement officials
from accessing users’ emails and online documents without
a valid search warrant. Under the current ECPA, law
enforcement can access citizens’ files and communications
stored by a third party for more than 180 days with only a
subpoena. Despite these concerns, the bill was passed,
fueled by the social-media-active youth whose desire to
share more and more about themselves online superseded
privacy issues (Couts, 2012). Bills such as this also receive
support from businesses that wish to gain from the informa-
tion that is generated by consumers.
●
Our Health Online. Allowing medical staff and pharmacists
to share patient medical information might help them help
us. Imagine being injured on a trip thousands of miles from
your home. If the doctor treating you can immediately
receive information about your allergies to certain medica-
tions, it might save your life. However, any electronic
record residing on a database that is connected to a public
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
239
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
The larger the data warehouse, the larger the storage capacity, the greater the memory, and
the greater the processing power of the computers that are needed. Because of capacity needs,
organizations often choose mainframe computers with multiple CPUs to store and manage data
warehouses. The computer memory must be large enough to allow processing of huge amounts
of data at once. The amount of storage space and the access speed of disks are also important.
Processing millions of records might take a long time, and variations in disk speed might mean
the difference between hours or minutes in processing time. And since a data warehouse is
considered a highly valuable asset, all data must be automatically backed up. Keep in mind that
data warehouses grow continually, because their very purpose is to accumulate historical records.
Retail chains such as Wal-Mart and Costco record millions of sales transactions daily, all of
which are channeled into data warehouses. Some have data warehouses that hold tens or
hundreds of terabytes of data. In addition to retailers, banks, credit-card issuers, health-care
organizations, and other industries have augmented their hardware for large data warehouses.
Many organizations accumulate not only sales transactions but also purchasing records, so they
can produce information from which to make better purchasing decisions, such as which
suppliers tend to offer lower prices for certain items at certain times of the year.
Data warehouses are gaining tremendous attention and popularity with businesses. The
thirst for storing and analyzing data has become nearly unquenchable, as data warehouses
become essential to the strategic and operational activities of many organizational activities and
functions. A survey of 421 data managers affiliated with the Oracle Users Group determined that
66 percent of the companies use data warehouses as the foundation for business intelligence and
analytics. However, most systems are developed in-house and used only by analysts and top
decision makers. For example, only 33 percent of the respondents’ companies enable access for
network is potentially exposed to unauthorized access by
people who do not have a legitimate need to know.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996 (HIPAA) is the U.S. federal law that was enacted to—
among other purposes—mandate how health-care providers
and insurance firms are to maintain records and disclose
information so that patient privacy is not violated. The law
restricts who accesses your medical records. Yet, even this
law recognizes the inability of organizations to ensure patient
privacy. For example, you can ask your doctor not to share
your medical record with other doctors or nurses in the
clinic, but they do not have to agree to do what you ask.
●
The Upside. In spite of the downside of collection of per-
sonal data, there is also a positive side. Database technol-
ogy enables companies to provide us with better and faster
services. It also makes the market more competitive. Small
firms often cannot afford the great expense of data collec-
tion. For much less money, they can purchase sorted data
—the same data that is available to the industry leader. So,
the wide availability of data contributes to a more egalitar-
ian and democratic business environment. The benefici-
aries are not only vendors but also consumers, who can
purchase new and cheaper products.
And while many of us complain that these huge databases
add to the glut of junk mail and spam, better information in
the hands of marketers might actually save consumers from
such annoyances. After all, those annoying communica-
tions are for products and services you don’t need. With
more specific information, marketers can target only those
individuals that might be interested in their offerings. While
you shop, special tracking software can tell the online
business, at least indirectly, what you do not like about
the site. This enables businesses to improve their services.
For example, many online retailers discovered that a hefty
proportion of shoppers abandoned their virtual shopping
carts just before the final purchase. Analysis of collected
information discovered that some people wanted to know
the handling and shipping charges before they charged
their credit cards. Now, most online retailers provide clear
shipping information and charges up front.
●
The Downside. The potential benefits from online medical
records could also create some challenges. The privacy,
security, and access of medical records information is a
paramount concern to consumers and health care provi-
ders. However, several additional challenges need to be
considered and addressed such as data usability, fragmen-
tation and ownership (Anonymous, 2013a). While some
industries have achieved significant progress with technol-
ogy adoption, health care has been primarily a paper-driven
system. In addition, the fragmentation of data sources can
cause the data sharing to be impeded, disrupting the ben-
efits of sharing information for diagnosis. Lastly, the use of
tablets can provide portable delivery of medical information
in hospitals and offices. However, popularity of “bringing
your own device” by health care professionals can pose
security risks and privacy abuses (Yudkin, 2012).
At the time of this textbook’s printing, the discussion, public
scrutiny, and legislative inquiries into the transfer of data from
telecommunication companies and storage by U.S. federal
government agencies has become a topic of significant
debate. It will be interesting to see the changes, if any, that
occur in the future.
240
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
marketing and sales personnel, which does not fully utilize data warehouses for a critical
business function. Although the majority of data warehouse content is transactional data, the
diversity of data is expanding into unstructured data at an escalating rate. Figure 7.12 illustrates
the representative proportion of data types stored in data warehouses (McKendrick, 2011). While
transactional data still remains the largest percentage of data warehouses, non-traditional data
types such as video and images are growing.
F I G U R E 7.12
Data types in a data
warehouse
Other
Social media
Mobile
Audio
Video
Images
Text
Information technology/operational...
Documents
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Transactional data
1%
4%
6%
8%
9%
27%
42%
85%
35%
36%
POINT OF
INTEREST
Cheaper and Faster Is Better
Many business organizations have decided to implement an analytics strategy, beginning sometimes with a
scaled down initial capability. To implement these analytical capabilities, some businesses are opting for
a new approach—the Cloud. While some people think that this technology is new, very often technology is
a “remake” of something from a previous technology initiative. Remote access to applications software, plat-
forms, data, and technology infrastructures has existed since the 1970s. By operating data analytics in the
Cloud, businesses can have these applications managed and updated by a third party. The Cloud can also
be used to implement a pilot project in a cost effective manner while testing its benefits and challenges.
Amazon Web Services (AWS) expanded their service offerings in late 2012 with their release of Amazon
Redshift, a cloud-based warehousing service. Redshift decreases the cost of data storage from between
$19,000 and $25,000 to only $1,000 per terabyte per year and promises query performance up to ten-times
faster than conventional on-premise data warehousing. Amazon promises its managed service will stay on
top of updates, tunings, and patches. Redshift is distinct from AWS’s other cloud-based storage service,
Amazon Relational Database Service (RDS), because Redshift is exclusively for warehousing and analyt-
ics, not transactional database use. In addition, Redshift is also capable of handling Big Data. The disrup-
tive nature of the service combined with the vast improvements in cost and performance compared to
previous services drew a lot of attention from the business/technology sector. If businesses can out-
source data warehousing and save time and money, they can reallocate those resources to add value to
their main line of business.
Sources: Griffin, J., & Danson, F. (2012, Nov). Analytics and the Cloud—the Future is Here, Financial
Executive, pp. 97–98; Henschen, D. (2012). Amazon Debuts Low-Cost, Big Data Warehousing. Informa-
tionWeek.
http://www.informationweek.com/software/information-management/amazon-debuts-low-
cost-big-data-warehouse/240142712
The data from which data warehouses are built usually comes from within an organization,
mainly from transactions, but it can also come from outside an organization. The latter might
Source: McKendrick, J. (2011). Data Warehousing Reaches an Inflection Point. Database Trends and Applications, 25(4), 2–3.
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
241
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
include national or regional demographic data, data from financial markets, and weather data.
Similar to metadata in any database, data-warehouse designers create metadata for their large
data pools. To uncover the valuable information contained in their data, organizations must use
software that can effectively “mine” data warehouses. Data mining is covered in Chapter 11,
“Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management.”
Designers must keep in mind scalability: the ability of the data warehouse to grow as the
amount of the data and the processing needs grow. Future growth needs require thoughtful
planning in terms of both hardware and software.
Phases in Data Warehousing
Three phases are involved in transferring data from a transactional database to a data warehouse:
extraction, transforming, and loading (ETL). Figure 7.13 describes the process.
F I G U R E 7.13
Phases in preparing and
using a data warehouse
External Data
Sources
Internal Data
Sources
Extract
Transform
Load
Metadata
Data
Warehouse
Serve
OLAP
Data
Mining
Information
Data Marts
Data
In the extraction phase, the builders create the files from transactional databases and save
them on the server that holds the data warehouse. In the transformation phase, specialists
“cleanse” the data and modify it into a form that allows insertion into the data warehouse. For
example, they ascertain whether the data contains any spelling errors and fix them. They make
sure that all data is consistent. For instance, Pennsylvania might be denoted as Pa., PA, Penna,
or Pennsylvania. Only one form would be used in a data warehouse. The builders ensure that all
addresses follow the same form, using uppercase or lowercase letters consistently and defining
fields uniformly (such as one field for the entire street address and a separate field for zip codes).
All the data that expresses the same type of quantities is “cleansed” to use the same
measurement units.
In the loading phase, the specialists transfer the transformed files to the data warehouse.
They then compare the data in the data warehouses with the original data to confirm
completeness. As with any database, metadata helps the users know what they can find and
analyze in the data warehouse.
A properly built data warehouse is a single source for all the data required for analysis. It is
accessible to more users than the transactional databases (whose access is limited only to those
who record transactions and some managers) and provides a “one-stop shopping” place for data.
In fact, it is not unusual for a data warehouse to have large tables with fifty or more fields
(attributes).
Much of the ETL activity can be automated. Depending on the needs of its users, the
structure and content of the data warehouse might be changed occasionally. Techniques such as
data mining and online analytical processing (OLAP) can be used to exploit it. Managers can
then extract business intelligence for better decision making.
© Cengage Learning 2015
242
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
Data Warehousing and Big Data
Data warehousing has been an essential ingredient in the trend toward Big Data, specifically data
collected about and from individuals. Although there are many definitions of Big Data, a
common thread is that Big Data is a magnification or expansion of the amount, types, and
level of detail of data that is collected and stored. Big Data involves high volumes of data
compiled from traditional, ordinary business activities, as well as newer, nontraditional sources.
With Big Data, instead of relying on aggregated data to populate data warehouses, the data is
stored at a much more granular level: from detailed transactions received from point-of-sale
(POS) terminals, automated teller machines (ATMs), webpages, and mobile phones. For example,
each time you purchase groceries, Big Data would represent information about items you
purchased: what you purchased (canned soup, apples, cheese, milk, etc.), what brands, at what
price, and in which quantities. So, rather than one summary transaction that records the total
paid for your groceries, Big Data would record possibly hundreds of more detailed data points.
It’s easy to see how this would create an “information explosion” and necessitate expanding
data warehouse capabilities.
Big Data also includes data collected from nontraditional sources such as social media. As
discussed previously, the collection of unstructured data in data warehouses has exploded over
the last several years. However, the lack of a traditional data structure and format can make the
data a challenge to analyze. For example, the textual data from a Twitter feed would be nearly
impossible to analyze for patterns and trends using traditional statistical and database query
tools. Sentiment analysis is a data mining method that uses a combination of natural language
processing, computational linguistics, and text analytics to identify and extract subjective
information in source materials (Anonymous, 2013b). It is primarily used to extract attitudes,
opinions, and emotions contained in text-based data, specifically from the web. Sentiment
analysis can be used to analyze data from a Twitter business account to understand how
consumers feel about their product, customer service, or brand.
Aggregate, or summary, data can provide insight into many questions asked by business
management and professionals. However, intense and detailed perspectives can only be gained
with the granular transaction information compiled from the source of the business activity.
While the sheer volume of data may be intimidating, it allows for a much greater depth of
analysis. Consumer product companies will be able to understand the links, if any, for customers
who purchase two or more of their product line and profile information (income, gender,
household size, etc.). Without the detailed data on their purchases, it would be impossible to
gather the necessary information to complete the analysis and determine these relationships. For
example, using sentiment analysis, a consumer products company can determine the number of
tweets which were categorized as positive or negative about a specific product or service. The
summary values of this analysis can provide insight on the attitudes of consumers over time for
a product.
Data mining, OLAP, and business intelligence are discussed in Chapter 11, “Business
Intelligence and Knowledge Management.”
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
243
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Summary
●
In their daily operations, organizations can collect
vast amounts of data. This data is raw material for
highly valuable information, but data is useless
without tools to organize it, store it in an easily
accessible manner, and manipulate it to produce
that information. These functions are the strength
of databases: collections of interrelated data that,
within an organization and sometimes between
organizations, are shared by many units and con-
tribute to productivity and efficiency.
●
The database approach has several advantages
over the more traditional file approach: less data
redundancy, application-data independence, and
greater probability of data integrity.
●
The smallest piece of data collected about an entity
is a character. Multiple characters make up a field.
Several fields make up a record. A collection of
related records is a file, or in the relational model, a
table. Databases usually contain several files, but the
database approach can be applied to a single file.
●
A database management system (DBMS) is a soft-
ware tool that enables us to construct databases,
populate them with data, and manipulate the data.
Most DBMSs come with programming languages
that can be used to develop applications that facili-
tate queries and produce reports. DBMSs are also a
major part of enterprise applications.
●
A database model is the general logical structure of
records in a database. The various database mod-
els are: hierarchical, network, relational, and object-
oriented. The most popular model is the relational
model, which is used to build most new databases,
although object-oriented databases are gaining
popularity. Some vendors offer DBMSs that accom-
modate a combination of relational and object-
oriented models, called object-relational.
●
The links among entities in a relational database
are maintained by the use of key fields. Primary
keys are unique identifiers. Composite keys are
combinations of two or more fields that are used
as a primary key. Foreign keys link one table to
another within the database.
●
In an object-oriented database, data sets, along
with the procedures that process them, are objects.
The relationship between one set of data and
another is established by one object containing
the other, rather than by foreign keys.
●
SQL has been adopted as an international standard
language for querying relational databases. SQL
statements can also be embedded in code that is
produced using many programming languages.
●
To construct a database, a designer first constructs
a schema and prepares metadata, which is infor-
mation about the data to be kept in the database.
●
To plan databases, designers conduct data model-
ing. Before they design a database, they create
entity relationship diagrams, which show the tables
required for each data entity and the attributes
(fields) it should hold, as well as the relationships
between tables. Then they can move on to con-
structing a schema, which is the structure of all
record structures of the entities, and the relation-
ships among them.
●
Many
databases
are
linked
to
the
web.
This
arrangement requires web server software, such
as Active Server Pages and Java servlets, which
allow users to enter queries or update databases
over the Internet.
●
Data warehouses are huge collections of historical
transactions copied from transactional databases,
often along with other data from outside sources.
Managers use software tools to glean useful infor-
mation from data warehouses to support their deci-
sion making. Some data warehouses are made up
of several data marts, each focusing on an organi-
zational unit or a subject.
●
In each addition of data from a transactional data-
base to a data warehouse, the data is extracted,
transformed, and loaded, a process known by its
acronym, ETL.
●
The low price of efficient and effective database
software exacerbates a societal problem of the
Information Age: invasion of privacy. Because
every transaction of an individual can be easily
recorded and later combined with other personal
data, it is inexpensive to produce large dossiers
on individual consumers. This poses a threat to pri-
vacy. However, commercial organizations insist
that they need personal information to improve
their products and services and to target their mar-
keting only to interested consumers.
●
Big Data, the collection and storage of ever-more
detailed quantities of data, has altered data gather-
ing and analysis techniques. Big Data is also creat-
ing a new mindset by using nontraditional data
sources, such as social media, to spot trends, atti-
tudes, and patterns of consumers and the general
public.
244
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Tyler
has
begun
to
consider
how
to
link
the
promotional strategy to the data needed to help his
parents manage the new location. Although he is not
sure exactly how to accomplish this, he is certain that
collecting and storing the right data will help create a
historical warehouse of information for operational,
tactical, and strategic decisions.
What Is Your Advice?
1. Kimball’s database from the order entry system is
crucial to its operations. Information about the
meals, drinks, and desserts ordered by customers
can provide accurate insight to manage the restau-
rant’s operations efficiently. What types of deci-
sions are required to manage the daily operations?
What decisions lead to managing costs? Is there
any information that can provide assistance on
their labor scheduling? Ordering? Compile a list of
the critical success factors and decisions that man-
agement should review.
2. Should Kimball’s maintain information on its suppli-
ers? Would that level of detail be necessary, or
would it overload the owners and Tyler? What infor-
mation do they need to support their operational as
well as tactical decisions? Is there any information
that could help them with strategic decisions?
3. Where would you learn about the process of gath-
ering data for management decisions? Consider
some sources that would assist you with this
important business process.
New Perspectives
1. Tyler wants to assemble a strategy to track the
influence of their new customer loyalty program.
What types of information should he consider
tracking? How would it integrate with current infor-
mation technology? Are new systems needed to
track this data?
2. Nontraditional data is an important component of
a data strategy. What types of nontraditional data
sources should Tyler consider? How would it be
analyzed? How might it relate with other systems
at Kimball’s?
Key Terms
Big Data, 243
character, 223
composite key, 230
data dictionary, 234
data integrity, 223
data mart, 238
data modeling, 235
data redundancy, 223
data warehouse, 238
database administrator (DBA),
226
database approach, 223
database management system
(DBMS), 225
encapsulation, 231
entity, 223
entity relationship diagram
(ERD), 235
field, 224
file, 224
foreign key, 230
inheritance, 231
join table, 229
many-to-many relationship, 230
metadata, 234
object-oriented database model,
231
one-to-many relationship, 230
primary key, 230
query, 226
record, 224
relational database model, 228
relational operation, 232
schema, 233
Structured Query Language
(SQL), 233
table, 228
traditional file approach, 223
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
245
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
Review Questions
1. It is easier to organize data and retrieve it when
there is little or no dependence between pro-
grams and data. Why is there more dependence
in a file approach and less in the database
approach?
2. Spreadsheets have become quite powerful for
data management. What can be done with data-
base management systems that cannot be done
with spreadsheet applications? Give several
examples.
3. What is the difference between a database and a
database management system?
4. DBMSs are usually bundled with powerful pro-
gramming language modules. Why?
5. DBMSs are a component of every enterprise
application, such as a supply chain management
system. Why?
6. What are the advantages and disadvantages of
object-oriented databases?
7. What is the relationship between a website’s local
search engines and online databases?
8. When constructing a database, the designer must
know what types of relationships exist between
records in different data sets, such as one-
to-many or many-to-many. Give three examples
for each of these relationships.
9. Give an example of a one-to-one relationship in a
relational database.
10. What is SQL? In which database model does it
operate? Why is it so popular?
11. What is a data warehouse? How is it different
from a transactional database?
12. Why is it not advisable to query data from trans-
actional databases for executive decision making
the same way you do data warehouses?
13. What are the phases of adding data to a data
warehouse?
14. What does it mean to cleanse data before it is
stored in a data warehouse?
15. What are data marts? How do they differ from
data warehouses?
Discussion Questions
16. Retail chains want to ensure that every time a
customer returns to purchase something, the
record of that purchase can be matched with pre-
vious data of that customer. What objects that
consumers often use help the retailers in that
regard?
17. Increasingly, corporate databases are updated by
the corporations’ customers rather than their
employees. How so?
18. Can you think of an industry that would not benefit
from the promise of a data warehouse? Explain.
19. Shouldn’t those who build data warehouses trim
the data before they load it to data warehouses?
Why do they usually not cut any data from
transactions?
20. The combination of RFID and database technol-
ogy enables retailers to record data about consu-
mers even when they have not purchased
anything at the store. Can you think of an exam-
ple and how the data could be used?
21. A retailer of household products maintains a data
warehouse. In addition to data from sales trans-
actions, the retailer also purchases and maintains
in the warehouse daily weather data. What might
be the reason?
22. Many organizations have posted privacy policies
at their websites. Why do you think this is so?
How is this related to databases and data
warehouses?
23. Consider the following statement: Database man-
agement systems and data-warehousing techni-
ques are the greatest threat to individual privacy in
modern times. What do you believe are the issues
associated with the consolidation and gathering of
private-industry data (discussed in the Ethical &
Societal section) by the federal government?
24. Privacy rights advocates demand that organiza-
tions ask individuals for permission to sell per-
sonal information about them. Some also
demand that the subjects of the information be
paid for their consent. Organizations have argued
that they cannot practically comply with these
demands and that the demands interfere with the
free flow of information. What is your opinion?
25. Organizations whose websites offer visitors some
control of how their personal information is
246
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
collected and used offer one of two options: “opt
out” or “opt in.” Explain each term.
26. Some people say that as long as the concept of
“informed consent” is applied, individuals should
not complain about invasion of their privacy.
What is “informed consent”? Do you agree with
the argument?
27. Businesses in the United States and many other
countries rarely allow customers to scrutinize and
correct records that the organizations keep about
them. Technologically, does the web make it less
expensive for organizations to allow that?
28. Big Data is gaining popularity in business orga-
nizations. How would the concept of Big Data
alter the perspective of what type of data is
stored and the challenges it poses? Consider the
various sources outlined in the chapter for
gathering data.
Applying Concepts
29. Direct your web browser to www.zillow.com.
Enter a real address. What is displayed comes
from at least one database. Prepare a short report
answering these questions: What information
elements must Zillow pull from databases to dis-
play what you see? (street address, town, etc.)
Are all the data elements textual? Explain.
30. Acxiom is a data services firm. Browse this com-
pany’s site and research its activities at its own
site and at other websites. Write a two-page
summary of the company’s activity: What does
the company sell? How does it obtain what it
sells? Who are its customers, and how do they
use what they purchase from Acxiom?
31. Research the business of DoubleClick, Inc. What
type of data does the company collect and sell?
How does it collect the data? Who are the com-
pany’s customers, and how do they use the ser-
vices or data they buy from DoubleClick? At the
company’s website, you may notice that the
company presents a privacy policy at this web-
site. Explain why only at this website and not a
general privacy policy.
32. Research various cloud-based data warehouse
services offered by businesses such as Amazon.
Write a two to four page research paper for your
management to provide insight and recommenda-
tions on using their service within your business.
Hands-On Activities
33. Mid-County Hospital holds data on doctors and
patients in two tables in its database (see the fol-
lowing tables): DOCTOR and PATIENT.
Use your DBMS to build the appropriate schema,
enter the records, and create the reports
described in items a-c on the next page.
PATIENT
SSN
Last N
First N
Admission Insurance
Doc ID
Date
055675432 Hopkins
Jonathan 4/1/13
BlueCross
221
101234566 Bernstein
Miriam
4/28/14
HAP
243
111654456 McCole
John
3/31/13
Kemper
221
200987898 Meanny
Marc
2/27/14
HAP
221
367887654 Mornay
Rebecca
4/3/13
HAP
410
378626254 Blanchard George
3/30/14
BlueCross
243
366511122 Rubin
David
4/1/13
Brook
243
DOCTOR
ID# LIC# Last
First
Ward Salary
Name
Name
102 8234 Hogg
Yura
INT
187,000
104 4666 Tyme
Justin
INT
91,300
221 2908 Jones
Jane
OBG
189,650
243 7876 Anderson
Ralph
ONC
101,800
256 5676 Jones
Ernest
ORT
123,400
376 1909 Washington Jaleel
INT
87,000
410 4531 Carrera
Carlos ORT
97,000
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
247
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
a. A report showing the following details for each
doctor in this order: Last Name, First Name,
and Ward. Arrange the report by ascending
alphabetical order of the last names.
b. A report showing the entire record with the
original order of columns of all the doctors
whose salary is greater than $100,000 who
work for one of the following wards: Internal
(INT), Obstetric-Gynecological (OBG), Oncol-
ogy (ONC).
c. A report showing the following details for all of
Dr. Anderson’s patients: Dr. Anderson’s first
name, last name, and Doctor’s ID, and ward
(from the DOCTOR table) should appear once
at the top of the report. Each record on the list
should show the Patient’s Last Name, First
Name, and Date of Admission (from the
PATIENT table).
34. Search for a video about databases on YouTube.
Print the video that you found showing all the
information associated with the video stored by
YouTube. Identify all of the attributes (fields) in
the printout that could be included in YouTube’s
database record structure. Compile a list of the
attributes for YouTube’s database.
35. Mr. Lawrence Husick is an inventor who, with
other inventors, obtained several U.S. patents.
Find the site of the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office. Conduct a patent search at the site’s online
patent database. Find all the patents that mention
Lawrence Husick as an inventor. Type up the
patent numbers along with their corresponding
patent titles (what the invention is). Email the list
to your professor. Find and print out the image of
patent No. 6469. Who was the inventor and what
was the invention?
Team Activities
36. Your team is to design a relational database for
an online pizza service. Customers log on to the
site and provide their first and last names,
address, telephone number, and email address.
They order pizza from a menu. Assume that each
item on the menu has a unique number, a
description, and a price. Assume there is one
person per shift who receives orders and handles
them, from giving the order to the kitchen to dis-
patching a delivery person. The system automat-
ically records the time at which the server picked
up the order. The business wants to maintain the
details of customers, including their orders of the
past six months. The following are reports that
management might require: (1) a list of all the
orders handled by a server over a period of time;
(2) summaries of total sales, by item, for a period;
and (3) a report showing all of the past week’s
deliveries by server, showing each individual
order—customer last name and address, items
ordered, time of order pickup, and last name of
delivery person. (You can assume the last names
of delivery people are unique, because if there is
more than one with the same last name, a num-
ber is added to the name.)
a. Chart the table for each entity, including all its
fields and the primary key.
b. Draw the entity relationship diagram.
37. Your team should contact a large organization,
such as a bank, an insurance company, or a hos-
pital. Interview the database administrator about
the database he or she maintains on customers
(or patients). What are the measures that the DBA
has taken to protect the privacy of the subjects
whose records are kept in the databases? Con-
sider accuracy, timeliness, and appropriate
access to personal records. Write a report on your
findings. If you found loopholes in the proce-
dures, list them and explain why they are loop-
holes and how they can be remedied.
Alternatively, log on to the company website that
has posted a detailed privacy policy and answer
the same questions.
38. Use the YouTube exercise above for this exercise.
Using Figure 7.5 as a guide, create a list of tables
containing the attributes identified from a You-
Tube video entry. Compile a list of analysis ques-
tions that YouTube could use to determine
various operational and tactical success factors to
manage their business.
248
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Filling the Shopping Bags with Data
Supermarkets compete in an industry with tight gross
and profit margins. The operational and marketing
challenges
of
this
industry
require
disciplined
inventory
control
as
well
as
a
focused
eye
on
consumer market trends and product selection. Food
retailers have a limited amount of shopping area and
shelving space. Therefore, the decisions about which
products
to
sell,
their
costs,
and
the
available
inventory are key success factors in supermarkets.
Lund Fund Holdings is a small, privately held retail
organization selling food products in their 21 stores in
the Minneapolis–St. Paul area. Their product line is
high-end, similar to what is found at Whole Foods. Its
family
operated
enterprise
also
includes
catering
services, online shopping, and pharmacies.
Lund’s information technology infrastructure had a
number of systems already installed and operational.
Their point-of-sale system tracked sales, pricing, and
inventory. Other systems provided necessary functions
to its operations including an accounting system that
maintained their financial transactions and reporting as
well
as
a
manufacturing
system
that
provided
functionality for in-store delicatessens and perishable
goods. Although all of those systems were operating
well for Lund, there was a problem. The various
systems did not provide an integrated environment of
corporate data. The “islands of technology” needed to
be combined into one data warehouse populated from
the various systems. Lund’s manager of information
systems clearly defined the issue: “We needed a [data]
warehouse to pull data from all of those operational
systems into a single spot.”
Lund’s needed the information technology and
associated data to assist buyers with an important
retail concept—to make sure that the appropriate
products were available to the consumers at the
right
time.
Easy
to
say,
but
challenging
to
accomplish.
Their
previous
solution
used
Excel
spreadsheets that were developed with requests to
its
information technology department.
The time
needed to fulfill these requests did not allow the
buyers to make effective decisions. In addition, when
the information was provided, the spreadsheets were
not able to “drill down” into the data. The delays in
the delivery of data and the limited functionality of
the spreadsheet models limited Lund’s ability to
complete
effective
analysis
and
make
timely
purchasing decisions.
The goal was clear, but the journey needed to be
constructed. They created a team that consisted of
various resources and roles within the organization.
The
implementation
team
was
to
include
both
business
and
information
technology
personnel
including
store
buyers
(also
called
category
managers), accounting, and store general managers
lead by a project leader and a representative from
Lund’s business intelligence software provider and
project consultant. They compiled a three-year plan to
develop their data warehousing initiatives, looking for
a phased-in approach rather than attempting to force
the project’s objectives too quickly. Once the objective
was set, what specifically was needed to achieve that
goal? Could everyone agree on what was required?
The team agreed that twelve key reports formed the
foundation of the initial phase. Through a traditional
business
needs
analysis,
several
interviews
were
completed to gather what information was needed to
fulfill the organization’s goals. The project team was
able to extract data from its various application systems.
The information system personnel’s knowledge of the
organization’s data was invaluable to developing the
data extraction process.
Once the data warehouse was created with the
data from Lund’s systems, they used MicroStrategy’s
BI product to interrogate the data warehouse. At this
point, the benefits became more transparent and
tangible.
The
category
managers
used
their
knowledge of the stores and market to complete the
purchasing activities for each store. They received
comprehensive sales information that they did not
possess or have access to previously.
The first
benefit was that category managers were able to
bargain more effectively with vendors, because they
were equipped with timely and accurate information.
Lund’s quickly realized that the newfound access
to corporate data affected many levels of personnel,
not just the category managers. Specifically, the
store managers now received sales information early
in the morning on their mobile devices. Decisions
could be completed more effectively and timely by
using accurate historical data contained in the data
warehouse.
Corporate personnel could efficiently manage its
sales forecasts and product shrinkage. Buyers were
able
to
extract
sales
information
on
seasonal
products from previous years. The buyer could now
view product information on units sold, stock outs,
and inventory overstocks. The buyers, equipped with
accurate, objective information, compiled ordering
forecasts
that
are
required
several
months
in
advance. After implementing the data warehouse,
sales increased 20 percent and after-holiday product
overstocks that required discounting were reduced.
Product
shrinkage
has
always
plagued
retail
establishments. The new system collects data on
what is discarded and no longer available for sale.
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
249
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
The shrinkage data, combined with sale and purchase
data, has expanded the organization’s data analysis
capability. The result? Lund’s gained a significant
reduction of shrinkage for their perishable goods.
It is clear that this food retailer has checked out
significant benefits by filling its cart with data.
Source: Briggs, L. L. (2010, First Quarter). Food Retailer Bags
New
Data
Warehousing
Solution.
Business
Intelligence
Journal, 15, 39–41.
Thinking About the Case
1. Why was the knowledge of the IS department so
valuable to the population of the data warehouse
from Lund’s various systems?
2. Consider the data that a supermarket tracks and
maintains through its operations. Several new
cracker products are being introduced in a few
months. The buyers need to gather information to
decide which new products should be approved for
Lund’s. Discuss what data should be extracted from
their data warehouse to move this decision forward.
3. Lund’s had several information technology sys-
tems already implemented in their organization.
How influential were the depth and functionality
of these systems on the success of the data
warehouse project? Why?
Retailing Big Data
“Big Data” is getting big attention in many business
organizations across various industries and markets.
Any
advantage
that
can
be
gained
over
your
competitors is a plus. The challenge is that many
business
organizations
are
implementing
similar
technology initiatives. Therefore, the organization that
crosses the technology “finish line” not only first, but
more effectively, gains the most.
Retailing is a fragmented industry, ranging in size
from
the
“big
box”
stores
to
local
proprietors
specializing in a particular product line. However, they
all have the same issues: improving cost leadership,
inventory
efficiency,
and
revenue.
One
of
the
important “cogs” of the wheel is building customer
loyalty. During challenging economic times, customers
are looking for bargains and increased value. How can
these be achieved without compromising profit?
Sears Holding, the parent company of Sears and
Kmart, has been experiencing challenges to their
organizational, financial, and market success. Faced
with the intense competition from giant “brick and
mortar”
and
online
retailers,
Sears
needed
to
improve customer loyalty to survive. Sales revenue
declined from $50 billion in 2008 to $42 billion in
2011. In the same period, Amazon increased its
revenue from $19 billion to $48 billion, surpassing
Sears for the first time.
In 2009, Sears decided to begin an initiative to get
closer to its customers. They wanted to achieve this
objective
by
implementing
Big
Data
technology.
However, their IT capabilities were not up to the task.
Responding to the challenge in 2011, Sears initiated
the
“A
Shop
Your
Way
Rewards”
membership
program as one of five tactics to gain a competitive
advantage. Sears also wanted to alter its reputation
as lagging in technology adoption.
Their implementation of Apache Hadoop, a “high-
scale,
open
source
data
processing
platform,”
focusing on Big Data, was announced. Sears’ past
process
for
analyzing
loyalty
club
memberships
needed six weeks to complete on their mainframe
systems using Teradata and SAS products. Their
new Big Data product has reduced the turnaround to
weekly. For some situations involving their mobile
and
online
commerce
applications,
Sears
can
complete daily analyses–a radical difference from
past practices. The level of data granularity was
increased to view details down to the customer level
if necessary. The size of data warehouses can become
unwieldy
and
cumbersome
with
the
increasing
timeframe of stored data. However, Sears has found
that maintaining all data “was crucial because we
don’t want to archive or delete meaningful data.”
A significant component of their Big Data project’s
success focuses on the technology infrastructure. Their
specific decision to implement Apache Hadoop, an
open-source
database
platform,
has
been
at
the
cornerstone of its initiative. With the Apache system,
storing 200 terabytes costs about one-third what it
would cost with a commercial relational database
product.
Therefore,
the
scalability
as
the
system
expands does not present a cost challenge to the
organization. The new product also enables parallel
processing
computing
power
to
reduce
the
time
necessary to process records. To emphasize that gain,
Sears states that the difference between processing 100
million and 2 billion records requires only a “little more
than a minute.” This fact must bring a smile to the faces
of the Big Data miners.
Although Sears has struggled, it still remains the
largest appliance retailer and service provider in the
United States. Therefore, it is imperative for Sears to
understand the needs of its appliance customers. They
do not believe that they have realized the full potential
of using Big Data with their appliance business. The
various
data
elements
associated
with
customer
preferences, service trends, and warranty problems
can provide more gains in this important product area.
Sears has populated its nearly 300 nodes with
2 petabytes of data including customer transactions,
point-of-sale, and supply chain data. Though it might
be easier to maintain only aggregate data in the data
warehouse,
Sears
stores
its
transactions
at
the
individual activity level. This approach allows the
250
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
2
organization to analyze and report about their supply
chain, logistics, and financial reporting as well as
product and customer sales. It uses Datameer, which
supports their data extraction and presentation in a
spreadsheet-style environment. Using the Big Data
initiative, Sears can be more proactive about its
promotional tactics. It offers direct promotions to
customers,
personalized
based
on
the
data
warehouse analysis. Previously, Sears would analyze
only 10 percent of its customer data to determine
what promotional offers would be successful. Now,
with the new system, they can analyze all data faster
and more efficiently.
As far as tangible results, in the quarter ended
July
2012,
earnings
(before
interest,
taxes,
depreciation and amortization) were up 163 percent,
to
$153
million.
This
impressive
increase
was
accomplished while same-store sales decreased 2.9
percent
and
4.7
percent
at
Sears
and
Kmart
respectively.
Sears
suggests
that
their
financial
performance
indicates
more
intelligent
targeted
marketing and promotion.
Sears has decided to leverage its Big Data project
success.
It
has
begun
to
market
its
Big
Data
technology
infrastructure
and
expertise
to
other
businesses through its new subsidiary, MetaScale.
Its new business venture offers its Hadoop data
center
clusters
either
directly
or
remotely
for
customers needing Big Data applications. In addition,
MetaScale provides consulting services to assist the
implementation of data analytics initiatives.
Sears has one advantage over the giant retailer
Amazon.
Sears
offers
a
marketing
channel
that
Amazon does not, retail storefronts. While Amazon
continually
is
redefining
the
customer’s
online
experience,
Sears
like
other
“brick
and
mortar”
retailers must determine how to improve the in-store
environment. For traditional retailing, the challenge
continues to reinvent the storefront, specifically how
to serve its technologically savvy customers who use
the web and mobile platforms. It is clear that Sears
must focus its resources on leveraging technology to
regain retail market share.
Sears’ Chairman, Edward Lampert has indicated
that technology will provide a strong influence for
the business to succeed. Some of his five “pillars”
include building brand awareness and creating value
through information-sharing for store employees. He
has stated that he spends more time on one pillar,
“reinventing
the
company
continuously
through
technology and innovation.” He believes that the
new customers will tend to use their smartphones
simultaneously as they shop in stores. Therefore,
defining and branding the cross-channel experience
will be a major focus as new technology initiatives are
considered.
Source: Henschen/Doug, Big Data, Big Questions; Henschen, D.
(2012). Big Data, Big Questions. InformationWeek (1349),
18–22.
Thinking About the Case
1. Consider that Sears is maintaining their data
warehouse to the individual transaction level. What
are the advantages and disadvantages of this data
storage strategy? If you were CTO, what data
analyses could you accomplish with detail data as
compared with aggregated data? Be specific.
2. The adoption of smartphone technology and
mobile applications are expanding. Think about
your experience of using your smartphones in a
retail environment. What functions and features
would you consider important for retailers to
implement for cross-channel marketing?
3. The airline industry has used historical informa-
tion for decades in order to determine pricing for
airfares. Could the availability of historical data
and price point modeling create dynamic price
changes? Discuss the pros and cons of this
initiative.
CHAPTER 7
Databases and Data Warehouses
251
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
PART
References
Anonymous. (2013a). 5 Challenges for Using Data in
Healthcare. Medical Economics, 90(7), 13.
Anonymous. (2013b). Sentiment Analysis Wikipedia.
San Francisco, CA.
Bridgwater, A. (2012). MySQL is “world’s most popu-
lar” open source database. Retrieved January 8,
2013, from http://www.computerweekly.com/
blogs/open-source-insider/2012/10/mysql-is-
worlds-most-popular-open-source-database.html
Couts, A. (2012). Netflix-Facebook bill passes U.S.
House withour email privacy protections.
Retrieved from Digital Trends website: http://
www.digitaltrends.com/social-media/netflix-
facebook-bill-house-vppa-ecpa/
Fontecchio, M. (2012). Oracle the clear leader in $24
billion RDBMS market. Retrieved from http://
itknowledgeexchange.techtarget.com/eye-on-
oracle/oracle-the-clear-leader-in-24-billion-rdbms-
market/
Kuehner-Hebert, K. (2012). Are You Ready for Big
Data? Target Marketing, 35(7), 18-20, 22-23.
McKendrick, J. (2011). Data Warehousing Reaches an
Inflection Point. Database Trends and Applications,
25(4), 2-3.
Rutenberg, J. (2012). Secret of the Obama Victory?
Rerun Watchers, for One Thing, The New York
Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/
2012/11/13/us/politics/obama-data-system-
targeted-tv-viewers-for-support.html?nl=us&
emc=edit_cn_20121113&_r=0
Yudkin, R. (2012). Popularity of mobile devices brings
risk. Health Management Technology, 33(4), 32.
252
Information Technology
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

three
PART
NetPhotos/Alamy
PART
3
WEB-ENABLED COMMERCE
CHAPTER 8 The Web-Enabled Enterprise 254
CHAPTER 9 Challenges of Global Information Systems 298
BUSINESS CHALLENGES
Early information technology enabled commerce
through telephone calls, paper forms, and entering
data at terminals connected to computer systems.
Today, businesses of all sizes are integrating web-
based technology and applications, and sharing
information globally to transform how they interact
and process transactions with their stakeholders. In
these two chapters, you will explore how Kimball’s
Restaurant and other businesses can integrate web-
based technologies and global information systems
into their strategies and operations.
●
In Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise,” you
learn how businesses use the Internet to achieve
strategic advantage and how they can use the
Internet to extend their reach. Various information
technology strategies such as websites, mobile
computing and social media can help their
business develop and become more efficient.
●
In Chapter 9, “Challenges of Global Information
Systems,” you learn how sharing electronic
information and operations among companies
and across international boundaries can bring
tremendous efficiencies—and challenges—to
operations from small businesses to
multinational corporations.
Web-Enabled Commerce
253
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
 
CHAPTER
Oleksiy Mark/Photos.com 
PART
eight
THE WEB-ENABLED ENTERPRISE
Learning Objectives
The
web
continues
to
be
the
most
exciting
development
in
the
field
of
information
systems
and
telecommunications. The combination of advanced telecommunications technology, innovative software, and mobile
hardware such as tablets and smartphones is revolutionizing the way people communicate, shop, process contracts
and payments, educate, learn, and conduct business. Numerous companies throughout the world have been
established thanks to the enabling power of the web, and existing businesses have used the web to extend their
operations. Firms conduct business electronically with each other and directly with consumers, using a variety of
business models. This chapter focuses on web technologies and businesses on the web.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Describe how the web, high-speed Internet connections, and mobile technologies have changed business
operations.
●
Explain the functionality of various web technologies.
●
Compare and contrast options for web servers.
●
Explain basic business-to-business and business-to-consumer practices on the web.
●
Explain the relationship between web technologies and supply chain management.
●
Give examples of features and services that successful business websites offer.
●
Explain how businesses use social media as part of their web strategies.
●
Learn about online annoyances such as spam and adware, and how to protect against online identity theft.
254
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Using the Internet
The new location was just about complete and would be
ready to open within a month. Tyler worked with Justin,
a local promotion consultant, to develop the final gra-
phics for the Lakeside location’s print promotions.
Serving a Full Plate of Websites
With the print campaign ready, Tyler wanted to focus on
Kimball’s web presence. Although he had some college
courses on website design, and was familiar with social
media through his personal Facebook, Instagram, and
Twitter accounts, he asked Justin to consult with him
on building a professional website and using social
media to promote the restaurant.
Luckily, the domain name KimballsLakeside.com was
available. Tyler registered the name immediately to
ensure that customers could easily access the restau-
rant’s website with an intuitive address. He discussed
the content for the new website with Justin. What would
be its purpose? How could the website promote the new
location as well as drive more business to the restaurant?
Could they integrate social media into their promotions?
Justin and Tyler discussed how to proceed with the
web and social media strategy. Justin pointed out that
websites should evolve over time as needs change. A
website should reflect the short-term needs of the busi-
ness, rather than hypothetical and perhaps ill-conceived
ideas more than six months in the future. With the
grand opening only a few weeks away, Justin felt the
website’s scope should be limited to what needs to be
done to prepare for the opening.
Justin asked Tyler about his immediate objectives
for
the
website.
Tyler
thought
for
a
second
and
responded, “What I’d like right now is to create a buzz
about the new location with two main thrusts: (1) to
inform our loyal patrons about the new location and
(2) to introduce new customers who would enjoy lake-
side dining.” Then he added, “We also need to include
business meetings and social occasions as another
market category. This would be an excellent source of
new business. Social occasions like wedding and baby
showers, birthdays, and anniversaries could be a terrific
market for our function room.” Justin agreed.
Having a Social Meal
Tyler was excited about using social media as part of
their marketing strategy. Justin warned that although
social media can provide many benefits, its use needs
to be planned with specific goals in mind for each “cam-
paign” and outcome desired. “You can’t just post things
on Twitter and Facebook on a whim. Sure, some things
can be sent such as ‘Our Grand Opening is Rocking the
World Tonight!’ But in terms of promotions and market-
ing strategies, we need an overall plan for integrating
social media.” Justin cautioned that many businesses
lose profit by over-promoting without a strategy to
increase market, revenue, and customer base. They
both knew that a well-constructed plan for the website
and social media was important.
Even with the tight timeframe before the opening,
Justin believed that the website and social media plat-
forms could be constructed and ready to implement two
weeks prior to the opening. Tyler created accounts for
Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook to reserve the restau-
rant name. Justin and Tyler placed some initial general
entries into the new accounts to begin the dialogue. Jus-
tin said the initial dialogue was important so that when
the website “goes live” and the web address is included
in
advertisements,
the
social
media
accounts
will
already show activity. It is important for customers and
potential customers to see action rather than a blank
social media stream.
Tyler agreed to post something each day on the
social networking accounts to inform customers of
the restaurant’s progress and get them excited about
the grand opening. He also would upload some pictures
to create interest in the new location. Then, he and
Justin would focus on the structure of the website and
integrating social media.
Web Business: Growing and Changing
Ford Motor Company is a world leader in automobile manufacturing based in Dearborn,
Michigan.
It
employs
about
176,000
people
in
80
plants
across
the
globe.
Although
manufacturing companies are not known for their social media or for their marketing
departments in general, when Ford rolled out the Fiesta in 2010, it also rolled out an innovative
social media package with it. The Fiesta Project was a social media marketing campaign that took
a micro-targeting approach. The campaign used real people to share the Fiesta experience in a
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
255
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
series of eight YouTube videos. The videos sparked over 1,000,000 views and 5,000 conversations
across Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. Ford chose social media for their rollout because it
wanted to connect with and engage a specific market: a younger, tech-savvy audience. By
targeting a specific group of people with a custom message, Ford made viewers feel understood
and thus the message gained more traction. Ford’s social media strategy gave them widespread
online awareness of the Fiesta, as well as the ability to gauge the online response to their
product. Ford acknowledged that the online attitude toward them was positive. With social
media, if you aren’t using, you’re losing (Anonymous, 2010).
The web has been a great enabler for conducting business within organizations, between
organizations, and between organizations and consumers. Vanguard, one of the world’s largest
mutual fund management companies, receives over 80 percent of its new clients through the
web. Social networking on sites like Facebook and Twitter has exploded over the past few years,
and content delivery of video clips and feature-length movies has boomed. The spread of
broadband links, new ideas of web use for commerce, and continued development of web
technologies help business on the web to grow and change all the time.
Web Technologies: A Review
Several standards and technologies enable the web to deliver rich information. The following is a
review of some nonproprietary standards and technologies.
HTTP
In Chapter 6, “Business Networks and Telecommunications,” you learned about protocols. The
protocol used to transfer and download web information is Hypertext Transfer Protocol, or
HTTP. A secure version of the protocol for confidential transactions is HTTPS (HTTP Secure).
Under these protocols, each web server is designated a Uniform Resource Locator (URL),
which is a unique address for a website. The address is the IP address assigned to the site, but in
most cases the site also has a domain name made up from letters. The term “URL” also refers
to the domain name. Domain names are used for convenience, because it is easier to remember
domain names than IP addresses. Each webpage has its own URL, which contains the IP address
or domain name of the site. Because the domain name must be unique, when an owner of a
website reserves a domain name to be associated with an IP address, no other site can be
associated with that domain name. Note that domain names often start with—but do not have
to include—www.
The last part of a URL, such as the “.com” in www.pinzale.com, is the top-level domain
(TLD). In addition to .com, .org, and .edu, many other TLDs can be requested for a domain
name, some of which are reserved for certain types of organizations and professions, and some
that are not. Country codes such as .ca for Canada or .uk for the United Kingdom can also serve
as TLDs. The only organization that is authorized to approve new TLDs is the Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), a not-for-profit organization established
specifically for this purpose. Usually, a website with any TLD can be viewed in the same way
regardless of technology. Recently, ICANN has expanded the portfolio of TLDs significantly to
include names such as .museum, .name, .post, .travel, .jobs, .info, and .coop (“Top Level
Domain Name List,” 2013).
256
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Know More About Web-Enabled Business
Understanding the capacity of web technologies and having
the ability and mindset to utilize them effectively and creatively
will help you be a more innovative professional. Web technol-
ogies continue to progress, enabling a growing number of
business activities. Almost all businesses, no matter how
small or large, are engaging in social media to communicate
with their customers and clients. By linking corporate systems
to the web, information resources, searching software, and
transaction applications are increasingly connected in a way
that allows employees and customers to receive the appropri-
ate information when and where they need it. New technolo-
gies that seem to be purely for “fun” all of a sudden are
utilized for serious business activities. Instagram, the mobile-
only photo sharing service, is just one example of an applica-
tion that started out being used recreationally but now has
attracted business users as a means to communicate with
their audience. Apparel brands such as Nike, Adidas, and
GAP are all focusing on using their Instagram social strategy
to develop a stronger brand image. By using cross-channel
posting, brands can hit PC followers on Facebook and mobile
users on Instagram. Over 90 percent of Instagram photos
posted by brands were also featured on Facebook and 60 per-
cent were tweeted on Twitter. Regardless of the career you
choose, you will not be able to perform your job without
using the web. You will need to contribute your knowledge of
web technologies and uses to improve performance for your-
self, your coworkers, and your organization.
Source: Anonymous (2012, Nov 02). 54 Percent of Top
Brands Now Using Instagram. Business Wire.
POINT OF
INTEREST
www.typosquatting.com
Typosquatting occurs when a person or company creates a domain name similar to a heavily-trafficked
site in order to receive many unintentional visitors. For example, in September 2011, Goggle.com received
824,850 unique visitors. Typosquatters’ sites may ask for an email address, which can then be flooded with
spam, or promise non-existent prizes such as iPods, iPads, or iPhones in exchange for personal informa-
tion. Typosquatting costs the top 250 most-trafficked websites $285 million in lost sales annually. In addi-
tion, typo domains pose security risks to Internet users because users may send emails to the wrong
address and release confidential information to hackers. Companies can protect themselves from typos-
quatters by registering typo domains in their own name and redirecting visitors to the real site, tracking
down the owners of typo domains, or taking legal action. No matter what action is taken, typosquatting
is harmful to Internet users because it puts their security at risk and to companies because typo domains
cause confusion and can lead to scams or destructive sites. As an Internet user, be careful that the site
you are accessing is the genuine site and not a typo domain.
Source: McNichol, T. (2011, Nov). When You Mean Facebook but Type Faecbook. Business Week, 1.
HTML and XML
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) is the most common programming language for
creating webpages and other information viewable in a web browser. It determines the look and
location of text, pictures, animations, and other elements on a webpage. Extensible Markup
Language (XML) enables the creation of various types of data. It is most often used not for
determining the appearance of visual elements on a webpage but to convey the meaning or
content of the data. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), the organization responsible for
web standards, combined the two markup languages HTML and XML into a standard called
Extensible Hypertext Markup Language (XHTML). HTML5 is the newest version of HTML/
XML. HTML5 includes support for the latest multimedia and mobile devices, and is rapidly
becoming the standard for webpage development. The W3C is expected to publish the final
HTML5 standard in 2014.
Every file displayed on the web is coded with a markup language such as HTML or XML.
Simply put, markup languages provide a system of standardized “tags” that format elements of a
document, including text, graphics, and sound. Formatting includes opening and closing tags
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
257
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
preceding and following a part of the document, such as <b> at the start of bold text, and </b>
at the end of bold text. Some tags are marked to link to another page either at the same site or
another site, and others create links to email addresses. Browsers interpret HTML and XML tags
and display the text in the fashion defined by the tags, or allow other software to pick up data
from the page and process it or copy it into the proper place in a database.
As in HTML, tags are used in XML to mark data elements. However, XML tags define “what
it is,” as opposed to “how it looks.” Figure 8.1 illustrates the difference between HTML and XML
tags. XML tags can be used in the same page with HTML tags to indicate both what the data
means (which is not visible to the user) and how each element should be displayed.
F I G U R E 8.1
HTML and XML code:
XML provides a method
for describing or
classifying data in a
webpage
Visible Web Page
Content
HTML code
XML code
Reebok® Classic
Ace Tennis Shoe
was $56.00; Now
$38.99
Soft leather tennis shoe.
Lightweight EVA molded
midsole. Rubber outsole.
China.
<strong><font face=”Verdana, Arial,
Helvetica, sans-serif”>Reebok&reg;
Classic Ace Tennis Shoe
</font></strong><br>
<strong>Was $56.00; Now $38.99
</strong><table width=”100%”
border=”1”><tr><td>Soft leather
tennis shoe. Lightweight EVA
molded midsole. Rubber outsole.
China.</td></tr></table>
<product type=”shoes”>
<name>
Reebok&reg; Classics Ace Tennis
Shoe
</name>
<price>$38.99</price>
<description>
Soft leather tennis shoe.
Lightweight EVA molded midsole.
Rubber outsole. China.
</description>
</product?
File Transfer
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is a common way of transmitting files from one computer to
another. Every time you download a file from a website or attach files to email, you are using an
FTP application. The file transmitted can be of any type: text, graphics, animation, or sound. FTP
is embedded in browsers and therefore is “transparent” to the users. You can also use a separate
FTP utility, with many available as shareware, to manage transmitting files.
Businesses use FTP to place files on a server for sharing among professionals. FTP is also
useful for placing files on a server that hosts a website. It’s also convenient for retrieving large
files that might exceed an email system’s size limits. For example, authors can place large
chapter and figure files in a folder on a server maintained by their publisher. Manufacturers
often place full assembly and maintenance manuals or videos at their website so customers can
download them any time. New methods have replaced FTP sites such as cloud drives, online
backup tools (such as Carbonite), and groupware productivity products (such as Wiggio).
However, FTP sites still remain popular due to the inexpensive and simple nature of file transfers.
Blogs
A blog (a contraction of “web log”) is a webpage that invites surfers to post opinions and artistic
work as well as links to sites of interest. Blog sites focus on a topic or a set of related topics, and
provide an easy way to post webpages or update existing ones. Most blogs contain commentaries
and humorous content. Users can simply click a button to open a window in which they type
text, and click another button to post it. The text is added to the webpage either automatically
or after a review by the blog’s operators. Some blog sites simply let “bloggers” add comments on
a topic, with the most recent comment appearing at the top. Many companies have established
blogs, and invite employees to use them for self-expression. The policy might encourage new
ideas from which the company can benefit. Some, however, shun the idea, because management
believes blogs are too informal and uncontrolled. Users can easily set up a blog using websites
such as WordPress, Typepad, Squarespace, and LiveJournal. Several blogging software vendors,
such as WordPress and LiveJournal, offer blog hosting and software use at no cost.
© Cengage Learning 2015
258
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
One interesting feature of some blogs is trackback. Trackback software notifies bloggers
when their posts have been mentioned elsewhere on the web, so they and their readers can
extend the discussion beyond the original blog. Below each post there is a TrackBack button or
similar option. When it is clicked, a new window pops up listing the sites mentioning the post.
The commercial potential of blogs has not escaped businesspeople. As traffic grows at some
popular blogs, entrepreneurs have started selling advertising space at the sites. The popularity of
blogs drives revenue to blog sponsors. A reader “clicking through” to a blog from a sponsored
link becomes a source of revenue and increases the popularity rating of the blog. The old rule on
the web is still much in force: the greater the number of eyeballs, the greater the commercial
potential of the site.
The importance of blogs to commercial organizations is primarily to find out what blog
participants think and say about the organizations. Many organizations use special software that
combs blogs for postings that mention the organizations’ names. PR people then read the
content and relay feedback to others in the organization as needed. For example, an anonymous
blogger boasted that he could break Kryptonite bicycle locks with a pen. Within a week the
posted item was mentioned in The New York Times, and Kryptonite recalled the locks. Some
companies offer blog mining applications, which is software that combs blogs, identifies
company names, and automatically tracks discussions. Such tools can turn blog data into useful
market research information.
Wikis
Many websites invite visitors or subscribers not only to read, view, and listen to their content,
but also participate in the site building and editing process. In the past, to do so would require
access codes and at least some knowledge of web editing software. Now, wikis make the process
easy and fast.
A wiki (from Hawaiian: quick) is a web application that enables users to add to and edit the
content of webpages. The term also refers to software that enables collaborative software used to
create and revise websites. All the software required to edit the pages is embedded in the pages.
Visitors do not need any software of their own, and do not need to upload saved pages. The
additions and revisions are performed on the page, using tool icons that are provided at the site.
The popular online encyclopedia Wikipedia, as shown in the screenshot, demonstrates the
concept well. For example, if you enter the term “telecommuting,” you will notice the
disclaimer that alerts users that the page needs revisions. In addition, at the top of the page you
can click on “Edit.” When you click the edit link, a new window opens, displaying both the text
and a set of tool icons to help you edit the text. Except for some protected entries, anyone with
web access can participate in improving Wikipedia.
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
259
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
A wiki is a collaborative
website where users can
enter and edit content;
Wikipedia.org is one of
the best known
Popular wiki applications include the free MediaWiki, Corendal Wiki, Wikiversity, and
XWiki. The WikiMedia Foundation (www.wikimedia.org) provides information and links to sites
that teach how to install and use wikis. The features of wiki technology make it a popular
ingredient in groupware, software that helps groups collaborate on projects.
Podcasting
While blogging is publishing text and other visual material, podcasting is publishing sound and
video. To podcast is to make a digital audio recording, usually of voice, and post the file on the
web so that people can download it and listen to it. RSS software called an aggregator or feed
reader automatically checks for new content and downloads files from a designated site in the
same way as is done for text files from online newspapers. Users can subscribe to a podcast site
to receive the latest audio files. The files are usually in MP3 format, which can be played on any
portable player or smartphone, including the Apple iPod, from which the word “podcast” was
born. However, one does not need this specific player to enjoy podcasts.
Podcasting has several potential uses. It already serves as “time-shifted” broadcast of radio
stations that post their programs for later listening. It is used by some museums for audio tours.
Some schools have experimented with the concept to deliver lessons to remote students or to post
recordings of lessons for students to review. Whatever the use, people can listen to their favorite
content wherever they can obtain a link to the Internet, without paying radio license fees.
Podcasting creates opportunities for businesses to communicate and promote their business,
products, and services. Apple’s iTunes product serves as a source to offer a variety of content
consisting of training, lectures, television episodes, movies, and music. Many of these podcast
media content files are free to download.
The web has changed the economics and delivery of many products and services in many
industries, education being no different. Education and training have been transformed by
podcasting. Recently, podcasting has evolved into a new concept distributed via the web called a
massive open online course (MOOC). This new education delivery combines the traditional
Courtesy of Wikipedia
260
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
course materials (readings, exercises, and so on) with interactive forums for educators and students.
These forums can be conducted in a fully interactive, live setting or as stored video content to be
played later. A form of distance learning, a MOOC extends an educational environment to various
participants with a desire to learn a subject and expand their knowledge. This method is an
excellent alternative for people in homebound situations, residents in areas geographically distant
from educational institutions, and professionals with heavy travel commitments.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Do You MOOC Much?
In February 2013, a study conducted by the Chronicle of Higher Education surveyed 184 professors that
have taught a massive open online course; 56 percent responded to the survey. One professor after
teaching his first MOOC believed that it was a full-time job to prepare for the session, but was astounded
that his online course was attended by 28,000 students. After finishing the six-week class, he was “enthu-
siastic” and believed that “every person’s education will have a significant online component.”
The enrollment size of the courses was substantial ranging from hundreds to thousands; with the median
enrollment 33,000. The professors leading these courses believe that some type of free online courses would
be incorporated into a traditional delivery degree program and reduce the overall cost of providing classes at
their home institution. The study found that the reason for engaging in this new education delivery method
was both altruistic as well as increasing their visibility in the education community and general public.
However, there are consequences. Professors believed that the preparation time was overwhelming and
required considerable hours in preparation and video recording. They conveyed that it reduced their abil-
ity for their on-campus responsibilities. The study found that the average pass rate for MOOCs are 7.5 per-
cent; far below traditional education methods. Instead of offering traditional college credit, professors are
offering certificates of completion. It is unclear how recruiters and employers would view the completion
of MOOCs as compared to traditional college courses.
Source: Kolowich, S. (2013). The Professors Behind the MOOC Hype. The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Interactive Communication Technology
People communicate in various ways. Several years ago, instant messaging (IM) offered users
real-time online interactivity. It might be thought of as “real-time email,” because, unlike email,
it is synchronous. IM allows a user to detect whether another person who uses the service is
currently online, and the user can then exchange information with an entire group (referred to
as a “chat room”), or with only one other “chatter” in privacy. Some IM applications include
two-way video, which turns the chat into a video conference, and most also include FTP to
allow sending and receiving files.
Over
the
last
few
years,
instant
messaging
software
has
evolved
from
text-based
communication to an expanded range of communication tools, including video chat. Many
software applications provide text, video, and audio-based methods to communicate with other
participants. Products such as Skype, ooVoo, and Wiggio provide a portfolio of tools to
communicate with other people.
Free IM applications are operated through a server, or a group of connected servers, which
provides a directory and functions as the hub for all callers. Some IM setups, such as AOL
Instant Messenger (AIM), Yahoo! Messenger, MSN Messenger, and ICQ, have become the
electronic meeting places for millions of people, making them an attractive target for online
advertisers. To overcome the need to use multiple IM applications, some software developers
produced universal IM applications that allow, for example, an AIM user to chat with an MSN
Messenger user. Trillian and Pidgin are two of these applications.
While interactive messaging serves social purposes, it also can serve an important business
purpose. Many online retailers post a special button on their webpages that lets shoppers
establish real-time communication with a sales representative. This instant access fosters more
personal service and saves telephone costs. For example, Venus Swimwear, a company that
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
261
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
specializes in direct mail junior bathing suits, uses InstantService, a chat application that enables
employees to answer customer questions in real time online. Venus’s director of e-commerce
marketing added this option to the three sites operated by the company because customers often
abandoned the site when they could not get answers while shopping. Using the telephone was a
bad option for those who used their telephone line for a dial-up Internet connection, and email
was inefficient and time-consuming. IM enables sales agents to handle up to five inquiring
customers at a time. The application also enables the company to “push” answers from a library
of answers such as a sizing chart, instead of typing them. The live chat reduced the amount of
email employees have to handle and decreased the customer abandonment rate by 15 percent
despite the increasing traffic at the sites. As shown in the illustration, many businesses have
added “Chat Online” options to the mail, telephone, and email contact information listed on
their websites. Some companies have implemented an online callback function that allows
customers to enter their contact information through a website to queue a callback.
Many business
organizations integrate
online chat into their
contact options on
the website
Cookies
If you have surfed the web, your computer probably contains cookies. A cookie is a small file
that a website places on a visitor’s hard disk so that the website can remember something about
the surfer later. Typically, a cookie records the surfer’s ID or some other unique identifier.
Combined with data collected from previous visits, the site can figure out the visitor’s
preferences. The user can opt to allow cookies; the option is exercised by checking a box in the
browser’s configuration window. On the user’s hard disk, the cookie subdirectory (folder)
contains a cookie file for each cookie-using website that the surfer has visited. Cookies might
hold server URLs. When you instruct the browser to reach a URL from which you have a cookie,
the browser transmits the information from the cookie to the server.
Cookies have an important function in web-based commerce, especially between businesses
and consumers. They provide convenience to consumers; if the cookie contains your username
and password for accessing a certain resource at the site (e.g., your bank account), you do not
have to reenter the information. Cookies often help ensure that a user does not receive the same
unsolicited information multiple times. For example, cookies are commonly used to rotate
banner ads that a site sends so that a surfer receives different advertisements in a series of
requested pages. They also help sites to customize other elements for customers. For example,
when a retailer’s site identifies a returning customer, it can build a page showing a list of items
and information in which the customer might be interested based on previous purchases.
Some cookies are temporary; they are installed only for one session, and are removed when the
user leaves the site. Others are persistent and stay on the hard disk unless the user deletes them.
Many cookies are installed to serve only first parties, which are the businesses with which the user
interacts directly. Others serve third parties, which are organizations that collect information about
the user whenever the user visits a site that subscribes to the service of these organizations. These
organizations include DoubleClick, ValueClick, and Avenue A.
Courtesy of Amazon
262
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
While cookies can make online shopping, investing, and reading more convenient, they also
open the door for intrusion into a person’s privacy. Remember that every piece of information
you provide while your browser is configured to permit cookies can be recorded and kept for
further use—use over which you have no control. Choices you make when selecting menu items,
clicking buttons, and moving from one page to another are also recorded. Such activities are called
clickstream tracking. Although some organizations post privacy policies at their websites and
tell you what they will or will not do with the information they gather, you cannot see what
information they have compiled by using cookies and how they use it. Especially worrisome are
third-party cookies, which collect your browsing and shopping habits across many websites. This
is akin to a spy who follows you from one store to another. Software designed to trace and report
your online behavior without your knowledge is called spyware. It includes cookies and other,
more sophisticated applications that are installed on your computer unbeknownst to you and
transmit information about you while you are online. As shown in the illustration, users can
configure their browser’s privacy settings to control the storage and use of cookies.
Cookies enable a site to
identify a user and provide
useful individualized
service, but users can
control the use of cookies
in their browser
It seems that the public has become more aware of cookies and how companies use them. In
January 2011, Valued Opinions disclosed the results of a study showing that 74 percent of users
were uncomfortable with companies collecting private data. At the same time, people (53 percent)
want to gain benefits from online activity and are willing to provide what is required to do so.
Interestingly enough, 62 percent of the opinion panel does not clearly understand what data
companies are collecting about them (Anonymous, 2011).
Proprietary Technologies
In addition to these and other widely used and usually free web technologies, many companies
offer proprietary technologies. A proprietary technology is the intellectual property of its
developer and is not free for all to use. These software packages include local search engines for
Courtesy of Microsoft
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
263
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
finding information about specific items; shopping cart applications for purchase, including
selection of items to place in a virtual cart and credit-card charging; wish lists, which allow
shoppers to create lists of items they would like others to purchase for them; video streaming
tools; and a host of software packages that are invisible to visitors but help the site owner to
analyze and predict visitor behavior, especially shopper behavior. The latter technologies might
not be considered web technologies per se, but they analyze data that is collected from visitors
accessing websites. For example, Amazon.com uses software that follows the estimated age of
those for whom a shopper purchases items, and offers new items that fit the progressing age of
the shopper’s family and friends.
Web-Enabled Business
Web-enabled business is often classified by the parties involved in the interaction: business-
to-business (B2B), business-to-consumer
(B2C), and business-to-government (B2G). Some
people
also
add
government-to-consumer
and
government-to-business.
Auction
sites
are
sometimes referred to as consumer-to-consumer (C2C) sites, but we consider them B2C, because
the business does intervene in several parts of the transaction and also charges the parties
commissions. The following sections describe the business models of the most pervasive types of
web-based business.
B2B Trading
Business-to-business (B2B) trading takes place only between businesses. Consumers of the final
goods and services are not involved. In general, the volume of e-commerce between businesses is
about 10 times as great as that of business-to-consumer e-commerce. And although not all
electronic B2B transactions take place on the Internet, most do. U.S. Census data estimates
approximately US$300 billion of B2B revenue are transacted online, which does not include
electronic data interchange (EDI) (Oracle, 2012). According to a B2B online survey, only
25 percent of B2B companies have an e-commerce site that indicates a projected growth in B2B
e-commerce (Oracle, 2012). This section discusses the major forms of B2B e-commerce.
Advertising
Online advertising is done mainly in two ways: through search engines and through banners.
Although advertising on the web is not aimed just at consumers, most of it is directed to them.
However, selling and buying web ads occurs between businesses: the website operators sell
advertising “real estate” to another business. Regardless of media, advertisers are interested in
reaching as many people who might buy their goods or services as possible. On the web,
advertisers are interested in what they call “traffic volume,” that is, the number of people who
come across their messages. As the number of people who log on to the web increases, so does
advertiser interest in this medium. Internet World Stats estimated that of the 7 billion people in
the world today, 2.4 billion—34.3 percent—used the Internet in 2012 (“Internet Usage
Statistics,” 2012). With this traffic volume, advertisers are willing to spend a lot of money on
web advertising. The research firm GroupM estimated that about $84.8 billion was spent on web
advertising in 2011, a 16 percent increase from 2010 (Hof, 2012; O’Leary, 2012). They also
predicted web advertising spending will grow to $98.2 billion in 2012, accounting for 19 percent
of all measured media spending (O’Leary, 2012).
Search advertising, which is any form of advertising through an online search site, is
regarded by businesses as highly effective. Shoppers have discovered that the fastest way to find
a business that can sell them the product or service they need is by looking up the product or
service on the web, and the most effective searches are through the best-known services and
those that identify the largest number of webpages: Google, Yahoo!, and Bing (see Figure 8.2).
All of these sites have the same advertising patterns. Whenever you search for an item, the top
and right-side links are, “Ads” or “sponsored” which are paid for by advertisers.
264
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
F I G U R E 8.2
Businesses have their
names and links displayed
as an ad at the top or right
in a search engine
Banners are images placed on a website that link to the site of the company selling the
product or service. In the early days of the web, the ads were shaped like a banner at the top of
the page. However, any image placed for advertising is now referred to as a banner.
How does a potential advertiser know how much traffic a site attracts? The most basic metric
that can be measured at a site is the number of impressions. An impression occurs whenever a
browser downloads the page containing the banner. More useful metrics are provided by several
companies that rate website visits similar to rating television viewing. For instance, comScore, an
online rating firm, maintains a panel of more than 2 million English-speaking online consumers
whom the firm polls periodically. The companies produce several metrics for subscribing
companies. Usually, subscribers of online rating firms are high-traffic sites that generate large
revenues from advertising.
In addition to impressions, rating companies measure other metrics. One is unique visitors per
month. If the same person visited a site several times during a given month, the person is counted
only once. The reason? Advertisers are interested in reaching many people, not the same people
with many visits. Another metric is unique visitor pages, which is the number of different pages at
the site that a single visitor accessed. The reason for this metric is that the same visitor is exposed
to different ads at the site. Reach percentage is the percentage of web users who have visited
the site in the past month, namely, the ratio of visitors to total web population.
As in print advertising, the site owner charges the advertiser by the ad’s size (so many pixels
by so many pixels) and by the amount of traffic, usually measured in number of impressions.
Using the IP address of computers accessing the pages with the banners, the advertiser can easily
count impressions. The charge is per month. Placing a banner at a heavily trafficked site may
cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.
To find out which sites engage visitors more than others, advertisers count on the ranking of
two main competing measurement firms: Nielsen and comScore. Prior to July 2007, both
companies ranked sites by the number of pages viewed by visitors. In July 2007, Nielsen decided
to rank sites by the amount of time visitors spend at sites.
The newest player in the market research industry is Kantar Group, a subsidiary of WPP PLC.
Through a series of mergers executed in order to expand their service offerings, Kantar has
Courtesy of Bing
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
265
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
become the second-largest market research firm in the United States, behind Nielsen. In 2011
Kantar and Nielsen partnered to expand local measurement of set-top-box data. In addition,
Kantar tracks purchase data from 200 million consumers globally and processes 20 million new
posts and articles from over 20 million new websites (Son, 2012).
Search Engine Optimization
The popularity and use of online search engines by consumers and businesses has created a
competitive environment for online advertising; an online “capture the flag” battlefield. It is
imperative for businesses to gain a competitive advantage by displaying their advertising entry
as close to the top of a search engine results page. Most online users do not navigate past the
second or third page in a search listing. Therefore, businesses with an online presence spend
significant resources on a series of methodologies and techniques to increase the number of
visitors to their website. Search engine optimization (SEO) implements a series of tactics to
allow a business to gain a high-ranking placement of their online entry in the search results
page. Using these techniques will optimize your website to influence the major search engines to
rank your search entry higher. The higher the entry in the results list will increase the likelihood
of generating a greater volume of qualified online traffic to your website.
An effective search engine optimization effort can directly lead to increased traffic to a
website including visits to websites and improved returning visitors. As traffic and the popularity
of the website expand, the increase of sales and profits also follows the same path. For example,
the St. Petersburg Times implemented an SEO strategy for its website, tampabay.com. Using
these techniques, their website reached 1.5 million hits a month and an increase of 22 percent
in digital advertising reviewing from 2009 to 2010. The growth has continued in 2011 with a
14 percent increase in the first quarter from the same period in 2010. The most significant
source of the website traffic growth was from search engines, a direct impact on their revenue
success (Fletcher, 2011).
POINT OF
INTEREST
Sales Tax for Everyone
Tax breaks for online shoppers could be coming to an end as states are strapped for revenue. According
to the National Conference of State Legislatures, states could be flooded with $23 billion in new annual
revenue if all states begin imposing sales tax for online purchases. Online retailers such as Amazon and
Overstock.com have relied on a 1992 Supreme Court ruling stating companies who lacked a physical pres-
ence in the state where the customer lived did not have to charge sales tax. From the late 1990s onward,
Amazon implemented a revenue-building program to milk the value of their massive reach called the
“Affiliate Program.” Other retailers could advertise their products on Amazon’s website for a commission
fee. However, by 2009 Amazon began cutting the affiliate program because some of their affiliates did
have a physical presence and thus, states wanted their tax revenues. The retail giant Amazon no longer
opposes the proposed taxes for online shopping. It plans to begin offering same-day delivery by having
more warehouses in more locations, thus, paying more in state sales taxes. By 2014, Amazon claims it
will pay sales tax in 13 states covering almost half of the U.S. population, but some state governors
believe all states will collect sales tax for online purchases as early as 2013.
Sources: Chang, A. (2009, Jun 30). Amazon cuts affiliates to avoid taxes: The retailer severs ties with
websites in two states so it won’t have to collect sales tax on customers there, Los Angeles Times, p. B.4;
Langley, M. (2012, Jul 16). Tax Break Nears End For Online Shoppers; Republican Governors, in Need of
Revenue, Drop Opposition, Wall Street Journal (Online).
Exchanges and Auctions
In the old days, a meeting place of buyers and sellers had to be tangible: a marketplace, an
annual fair, or a store building. Finding a buyer for scrap metal, used scientific equipment, or
any other commodity might have taken a long time. Also, the buyer and seller had to pay high
finder’s fees to individuals and firms that specialized in such intermediary trade. On the web,
266
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
the marketplace can include as many sellers and as many buyers as wish to participate, as long as
they have access to the Internet.
An intranet is a network used only by the employees of an organization. An extranet
limits site access to the employees of particular organizations, usually business partners. An
extranet might be viewed as connecting intranets of business partners.
An exchange is an extranet for organizations that offer for sale and bid on products and
services of a particular type. Unlike a public auction site, such as eBay or uBid, access is usually
limited to subscribers who often pay a periodic fee to the site’s operator. Auction sites whose
purpose is to serve as a meeting place of buyers and sellers in a particular industry are sometimes
operated by an industrial association. Others, like askart.com, are established by entrepreneurs
for the sole purpose of making profit. When the purpose is only to provide a place where sellers
compete for the business of a single buyer, the buyer operates the site.
When the site is established by a private business as a meeting place for multiple buyers and
sellers, the operator is impartial and profits from transaction fees paid either by one party or
both—the seller and buyer—whenever a sales transaction is signed. The advantages of businesses
using auction sites to purchase materials are clear. In the past, purchasing agents had to spend a
day to research sellers of a particular product. Then, using the research, the buyer would need to
call a list of sellers for a single purchase or sale. Using an online auction site, the buyer can post
the information on what they need online for sellers to view and respond. Different than the
consumer-to-consumer purchases posted to eBay, B2B purchases require larger quantities of
product and are more sensitive to price, quality, and delivery of materials to the buyer.
Very often, auction sites sell a great variety of items to reach a larger market of business
buyers. Proxibid, located in Nebraska, is an example of an online auction site offering a wide
portfolio of product categories. Proxibid has developed relationships with over 2,500 auction
companies and thousands of bidders worldwide. Their product categories range from antiques,
memorabilia to heavy construction equipment, farm machinery, and livestock.
Some electronic markets are established by a single buyer or by an organization that
represents many buyers. For example, ChoiceBuys.com is a site operated by Choice Hotels
International, a company that franchises the hotels Comfort Inn, Comfort Suites, Quality,
Clarion, Sleep Inn, Econo Lodge, Rodeway Inn, Cambria Suites, Suburban Extended Stay Hotel,
and MainStay Suites. The company franchises over 6,000 establishments in the United States
and around the world. In 1999, the company established the website so it could concentrate all
purchases for the hotels through a single channel. The site invites sellers to offer their products.
For the sellers, this is an opportunity to obtain big contracts. For the hotels, this is a way to
enjoy substantial discounts, which ChoiceBuys.com obtains through its buying power. For
Choice Hotels, it is a way to generate revenue from the transaction fees that the bidders pay,
and indirectly a way to attract more franchisees that, of course, pay the company franchise fees.
Independent hotels are allowed to make their own purchases, but an increasing number of
purchases are made through the Choice’s procurement services site. Processing orders through
the site not only saved money for the hotel operators but also enriched Choice Hotels. Since all
transactions are electronic, they are automatically recorded and provide valuable data from
which useful information can be gleaned. As shown in the illustration, Choice Hotels provides a
comprehensive
website
forum
for
vendor
information
as
well as
other
information
for
franchisees.
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
267
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Online websites can
provide a portal of
services for purchasing,
such as this site for
Choice Hotels
Many exchanges require businesses to register as members and to pay an annual fee. Many
guarantee sellers that they will receive payment even if the buyer defaults, an important and
attractive consideration for sellers. Electronic marketplaces bring markets closer to what
economists call perfect markets. In a perfect market, no single buyer or seller can affect the price
of a product. On the Internet, all buyers and sellers have access to the same information at the
same time. Thus, no single buyer or seller has an information advantage over competitors.
Online Business Alliances
Companies in the same industry—competitors—often collaborate in establishing a website for one or
several purposes. One major purpose might be to create buying power by consolidating purchases.
Another might be to create a single place for customers, assuming that expanded choice will benefit
the group. The concept is not new: real estate agents have collaborated in the Multiple Listing Service
(MLS), whereby multiple agencies have access to real estate that is registered for sale with one of
them. This system, which was in place many years before the web, is now managed on the web.
Interestingly, real estate agents are now under competitive pressure from operators of websites.
Sellers who wish to reduce the traditional 6 percent agent commission increasingly turn to online
real estate markets. Many sellers are willing to do much of the work done by agents, and list their
property with sites such as Redfin.com and ziprealty.com instead of with an agent who is a
member of the National Association of Realtors® (NAR), the organization that operates MLS. Many
buyers prefer to search for houses on their own. They can use a site such as Zillow.com to estimate
house prices in an area of interest. They may save thousands of dollars when purchasing from a
seller who pays a low flat fee instead of a high percentage commission to a real estate agent. In
other words, the web is removing the expensive middleperson in this industry also.
In some cases, the purpose of an alliance site is the same as an auction site operated by a single
company, but the operator is a business that works for the allied companies. The purpose of such a
site is to set the prices of purchased products and services. Big players in an industry, such as airlines
or automakers, establish a shared company that operates the site. Suppliers are invited to sell through
the site and compete among themselves. The competition drives prices down. The allies may enjoy
lower costs and greater profit margins. A grand attempt by the auto industry to use this method
through an alliance called Covisint failed because suppliers refused to compete against each other
Courtesy of Choice Hotels International
268
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
online. The Covisint software was sold to Compuware, a software development company in Detroit.
However, Star Alliance, an alliance of 27 airlines, has done well with its online joint purchasing.
Star Alliance is one of several airline alliances, such as OneWorld and SkyTeam Star Alliance
that established an extranet for two purposes: to concentrate purchases from parts and service
providers, and to represent the group to its clients, airline passengers. The Star Alliance includes Air
Canada, Air New Zealand, Austrian Airlines, Lufthansa, Scandinavian Airlines, United, US Airways,
and other companies. On the consumer side, the airlines collaborate in frequent flier programs:
you can fly with any of them and accrue miles with the entire alliance rather than with a single
airline. The Star Alliance site provides several useful services for travelers of all member airlines. On
the B2B side, the alliance solicits bids from suppliers of aircraft parts and maintenance services,
food, ground equipment, office supplies, and other products and services. The allies use the
extranet to share information about inventory levels, facilitate joint planning and forecasting for
material requirements, and facilitate communication and business transactions between the airlines
and suppliers. The hub for joint purchasing has saved the allies millions of dollars annually.
In 2001, Orbitz was established by United Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Continental Airlines,
Northwest Airlines, and American Airlines to serve customers through a single website. The allies
wanted to establish a site that “would provide comprehensive and unbiased travel information”
as well as one that would make planning and buying travel on the Internet easy and hassle free
instead of the usual “scavenger hunt.” The site provides a comprehensive search engine, a list of
flights by lowest price and number of stops without favoring any airline, and special Internet-
only fares with over 455 airlines. By using their own website, airlines can stop paying the $5 to
$10
commission
they
usually
pay
to
online
brokers
such
as
Expedia,
Travelocity,
and
Priceline.com. They can also eliminate fees to online database companies that link travel
agencies, airlines, and other travel companies. In addition to the airlines, the site serves 22
rental car companies, cruise lines, and tens of thousands of lodging establishments. After the
approval of an initial public offering, in July 2007 Orbitz began trading on the NYSE.
Similar alliance sites have been established by firms in the general retail industry, the food
industry, and the hospitality industry (hotels).
B2C Trading
Although business-to-business trading on the Internet is much larger in volume, online business-
to-consumer (B2C) trading is more visible to the general public. Online consumer shopping and
buying has become a daily activity for many consumers. In addition to e-retailing, also known as
“e-tailing,” B2C activities include reading an online newspaper and paying bills online. Figure
8.3 illustrates the growth in online consumer spending in the United States.
F I G U R E 8.3
Online consumer
spending continues
to grow in the
United States
2003
0
Dollars (billions)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
2004
2005
2006
2007
Year
Retail E-Commerce Sales 2002–2011
2008
2009
2010
2011
2002
Source: Richter, Felix. (2012). [Graph illustration of e-commerce sales in the United States from 2002-2011]. E-Commerce in the
United States. Retrieved from http://www.statista.com/topics/871/online-shopping/chart/683/e-commerce-in-the-united-states/
Courtesy of Statista, Inc.
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
269
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
E-Tailing
You can shop the web for virtually any item you want, from collectibles to automobiles, order
these items online, and receive them at your door. As Figure 8.3 indicates, e-commerce sales in the
United States have steadily increased over the past 10 years, peaking in 2011 at $162 billion. At
various retail sites, shoppers can use sophisticated search applications to find information on
desired items, read other shoppers’ reviews of items, post their own opinions, drop an item in a
virtual shopping cart, change their minds and remove the item, or decide to buy the item and pay
by providing a credit-card number or through a debit service such as PayPal. Online retailing—
e-tailing—continues to grow throughout the world for several reasons: greater availability of faster
communication lines to households, growing confidence in online purchases, and the increasing
ability to find the item one searches for and rich information about it.
While e-tailing targets shoppers on PCs, “m-tailing” captures shoppers through their
smartphones or tablets. U.S. mobile commerce revenue in 2010 was only $3 billion however;
that number is expected to dramatically rise to $31 billion by 2016 (Richter, 2012).
In the new world of the web, there are several models associated with retail businesses.
Traditional
retailers,
often
called
brick-and-mortar
businesses,
have
extended
their
“storefront” by launching an e-tailing arm. Companies such as Target, Home Depot, and
Walmart have created an online version of their retail operations. Businesses such as
Amazon.com and Buy.com that transact business only through an online environment are
called pure play retailers. Online sites combine user-friendly and enticing webpages, database
management systems, and transaction software to provide shopping and buying convenience.
Companies that sell online have smaller expenses than those selling from stores because they
do not have to buy or rent store buildings and use labor to operate cash registers. They do,
however, maintain large warehouses and pay for picking, packing, and shipping, three
activities known as fulfillment. In some cases, however, they do not even need to maintain
their entire inventory because they can simply route orders directly to manufacturers, who
ship the items directly to the customer.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Buy Online. Pickup Offline.
Three major retailers, Nordstrom, Walmart, and Lowes, all offer ordering online with in-store pickups. Cus-
tomers shop online just as they normally would except at checkout, they select “In store pickup” as the
shipping option. They then go to the brick-and-mortar retail location to pick it up. This option allows cus-
tomers to shop from the convenience of their own homes or from a mobile device and conduct research
on alternative products. They also can avoid busy times at the mall and the bustling crowds. Customers
benefit because they simply have to pay for the item when they arrive at the store without spending time
trying to find it first. From the store’s perspective, this is a negative aspect, because ordering online elim-
inates impulse purchases. Brick-and-mortar stores want people to walk around and see all the items for
sale. The stores do benefit, however, because they get the sales of people who strictly shop online and
would otherwise order products from large online retailers instead of brick-and-mortar stores.
Sources: Lowes (2012). Buy Online. Pick Up In Store. from http://www.lowes.com; Nordstrom (2013).
Buy Online, Pick-Up in Store. from http://www.nordstrom.com; Walmart (2013). Help: Pick Up Today.
from http://www.walmart.com
An important element of online retailing is selection. Compare the variety of products that
can be offered at a web storefront with the selection offered by a brick-and-mortar store: a
typical DVD store offers about 25,000 different titles, while Amazon offers 500,000 titles, which
is the total number of titles offered for sale in the United States. E-tailers also experience fewer
returns because shoppers have more information at hand before they make their purchases. So,
shoppers are more satisfied with their buying decisions, and web businesses save the costs of
dealing with returns. Another explanation for fewer returns is the creation of what marketers call
one-to-one relationships. Using cookies, the website software can track the clickstreams of
shoppers who browse the site and track their interests. When the same shopper logs on again,
270
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
the software offers new items that fall within his or her interest area. And with every visit, the
software learns more about visitors and their preferences.
As Figure 8.4 summarizes, consumers find several advantages to shopping online: convenience,
time-savings, wide selection, search mechanisms, comparative shopping, and product reviews.
E-tailers face mounting challenges, however. The competition is just a click away, so it is
critical to offer a wide selection and excellent service, in addition to low price. E-tailers provide
easy-to-use online tools to track shipments, and many make returns easy. Some brick-
and-mortar retail chains allow purchases made on their websites to be returned to physical
stores.
F I G U R E 8.4
Online shopping benefits
Benefit
Because shoppers can…
Convenience
Shop from anywhere at any time of the day.
Time-saver
Visit numerous online stores in a few minutes; it would take 
hours to do so at shopping malls.
Wide selection
Choose from a selection of products that no shopping mall 
can offer.
Search mechanism
Find who sells a specific item within seconds by using
search engines.
Comparative shopping
Quickly compare quality and price across multiple sellers.
Product reviews
Read product reviews by independent experts and other 
shoppers, often on the same webpage that describes
the item.
The greatest challenge for e-tailers is turning shoppers into buyers, and then turning the
buyers into repeat buyers. To this end, many e-tailers have linked their customer relationship
management (CRM) applications, discussed in Chapter 3, “Business Functions and Supply
Chains,” to their websites. Using cookies and other software, they not only collect large amounts
of information about individual shoppers but also constantly update their profiles. The purpose
of consumer profiling is to know the consumers better so the business can serve them better,
while also streamlining its marketing and sales operations.
While consumer profiling might sound benign, many privacy advocates claim that it violates
privacy rights. Imagine that every time you log on to a site, this fact is recorded. Then, when you
click on an icon, it is recorded, too. The software at the server side also records the time you
spent at each specific page, assuming the longer you spent, the more interested you are.
Chances are the site will send you promotional email about the items displayed on that carefully
viewed page. Also, the next time you log on to the site, you might find that this particular page
appears on your computer monitor faster than before. These subtle changes result from
intelligent analysis of the information you provided knowingly or unknowingly to the site—and
perhaps other sites that forwarded the information to this retailer. Many retailers also sell the
information they collect to data brokers such as ChoicePoint and Acxiom, who combine
personal data and sell the records to other companies. Privacy advocates object to such
observation and sales of data without the user’s consent.
Affiliate Programs
Many online businesses offer affiliate programs to website owners. The
affiliate, the website owner, places a link, usually a banner, to the e-tailer at the site. Affiliates
are compensated in one of several ways: pay per sale, in which only if a visitor ended up
purchasing something is the affiliate paid a fee; pay per click, in which the affiliate is paid a small
fee (usually a few cents) whenever a visitor clicks the banner; or pay per lead, whereby a lead
means that the visitor clicked through to the advertiser’s site and filled out a registration form to
receive periodic information. Retailers usually use the pay per sale model.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
271
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Some companies make money by being affiliate aggregators. LinkShare (www.linkshare.com)
and Commission Junction (www.cj.com) let you choose from hundreds of affiliate advertisers,
some offering reduced commissions. You can pick the ones you want to mention at your
website.
Coopetition
Amazon.com has taken a step beyond affiliate programs to cooperate with
competitors, a model we may call “coopetition”: Amazon includes its competitors on its own
site. When you use the search engine at the company’s site for a certain item, it brings up the
product description and price from Amazon.com’s database and also the same type of
information from other companies’ databases. Although these companies are direct competitors,
Amazon benefits from this cooperation in two ways: it attracts more shoppers to visit its site
first, because they know there is a high probability that they will find the item they want at the
site, even if they end up buying from another company; and it receives a fee from these
affiliated companies whenever they sell through Amazon’s site. Recently, Amazon announced a
virtual currency for its Android application store called Amazon Coins (Spence, 2013). They are
targeting the new currency at buying applications online. Other e-tailers also give web presence
to competitors.
Mobile Advertising
Smartphone and tablet screens are the frontier of advertising. The mobile advertising industry is
rapidly growing, mostly due to smartphone and network adoption. Estimates put North
American smartphone users in 2008 at about 60 million and growing to 239 million by 2013.
3G network data plans will reach 95 percent penetration by 2013 in the United States and
70 percent penetration in Canada by that time. In 2009, mobile advertising revenues in the
United States and Canada were $208 million but by 2012 they were predicted to hit $1.5 billion,
according to Parks Associates’ report, Mobile Advertising: Analysis and Forecasts (Anonymous,
2009). One of the main types of mobile advertising is advertising in apps. Many applications on
smartphones allow users to download a free version or purchase an ad-free version. Ads can be
full-page displays that go away after an allotted period of time, or a smaller box on the screen.
Advertisers charge per impression (view) or per click. Businesses can purchase ads to be seen on
mobile devices through Google or Apple. Mobile ad spending is already estimated to be between
$550 and $650 million (Gobry, 2011).
Auctions and Reverse Auctions
Similar to auctions among companies, some websites serve as auction hubs for individuals. The
most prominent of the sites is eBay, but there are many other smaller and independent online
auction sites such as uBid. The business model is simple: sellers list information about the items
or services they offer for sale, and if a sale is executed, the site owner collects a fee. Because the
sites provide only a platform for a transaction that eventually takes place between two
consumers, some people like to call online auctions consumer-to-consumer e-business. To
participate in auctions, one needs to register as a member. To help bidders know to what extent
they can count on the sellers’ integrity, eBay publishes the number of feedback comments it
received on a member, and the number and percentage of positive feedbacks. (However, eBay’s
feedback may be abused. For example, a seller may earn positive feedback on many small sales,
then use the high rating to cheat buyers on large sales.)
272
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
POINT OF
INTEREST
The Busy Bay
eBay is the world’s largest online auction place with 108.3 million active users globally. In 2011, the total
value of goods sold on eBay was $68.6 billion; that’s $2,100 per second! The following stats are from 2012:
●
A passenger vehicle sold every 2 minutes
●
More than 4.69 million passenger vehicles have been sold to date on eBay Motors
●
An RV or camper sold every 33 minutes
●
A boat sold every 19 minutes
●
A pair of shoes sold every 3 seconds
●
A cell phone sold every 5 seconds
●
An MP3 player sold every 26 seconds including Apple iPod, Creative Zen, and others
●
A GPS device sold every minute
●
An Apple iPad, laptop, or notebook sold every 2 minutes
Because eBay has such a massive global reach, more and more people go there first to buy or sell just
about anything.
Sources: eBay (2012). eBay Marketplaces Fast Facts At-A-Glance (Q3 2012); eBay (2012). eBay Motors Fast
Facts (Q3 2012); eBay (2012). Who We Are Overview. from http://www.ebayinc.com/who
The ability of websites to serve as prompt exchanges of information has supported another
popular business model, the reverse auction or name-your-own-price auction. Consumers
at Priceline.com are invited to post requests for services and name the prices they are willing to
pay. Although they also deal in home mortgages, the services are mostly for travel, such as flights,
cruises, lodging, and car rentals. Customers can post the destination, day, and time of a flight as
well as the maximum price they are willing to pay. Then, airlines are invited to consider the
requests. The first airline to accept the terms wins the offer. Shoppers are required to transmit a
credit-card account number. The account is charged as soon as an airline accepts the deal.
Priceline’s revenue comes from the fees that airlines and other businesses pay to use the service.
Content Providers
On the web, content means information, such as news, research results, statistics, and other useful
information as well as artistic works such as music, pictures, and video clips. Some place this
category within classified ads, including job postings and online dating services. Over the years,
individuals and organizations have spent increasing amounts of money on content. Although
most news can be obtained free of charge, many articles cannot. Some audiences welcome for-fee
content, especially if it is highly specialized. Given a choice, many people prefer to read the same
information online rather than on paper because they can use search operations to quickly find
specific articles. This might be one reason why many prefer to subscribe to the electronic version
of a newspaper. Content revenues also have grown since companies such as Amazon, Apple, and
Walmart started selling individual songs and books online.
In recent years, video has become a popular type of content. Several sites enable anyone to
upload video clips. Some of the sites, such as YouTube, have attracted millions of people daily.
The high volume of traffic translates into dollars through advertisements, as the site owners
provide the content free of charge. While many YouTube users are individuals, YouTube has also
become an integral component of the marketing strategy for business organizations for
advertising, promotions, and contests. The no-fee, popularity, and high adoption rate of
YouTube accounts provides a “win-win” value proposition for businesses. Companies can upload
commercials aired on television as well as other corporate videos. For example, Frito-Lay
uploaded a video with an intern to promote their internship program. This media promotion
can provide significant value over traditional outlets, such as magazines or newspapers, to reach
people with an interest in working for Frito-Lay.
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
273
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
POINT OF
INTEREST
The Internet’s Criminals
In early 2010, a street fight erupted in Norfolk, Virginia. By the time the police arrived, the fighters had
scattered and no witnesses would cooperate. Despite the cold case, police caught a break when they
found a cell phone video posted on YouTube in which they could clearly identify the suspects. Seven peo-
ple identified from the YouTube video were apprehended. Law enforcement officials have used YouTube
and other social media sites such as Facebook and Flickr to catch criminals drag racing in Chattanooga,
Tennessee, rioting in Los Angeles, California, and even a man accused in a shooting in Minneapolis, Min-
nesota. Although YouTube has no way of knowing how often police use the video-sharing service, it
makes it easier for police to bag the bad guys when he/she stars in a YouTube video.
Source: Carey, C. (2010, Feb 09). The cops are watching YouTube, too, USA TODAY, p. A.3.
Bill Presentment and Payment
Because it is so easy to transfer funds online from one bank account to another, and it is so easy
to send information, including bills, by email, many utility companies try to convince customers
to accept electronic bills and pay them online. Some customers accept the option of electronic
bill presentment
but refuse to sign
an agreement
that would enable the company to
automatically charge their bank account. Obviously, banks are always a participant in electronic
payment if the charge is to a bank account (which is how most utility and mortgage companies
want to be paid), but some banks, for their own reasons, refuse to join such trilateral initiatives.
Electronic bill presentment and payment (EBPP) saves utility companies and financial
institutions that bill customers regularly—mainly for loan payments—millions of dollars. The
bills are presented automatically, directly from the companies’ information systems to payers’
email addresses, and therefore save labor, paper, and postage. Direct charge to a bank account
saves the labor involved in receiving and depositing checks. Yet, EBPP is spreading slowly. Most
people still prefer to pay their bills by check and through the mail, partly because fraud on the
Internet has increased in recent years, especially through a practice called phishing, discussed
in this chapter’s Ethical & Societal Issues feature. Figure 8.5 illustrates the practice. Note that the
link does not link directly to Barclays, but to a fictitious site that is also not secure. A legitimate
website is secure when it includes an “s” in https:// URL. Also note the bank warnings to
customers. This particular email was sent to a person who does not even have an account with
the bank. Many banks have adopted a new technique to impede phishing. This technique
requires the customer to select a personal image that is displayed with any forms that request a
password. Customers of a bank’s online services are advised to enter a password only when they
see the image they originally selected.
274
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
F I G U R E 8.5
Phishing plagues financial
institutions through fake
emails prompting
unsuspecting consumers
to click links and enter
personal information
A recent study conducted at a Microsoft TechEd conference states that despite the public’s
growing
awareness,
phishing
still
remains
a
serious
threat
(Anonymous,
2012d).
Large
organizations continue to be targeted by phishing attacks that often lead to a security breach.
The survey found that the number of organizations targeted by phishing incidents has risen to
58 percent in 2012 from 48 percent in 2010.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Banks Fending Off Phishing
Phishing is a cyberattack tactic used to trick Internet users into giving up personal information such as
PINs and account numbers. Nearly half of all “phishing” attacks in 2011 targeted the financial-services
industry. Some of the biggest players in the industry such as American Express Co., J.P. Morgan Chase &
Co., and Barclays PLC are taking steps to make life harder for Internet scammers by buying new exclusive
domain extensions. Firms have put out at minimum $3.3 million or $185,000 per address to the Internet Cor-
poration for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the nonprofit organization that oversees the Internet,
to secure the extensions. Examples of the new extensions include .citi, .bofa, and .barclays. These firms
hope the new extensions will assure their online customers that they are dealing with the bank’s real
site and not a scam website. The new domain extensions, which could be approved by ICANN as early
as 2013, will help combat the large amount of Internet fraud in the financial industry by preventing custo-
mers from being tricked into dealing out confidential information to fake websites.
Source: Seidman, A. (2012, Aug 16). No ‘Phishing’: Banks Try to Sink Scammers; Financial Firms Apply
for Own Internet Domain Names, Wall Street Journal (Online).
Courtesy of Fraud Watch International
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
275
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Online Annoyances and Worse
The web provides excellent opportunities but its wide availability
combined with ingenuity have created some practices that range
from mildly annoying to criminally dangerous.
●
Email Spam. Spam is the term for any unsolicited com-
mercial email. The reason for spam is simple: it is the most
cost-effective marketing method. Even if a fraction of a per-
cent of the recipients end up purchasing the product or
service touted, the spammer profits. Both individuals and
organizations dislike spam. Individuals have to wade
through a long list of unsolicited email to get to useful
email. Organizations face an increasingly costly burden.
Consider that if spam makes up half of the email the orga-
nization receives, the organization must employ twice the
bandwidth it really needs for communications and twice
the space on email servers. Obviously, it will pay twice as
much as necessary to operate an email system. Spam-filter
software has helped to some extent, but spam is still on the
rise and still wastes resources. In 2009, about 80 to 85 per-
cent of all email traffic was spam (Radicati, 2009).
The Direct Marketing Association (DMA) defends the right of
businesses to send unsolicited commercial email as a legiti-
mate and cost-effective way of doing business. Indeed, the
method gives small, entrepreneurial businesses a chance to
compete. The DMA sees no difference between junk “snail”
mail, which most of us reluctantly tolerate, and spam.
In May of 2009, a federal judge in California ordered con-
victed spammer Sanford Wallace and two other men to
stay away from Facebook after they were found guilty for
spamming on the site. Sanford was found guilty under the
CAN-SPAM act a year prior for phishing and spamming
MySpace users. The judge awarded MySpace $230 million
in damages (McMillan, 2009). According to this law, spam is
a crime only if the sending party hides its true identity or
does not provide an opt-out option.
Is unsolicited commercial email a legitimate marketing tool,
or is it a nuisance that should be eradicated by strictly
enforced laws? Would it be fair to outlaw an efficient way
for businesses, especially entrepreneurial businesses, to
approach potential customers?
●
Mobile Spam. With 89.6 million Americans using their
smartphones to access their email, according to comScore
research, the threat of mobile spam arises (Pimanova, 11
September 2012). The problems and difficulties associated
with mobile spam are different from those originating from
email spam. For one, people with BlackBerries, iPhones, or
other smartphones believe that because of the device’s lim-
ited use, compared to a PC, they are more secure. That is a
false assumption that can lead to smartphone users not
being able to identify spam when they receive it. Addition-
ally, clearing spam from inboxes on a smartphone with
limited screen space takes considerably more time than
on a PC. Pay attention to fonts, headers, images, text, and
links that appear skewed from the norm; those are usually
good hints for picking out spam (Brown, 2009).
●
Pop-Up Windows. You browse the web, stop to read an
interesting article, and a few seconds later a window pops
up, partially covering the text you were reading. The pop-up
contains an advertisement. You look for the icon to close
the window. It is not in its normal location. You finally man-
age to close the window, but as soon as you do, another
one pops up. And so on, and so forth, more and more win-
dows. When you finally close the main site’s window, you
discover that several other windows popped up behind the
window. The site owner is paid by advertisers to run these
pesky windows, which is legitimate. However, many people
are quite annoyed by the practice. Some employ special
applications or turn on a browser option that prevents
pop-up windows. Is this a good solution? Not always.
Many sites have links that open a little window to provide
further information, such as a window with help or expla-
nation of a term. If you block all pop-up windows, such
useful windows do not open. If you use a selective pop-
up “killer,” you have to program it to allow pop-up windows
for individual sites. Thus, even with a solution, pop-up win-
dows waste surfers’ time. Web surfers might not like pop-
up windows, but advertisers love them, because they are
an effective marketing tool.
●
Adware. A growing number of organizations use adware,
software that delivers ad banners or pop-up advertising
windows on the web. Often, the banners hide large parts
of the information on the page. Adware is often tailored to
users, based on their profiles, such as previous interests.
Some companies use adware that pops up deliberately to
cover banners of competing companies that paid to adver-
tise at the site a user visits. The visitor might not even know
that the ad is not originating from the website or its legiti-
mate advertising clients, but from another one.
●
Spyware. A more disturbing “ware” is spyware. As dis-
cussed in this chapter, spyware is software that uses the
Internet connection of a computer to transmit information
about the user without the user’s knowledge or permission.
Usually, the software transmits information about users’
activities with their computers, including their every move
on the Internet. It sits on the computer’s hard disk, secretly
collects information, and transmits it to the computer of a
company, usually for marketing purposes, but also for
industrial espionage. Some surreptitious software is also
designed to pop up windows. Some countries have crimi-
nalized adware and spyware, but in much of the world the
software does not violate any law.
●
Phishing. A growing number of web users receive a spe-
cial kind of spam that intends not to sway them to buy
something but to defraud them. The practice is called
3
PART
276
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
Extra-Organizational Workforce
The web enables companies to purchase labor from many more people than their own employees.
Crowdsourcing is a process for outsourcing a variety of tasks to a distributed group of people,
both online or offline. Different than traditional outsourcing, crowdsourcing is a task or problem
that is outsourced to the public rather than a specific company contracted for a defined purpose.
For example, companies can augment their intellectual pool by using the web to employ talent
beyond their own employees. They can enjoy more labor for less money by offering cash for
research and development (R&D) solutions provided by researchers outside their organizations.
InnoCentive, Inc., originally formed as a subsidiary of the pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly
and Company, operates a website connecting companies (“seekers”) with scientists (“solvers”).
Companies whose R&D staffs cannot find a solution to a biological or chemical problem can
post the challenge at the site and offer a cash reward for a practical solution. Scientists and
researchers from around the world can register with the site and work on solutions. The site is
operated in seven languages to accommodate scientists and organizations from all over the
world. As of 2012, InnoCentive is a privately held, venture backed firm. Many companies,
including Eli Lilly, Booz Allen Hamilton, Dow Chemical Co. and the giant consumer product
company Procter & Gamble, have worked with InnoCentive. The company has more than
270,000 registered problem solvers in nearly 200 countries. With over 1,300 awards approved
totaling $37 million, they have received over 34,000 solutions submissions. InnoCentive
provides an online forum to connect problem solvers and cloud-based technology to create rapid
solutions for innovative projects (“Innocentive Corporate Website—About Us,” 2013).
When a company employs a staff of researchers it must pay them regardless of how fruitful
their efforts are. When offering cash for solutions, many more scientists might work for the
company, but the company pays only the scientist who solves the problem. This enables
the company to tap many more creative minds and to reduce the high risk involved in R&D.
The solution to a scientific or technological problem may arrive sooner, and the cost savings can
be huge.
Mobile Commerce
In Chapter 6, “Business Networks and Telecommunications,” you learned about the many wireless
technologies that enable people to access the web while away from the office or home. Wireless
technologies enable what some people call mobile commerce, sometimes referred to as
m-commerce. Mobile devices already let users log on to the Internet, but they can also provide an
additional benefit to businesses: a device can be located with an accuracy of several feet, much
like locating a cellular phone. As soon as you come within a few blocks of a store, your handheld
computer or phone could beep and display a promotional message on its monitor.
Mobile commerce allows people to use their mobile devices to experience an event and react
immediately. For example, they might view a horse race and place bets from their seat. Or, they
phishing, a play on “fishing.” Criminals send thousands of
messages that look as if they were sent from a bank, a
credit-card company, or any other financial institution or
an organization where the recipient has authority to with-
draw funds. The email provides a web link where the recip-
ient is urged to go and supply personal information,
including codes that are used to withdraw or transfer
funds. One of many “reasons” is “explained” in the mes-
sage: your account must be renewed, the bank lost your
details, you should verify your personal information or the
account will be revoked, and many others. Thousands of
people have fallen prey to the con artists, who used the
information to withdraw funds. The most obvious sign that
an email message tries to phish is a message from an insti-
tution with which you have never transacted, such as a
bank where you do not have an account. A more subtle
sign is the URL that appears when you move your mouse
to the link provided: the domain name is not the one of the
legitimate organization. Suspect every email message that
asks you to update your personal information online. Call
the organization using the legitimate number you have on
file and ask if the message is genuine. Banks and other
institutions rarely use email to ask for “account information
update.” Phishing continues to grow. According to a 2012
Symantec Intelligence Report, August of 2012 showed a
jump in email phishing activity. While email phishing attacks
averaged one out of every 500 emails in the previous four
months, August showed a rate of one phishing email out of
every 312 emails. In addition, the two most “phished” coun-
tries were the Netherlands at one phishing email in 94.4
emails (1.06 percent) and South Africa at one in 171.2
emails (0.58 percent) (Pimanova, 11 September 2012).
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
277
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
can see a demonstration of a product at a public place and order it online. Impulse shopping will
no longer be limited to shopping malls. Recall our discussion in Chapter 6 of future uses of RFID.
Mobile devices might be equipped with RFID readers so their owners can use a product’s
electronic product code (EPC) to download information about it from the web.
Smart mobile devices might be helpful in salesforce automation. Traveling salespeople are
able to access data through the mobile device almost anywhere. They are able to access
corporate databases through their company’s intranet. Both traveling salespeople and consumers
already practice mobile commerce whenever they transact while using a hotspot or a web-
capable cell phone.
Maintaining information on travel itineraries can be tedious. Tripit is a mobile app that can
track various travel reservations (hotel, airfare, rental car) and combine them into a travel plan
for a particular trip. Users can build their travel plans through the application by forwarding
an email confirmation from a travel provider to a Tripit email address. The user’s app will read
the email containing the travel information and automatically add it to the user’s travel plan.
Mobile applications such
as Tripit provide
consumers with
information about their
travel itineraries
Some people believe that the most attractive mobile application might not be online buying,
but the delivery of highly relevant information, custom-tailored to the user’s current location
and activity. Location-based services include downloading coupons at the store in which the
consumer has just entered, finding out about nearby restaurants, or reading product reviews
while shopping at an appliance store.
In the United States, cell phones must, by law, include global positioning system (GPS)
capability, so that people can be located in case of emergency. As telephoning and other
technologies are merged into a single device that can also link to the web, the potential for
marketing and pushing information might be too tempting for businesses.
Tripit
278
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
Most experts believe that exponential growth in mobile applications available on smart-
phones and tablets will continue. A recent survey by ClickZ reports more than three out of four
people believed that all business organizations and brands should offer a mobile application
(Klotz-Young, 2012). An excellent example of mobile computing and branding is Dunkin’
Donuts. In April 2012, they announced the availability of a mobile application to “connect”
guests to their brand. Customers can use the new app to complete many activities including
paying for purchases at their franchises, adding funds to their account, sending gifts to friends,
and locating the nearest location. In addition, their application links to Dunkin’ Donuts social
media communities consisting of 6.8 million Facebook fans (Anonymous, 2012b).
Privacy proponents have already voiced concerns about mobile commerce. Some people are
unaware that commercial organizations can track them down anytime when their mobile device
is on. These devices not only allow consumer profiling, as already practiced by many online
retailers, but can also tell retailers and other organizations your exact location at any given time.
The result might be “we know who you are, what you have done on the web, and where you are
now.” While some users are not comfortable about tracking, others are not concerned about
privacy and security issues. In fact, many social media sites such as Twitter and Foursquare use
location services to report where the user is located as they provide information through their
site. However, a recent research study completed by Veracode notes that as more applications are
web- and mobile-enabled, testing and security issues will need increased attention (Anonymous,
2012e).
The concerns over privacy are only one issue relating to security in mobile computing. As in
the Dunkin’ Donuts example, an increasing number of customers are paying for purchases with
mobile devices. Mobile payment systems such as PayPal, Square, Google Wallet, and Apple
Passbook have been developed to complete payments on mobile devices. It will be important to
protect the consumer’s identity and provide trust that purchasing information will not be sold
(Purewal, 2013).
POINT OF
INTEREST
Thou Shalt Not Steal … My Identity!
The adoption of various information technology applications by consumers has increased over the last
several years. The Bureau of Justice Statistics estimates that 8.6 million households with at least one
child over 12 years old has been a victim of identity theft, a rise from 6.4 million in 2005. A significant pro-
portion of the increase was due to the unauthorized use of an existing credit-card account between 2005
and 2010. The issue of identity theft has heightened the need for consumer caution. Although the number
of households experiencing the fraudulent use of an existing account other than a credit card (checking,
savings, utility) held stable at 35 percent, and the number of new accounts opened illegally decreased
from 23 percent to 14 percent in the same period, the total financial losses due to identify theft were
over $13 billion. Protecting your personal and financial account information needs to be a continued effort
on the part of consumers.
Source: Anonymous (December 17, 2011). Bureau of Justice Statistics; Identity Theft Reported by House-
holds Rose 33 Percent From 2005 to 2010. Investment Weekly News, 469.
Social Media on the Web
Social media have had a widespread influence on consumers and business organizations alike in
recent years. More than 900 million people check their Facebook accounts on a monthly basis
(Aquino, 2012). The adoption and use of social media is also generating advertising revenue.
A recent study by BIA/Kelsey forecasts that social media ad revenues in the United States will
reach $9.2 billion in 2016, up 100 percent from 2012 (Anonymous, 2012a). Popular social media
sites such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and Foursquare create a “buzz” about a variety of
subjects and topics. Businesses can leverage additional advertising and exposure to their brand
and products through well-planned social media strategies. Organizations can leverage social
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
279
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
media to communicate with consumers immediately, instead of the longer timeframe of
response
for
traditional
communications
mediums
(newspapers,
radio,
television,
etc.).
Organizations are finding that using social media is even more effective for disseminating
information than posting press releases and information on their websites. For example, a micro-
blog message on Twitter can alert customers to a new promotion, product, or location. Like
traditional marketing sourcing techniques, social media messages can link directly to an
organization’s website for more information, boosting web traffic to their site at no cost.
The challenges associated with social media mirror the challenges of any business strategy.
An effective social media strategy must be well-organized and coordinated, focusing on
objectives
to
communicate,
promote,
and
market
to
an
organization’s
customers
and
stakeholders. As with any information technology initiative, it is imperative for the business to
drive the use of social media rather than the other way around. Information technology and
business leaders must collaborate to focus on a common goal and approach, and then plan how
to use social media to communicate this. Ford Motor Company, for example, has embraced the
use of social media for its marketing and customer support activities. Its approach is to
encourage
employees
to
become
advocates
to
share
company
content
in
social
media
environments (Donston-Miller & Carr, 2012).
One of the most frequent criticisms of social media is to question whether any value is
gained from the resources devoted to its implementation. It is important to gather and compile
data to determine the influence and value gained by your organization’s social media efforts.
Social media analytics can be used to calculate the returns, if any, to the business. Data analytic
tools such as sentiment and content analysis can provide quantifiable metrics to track the value
of social media initiatives. In a recent survey of business executives, over 60 percent of the
companies using social media and data analytics allocated between 1 and 2.9 percent of their
marketing budget to social analytics (Aquino, 2012).
Although there are challenges in integrating of social media, the benefits of doing so are
becoming clear. A recent study posits that the social media interaction between a brand and its
customers influences long-term sales increases. When implemented systematically, the realized
benefits of social media interactions are seen in increased transactions, profits, and return on
investment (Anonymous, 2012c). Social media not only increases business, but also has been
influential in the area of learning. ASTD and the Institute for Corporate Productivity found that
there is a clear relationship between how people learn and their age or generation. When asked
for the context on how social media tools assist in accomplishing learning and accomplishing
work, the millennial generation
outpaces previous generations (Generation
X and Baby
Boomers) in every respect (Patel, 2010).
Social media also influences the dialogue with stakeholders outside of the products
organizations sell. Sodexho implemented a recruitment campaign using Twitter. With a
relatively small investment ($50K), recruiters searched Twitter to find food-related and job-
searching tweets. Selected Twitter users were referred to Sodexho’s recruiting webpage. Within
six months, Sodexho’s recruiters were able to fill enough open jobs to save $350,000 in
recruiting ads targeted for Monster.com (Paine, 2011).
Supply Chains on the Web
Supply
chains
extend
from
commercial
organizations
to
both
suppliers
and
buyers.
Organizations connect their supply chain management (SCM) systems to their suppliers at one
end, and to their buyers at the other end. Thus, an organization might be a participant among
other buyers in an extranet managed by one of its suppliers, and a participant among several
sellers in an extranet of a buyer. Large retailers manage extranets through which their suppliers’
SCM systems can provide useful information to their own, so they can track orders and
shipments as well as collect useful information for decision making on which supplier to select
for which order. In this regard, a large retailer’s extranet becomes a marketplace for many sellers
and a single buyer.
In the years before the Internet opened to commercial activities, many companies invested
in Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) systems to exchange documents electronically with
280
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
business partners. EDI consists of certain standards for formatting documents such as orders and
invoices, software that translates the data properly, and the networks through which the
information flows between subscribing organizations. The networks are owned and managed by
value-added network (VAN) companies, telecommunications companies that manage the traffic
of EDI between the business partners. Subscribers pay for this service. However, EDI can also be
executed on the Internet. Although EDI provides some advantages, such as a high degree of data
security and nonrepudiation (inability to deny sent messages), companies that want to connect
to establish similar data exchange with business partners can use the web technologies on the
Internet. XML and its descendants, in particular, enable business partners to set standards for
data formats in webpages. Dynamic page technologies, the software that links webpages with
databases,
automate
much
of
the
business
activity
with
business
partners.
Orders
can
automatically trigger notices to warehouse personnel on their stationery or handheld computers
to pick and pack items for shipping. The information automatically flows into the accounting
ISs as well as SCM systems of both the buyer and seller. Figure 8.6 illustrates how information
flows between organizations.
F I G U R E 8.6
Online supply chain
management
Step 4. Approve
payment
Step 6. Notice of
deposit
Transfer Of
Physical Product
EDI (Transfer of
Documents)
Purchasing
Organization
Bar codes or
RFID tags
used to verify
items received
Supplier
Step 1. Proposal
Step 2. Signed contract
Step 3. Shipping documents
and invoice
Bar codes or
RFID tags
 used to record
items shipped
Purchasing
Organization’s
Bank
Step 5. Electronic funds
transfer
Supplier’s
Bank
Ship Items
Receive Items
EDI
or
XML
SCM
Systems
SCM
Systems
Companies encourage their suppliers to join their extranets. For example, the bookstore
chain Barnes & Noble uses an extranet to do business with thousands of its suppliers. So does
Office Depot, one of the world’s largest retailers of office supplies. It uses an extranet to order
billions of items annually. The extranet saves the company much paper and administrative
labor. Walmart, the world’s largest retailer, uses an extranet with Procter & Gamble and
hundreds of other manufacturers. In addition to saving both labor and paper, the results are
smaller inventory and greater in-stock availability of products. As shown in their webpage,
Staples provides an online venue where suppliers can log in to transact business electronically.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
281
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Large retailers invite
suppliers to join their
extranets as trading
partners
XML is used extensively in web technologies so that the SCM systems of two organizations
can “speak to one another.” This ensures that the meaning of data exchanged between the
organizations can not only be displayed for employee eyes through web browsers, but that the
received data can be interpreted correctly by systems that automatically capture and store it in a
database for further processing.
Options in Establishing a Website
A website is, practically speaking, the webpages that make up the information and links to web
technologies that the site provides. To establish a web business, an organization must have
access to an Internet server and the ability to control its content. Recall that an Internet server is
a computer that is connected to the Internet backbone. Businesses have two options when
establishing a website: installing and maintaining their own servers, or contracting with a web
hosting service.
Owning and Maintaining a Server
Installing and maintaining a server at the business’s own facility is a costly option, but it gives
the business the greatest degree of control. Setting up a server requires expertise, which may or
may not be available within the business. The business must obtain a high-speed physical link
to the Internet backbone. It must also employ specialists to maintain the server or many servers
on which the website resides. In large organizations, these specialists might be employees of the
company; in smaller ones, they might be contract personnel whose services the company hires.
The specialists purchase a server (or multiple servers) for the company, connect it to the Internet
through a high-speed dedicated line, register a domain name for the site, and install the proper
software for managing the server and creating webpages. The specialists “scale up” the server
system when the business grows and handle issues such as load balancing to ensure quick
response and to minimize the probability of site crashing. A site crashes when too many people
try to log on and the software stops responding to anyone. Load balancing transfers visitor
Courtesy of suppliergateway
282
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
inquiries from a busy server to a less busy server for identical information and services. Thus, the
specialists often must connect mirror servers—servers on which the same content and
applications are duplicated—to speed up and back up the process.
A large company that uses the web for much or all of its business usually has its own servers
and manages them fully. This may be a company whose entire business is conducted online, or a
brick-and-mortar company that owns stores but also offers the same, many of the same, or
additional
items
for
sale
online.
These
companies
employ
crews
that
manage
Internet
networking, the hardware and software of the site, and the people responsible for updating the
webpages.
Using a Hosting Service
A majority of organizations that have a commercial presence online either do not own servers or
own servers but let someone else manage at least some aspect of the site. These organizations use
web hosting services. Web hosting companies specialize in one or several types of web hosting:
shared hosting, virtual private server hosting, dedicated hosting, or co-location.
In shared hosting, the client’s website is stored on the host’s same physical server along
with the sites of other clients. The hosting company owns the server and the server
management software. It offers space on the servers for hosting websites. This is a relatively
inexpensive option. The client can use templates provided by the hosts for building pages, or,
for an extra fee, have the host’s designer design the website. However, many clients prefer to
design and upload their own webpages. The service includes transaction and payment software
for use by the subscribing businesses’ clients. If the server is shared, the host might not be able
to allow a client to maintain its own domain name, such as www.myownco.com, but only a
subdomain that contains the host’s domain name, such as myownco.myhost.com. However,
special software employed by many hosts allows clients to use their own domain names, and
although the server has only one IP address, the software directs traffic to the proper site on the
server. If an independent domain name is important, this is a factor that a business must
consider before selecting a hosting service.
Small businesses with a limited number of products to sell can select a host such as aplusnet
for shared hosting. The company invites you to “create an online business” for $19.95 per
month. When your business grows and has more products to sell, the company promises to
“grow with you” by providing more disk space. Large search engine and portal companies, such
as Yahoo!, offer similar services. Yahoo!, for example, offers to build and host a fully functioning
online store for a monthly fee. Clients have access to easy-to-use web design software tools to
create the pages of their new site. This type of option is often a “turnkey” solution for a small
business that wishes to go online almost overnight. In addition to disk space and help with
website design, the hosting company typically also provides a number of email addresses and a
control “dashboard,” a mechanism for the client business to have remote control over content
and other aspects of the site. Many hosting services offer WordPress or Blogger which can be
used to design websites using templates, or third-party software tools such as Artisteer. Some
hosts also offer to list the new site on frequently used search sites, such as Yahoo! and Google.
Many of the hosts also help with domain name registration.
In shared hosting, hundreds of businesses might share the same server and storage space.
Therefore, the host often limits the storage space allotted to each client, the number of
transactions performed per month, or simply the amount of data, in megabytes, that the site
transmits per month. Also, a technical problem in one site could affect the functionality of the
other sites residing on the server.
The purpose of a virtual private server is to create the impression that the client
maintains its own server. Virtual private server technology enables one server to be virtually split
into many addressable servers, each for a different client and with its own domain name. This
option is usually less expensive than renting a dedicated server, while enjoying the same
benefits, including full control of the content of the virtual server.
Some companies might want to use entire physical servers all for themselves, and therefore
opt for dedicated hosting. In dedicated hosting, the host dedicates a server to the client, and
the client can fully control the content on the server’s disks. The host is responsible for
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
283
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
networking management. For example, 1&1 (see illustration), Acenet, and InMotionHosting offer
such a service and allow the client to select from several servers. The greater the server’s power,
the higher the monthly fee. This service is more expensive than shared hosting, but it comes
with several advantages.
Dedicated
hosting has fewer
restrictions on
storage space and
transactions, and since only one site resides on the disks, no other site can affect its
functionality. Renters of dedicated servers usually have root access, which means they act as
unrestricted administrators of that computer. The greater control of the dedicated server option
comes with a price: this option is more expensive than shared hosting or a virtual private server.
The web hosting service 1&1 is one of many organizations providing various features and
services for a business’s website.
Shared hosting services
offer website hosting with
many services for a
reasonable monthly fee
In some cases, a company might want to fully manage its own web servers but prefers the
expertise of a hosting company in managing networking and security. Some hosting services
accommodate such demand by offering a co-location service. The client owns the servers and
manages their content, but the servers are co-located with the servers of other clients as well as
those of the host’s in a secure (physical) site. This approach has been taken by some online
retailers, such as Overstock.com, because it affords some advantages: the client does not have to
employ hardware and network specialists, spend money on building a special secure location for
the server, or ensure power supply. All these concerns are transferred to the hosting company.
Co-location is usually the most expensive of hosting options. The client must purchase and run
the servers, as well as pay for the co-location.
Selecting the proper host may determine the difference between a faltering site and a
thriving one. ClawfootCollection.com was operated by an online retailer Vintage Tub & Bath. It
was spun off from VintageTubs.com. The site offered reproduction antique bathtubs and
bathroom fixtures. The site sold to no more than a dozen buyers in its first year online. Vintage
decided to hire the services of a new hosting company, Demandware, Inc. Demandware not
Courtesy of 1&1.com
284
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
only hosted the site, but also redesigned it. It maintains the site’s “back end”—the connections
to software such as billing, accounting, and other business functions invisible to shoppers—and
ensures the shopping cart works. Within a few months the site was listed as number one for the
keywords ‘acrylic clawfoot tub’ and sales increased. Interestingly, Demandware charges its clients
by the number of site visitors.
Considerations in Selecting a Web Host
A majority of businesses do not maintain their own web servers or co-locate them; they use host
services. When a decision is made to use such a service, managers must consider several factors.
Figure 8.7 lists the major factors. Hosts can be compared using points, for example, on a scale of
1 for the best and 5 for the worst. A simple evaluation method is for managers to compare each
factor for the prospective host, compare the total scores, and then make a decision. The
evaluators might wish to assign different weights to the various items based on how important
each item is to the business.
F I G U R E 8.7
Factors to consider when
evaluating a web hosting
service
Evaluation Criteria 
Points
Type and quality of applications provided 
(Shopping carts, credit-card processing, blogs, Wikis) 
Storage space limitations 
Traffic/bandwidth limits 
Quality and availability of technical support 
Email accounts (number and features) 
Scalability
Control panel and user interface 
Support and templates for website design 
Security
Uptime ratio
Setup
Monthly fees
Customer reviews 
The business should be able to use a database management system (DBMS) for cataloging its
products and enable online shoppers to perform searches. Thus, the DBMS offered is important.
It also might need to use dynamic webpages, pages that enable communication between the
shopper’s browser and the database. Such pages can be built with several programming tools:
CGI, Java servlets, PHP, and ASP (Active Server Pages). Since the functionality of databases and
dynamic pages, as well as some features on the pages, depend on the operating system that the
hosts use, all this software must be considered. For example, if the client elects to build and
maintain the webpages and prefers to use ASP, they should be aware that such software will run
only on a server running Microsoft Windows.
Most hosting companies offer the use of a combination of software popularly called LAMP,
which is an acronym: Linux for operating system, Apache for server management software,
MySQL for DBMS, and PHP or Python or Perl for developing dynamic webpages. All of these
resources are open source software, and therefore do not require license fees for the host, who
can thus make the service more affordable. However, many hosts also offer other software,
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
285
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
including Windows, for higher fees. In addition to these issues, the client should ensure
satisfactory shopping cart, credit-card processing, and other applications at the site. If the client
business needs integration of the web software to its back end systems, it must ensure that the
hosting company can execute and maintain the integration.
Content management systems have become popular as a means of building and
maintaining websites. Joomla! is popular content management software that allows users to
publish, edit, and update website content. This product also provides procedures to manage the
workflow of website maintenance in a collaborative environment.
Storage space limitations might become a serious inhibitor, especially if the business expects
to offer a growing number of products and augment the information provided through the site.
The client should enquire about options to increase storage space on demand and its cost.
Most hosts provide technical support 24 hours per day, 7 days per week throughout the
year, known as 24/7/365. The client should ensure such service is provided and know exactly
what support services are included in the contract.
You should be informed about the quality of the equipment that the hosting company
provides, security measures it maintains, the sophistication of server and load management, and
the technical skills of its personnel. Companies should inquire about past downtimes and
recovery timeframes for the hosting company because they are an important part of technical
support. If the client needs help in developing and updating webpages, the evaluators should
explore the appearance and functionality of current clients of the hosting company.
Some hosting companies charge extra fees for shared hosting if the site experiences activity
above a predetermined amount of data that is transferred (downloaded from the site or uploaded
to it) or number of visits from web surfers, known as hits. In such arrangements, additional fees
are charged for over-the-limit data transfer or hits. Web hosting companies price their services
this way because the greater the number of hits, the more bandwidth they must allocate. The
size of every file that is downloaded or uploaded is recorded, and if the limit—say 200 GB—has
been exceeded, additional fees are charged. If the client’s business grows, the cost might end up
much greater than planned.
All hosting firms provide subscribers with several email addresses. Some also provide
forwarding to other email addresses. Clients should examine these factors as well as the size of
email boxes, autoresponding (automating email reply), and access to mailing lists.
Scalability is the ability of an organization to modify the capabilities of IT to accommodate
growing needs. In this context, it is the ability for a website to grow—an important factor for
most businesses. It is best to select a hosting company that has the hardware, software, and
expertise to accommodate varying traffic levels and that can demonstrate its ability to develop a
site from a simple, static one (one that does not require interactivity) to a heavily trafficked,
interactive one. This applies to disk space, growing sophistication of software used, faster backup
mechanisms, and other resources.
Smaller businesses often need help with the design of their webpages. They need to discover
whether the hosting company maintains experienced and available web design personnel.
The host’s physical site must be well secured against physical entry as well as intrusion
through the Internet. Clients should ask for information about security measures. Some hosts
are so careful as to not even advertise where they keep servers. Yahoo! is one such host.
Businesses want their websites available to users all the time. Downtime denies them
business and damages their reputation. Hosting companies usually advertise their uptime as a
percentage. For example, they might say they guarantee 99 percent uptime. This means that the
client should expect the site to be down 1 percent (87.6 hours) of every year. Companies that
need a higher uptime, such as 99.9 or 99.99 percent, should take notice of this and ensure that
the host has the resources to claim such a high number of “nines.” Such resources often include
subscriptions to the services of two electric power companies or the availability of gas generators
or other type of power backup. Redundancy, placing the site on two or more servers, is also a
measure to ensure uptime.
Setup and monthly fees are self-explanatory. Monthly fees can range from several tens of
dollars to several hundred dollars. Some hosting companies offer large discounts to clients that
sign multiyear contracts. As in any purchase, customer reviews and independent evaluations
should also be considered.
286
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
More than Meets the Eye
However a business chooses to run its website, several elements must be present to conduct
business, which are illustrated in Figure 8.8. While the shopper (a consumer or corporate
purchasing officer) sees only webpages, several applications and databases actually support
online shopping and purchasing: an application that provides an inquiry interface for the
shopper, which is connected to a catalog that is actually a database consisting of visual and text
product descriptions; an application that takes the order, which is connected to an inventory
application that is also connected to the product catalog database; a credit-card application that
verifies authenticity of credit-card details and balance; and, in many cases, an order-fulfillment
system that displays on monitors located in warehouses which items are to be picked off shelves
and where they should be shipped. The latter system might include an automated conveyor
system that picks the items with little human labor.
F I G U R E 8.8
The components of a
web-based retailing
operation
John Doe
59 Court St
America, CT
06982 Order:
1 pair NSX-01
John Doe
1 pair NSX-01
3 boxes-NSS#23
1 boxes-NQ-56
Dynamic Webpages
with Search Software
Catalog Database
Customer
Picking and Shipping
Application
Order Processing
Application
Shipping
Credit-Card
Company
National Credit Corp.
Credit-Card Verification
Application
Find:
John Doe
Visa
Account: 098334574407
Exp Date: 04/09
Total: $95.68
Rules for Successful Web-Based Business
Most organizations that operate a website do so to sell either products or services. Web software
and the ability to connect web servers to organizational information systems open numerous
opportunities. Often, whether an online business succeeds depends not only on availability of
the proper software but how it is used. Several elements must be considered, especially if the site
is to support B2C commerce.
Target the Right Customers
Targeting the people or organizations that are most likely to need the products and services you
offer has always been the most important effort in marketing, with or without the web. On the
web, targeting includes identifying the sites your audience frequently visits. For instance, a
business that sells sporting goods should create clickable links at sites that cover sporting events
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
287
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
and provide sports statistics. Banks that offer mortgage loans should create links at realtors’ sites.
And any business that targets its products to young people should do so at popular music sites.
This principle should also apply to blogs and popular podcasts. Podcasting can include visual
advertisements displayed by the player software.
Capture the Customer’s Total Experience
By using cookies and recording shoppers’ movements, CRM software can create electronic
consumer profiles for each shopper and buyer. The shopper’s experience with the site then
becomes an asset of the business. Such marketing research fine-tunes the portfolio of products
that the business offers and tailors webpages for individual customers. It also can be used to
“market to one” by emailing the shopper about special deals on items in which he or she has
shown an interest.
Personalize the Service
CRM software and webpage customization software can be combined to enable customers to
personalize the pages and the service they receive when they log on to the site. Letting shoppers
and readers select the type of email content they want is welcome, but sites should respect
privacy by letting customers opt in rather than opt out. Opting in means that the customer can
actively check options to receive email and other promotions, while opting out requires the
customer to select not to receive such information—an annoyance to many customers.
The web also enables companies to let consumers tailor products. Land’s End’s website
invites men to dress a virtual model with a build like theirs and order pants online. Although a
pair costs significantly more than one a customer would purchase in a store, Land’s End has
been very successful with the concept. It has acquired many loyal customers because there is
little reason to return a pair of pants that is made to order, although the company’s policy allows
returns.
Shorten the Business Cycle
One reason people like to do business on the web is that it saves them time. Businesses should
keep looking for opportunities to shorten the business cycle for their customers, from shopping
to paying to receiving the items they ordered. Fulfillment, the activities taking place after
customers place orders online, is one of the greatest challenges for online businesses.
Those who can ship the ordered products fastest are likely to sustain or increase their market
shares. Some have decided to outsource the entire fulfillment task to organizations that specialize
in fulfillment, such as UPS’s e-Logistics and FedEx’s Supply Chain Services. E-Logistics, for
example, offers to receive and store the business’s merchandise in its warehouses, receive orders
online, and then pick, pack, and ship them to the online business’s customers. It also offers a
product return service. A shorter business cycle is not only important for customer satisfaction
but also enables the company to collect payments faster because credit cards are usually charged
upon shipping.
Let Customers Help Themselves
Customers often need information from a web-enabled organization. Such information includes
the status of an order, the status of a shipped item, and after-sale information such as
installation
of
add-on
components
and
troubleshooting.
Placing
useful
information
and
downloadable software at the site not only encourages customer loyalty but also saves labor.
This concept is often referred to as self-service—the customer’s ability to determine the timing
and services of their needs from a business organization through a website.
Practically every online business now sends email messages with the status of the order, a
tracking number, and a link to the shipping company for checking the shipping status.
Hardware companies can post online assembly instructions for their “assembly required”
288
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
products. In addition to including Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) information, some
companies have used knowledge management software (discussed in Chapter 11, “Business
Intelligence and Knowledge Management”) that can answer open-ended questions.
Be Proactive and De-Commoditize
Expecting customers to visit your website every time they need your service might not be
enough in today’s competitive marketplace. Customers now demand not only prompt email
replies to their queries but also proactive alerts. For example, the travel websites Orbitz and
Travelocity email or text message airline customer’s gate and time information if a customer’s
flight is delayed or if gates change. Some manufacturers email customers about product recalls or
to schedule periodic service appointments. Online drugstores invite customers who regularly take
a certain medication to register for automatic replenishment of their drugs. The company’s
software calculates when the next lot is to be shipped and ensures that it arrives in time.
All these initiatives, as well as many others, are efforts to de-commoditize what companies
sell. A commodity is any product that is sold for about the same price by a multitude of vendors
in a highly competitive market, usually with a thin margin of profit. By adding a special service
or additional information, the company keeps the products it sells from becoming a commodity.
Adding an original service or information to the product differentiates the “package” that online
shoppers purchase from the “package” sold by competitors.
E-Commerce Is Every Commerce
You might have noticed that the title of this chapter does not contain the term “e-commerce.”
You might have also noticed that this is not the only chapter in which web-enabled business
activities are discussed. In fact, every chapter in this book gives examples of what is popularly
referred to as e-commerce. Web technologies have been integrated into the business world to a
degree that makes it difficult at times to realize which activities take place inside the
organization and which involve information flowing from other places through the Internet. We
have become so accustomed to the integration of the web into our daily activities, especially the
commercial ones, that the lines between commerce and e-commerce have been blurred. We will
eventually stop using the term “e-commerce” and simply consider the web another means of
supporting business, much the way we consider technologies like the telephone and computer.
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
289
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Summary
●
Some industries have changed dramatically and
continue to change thanks to web technologies.
This
includes
activities
between
and
within
organizations.
●
HTTP is an Internet standard that enables addres-
sing of web servers with domain names. HTTPS is
a secure version of the protocol and is used for
confidential transactions. HTML is a markup lan-
guage for presentation of webpages. XML is a
markup language for delivery of information about
data communicated through webpages. XHTML
combines features of HTML and XML. HTML5 is
the most recent version of HTML, and integrates
features of XML. FTP is a protocol for uploading
and downloading files. Blogs enable people to con-
veniently create discussion webpages by posting
comments and responding to them. Instant mes-
saging online chat services enable people to corre-
spond in real time and help businesses serve
online customers. Cookies help websites to person-
alize the experience of visitors. Along with other
software that spies on unwitting web surfers, they
might provide detailed information about web
users.
●
In addition to a large number of nonproprietary
web technologies, many more are developed and
licensed to organizations by software vendors.
●
An organization has two options when deciding to
do commerce online: own and maintain its own
web servers at its own facilities, or contract with a
web hosting company. When contracting with a
web host, there are several degrees of service:
shared hosting, virtual private servers, dedicated
hosting, and co-location.
●
When selecting a web hosting company, organiza-
tions should consider several factors: type and
quality of application provided, storage space,
bandwidth, quality of technical support, traffic
limits, availability of email accounts and services,
scalability, user interface, support of webpage
design, security, uptime ratio, setup fee, monthly
fee, and customer reviews.
●
Web-enabled commerce can generally be classified
as
business-to-business
(B2B)
or
business-
to-consumer (B2C). In the former, businesses use
networks to trade with other businesses, possibly
through an extranet. In the latter, businesses adver-
tise and sell goods and services to consumers via
the web. The higher volume of e-commerce is con-
ducted between businesses.
●
Business-to-business trading often relies on elec-
tronic data interchange (EDI), which is conducted
over value-added networks. XML facilitates interor-
ganizational online trading similar to EDI. When
linked to internal ISs, web technologies enhance
supply chain management. Online interorganiza-
tional commerce often takes place through an
extranet.
●
With the proliferation of mobile smartphones and
wireless handheld computers, mobile commerce
is increasingly important and needs to be consid-
ered in any online business strategy.
●
To be successful, an online business must target
the right customers, capture the customer’s total
experience, personalize the service, shorten the
business cycle, let customers help themselves,
and be proactive.
●
Spam, and to a lesser degree spyware, adware,
and pop-up windows, have become online annoy-
ances. Society is trying to strike a balance between
allowing these phenomena to continue as a form of
commercial promotion and free speech, and curb-
ing them to reduce the public’s waste of resources.
Phishing has become a pervasive crime, defraud-
ing people and stealing their identities.
290
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
It quickly became evident to Tyler that creating a
website was more difficult than he remembered from
his college courses. Any website could be developed
“on the fly.” But would the design, layout, and format
of
the
site
match
the
Lakeside’s
setting
and
atmosphere? Just as the website for an elegant jewelry
store should promote elegance and distinctiveness, he
wanted the Kimball’s Lakeside website to reflect its
special features. And how was he going to channel his
enthusiasm for social media into a plan that would
really support his goals for Kimball’s Lakeside?
What Is Your Advice?
1. If you were Justin, what advice would you give Tyler
on the functions of the new website? What types of
functions and information should the website pro-
vide to customers and prospective customers?
2. How would you recommend that Tyler use social
media in the period leading up to the grand open-
ing? What types of messages would you post?
3. What type of software would you need to build
and maintain the website? What type of hosting
service should Tyler purchase to host the initial
website?
New Perspectives
1. Consider the concepts and discussion from Chap-
ter 7 relating to data requirements that the owners
need in order to manage the restaurant more
effectively and efficiently. How would you inte-
grate website and social media functions into
those data requirements?
2. How could the restaurant use social media promo-
tions like Groupon and Restaurant.com to integrate
into their social media strategy? What are the
advantages and disadvantages of this strategy?
3. What features of a website hosting service would
be important to consider in planning for the poten-
tial future growth of Kimball’s website?
Key Terms
B2B, 264
B2C, 264
B2G, 264
banner, 265
blog, 258
brick-and-mortar, 270
C2C, 264
clickstream tracking, 263
co-location, 284
consumer profiling, 271
content management
system, 286
cookie, 262
crowdsourcing, 277
dedicated hosting, 283
domain name, 256
dynamic webpage, 285
extranet, 267
File Transfer Protocol (FTP), 258
fulfillment, 270
HTML5, 257
Hypertext Markup Language
(HTML), 257
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP), 256
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Secure (HTTPS), 256
impression, 265
instant messaging (IM), 261
intranet, 267
load balancing, 282
massive open online course
(MOOC), 260
mirror server, 283
mobile commerce, 277
phishing, 274
podcast, 260
pure play, 270
reach percentage, 265
reverse auction (name-your-own-
price auction), 273
search advertising, 264
search engine optimization
(SEO), 266
self-service, 288
shared hosting, 283
spyware, 263
top-level domain (TLD), 256
trackback, 259
Uniform Resource
Locator (URL), 256
virtual private server, 283
web hosting, 283
wiki, 259
XHTML, 257
XML, 257
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
291
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Review Questions
1. The web has been an enabler of new business
methods. What does “enabler” mean in this con-
text? Give an example of a business activity that
is enabled by the web and that would not be
possible without the web.
2. What is HTML, and why is it needed to use the
web? What is HTML5 and how does it differ from
previous versions?
3. What is XML? How is it different from HTML,
and what purpose does it fulfill in web
commerce?
4. What is the relationship between a domain name
and an IP address?
5. When you visit a website and click a Download
button, you activate software that adheres to a
certain protocol. What protocol is that?
6. What is instant messaging (IM), and how
can it support business operations? Which
technology does IM replace or augment in
online retailing?
7. What is blogging, and what potential does it have
for businesses?
8. What is podcasting, and how is it different from
radio broadcasting?
9. In the context of the web, what is a cookie? What
is the benefit of cookies for online shoppers?
What is the risk?
10. What is an intranet, and what purposes does it
serve?
11. What is an extranet, and what purpose does it
serve?
12. When contracting with a web hosting company,
what is the difference between a shared server
and a dedicated server?
13. When selecting a web hosting company, one of
the important factors to consider is uptime ratio.
What is it, and why is it important?
14. What does “unique monthly visitors” mean in
online lingo? Who uses this metric and for what
purpose?
15. What is phishing? How do people get “phished”?
16. What are the various issues and strategies to
develop and implement a social media strategy?
Discussion Questions
17. Recall our discussion in Chapter 6, “Business
Networks and Telecommunications.” What is the
single most important factor enabling streaming
video on the web?
18. Some top-level domains (TLDs) are reserved for
certain organizations. Why is this important?
Would you prefer that anyone could register a
TLD of his or her choice?
19. Podcasting is said to allow subscribers to
“time-shift.” What does this mean, and does this
give listeners a benefit they do not have with
radio programs?
20. E-tailers can use their software to charge different
shoppers different prices. This is called price dis-
crimination, and it is legal. Some observers say
that shoppers discriminate based on price when
they decide from whom to buy, and therefore it is
ethical for e-tailers to price-discriminate. Do you
agree?
21. Do you see blogging and podcasting as a threat
to the written and broadcast media? Explain.
22. One of the most frustrating types of events to an
e-tailer is shopping cart abandonment. From your
own online shopping experience, what are the
things that would cause you to abandon an online
shopping cart?
23. Mobile commerce gives organizations the oppor-
tunity to send location-related advertising, that is,
they can send advertising to our mobile devices
based on where we are. What are the positives
and negatives of this capability?
24. If you were giving advice to a business on using
social media, what would you list as advantages
and disadvantages? Can it be done “wrong”?
25. You have a new home business. You sell a con-
sumer product for which you have a patent. You
believe there will be much demand for it. To pro-
mote it, you decide to purchase a list of 2,000,000
email addresses of people who fall in the demo-
graphic groups that are likely to purchase the
product. The seller told you that these were only
addresses of people who did not opt out from
292
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
receiving messages from businesses. After you
emailed the promotional message, you received
hundreds of angry email messages, including one
from the Coalition Against Unsolicited Commer-
cial Email (CAUCE). Was there anything wrong in
what you did? Why or why not?
26. The owners of a small business tell you that they
would not be able to reach enough customers to
survive if they couldn’t use mass, unsolicited
email. You strongly object to spamming. How do
you respond to them?
27. Scott McNealy, former CEO of Sun Microsystems,
said: “You already have zero privacy. Get over
it!” Some observers say that expecting privacy
when using the Internet is ridiculous; the Internet
is a public network, and no one should expect
privacy in a public network. Do you agree? Why
or why not?
28. A student established a website that serves as an
exchange of term papers. Students are invited to
contribute their graded work and to search for term
papers that other students contributed. When criti-
cized, the student claims that this, too, is a way to
do research. He argues that the moral responsibil-
ity rests with those who access his site, not with
him. Do you agree? Why or why not?
29. There have been international efforts to harmo-
nize laws addressing free speech on the web.
Do you think such efforts can succeed? Why or
why not?
30. What do you think makes social networking web-
sites so popular?
31. Web advertising is directed mostly at consumers,
yet the topic is discussed in this chapter as a
business-to-business commercial interaction.
What could be the reason for this?
Applying Concepts
32. Find three commercial sites that operate in three
different markets and offer affiliate programs.
Write up a summary: What do they sell? What do
their affiliate programs promise, and in return for
what? Classify each program as pay per sale, pay
per click, pay per lead, or another type, and
explain why you classified the way you did.
33. Choose a topic in which you are interested. Select
three different search engines (e.g., Google,
Yahoo!, and Bing) and use them to look for
information about the subject. Rank the perfor-
mance of each site. A long list of sites that pro-
vide too broad a range of information is bad; a
shorter list of sites that provide more narrowly
defined information is good. Explain your
ranking.
34. You have been hired by a pizza delivery service to
design a website. The site should be attractive to
families and young professionals and should
allow them to order home delivery. Use a web-
page development application to build the home
page of the business. Submit your page to your
instructor.
35. A local health club wants to implement a website
for its new opening. The listing below is an initial
selection of their needs for the website. Compile a
matrix of three shared hosting services including
the various features and services offered by each
service for comparison.
Included Domains
3
Web Space
250 GB
Monthly Transfer Volume
12,500 GB
Email Accounts
40
Mailbox Size
5 GB
Search Engine Submission
Yes
Website Builder
28 Pages
Blog
Yes
Mailing Lists
Yes, 3,000
customers
Content Management
Yes
Form Builder
Yes
Client Management
Yes
Support
24/7 Toll-free,
Email
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
293
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Hands-On Activities
36. Prepare your résumé as an HTML document.
(Hint: You can use the File, Save As feature of
your word processor to save a document as a
webpage or .html file.) If you wish, include your
scanned photograph. Submit your work by email,
or post it to your website and email the website
link to your professor.
37. Consider the following options for a business that
wishes to use a website: (1) maintaining their own
server at their facility, (2) using a host for a shared
server, (3) using a host for a virtual private server,
(4) using a host for a dedicated server. You are a
consultant. Consider each of the following scenar-
ios independently of the others, and recommend
the best hosting option to the business. Consider
all the relevant factors, such as purpose and cost.
a. A family-owned jewelry store at a shopping
mall. The owners want to make the public
aware of what the store offers. They want to
pay as little as possible for this web presence.
b. A large retail company. Management wants to
be able to execute purchases from suppliers
through the new website, and to allow their
own customers to shop and buy through the
site. It is willing to employ its own team and
facility for the servers.
c. A small printing business. The owners insist
on having their own domain name. They wish
visitors to have every sense that the site is run
and controlled by the owners.
d. A small home business. Management does not
want to register and pay for its own domain
name.
e. A large Internet-only e-tailer. It needs to
change the list of products daily. Its web
design team might want to change the DBMS,
shopping cart application, and other applica-
tions when the need arises. It already owns the
servers but no longer wants to manage net-
working, backup, redundancy, and security.
f. A brick-and-mortar retailer that wants to
extend its sales operations to the web. It has a
web design crew that is capable of changing
content and is expert at using and modifying
web applications such as dynamic pages and
shopping cart applications. However, manage-
ment does not want to purchase servers or
manage their networking and security.
38. Devote one day as “Low Technology Day” and
express your experience. For one full day (24
hours) do not use the Internet, do not use a
mobile phone or any other communication
device. Write a 1−2 page report on how this
affected your mood, social experiences, time
management, and any other aspect of your life
during that 24-hour period.
Team Activities
39. Social media is being used by many companies
to promote, sell, and market their products and
services as well as reduce costs of operations.
Research the use of social media by three busi-
ness organizations and document (a) the details
of their social media effort, (b) the return on its
investment and benefits to its business, and (c)
the critical factors that led to their success.
40. Team up with another student to analyze the privacy
policies of three companies that specialize in col-
lecting consumer information on the web. All must
be companies that install third-party cookies. There
are at least 10 such companies. List the common
factors of the three companies. Then list the factors
in which they differ. For each of the differing ele-
ments, which company treats consumers better, in
terms of less invasion of privacy and more
disclosure of its activities? Among other factors, see
if the companies offer opt-in or opt-out options.
41. With two other team members, prepare a ratio-
nale for an original business idea that could gen-
erate revenue on the web. Prepare the rationale in
a way that would convince a venture capitalist to
invest money in this new business.
42. You are the owner of the pizza delivery business
with minimal understanding and skills to develop
a website. Your team has been assigned to use a
shared hosting service to design and implement
a website using WordPress. Find two software
packages compatible with WordPress that will
automate the design with templates. What are the
costs and issues associated with this website
development approach?
294
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Building a Home Lending Operation
Buying a home is a complex and detailed process.
A consumer has to gather and consider so many details
and data points in order to make an informed decision,
and it is hard to know if you’re getting the best deal and if
it’s in your best long-term interests. The various options
and suppliers involved in the process only tend to
magnify the complexity and time needed. Even for a
buyer who has been through the process previously, it
is time consuming. For a beginner, it can be terrifying.
Some people may believe that the depth and
complexity of a home purchase and financing may
not lend itself to a web-based solution. Think so?
That’s not what Wells Fargo believes.
Even with economic challenges, the market for first-
time homebuyers is strong. A survey completed by
Wells Fargo in 2011 found that the most significant
opportunities in the housing industry were for the
millennial generation (born between the early 1980s
and early 2000s). Even considering the large Baby
Boomer generation (born between 1946 and 1964), the
millennials consist of more than 77 million people. This
new generation is eager and able to find information,
especially online. This foundation of information builds
confidence and knowledge. Although there were many
different options to collect information about home
ownership, Wells Fargo also believed the market lacked
a “comprehensive, one-stop, self-directed resource” for
home buyers. It was clear that a market existed for the
new initiative, but how should it be fulfilled? Would you
build a home without a plan? Drawings? No.
Websites, like any other software development,
need to be planned, designed, and implemented with
careful thought and research. For a variety of reasons,
sometimes website development is not well planned.
Wells Fargo instituted a methodical approach. From
the beginning of this initiative, they defined the goals
of the project and remained focused on the mission of
the project. Their guiding metaphor for design was a
“roadmap” to assist consumers in the process of
gathering information and making choices toward
their goal of obtaining a mortgage. Many consumers
have a “full plate” of complicated economic and
financial challenges. The key to success was to
assemble a website to get essential information to
consumers and add value to their online experience.
Like the sales cycle, the home lending process has a
similar cycle from researching, application, approval,
and servicing. Again, the roadmap was important to
the design process. In addition, Wells Fargo also
compiled data on how consumers gained access to
their current website as well as what they did (tools,
functions)
once
they
arrived.
This
information
provided
the
bank
with
insight
on
consumer
preferences associated with an online experience.
Their goal was to “serve customers the way they
wanted to be served.” This goal would be defined in
three strategies: (1) focus on consumers’ financial
needs, (2) deliver and provide educational value, and
(3) humanize the online channel. Although the goal is
important, specific tactics would be needed to clearly
frame the building of the website. For example, while
the website would “perform” based on a consumer’s
preferences, they could always decide to connect with
a mortgage consultant at Wells Fargo to supplement
the online experience. The online experience is crucial
to deliver information and education in a timeframe
and
environment
that
the
consumer
chooses.
However, when the process requires a personal
touch, they can elect to have a consultant intervene,
again, based on their choice.
Wells Fargo believed that careful thought to design
conquers the complexity of the entire process. This
mentality centers on the principles of simplicity and not
overcomplicating initiatives. To embed these principles
in the website, the design stage included several
characteristics,
including:
(1)
delivering
information
tailored
to
the
customer’s
individual
needs,
(2)
providing comprehensive, but consumable information,
(3) protecting the consumer’s anonymity during the
process, (4) allowing consumers to speak with a
representative when needed, (5) offering transparency
to information and the process, and (6) providing easy
access to information. These six characteristics help to
clearly frame the process of building the website.
As Wells Fargo drilled deeper into the project, they
began to define the essential elements of the proposed
website. These elements included a learning center,
glossary of terms, tools/tips, online application forms,
checklists to guide the consumer through the process,
and home ownership guides. These features were
developed to satisfy the objectives of the website
project as well as clearly define how those objectives
would be accomplished in the new product.
The self-service nature of the website provides a
flexible environment for consumers with various
levels of financing knowledge, at purchasing stages,
and with different preferences to be informed about
Wells Fargo financing products and home buying in
general. Business relationships, even in an area as
complicated as home financing, can be developed
through a self-service, online environment. Building
those relationships through a free website product
can
build
affinity
and
ultimately
increase
the
customer base of a bank’s mortgage portfolio.
Source:
Slaughter,
P.
(2012).
Playing
Online.
Home
Furnishings Business, 7(9), 14-19.
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
295
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Thinking About the Case
1. Some websites are not very useful, functional, or
well organized. Why do you believe that websites
are approached differently than other software
development initiatives? What did Wells Fargo do
differently?
2. Consider the feature that the consumer could
remain anonymous for as long as they wished.
Why would it be beneficial to have the prospective
home financing customer anonymous? Why would
Wells Fargo encourage (or require) the consumer
to contact a representative? Would this interaction
increase the likelihood of closing the sale?
3. Wells Fargo said that “We also were mindful that
each consumer comes to the transaction with a
different level of understanding and with different
styles of learning.” What challenges does that
create for the bank and its website design? Is the
marketing of home financing different than mar-
keting other service products?
Furnishing Dollars with Online Initiatives
With the early adoption and use of websites, there were
certain
items
that
businesspeople
and consumers
believed were “off limits” for online purchasing. Who
would have thought you could have purchased shoes
online? Cars? Clothes? How about furniture?
According to an IBISWorld study released in 2012,
online furniture sales amounted to $6.3 billion in 2011,
a 7.5-percent increase from 2010. With the estimate that
2012 online furniture sales will increase by 9.9 percent.
While they predict that the growth will increase to $10.8
billion by 2017, these sales are not just for small items,
but all types of furniture. The original thought was that
people needed to “touch and feel” furniture in order to
complete the sale. However, with the growing number
of furniture sales being completed online, that attitude
and culture is changing. Here is a tale of three
companies that set up their furniture businesses in an
online environment.
Gardiners, an 80-year-old company with five
stores in the Baltimore area, has leveraged website
technology for its business. They launched their
online
business
with
help
from
a
website
development
and
Internet
consulting
firm
that
specialized in the furniture industry. Their transition
into the online environment was planned with the
“walk before you run” mindset. They began by
selling online only those products that were stocked
at their stores. Because their original online system
did not directly interface with their in-house systems,
they were required to update the online system
nightly with accurate product information based on
what was sold in their stores each day.
Can social media have a positive influence on
furniture sales? La-Z-Boy believed the answer to that
question was “Yes.” They used the social media site
Pinterest in a recent marketing campaign. Pinterest, a
popular social media site, was conceived to create a
platform where users can upload images of what they
enjoy in their lives in an online “bulletin board” format.
In 2012, La-Z-Boy’s Hammary division developed a
marketing campaign using Pinterest to increase its
consumer and retailer participation, along with its
current social media channels (Facebook and Twitter).
Consumers
participated
in
a
contest
by
posting
images on Pinterest of Hammary’s products that they
would like to win. After uploading images to Pinterest,
the contestant then “pinned” their submission to
Hammary’s Facebook or Twitter account. The contest
winner, chosen based on the largest total number of
Twitter
followers,
Pinterest
re-pins,
and
Facebook
“likes,” would be given $2,000 worth of furniture. La-
Z-Boy is leveraging the success of this campaign to
target
retailers.
Their
marketing
executive
stated,
“We’ll
use
Pinterest
to
get
retailers
into
the
showroom. This interior design community we built
definitely helped position us.”
The concept of online shopping carts can be
transformed with social media. Carl’s Furniture City
in Utica NY has attempted the integration of a
shopping cart with Facebook. In one month, they
received three sales totaling $2,100 sourced from
Facebook. Data like this, compiled by Web4Retail,
can provide a measureable, objective payback for
retailers to support social media strategies. However,
could the use of an online site draw shopping away
from
stores?
Web4Retail
executives
believe
that
“retailers that commit to doing business on the
Internet
are
giving
their
stores
more
protection
against getting shopped than those who don’t.” They
believe that customers visit the store to view items
which were once created by an online shopping cart.
Customers do not have the time to re-visit the store,
but then rely on the shopping cart to purchase
products at home. Sales personnel at the store can
properly log the visit and then gain credit for the
online sale, protecting their commission.
Source: Zakrajsek, L., & McGee, K. (2012). Wells Fargo’s New
Home Lending Site. Mortgage Banking, 72(9), 88–91.
Thinking About the Case
1. Do you think that the more gradual implementa-
tion of online sales implemented by Gardiners is
too safe? Is there a benefit to this careful, planned
approach? Are there any risks to the delayed
updates to Gardiners online system?
2. How did the Pinterest campaign using social
media increase interest for La-Z-Boy’s retail
channel? When the marketing executive
3
PART
296
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
discussed the “community we built,” what do
you believe he meant?
3. Are retail stores being used by consumers to
“touch and feel” products and then purchase
them online from other online retailers?
Do you believe this practice is widespread? Do
you believe that social media and an intelligent
strategy can create synergy between a retailer’s
online and “brick and mortar” channels?
References
Anonymous. (2009, Jun 16). Smartphones, Data Plans,
New Apps to Drive Mobile Advertising Revenues
to $1.5 Billion in 2013, PR Newswire.
Anonymous. (2010, Jul 22). Ford Launches Second
Chapter of The Fiesta Project; Eight New Web-
isodes Hit YouTube for Ford Fiesta’s 2011 Social
Media Campaign, PR Newswire.
Anonymous. (2011, Jan 19). Valued Opinions Online
Survey Shows Concern Over Internet Security,
PR Newswire.
Anonymous. (2012a). BIA/Kelsey; BIA/Kelsey Forecasts
U.S. Social Media Ad Revenues to Grow from
$4.6B in 2012 to $9.2B in 2016. Marketing Weekly
News, 68.
Anonymous. (2012b). Dunkin’ Donuts Unveils Mobile
App for Payment and Gifting of Dunkin’ Products.
Entertainment Close-Up.
Anonymous. (2012c). LoyaltyOne; Consumer Social
Media Engagement with Brands Leads to Increased
Sales, Study Reveals. Marketing Weekly News, 134.
Anonymous. (2012d). Spear Phishing Statistics: 2012
Findings from Microsoft TechEd, RSA Security
Conference Surveys. Retrieved from http://blog
.proofpoint.com/2012/07/spear-phishing
-statistics-2012-findings-from-teched-rsa-security
-conference-surveys.html
Anonymous. (2012e). Veracode, Inc.; Growth in SaaS
and Mobile Applications Increases Requirement
for Software Security Testing at Scale. Investment
Weekly News, 521.
Aquino, J. (2012, Nov). TRANSFORMING SOCIAL
MEDIA DATA INTO PREDICTIVE ANALYTICS.
Customer Relationship Management, 16, 38-42.
Brown, C. (2009). Fighting mobile phone spam.
Network World, 26(27), 25-25.
Donston-Miller, D., & Carr, D. F. (2012). 7 Lessons In
Social Business. InformationWeek (1350), 22-27.
Fletcher, H. (2011). Finding ‘Things To Do’. Target
Marketing, 34(6), 16-18, 20.
Gobry, P.-E. (2011). The Online Ad Market Comes
Roaring Back With A Record $26 Billion In 2010.
From http://www.businessinsider.com/internet-
advertising-report-2011-4?op=1
Hof, R. (2012). Internet Ad Spending Bucks Economy
to Grow 12% in Q1. Retrieved from www.Forbes
.com website: http://www.forbes.com/sites/
roberthof/2012/07/10/internet-ad-spending-
bucks-economy-to-grow-12-in-q1/
Innocentive Corporate Website – About Us. (2013).
Retrieved January 18, 2013, from https://www
.innocentive.com/contact-innocentive
Internet Usage Statistics. (January 1, 2013). Retrieved
January 2, 2013, from http://internetworldstats
.com/stats.htm
Klotz-Young, H. (2012). Staying Connected Via Apps.
SDM, 42(9), 57-60, 62.
McMillan, R. (2009, May). Judge Kicks Notorious
Spammer off Facebook. PC World, 27, 20-20.
O’Leary, N. (2012). GroupM: Global Web Ad Spend Up
in 2011. http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-
branding/groupm-global-web-ad-spend-16-percent-
2011-139483
Oracle. (2012). 2012 B2B E-Commerce Survey: Results
and Trends. [White Paper]. http://www.oracle.com/
us/products/applications/b2b-ecommerce-trends-
2012-1503041.pdf
Paine, K. D. (2011). Measuring the real ROI of social
media. Communication World, 28(1), 20-23.
Patel, L. (2010). THE RISE OF SOCIAL MEDIA. T + D,
64(7), 60-61, 68.
Pimanova, J. (11 September 2012). Summer 2012:
Email Phishing Trends Heat Up. From http://www
.emailtray.com/blog/category/email-trends-and-stats/
Purewal, S. J. (2013, Jan). The Privacy and Security
Implications of a Cashless Society. PC World, 31,
33-34.
Radicati, S. (2009). Email Statistics Report, 2009-2013:
The Radicati Group, Inc.
Richter, F. (2012). e-Commerce in the United States:
Statista.
Son, A. (2012). Industry Report 54191 Market Research
in the US. IBISWorld, 25-27. http://0-clients1
.ibisworld.com.helin.uri.edu/reports/us/industry/
default.aspx?entid=1442
Spence, E. (2013). Amazon Coins Will Be A Welcome
Disruption To Android Developers. Forbes.com.
http://www.forbes.com/sites/ewanspence/2013/
02/05/amazon-coins-will-be-a-welcome-disrup-
tion-to-android-developers/
Top Level Domain Name List. (2013). Retrieved
January 16, 2013, from http://data.iana.org/TLD/
tlds-alpha-by-domain.txt
CHAPTER 8
The Web-Enabled Enterprise
297
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
 
CHAPTER
© nopporn/Shutterstock.com
PART
nine
CHALLENGES OF GLOBAL
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Learning Objectives
A growing number of organizations operate globally or, at least, in more than one geographic market. These
organizations face some challenges that have a considerable impact on their information systems. The organizations
have to meet the demands of global operations by providing international ISs designed to accommodate the free
flow of information both within a single company’s divisions and between multinational corporations. These issues
are important because so many companies operate a website, and websites are accessible globally. For
professionals, this means a growing focus to understand other cultures, standards, and legal systems when
applying and using information systems in a global business community.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Explain why multinational corporations must use global information systems.
●
Provide elementary advice for designing websites for an international audience.
●
Cite the cultural, legal, and other challenges to implementing international information systems.
298
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Long Distance Recipes
While Michael and Tyler were planning the operational
and marketing aspects of the Lakeside location, Liz
began to consider some details of the kitchen opera-
tions and menu. The family’s plan was to maintain the
“hometown” meals and reasonable cost in the new
location. However, she also thought that the menu
needed some “upgrades” for the new location. She
believed it was important to maintain their core menu
choices, but to also set a slightly different tone with
additional menu choices for the Lakeside. Because
their plan was to offer the Lakeside function room for
business meetings, social functions, and special occa-
sions for groups, a broader array of menu choices
could give them a competitive advantage.
Michael and Liz enjoyed traveling to places outside
of the United States. When they traveled, Liz explored
the local restaurants and food stores to get inspiration
for new recipes and ingredients. She found interesting
items in countries such as Spain, Italy, Portugal, and
France. She wondered how Kimball’s could stimulate
their current menu choices as well as build new choices
to rebrand the new location. Using the current menu
along with her travel notes on various meals and ingre-
dients, she was excited about developing a winning
menu for their Lakeside location.
New View, New Menu
Liz began to develop new appetizers, entrees, and side
dishes that used various imported spices and condi-
ments. Whether it was imported olive oil, pasta, or
roasted peppers, the imported ingredients could add
great value to the menu. Now, what would be the
cost and availability for such items? She searched
on the Internet for foreign suppliers to purchase
items that she would need. There were several suppli-
ers who sold and shipped products to the United
States. She also researched several U.S. food suppli-
ers to compare costs and shipping logistics. Michael
and Liz then met to review her ideas and what she
found.
Michael liked Liz’s additions to the menu. For exam-
ple, an appetizer tray of various imported cheeses,
olives, and roasted peppers could appeal to groups as
well as individual patrons. Michael agreed with Liz that
they were not abandoning their “old” menu selection,
just expanding it to appeal to a broader range of custo-
mers. The upgraded appetizers could be marketed to a
late-night crowd along with drinks and light fare.
Michael also thought that these additional menu items
could be offered on certain nights as a special promo-
tion or for “after work” gatherings.
Michael, being the numbers fanatic, evaluated the
costs of purchasing these items through a local supplier
or overseas. He found the costs were very similar; prob-
ably balanced between the local supplier’s markup ver-
sus dealing with the overseas manufacturer/supplier
directly. Purchasing from a foreign supplier did not
seem outrageous.
Liz and Michael were pleased with the newly rede-
signed menu and its potential to brand The Lakeside a
little differently than their current location.
Multinational Organizations
Consider this: An American software development firm sends out an annual brochure to its
global investors to include the state of the company, some brief statistics, and a compacted
S.W.O.T. (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats) analysis. Under the heading
“Future External Threats,” the company put a picture of a red flag, which is a symbol of
‘danger’ in the United States. The company was bombarded with emails and letters from
global investors who were upset and confused as to why a socialist revolution, symbolized by
the red flag, threatened the future of the company. In addition, after company representatives
finished writing and designing the brochure, it was sent to a translator to be converted to the
native languages of the company’s global investors. The brochure’s wording included terms
and phrases that were untranslatable, such as ‘FAQs’ and ‘wrap-up.’ Some of the software
development firm’s largest international investors were perturbed that although the brochure
they received was translated to the right language, it was in the wrong local dialect. Being
some of the company’s biggest investors, they were dismayed that the company did not take
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
299
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
the time to cater to this seemingly minor detail. International corporations regularly
encounter these types of problems, and realize that they need to overcome cultural, legal, and
other challenges.
An increasing number of the world’s corporations have branched into countries all over
the globe, becoming true multinationals. While they might have headquarters in a single
country, they operate divisions and subsidiaries in different countries to take advantage of
local benefits. For instance, a company might establish engineering facilities in countries that
offer large pools of qualified engineers, build production lines in countries that can supply
inexpensive labor, and open sales offices in countries that are strategically situated for
effective marketing.
Because of these dispersed operations, a company’s nationality is not always obvious. 3M,
which stands for Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, is headquartered in St. Paul, Minnesota
but has about 44,000 international employees in 60 different countries (3M, n.d.; Amari, 2012).
For 3M to become as successful as it is today, it had to establish an international presence in
order to gain access to new materials. To create a beachhead into foreign markets, 3M merged
with other companies in similar industries who are headquartered abroad. Facebook is another
example of an American company that went global for multiple reasons. First, Facebook
expanded its reach and connected more people by making its services available in 50 different
languages. Second, it has established subsidiaries in other countries such as Ireland in order to
ease the funneling of profits in and out and to take advantage of tax benefits (Drucker, Oct 21,
2010). Subsidiaries like this are registered and operate under the laws of the respective host
countries, and they employ local workers.
One hundred of the 500 largest Canadian companies have majority U.S. ownership, and
90 percent of U.S. multinational companies have Canadian offices. Most large international
companies have a subsidiary in Canada such as Walmart, Ford, Hewlett-Packard, and TJX (Post,
2010). Japanese companies own U.S. subsidiaries in every imaginable industry. British companies
have the largest foreign investment in the United States (Jackson, 2012). Thanks to the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and agreements between the United States and the
European Union, we might witness the internationalization of many more American, Canadian,
Mexican, and European corporations.
Multinational corporations must use global information systems, which are systems
that serve organizations and individuals in multiple countries. These companies might have
unified policies throughout their organizations, but they still have to abide by the laws of the
countries in which each unit operates, and be sensitive to other local aspects of their interaction
with businesses as well as consumers. Therefore, unlike organizations that operate in a single
country, multinational companies have the burden of ensuring that their information systems
and the information flowing through the systems conform to laws, cultures, standards, and
other elements that are specific to countries or regions.
The Web and International Commerce
The emergence of the web as a global medium for information exchange has made it an
important
vehicle
for
both
business-to-business
(B2B)
and
business-to-consumer
(B2C)
commerce. As of June 2012, more than 2.4 billion people logged on to the Internet across the
globe (Anonymous, 2012). Over 70 percent of them come from non-English-speaking
countries, as Figure 9.1 shows, and more than half of all e-commerce revenues come from
these countries. The ratio of non-English speakers to English speakers has steadily grown over
the years. As Figure 9.2 indicates, a growing number of web users come from regions other
than North America.
300
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
F I G U R E 9.1
Over 70 percent of
Internet users reside in
non-English-speaking
countries
English
Speaking
27.27%
Non-English
Speaking
72.73%
F I G U R E 9.2
Internet users by global
region
1,077
519
274
255
90
24
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
Asia
Europe
North America
Latin America/
Caribbean
Africa
Middle East
Oceania/
Australia
Millions of Users
167
The spread of Internet use opens enormous opportunities for businesses the world over.
Some of the countries with current low participation rates have the greatest potential for
expanding accessibility to the Internet, such as China. About 1 billion citizens of the People’s
Republic of China logged on as of June 2012, but that represents only 27 percent of the
population. The Chinese market is expected one day to be the world’s largest in terms of
consumer spending. For some regions, the trajectory in growth from 2000 to 2012 has been
astounding. For example, the Middle East, Latin America, and Africa have all increased over
1,300 percent in 12 years (Anonymous, 2012).
Courtesy of Internet World Stats
Courtesy of Internet World Stats
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
301
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
POINT OF
INTEREST
Low Penetration
In 2012, the world population was estimated at 7.0 billion people. About 34.3 percent of the population
used the Internet on a regular basis, double the Internet penetration in 2007. Africa is second only to
Asia in population, with 1.1 billion people. Although only 15.6 percent of Africa’s inhabitants used the
Internet regularly, this number is 5 times what it was in 2007. In contrast, 78.6 percent of the inhabitants
of North America and 63.2 percent of the inhabitants of Europe used the Internet regularly. The country
with the largest penetration of the Internet is Iceland. Over 97 percent of this island’s population regularly
uses the Internet. The country with the lowest penetration is Myanmar. Only 1.0 percent of the 54 million
residents of Myanmar use the Internet. The market of global Internet users has rapidly increased in the
past five years because of the social, cultural, and economical connections people can make on it.
Source: Anonymous. (2012). Internet Usage Statistics. Retrieved January 2, 2013, from http://internet
worldstats.com/stats.htm
The web offers opportunities not only to increase revenue but also to save on costs.
Consider, for example, how much money is saved when instead of printing product and service
manuals on paper and shipping them to customers, companies publish them on the web, ready
to be downloaded at a user’s convenience. Furthermore, imagine the convenience if the manuals
were prepared not only using hypertext and graphics but also animation for easier and more
informative use. Some companies place video clips to instruct buyers how to assemble the
products they purchased. Many companies have stopped enclosing manuals with their retail
products. They invite you to log on to their website and peruse the product’s manual in your
own language. This saves not only paper and printing but also much of the labor involved in
customer service. By placing maintenance manuals in multiple languages on their websites,
some companies cut as much as 50 percent of their customer service costs.
Organizations that wish to do business globally through their websites must be sensitive to
local audiences. Thus websites should be tailored to the audiences they are meant to reach.
A majority of web users prefer to access the web using a language other than English, so
organizations must provide their online information and services in other languages, as well as
English. As Figure 9.3 shows, organizations must plan and carefully design their global sites so
that they also cater to local needs and preferences, a process sometimes called glocalization.
F I G U R E 9.3
Imperatives to consider
when designing websites
for an international
audience
Plan
Plan the site before you develop it. A site for an international audience 
requires more planning than a national one.
Learn the 
Learn the cultural preferences, convention differences, and legal issues, 
Preferences
or use experts who know these preferences. Tailor each local site (or the 
local section of your site) to the way in which the local people prefer to 
shop, buy, and pay.
Translate Properly 
Use local interpreters to translate content for local audiences. Do not use
software or other automated methods, unless humans review the
translated material. Experienced translators are attentive to contemporary
nuances and connotations.
Be Egalitarian 
Do not let any audience feel as if it is less important than other 
audiences. Keep all local sections of your site updated and with the same 
level of information and services.
Avoid Cultural 
If the local language or culture has a word or picture for 
Imperialism
communicating an idea, use it; do not use those of your own country. 
Give the local audience a homey experience.
© Cengage Learning 2015
302
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
Glocalization is a combination of universal business models and management philosophy
with some adaptations for local audiences. One example of an organization that glocalizes is
McDonald’s. While the restaurant chain’s logo and many other features are the same
throughout the world, it makes some menu changes to appeal to local palates. Sometimes,
other elements are changed. For example, in France, the restaurant chain replaced its familiar
Ronald McDonald mascot with Asterix the Gaul, a popular French comic book character. Much
like the presence of a global restaurant chain, websites are present everywhere someone can
link to the web. Therefore, website designers must keep glocalization in mind. The design and
implementation of information technology must support an organization’s deployment of
glocalization.
Think Globally, Act Locally
Marketing experts often advise companies that operate internationally to “think globally, act
locally.” Acting locally means being sensitive to regional customs and language nuances. When
interest in the company’s business increases, especially from consumers, it is advisable to open a
local office and let a local team handle both the website and fulfillment operations. Recall that
fulfillment in online business includes picking, packing, and shipping. When most of the
business comes from one country or region, the business, its website, and its information
systems are managed centrally, but when a growing proportion of transactions are completed in
other regions, businesses find that they must decentralize control.
Thinking globally and acting locally might sound like contradictory ideas, but they are not.
Recall our discussion of strategies in Chapter 2, “Strategic Uses of Information Systems.” Thinking
globally has to do with the company’s strategic planning. It involves decisions such as product
lines and business alliances. However, the same strategy can be followed with a local flavor. For
example, the same product, in whose design and production the company holds a competitive
advantage, can be packaged and advertised with local motifs. The local branch of the company
might still recruit engineers with the same excellent qualifications as those of their peers in other
countries, but apply different interview tactics and social benefits suited to the customs and
holidays of that country.
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Learn About Challenges of Global ISs
The growing globalization of business means that chances are
high you will be employed by a company that operates outside
your country. Even if your employer does not have offices in
another country, you may be involved in global business. Being
aware of the challenges involved in global business and the
information systems supporting the business may determine
your professional success. One does not have to work for a
multinational corporation to need to be aware of the chal-
lenges discussed in this chapter. One only has to work for
any organization that has a multilingual workforce or which
operates in multicultural markets to have to care about these
issues. And there is a high probability that you will work for
such an organization.
By default, every business that establishes a website in some
way uses a global information system. Many organizations use
additional types of global ISs. All face challenges. Neglecting
to pay attention to such issues as different cultures, language
nuances, conflicting national laws, and different standards can
hurt the business’s reputation and cause loss of revenue. As a
professional who is knowledgeable about these issues, you
can be a valuable asset to your organization.
Challenges of Global Information Systems
While the web offers tremendous opportunities for establishing international ISs, global ISs are
not without their challenges, both for B2B and B2C commerce. Some of the challenges that
businesses must address are technological barriers, regulations and tariffs, electronic payment
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
303
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
mechanisms, different languages and cultures, economic and political considerations, different
measurement and notation standards, legal barriers, and different time zones. These challenges
are discussed in the following sections.
Note that we discuss differences among world regions and among countries, but much of
the discussion applies to regions within the same country. For example, there are legal and
cultural differences among states in the United States, Germany, India, and Brazil, as well as
legal, cultural, and linguistic differences among provinces in Canada and cantons in Switzerland.
Technological Challenges
Not all countries have adequate information technology infrastructure to allow resident
companies to build an international information system. International ISs, especially those
using the web, often incorporate graphics to convey technical or business information, and
those applications, as well as interactive software, require increasingly fast (broadband)
communication lines. The bandwidth available in some countries is too narrow for high-
volume transmission of graphically and animation-rich webpages. Thus, companies might
have to offer two versions of their sites, one for wide bandwidth and another for narrow
bandwidth. Often, companies use one website but provide the same content in using
both graphically rich and text-only pages, or use the same video for download at different
speeds.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Translation Troubles
Multicultural businesses face two main types of translation issues. The first occurs when there is no
direct word in the target language and the word must be described rather than translated. The second
issue arises when the word appears to have an appropriate match in the targeted language but the
meaning or importance is lost in translation. Translation issues like these are troublesome for multicultural
businesses who seek to get their messages across accurately without being inconsiderate or insulting to
other cultures.
Source: Blenkinsopp, J., & Maryam Shademan, P. (2010). Lost in translation? Culture, language and
the role of the translator in international business. Critical Perspectives on International Business, 6(1),
38–52.
Language issues present another technological challenge. You might recall the earlier
discussion of how characters are represented by bytes in computers. This setup is fine for
languages with up to 256 (28) characters, such as English and other languages whose alphabetic
root is Latin, and for other languages whose characters represent individual phonemes rather
than words, such as Cyrillic, Hebrew, and Arabic. But eight-bit bytes are not sufficient for
languages with larger numbers of characters, such as Chinese, in which characters represent
whole words. The solution for this obstacle is to ensure that computers can use Unicode, with
double-byte characters—allowing for up to 65,536 (216) characters. However, if only the servers
are programmed to accommodate Unicode, while the other systems (such as databases and
applications on computers interacting with the servers) work with single-byte characters, then
these back-end systems will record and display gibberish. Thus, entire systems must be
reprogrammed or use special conversion software. As computers convert to operating systems
that support Unicode, displaying different character sets should be less of a problem. As shown
in the illustration, Amazon has designed its website to include differences based on the targeted
country. It not only includes language differences, but changes the advertisements specific for
the country.
304
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
Businesses that cater to
an international audience
must “glocalize” their
websites
Other points that might sound trivial can also wreak havoc in international ISs or prevent
individuals and companies in some world regions from transacting with companies that did not
make their websites and applications flexible. For example, fields such as telephone numbers should
be set for variable length, because the number of digits in telephone numbers varies by country.
Many sites still offer forms that limit telephone numbers to 10 digits and do not accept shorter or
longer numbers even when they are meant for audiences outside the United States and Canada.
Similarly, postal codes are organized differently in different countries and are not called zip codes,
and yet some U.S. sites are still designed with only a 5-digit (or extended 9-digit) postal code field.
In some cases, no elegant solution can be found even if every effort is made to localize
information systems. AES Corp. generates and distributes electric power to 27 countries on five
continents. It uses SAP’s ERP system on servers that connect all of its sites. When AES originally
installed SAP, it did not support the Ukrainian language, so the company decided to use Russian
in its Ukrainian office. As of 2013, it does support the Ukrainian language.
Regulations and Tariffs
Countries have different regulations on what may or may not be imported and which tariff
applies to which imported product. While many executives know they might be missing out on
lucrative
deals
with
overseas
businesses,
they
are
afraid
that
exploring
international
opportunities would entail too many hassles. They are also afraid that even with the proper
research, employees might not know how to comply with the laws of destination countries, let
alone calculate how much the organization would have to pay in taxes, tariffs, custom duties,
and other levies on exported or imported goods.
Companies such as NextLinx, operating as a subsidiary of Amber Road, help exporters and
importers who use the web for commerce. The NextLinx software is integrated with a company’s
ERP systems and website. When a business from another country places an order, the
information—such as type of item and destination country—is captured by the software, and an
export manager can see how much the company will have to pay in tariffs, receive an estimate
of how long the goods will stay in the seaport or airport before they are released from customs,
and, if the manager wishes, also receive information on regulations, license required, shipping
Courtesy of Amazon.com
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
305
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
companies in the destination country, and other useful information. Since the software is linked
to the web, it is continuously updated and provides useful information immediately. The
software also calculates, on the fly, the total cost of delivering the goods to the buyer’s door. It
also provides more than 100 forms that exporters can fill out and save electronically. The
logistics component of the application offers shipping options with land, sea, and air carriers;
books shipping space; and tracks shipping status. Several studies have shown that U.S.
companies have turned away about 80 percent of online orders that come from other countries
because they are not familiar with export regulations. This service can expedite the process.
Differences in Payment Mechanisms
One of the greatest expectations of e-commerce is easy payment for what we buy online. Credit
cards are very common in North America and are the way businesses prefer to be paid online.
However, this practice is not widespread in other regions of the world. The high rate of stolen
credit cards, especially in Eastern Europe, attaches risk to such payments and deters potential
online customers. Also, most Europeans prefer to use debit cards rather than credit cards. (The
holder of a debit card must maintain a bank account from which the purchase is immediately
deducted; the holder of a credit-card receives a grace period of up to a month and pays the
credit-card issuer in any way he or she prefers. The holder of a credit-card is subject to fees and
interest charges while a debit card holder may receive interest on their account balance.)
Americans are more willing to give credit-card details via the web than people from other
nations. Until citizens of other countries become willing to do so, payment through the web,
and therefore B2C trade, will not reach its full potential.
In 2008, there were 176.8 million credit-card holders holding 1.49 billion credit cards
in America (Woolsey, 2012). By 2011, there were 183 million credit-card holders with only
1.28 billion credit cards (Anonymous, n.d.-b). Americans pay with credit cards in 20 percent of all
transactions and in almost all online transactions. In Japan, on the other hand, only 8 percent of
transactions involve credit cards, and most Japanese are reluctant to use credit cards for online
purchases. This calls for a different mechanism of payment. In Japan, many people who order
merchandise online prefer to pick it up at convenience stores called “konbini,” and pay there for
what they purchase. Since shipping companies are reluctant to leave parcels unattended when the
recipient is not home, the alliance of e-tailers and konbini affords not only payment confidence but
also convenience. The British and French prefer to use debit cards, while in Germany, online bank
transfers and the PayPal online payment service are most popular (Holmes, 2011). (See the table
illustration for credit-card expenditures by country.) E-tailers from other countries who want to
operate internationally in Japan must be aware of these regional preferences. The following diagram
shows the various countries and their respective credit-card transaction amounts.
Average spent on credit-
card transactions in 2012
267
297
2,699
3,870
4,236
7,406
7,889
5,019
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
6,000
Germany
France
China
United Kingdom
Japan
United States
Canada
Australia
South Korea
Dollars (USD)
158
Courtesy of Creditcards.com
306
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
Contactless payments and digital wallets are growing in popularity globally although they
have not overtaken traditional forms of payment. Google Wallet and Isis are “virtual wallets” on
your smartphone. The customer creates an account with a payment provider linked to a
financial account such as a checking or credit-card. Then, when purchasing goods or services
with a business that accepts the provider’s payment system, the customer authorizes payment
immediately as opposed to providing a credit-card number directly.
At this writing, Google Wallet is only available in the United States and Isis is only available
in Salt Lake City, Utah and Austin, Texas (Anonymous, n.d.-a; n.d.-c). Contactless payments,
using near-field-communication (NFC) in physical cards, have existed in London, UK since 2007,
primarily in coffee and sandwich shops. Contactless cards were introduced in Ireland in 2011
(Anonymous, 2011). The use of mobile payments is increasing steadily. In 2012, Adyen
processed more than $10 billion globally through online, mobile, and point-of-sale payment
transactions
(Lomas,
2013).
Europe
leads
the
world
with
15.3
percent
of
all
payment
transactions using a mobile device, followed by North America and Asia with 12.4 and 11.2
percent, respectively.
Security concerns are the main reason behind the slow adoption of new forms of electronic
payments. In 2011, Citi’s security was hacked and credit data of some of its North American
cardholders was stolen. Such events make consumers question the security of their personal
information and may delay the transition to e-payment as a primary means of payment in some
societies.
Language Differences
To communicate internationally, parties must agree on a common language, and that can create
problems. For instance, data might not be transmittable internationally in real time because the
information must first be translated (usually by human beings). Although some computer
applications can translate “on the fly,” they are far from perfect. Another hurdle is that national
laws usually forbid businesses to run accounting and other systems in a foreign language,
leading to an awkward and expensive solution: running these systems in two languages, the
local one and English, which is the de facto international language.
Companies that are in the forefront of web-based e-commerce have translated their original
websites into local languages. They localize their sites by creating a dedicated site for each
national audience. But translation can be tricky. For instance, the Taiwanese use the traditional
set of Chinese characters, but people in the People’s Republic of China prefer the simplified
character set. Spanish terms in Spain might be different from those in Latin America, and even
within Latin America. In some parts of South America people do not even call the language
Español (Spanish) but Castellano (Castilian). In addition, mere linguistic translation might not
capture cultural sensitivities. Therefore, some companies prefer to leave web design and
translation to their local overseas offices.
Several companies, such as TRADOS, Inc., offer translation software and services to
companies involved in global commerce. TRADOS’ software package by the same name
translates webpages into many languages, including those requiring special characters such as
Hindi, Chinese, Greek, and Hebrew, but also ensures consistency of terms and sentence structure
in different languages. When webpages are translated, the software ensures that the XML tags
and statements are retained from the original languages, so that the company maintaining the
website can continue to use the same XML code for online transactions with companies and
shoppers in its new markets. Other tools translate MS-Word documents to multiple languages.
One such tool is Wordfast. Google also offers a translation service for text as well as being able
to translate websites into different languages.
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
307
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Cultural Differences
XL Group is a global insurance firm operating 60 offices in 21 countries and branding itself as
“one company without borders.” At one point, the company had seven different email
addressing standards at local offices. When the company’s CIO decided to adopt a single
universal naming format, he faced resistance. In South America, for instance, a person might use
five names: his first and middle names, and his parent’s middle and last names. That caused
some people to have long email addresses. The CIO’s suggestion to use employee ID numbers as
their email addresses (with the company’s suffix) was received with resentment in South
America
and
Europe
because
it
was
impersonal.
To
mitigate
these
unexpected
cultural
differences, the CIO established a system that greets each employee by name in a personal
manner as soon as the employee logs on to a computer.
Cultural differences refer in general to the many ways in which people from different
countries vary in their tastes, gestures, preferred colors, treatment of people of certain gender or
age, attitudes about work, opinions about different ethical issues, and the like. ISs might
challenge cultural traditions by imposing the culture of one nation upon another (cultural
imperialism).
Conservative
groups
in
some
countries
have
complained
about
the
“Americanization” of their young generations. Governments might be inclined to forbid the
reception of some information for reasons of undesirable cultural influence. An example of such
fear is the French directive against use of foreign words in government-supported mass media
and official communications. A similar example is the ban by the Canadian province of Quebec
on the use of non-French words in business signs. These fears have intensified with the growth
of the Internet and use of the web. Because the Internet was invented and first developed in the
United States and is still used by a greater percentage of Americans compared with any other
single nation, its predominant culture is American.
As mentioned previously, companies that use the web for business must learn cultural
differences and design their sites accordingly. Web designers need to be sensitive to cultural
differences. People might be offended by the use of certain images, colors, and words. For
example, black has sinister connotations in Europe, Asia, and Latin America; the index-
finger-to-thumb sign of approval is a rude gesture meaning “jackass” in Brazil; the thumbs-up
sign is a rude gesture in Latin America, as is the waving hand in Arab countries; and pictures of
women with exposed arms or legs are offensive in many Muslim countries.
Conflicting Economic, Scientific, and Security Interests
The goal of corporate management is to seize a large market share and maximize its
organization’s profits. The goal of a national government is to protect the economic,
scientific, and security interests of its people. Scientific information is an important national
resource and a great source of income for foreign corporations, so occasionally those interests
conflict.
For instance, companies that design and manufacture weapons have technical drawings
and specifications that are financially valuable to the company but also valuable to the
security of their country. Hence, many governments, including the U.S. federal government,
do not allow the exchange of weapon designs. Transfer of military information to another
country, even if the receiving party is part of an American business, is prohibited. Often,
products whose purpose has nothing to do with the military are included in the list of
prohibited trade items, because of the fear that they could be converted for use against the
country of origin. In recent years, the list has included some software packages. The result is
that, although American divisions of a company can use such software, their sister divisions
in other countries cannot.
The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) requires a license for the permanent export,
temporary import, or temporary export of classified or unclassified items that have military
308
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
application that are considered defense articles. These items can include software or technology,
blueprints, design plans, and retail software packages and technical information. Items that have
been temporarily imported/exported or permanently exported without a license are subject to
detention and possible seizure. Items that have dual-use (commercial and military applications)
may be subject to an export license depending on the specifications of the commodity. Because
some software applications and technologies designed in the United States can be used against
the U.S. in times of warfare or in acts of terrorism, the CBP strictly regulates the exportation of
these commodities (Anonymous, 2012).
Another problem that arises with international information interchange is that countries
treat trade secrets, patents, and copyrights differently. Sometimes business partners are reluctant
to transfer documents when one partner is in a country that restricts intellectual property rights,
while another is in a country that has laws to protect intellectual property. On the other hand,
the employees of a division of a multinational corporation might be able to divulge information
locally with impunity. Intellectual property is tightly protected in the United States and Western
Europe, and American trade negotiators and diplomats have pressured some countries to pass
and enforce similar laws. Reportedly, the legislatures of several Asian nations have passed such
laws or have revised existing laws in response to U.S. pressure.
Political Challenges
Information is power. Some countries fear that a policy of free access to information could
threaten their sovereignty. For instance, a nation’s government might believe that access to
certain data, such as the location and quantity of natural resources, might give other nations an
opportunity to control an indigenous resource, thereby gaining a business advantage that would
adversely affect the resource-rich country’s political interests.
As mentioned in Chapter 5, “Business Software,” however, the recent trend in less rich
countries is to adopt free open source software to avoid high costs. National governments
in South America as well as local governments in Asia and Europe have adopted policies of
using only open source software whenever it is available. Global corporations must ensure
compatibility with the software adopted by governments and corporations in such locales.
Companies must also be aware of limits that some governments impose on Internet use.
China, Singapore, and many Arab countries impose restrictions on what their citizens can
download, view, and read. Free speech is not a universal principle. In practical terms, this means
that executives might want to rephrase or cut out some content from their websites or risk their
sites being blocked by some governments. This is an especially sensitive issue if a company
enables employees or customers to use blogs at its website, in which they express their personal
opinions.
Some corporations have found themselves in uneasy positions in countries that have limited
civil rights. Microsoft, Yahoo, and Google were warned that they could not do business in China
unless they collaborated with the government. This collaboration started by blocking certain
search
terms
(e.g.,
“Taiwan”
and
“Falun
Gong”),
but
were
extended
to
providing
the
government
the
identities
of
people
who
searched
for
certain
information,
which
the
government took as a sign that they were dissidents. In some cases, individuals were imprisoned
and tortured. The ethical dilemma for these companies is how to balance the business interest of
their shareholders with moral principles of privacy, serving all web users equitably, and not
helping dictatorships to violate civil rights.
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
309
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
POINT OF
INTEREST
Google Creates a New Niche in Chinese Territory
After years of battling with the Chinese government over censorship restrictions on Google’s search engine,
Google moved its servers to Hong Kong in 2010 in order to stop self-censoring web content. Their actions
resulted in a decreased market share compared to the leading Chinese search engine, Baidu, which controls
78.6 percent of the Chinese search-advertising market. To keep its presence in China, Google has created a
niche for itself in the mobile ad market, targeting ads at mobile phones. Mobile advertising can hit iPhone,
iPads, and Android devices and can be more personalized than desktop-based ads because ads are automati-
cally sent to users watching videos or playing games on their mobile phones or tablet devices. Google’s AdMob
unit, purchased in 2010 for $750 million, now has 10,000 registered developers in China and its servers receive
7.9 billion requests per month to show ads to mobile-app users in the country. Google has skirted censorship
issues with the Chinese government by creating a niche for itself in a similar yet unexplored market in China.
Source: Lee, M. (2012). Google Gets Some Rare Good News in China. Business Week. http://www
.businessweek.com/articles/2012-08-30/google-gets-some-rare-good-news-in-china
Different Standards
Differences in standards must be considered when integrating ISs internationally, even within the
same company. Because nations use different standards and rules in their daily business operations,
sometimes records within one company are incompatible. For instance, the bookkeeping records of
one division of a multinational company might be incompatible with the records of other divisions
and headquarters. As another example, the United States still uses the English system of length and
weight measures (inches, feet, miles, quarts, pounds, and so on), while the rest of the world (including
England) officially uses the metric system (centimeters, meters, liters, kilograms, and the like). There
are also different standards for communicating dates, times, temperatures, and addresses. The United
States uses the format of month, day, year, while the rest of the world records dates in the format of
day, month, year—so a date recorded as 10/12/14 might be misinterpreted. The United States uses a
12-hour time notation with the addition of a.m. or p.m., while other parts of the world use a 24-hour
notation (called “military time” in the United States because the U.S. military uses this notation). The
United States uses Fahrenheit temperatures, while other countries use Celsius temperatures. Americans
communicate addresses in the format of street number, street name, and city name. Citizens of some
other countries communicate addresses in the format of street name, street number, and city name.
Not resolving different standards can be extremely costly. In 1999, NASA lost track of a
spacecraft that it sent to Mars. Reportedly, an investigation found that an error in a transfer of
information between the Mars Climate Orbiter team in Colorado and the mission navigation team
in California led to the spacecraft’s loss. Apparently, one team used English units and the other used
metric units for a key spacecraft operation. The information was critical to the maneuvers required
to place the spacecraft in the proper Mars orbit. The cost to U.S. taxpayers was $125 million.
Companies that want to operate globally must adapt their ISs to changing formal or de facto
standards. In recent years the growing number of countries joining the European Union (EU)
imparted significant power to this bloc. Corporations in non-EU countries have grown accustomed
to adapting their systems to those of the EU. For example, in 1976, Europeans adopted the 13-digit
European Article Number (EAN), while American companies used the 12-digit Universal
Product
Code (UPC). The additional bar in the EAN bar code identifies
the product’s country of origin. For seven years, the American Uniform Code
Council (UCC) promoted the use of the European standard. In 2004, the
organization officially adopted it. Retailers embarked on a hectic effort to modify
information systems to recognize, record, and process UPCs of 13 bars instead of
12 bars so they could meet the January 2005 deadline. Most bar-code readers could
already read the extra bar, but the software in back-office systems—such as sales,
shipping, receiving, and accounting systems—had to be modified. Best Buy, the large
electronics and appliance retailer, spent 25,000 hours of staff and consultant time to
ensure that cash registers, software applications, and databases could process and
store the extra digit.
The GTIN-14 bar code is capable of
storing 14 digits to identify trade items,
products, or services
Courtesy of gtin
310
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
The UCC has developed the 14-digit Global Trade Item Numbers (GTINs). This code is
large enough to identify more than 100 times the number of products and manufacturers that the
12-digit UPCs could. An example of the GTIN-14 bar code is shown on the previous page. GTINs are
designed to support global supply chains. Eventually, manufacturers and retailers might have to use
either GTINs or another standard of larger codes embedded in RFID tags. RFID tags are heavily used
in the United States, and American standards could expand to Europe and the rest of the world.
Legal Jurisdictions in Cyberspace
Imagine you are surfing the web and come across a virulent site
that preaches hatred and violence. You file a complaint in court,
but the court cannot do anything because the site is maintained
in another country that does not uphold your country’s law. Or,
you shop on the web and purchase an item from a site that is
physically maintained on a server in another country. When you
receive the item, you discover that it is of a lower quality than
promised. When you contact the site, the owners are rude and
unresponsive. You decide to sue, but under which country’s
laws?
These
problems
are
two
examples
of
the
legal
challenges in today’s electronic global markets.
●
Offshore Websites. Dawn Thompson overcame an acci-
dent that left her a paraplegic and became an award-
winning romance writer. When she died in 2008, she hoped
that the ongoing royalties from her books would be put toward
caring for her disabled sister. The good news is that her books
are still widely read. The bad news is that readers have down-
loaded Thompson’s works over 4800 times from a single off-
shore website for free. These ‘rogue’ sites operate from
outside the United States and offer copyrighted material
such as books, movies, and music for free (Aistars, 2011).
In early 2012, one of the Internet’s most popular file-sharing
websites, Megaupload, was busted by the U.S. Federal
Bureau of Investigation. Megaupload, Ltd. and its collection
of websites, based in Hong Kong, was responsible for gen-
erating over $175 million in illegal profits and was responsi-
ble for over a half a billion dollars in damages to copyright
owners. Sites like Megaupload are considered ‘cyberlock-
ers’ because they are a virtual storage space for files that
can be downloaded from any web browser. These sites are
usually littered with a smorgasbord of pirated movies, TV
shows, music, e-books, and software that can be down-
loaded with ease (Fowler, 20 January 2012).
American consumers, through their overwhelming Internet
presence, indirectly ask American authors, publishers, produ-
cers, and musicians to participate in e-commerce to share
their works. Their works need to be protected to ensure fair
business practices. Although the U.S. Congress was pre-
sented with the ‘Stop Online Piracy Act’ bill in early 2012, it
was met with heavy opposition and soon afterwards was
shelved by Congress (MacCullagh, 30 March 2012). Web cen-
sorship is a tricky issue because it can be seen as infringing
on the U.S. First Amendment right to freedom of speech.
●
Consumer Protection by Whom? Where can consu-
mers sue for e-commerce transactions gone wrong? Suppose
you purchased an item from a site located in another country,
and the item has a defect or arrived after the time promised.
Because your request for compensation or another remedy
has not been answered satisfactorily, you decide to sue the
e-tailer. Where do you file the lawsuit? Your own country? The
e-tailer’s country? The venue of e-commerce lawsuits is still
undecided in many parts of the world.
In November 2000, the European Union (EU) passed a law
that lets consumers file lawsuits against an online business
in any of the member countries composing the EU. Before the
amendment to the 1968 Brussels Convention (which regulates
commercial-legal issues in the EU), consumers could sue an
online business only in courts in the country of the online
business. If a website has directed its business at consumers
in a certain country, the consumers can sue the website’s
owner in their own national courts. Businesses vehemently
opposed the move, but consumer advocates said people
would be more confident about online shopping if they
knew they could get redress in their local courts.
●
Two Approaches to Jurisdiction. As you have seen, the
issue of e-commerce jurisdiction is broad. The U.S. Federal
Trade Commission and European government organizations
have examined the issue in an attempt to reach an interna-
tional agreement such as the one reached within the EU.
There are two approaches to such an agreement. One
approach is the country-of-origin principle, whereby all
legal matters are confined to the country from which the
site operates. Under this principle, the laws of that country
apply to the operations and conduct of the site and who-
ever interacts with the site, regardless of their own loca-
tion. Therefore, a lawsuit could be brought only in the
country of the website and would be adjudicated according
to that country’s laws. Under this principle it is likely many
firms would opt to establish websites in countries with lax
consumer protection laws.
The other approach is the country-of-destination principle,
whereby dealings with the site, regardless of the site’s coun-
try of operation, are guided by the laws of the country to
which the site caters. The EU adopted this approach within
its territory, however achieving broad international agreement
on e-commerce jurisdiction might take several years.
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
311
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Legal Barriers
The fact that countries have different laws has a significant impact on global business in general,
and on e-commerce in particular. The differing laws can pose serious challenges to international
transfer of data, free speech, and the location of legal proceedings when disputes arise between
buyer and seller.
Privacy Laws
Although many of the challenges involved in cross-border data transfer have been resolved
through international agreements, one remains unresolved: respect for individual privacy in the
conduct of international business. Interestingly, despite the importance attached to privacy, its
value is not even mentioned in the constitutions of the United States and many other countries.
Nonetheless, a majority of the democratic nations try to protect individual privacy.
POINT OF
INTEREST
International Hall of Shame
Privacy International (PI) is an international organization that is essentially a counter-attack to the ‘Big
Brother’ effect. Their mission is to protect the global right to privacy and fight intrusive surveillance from
governments and corporations. In the European Privacy and Human Rights report conducted by PI, The
Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), and Center for Media and Communications Studies (CMCS),
assessments ruled European democracies were generally in good standing although some countries fal-
tered with preserving privacy. In Croatia there was found to be no direct method for reviewing or auditing
the actions of security services and medical databases were emerging with centralized registries. Addi-
tionally, in Croatia and Bulgaria, there was direct access to information held by third parties without war-
rants or proper legal documentation, by unaccountable organizations. The report’s final conclusion on the
EU: for a world leader, the privacy provisions were sub-par while surveillance intrusions went too far. The
security risks and the extent of government surveillance which exist in some foreign countries can deter
businesses from setting up shop there.
Source: European Privacy and Human Rights (EPHR) 2010. (26 January 2011): Privacy International, the
Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), and the Center for Media and Communications Studies
(CMCS).
Countries differ in their approaches to the issue of privacy, as reflected in their laws. Some
are willing to forgo some privacy for the sake of a more free flow of information and better
marketing. Others restrict any collection of personal data without the consent of the individual.
The European Union enforces a privacy law called the Directive on Data Privacy. Member
countries have crafted their laws according to the Directive. Usually the law is titled “Data
Protection Law.” The EU defines personal data as “any information relating to an identified or
identifiable natural person; an identifiable person is one who can be identified, directly or
indirectly, in particular by reference to an identification number or to one or more factors
specific to his physical, physiological, mental, economic, cultural, or social identity.” Some of
the principles of the directive are in stark contrast to the practices of U.S. businesses and
therefore limit the free flow of personal data between the United States and the EU. For
example, consider the following provisions and how they conflict with U.S. practices:
●
Personal data can be collected only for specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes and not fur-
ther processed in a way incompatible with those purposes. However, in the United States,
businesses often collect data from people without having to tell them how the data will be
used. Many U.S. corporations use personal data for purposes other than the original one, and
many organizations purchase personal data from other organizations, so subjects do not even
know that the data is used, let alone for what purpose. Obviously, these activities would not
be allowed under the EU directive.
312
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
●
Personal data can be processed only if the subject has given unambiguous consent or under
other specific circumstances that the directive provides. Such circumstances are not required
by American laws. In the United States, private organizations are allowed to process personal
data without the subject’s consent, and for practically any purpose.
●
Individuals or organizations that receive personal data (the directive calls them “controllers”)
not directly from the subject must identify themselves to the subject. In the United States,
many organizations purchase personal data from third parties and never notify the subject.
●
People have the right to obtain from controllers “without constraint at reasonable intervals
and without excessive delay or expense” confirmation that data about them is processed, to
whom the data is disclosed, and the source that provided the data. They are also entitled to
receive information on the “logic involved in any automatic processing of data concerning”
them, at least in the case of automated decision making. Decision making, practically speak-
ing, means using decision-support systems and expert systems to make decisions on hiring,
credit extension, admittance to educational institutions, and so forth. None of these rights is
mandated by any U.S. law.
●
People have the right to object, “on request and free of charge,” to the processing of personal
data for the purpose of direct marketing, or to be informed before personal data is disclosed
for the first time to third parties or used for direct marketing. Furthermore, controllers must
expressly offer the right to object free of charge to disclosure of personal data to others. Amer-
ican companies use personal data especially for direct marketing, never tell subjects that they
obtain data about them from third parties, and rarely offer subjects the right to object to dis-
closure of such data to other parties.
American companies are very busy collecting, buying, and selling personal data for decision-
making and marketing purposes. The American view is that such practices are essential to
efficient business operations, especially in marketing and extension of credit. Thus, this huge
discrepancy between the European and American approaches does not allow unrestricted flow of
information.
Applicable Law
As discussed in the Ethical & Societal Issues box in this chapter, countries have differing laws
regarding free speech, which can significantly impact what a company may or may not display
from its servers. Other laws affecting online business include those that address gambling,
auctioning, sales of alcoholic beverages and drugs, and other areas. After establishing online
business in another country, some companies discovered that their practice was not in
compliance with a local law. For example, eBay discovered that Dutch and Italian laws required
that a certified auctioneer be present at any auction. This made its online auctions illegal in
these countries. Some countries have changed their laws to accommodate online business, but
others have not. Such legal discrepancy among jurisdictions should not come as a surprise to
executives; they must research the legal environment in every jurisdiction where they intend to
do business. The lessons of Yahoo!, eBay, and other online pioneers prompted many companies
to employ legal research experts before they start business in a new jurisdiction. Often, this
effort is part of a larger effort to research the local culture and practices. Some companies have
hired local experts to help them in assessing local considerations, and in some cases executives
decided to avoid doing online business in certain countries altogether.
As mentioned before, legal barriers to online business often exist within a country. For
example, states in the United States have different laws regarding the purchase and delivery of
alcoholic beverages. A company selling wine online to individual consumers must ensure that
the buyer’s state allows home delivery of wine. Shipping to a state forbidding such a transaction
is criminal.
Different Time Zones
Companies that operate in many global regions, especially multinational corporations, must craft
policies for the work of both their employees and information systems. Teleconferencing systems
must be available much of the day, and in many cases 24 hours per day, so that employees many
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
313
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
time zones apart can communicate to discuss problems that
need immediate resolution. Teams in support centers might
have to work in shifts to accommodate clients worldwide.
When
scheduling
teleconferencing
sessions,
managers
in
North America should remember, for instance, that scheduling
a
session
for
Friday
afternoon
with
their
Australian
counterparts will force the Australians to come to the office on
Saturday morning.
In
their
global
supply
chain
management
systems,
managers must be aware of what might seem to be incorrect
time
stamping
in
shipments
and
payment
records.
For
example,
consider
interaction
between
a
corporation’s
Pennsylvania
manufacturing
plant
and
its
South
Korean
assembly plant. Because South Korea is 14 hours ahead of
Pennsylvania, shipping records could show that subassemblies
were shipped from Pennsylvania a day before they were
ordered in South Korea. To eliminate confusion, the systems
at both locations can be designed to record the local times of
both locations, or only that of a single location, such as the
company headquarters’ time.
The various time zones of major cities require many operations to be
available 24 hours a day
Vasiliy Yakobchuk\Photos.com
314
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
Summary
●
As more companies use the web for both B2C and
B2B
business,
they
must
accommodate
non-
English-speaking audiences and tailor their sites
to local preferences. They also must be carefully
attuned to the cultural differences and payment
preferences of different world regions as well as
be aware of legal and tariff issues.
●
Organizations that engage in international trade,
especially through the web, must also be aware of
the linguistic, cultural, economic, and political chal-
lenges involved in such trade.
●
One important unresolved issue is the discrepancy
between the laws governing the collection and
manipulation of personal data in two economic
powers,
the
United
States
and
the
European
Union,
which
have
incompatible
data
privacy
laws. This difference restricts the flow of personal
data between the United States and the EU.
●
Several cases have demonstrated that the old legal
approach of territorial jurisdiction is inadequate
when so much information is communicated and
so much business is conducted on the Internet.
Issues such as free speech and consumer litigation
of e-tailers have brought to light the need for an
international legal reform for cyberspace.
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Liz
considered
the
advice
from
Michael
when
evaluating suppliers. She refined her list of overseas
suppliers
and
developed
an
inventory
list
and
associated prices. The list included the name of the
company, website URL, contact number, and the
products that would be purchased from the company.
She knows that the suppliers need to be linked to the
food items in the new point-of-sale system.
What Is Your Advice?
1. Contracting with supplier partners in other coun-
tries can offer challenges compared with dealing
with onshore partners. What issues do you believe
Liz and Michael should address when ordering
from
suppliers
overseas?
Should
they
order
online, or off-line?
2. How should Liz address the interaction with the
point-of-sale system information in relation to the
food supplies that are purchased overseas?
New Perspectives
1. When Liz and Michael were in Europe a few sum-
mers ago, Liz made a few of her sauces and appe-
tizers for a local restaurant in Spain. She received
positive comments on these items from the chef at
the restaurant. Tyler and Michael thought that
they could sell these items both in the U.S. and
overseas. What advice would you give them to
consider when developing a website for onshore
(U.S.) sales, as well as some European countries
(Italy, Spain, Portugal, and France)?
Key Terms
European Article Number (EAN),
310
global information system, 300
Global Trade Item Number
(GTIN), 311
glocalization, 302
Uniform Code Council (UCC), 310
Universal Product Code (UPC),
310
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
315
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Review Questions
1. What is meant by the term “global information
systems”?
2. Executives of multinational corporations are
advised to think globally and act locally. What
does this mean?
3. Manufacturers and retailers have used product
bar codes for many years. What information does
the 13-digit European Article Number (EAN) con-
tain that the 12-digit Universal Product Code
(UPC) did not, and why is this information
important?
4. Is every website a form of global IS? Why or why
not?
5. Using software for automatic translation of
webpages into other languages for local
audiences saves much labor cost and time.
If you were an executive for a company that
maintains a multilingual website, would you
settle for software-based translation only?
Why or why not?
6. Many organizations, especially multinational cor-
porations, must consolidate reports to ensure
smooth operations. These reports include
currency, measurements, and dates. How would
you help them receive reports “on the fly” that
are in the desired currency and format?
7. Many European countries have stricter privacy
laws than the United States. What is the impact of
this discrepancy on multinational corporations
with offices on both continents? In terms of busi-
ness functions, which activities, in particular, are
affected?
8. Give three examples of cultural imperialism. Why
do you think your examples reflect cultural
imperialism?
9. American companies whose main business is
web search have encountered political challenges
in some countries. Give two examples of such
challenges.
10. What are the implications of different time zones
for global supply chain management systems?
11. Countries can adopt either a country-of-origin law
or a country-of-destination law. What is the dif-
ference between the two approaches? Which is
more helpful to consumers and which is more
helpful to e-tailers? Explain.
Discussion Questions
12. Ask yourself: what are the “nationalities” of the
following corporations? Consider nationality to be
the country where the corporation is registered:
SAP (software), BP (gasoline), CheckPoint (secu-
rity software), LG (electronics), Corona (beer),
Heineken (beer), Goodyear (tires), JVC (electronics),
Braun (small appliances), Siemens (electronics),
Nokia (mobile telephones), Business Objects
(software). In your opinion, if a company has its
headquarters in Bermuda, is it a “Bermudan”
company? If so, in what respect? If not, explain
why not.
13. Several technologies have been practically given
away by the United States to the world. Name at
least two such technologies. Do you think that
this was “charity” or that the United States reaps
some benefits from having made the technolo-
gies widely available? Explain.
14. The U.S. Department of Commerce has relaxed
restrictions on the export of encryption
(scrambling) software for communications, but it
still bans the export of many such applications.
Do you agree with such bans? Why or
why not?
15. Almost all of the European Union countries
use the Euro as their common currency. Does
this help or hinder international ISs? Does it foster
the use of information systems and the web?
Explain.
16. Consider sensitivity to privacy in the United
States. Are Americans more sensitive to govern-
ment handling of private information or to busi-
ness handling of private information? Now
answer the question regarding Western European
countries.
17. Apparently, the European Union has stricter
privacy laws than the United States, and not
many U.S. companies are willing to comply with
the EU Directive on Data Protection. How would
you resolve the conflict?
316
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
18. If a non-English-speaking country had established
the Internet, do you think that country would
impose its own “cultural imperialism” on the
web? Why or why not?
19. Which legal approach do you prefer for
e-commerce: country of origin or country of
destination? Answer the question as a business-
person, then answer it as a consumer.
20. If some countries clearly adopt the country-
of-origin approach for legal issues of
e-commerce, online retailers might relocate
to operate from those countries. Why?
21. An American company employs engineers in
California and in several Asian and European
countries. The engineers exchange email and
communicate via VoIP, teleconferencing, and
collaborative project management tools. The
Americans often use phrases such as “Let’s touch
base in a week,” “Right off the bat…,” and “…all
the way to the end zone.” An executive instructs
them to avoid such phrases in communication
with colleagues from other countries, and per-
haps even with any colleague. Why?
Applying Concepts
22. You are an executive for Bidway.com, an auction
site that has successfully competed with eBay
and Yahoo! in the United States. Management
decided to open use of the site to residents of all
countries. You were given an important assign-
ment: collect intelligence that will help ensure a
smooth transition from a national business to an
international business. If you envision that there
might be too many difficulties in certain coun-
tries, management will accept your recommen-
dation to block bidding by residents of those
countries, but you must be careful not to miss
potentially profitable markets. Prepare an outline
of all the aspects about which you will collect
intelligence for each country, and explain why
this item is important.
23. Why does the United States still use the English
system? When was the last attempt to officially
move to the metric system? Does the use of
English measurement units put U.S. companies at
a disadvantage when competing on international
contracts? How has software solved the chal-
lenge? Give examples of engineering software
that resolves this challenge. Research on the web
and summarize your findings in two pages.
Hands-On Activities
24. You are the international sales manager for
Aladdin Rugs, Inc., a multinational company
headquartered in the United States. At the end of
every month, you receive reports from the
national sales managers on your company’s
operations in England, Germany, and Japan. The
products are sold by area. The managers report
the units sold and income from sales in their
national currencies: pounds sterling (£), euros (€),
yens (¥), and U.S. dollars (US$). Use your
spreadsheet program to consolidate the sales
reports you received, as follows.
a. Under “Totals,” enter formulas to convert
square yards to square meters and enter
another formula to total the area in square
meters for all four countries.
b. In a financial newspaper such as the Wall
Street Journal or on the web, find the rates of
exchange for the three currencies against the
US$ on the last business day of last month.
Enter a formula that will convert all non-U.S.
currencies to US$. (Extra challenge: program a
macro to do the calculations.)
c. Test all formulas with actual numbers.
25. Google and other sites offer web-based transla-
tion services. Test the quality of such tools. Write
a message of 50 words in English. Use the tool to
translate it to German or another language with
which you might be familiar. Copy the translated
text, paste it to be translated, and use the tool to
translate it back to English. Compare the original
and translated English messages. Write a short
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
317
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
report and email it to your professor. How good is
the translation tool? About how much of the text
in the translated version came out identical to
the original? Was the spirit of the message accu-
rate (even if in different words)? Did you find
anything funny in the back-translated text?
Team Activities
26. Team up with three other students. Decide on
three keywords with which the team will
conduct a web search. All of you should use the
same search engine. One team member should
record the number of sites found in the United
States, another in Germany, another in France,
and another in the Netherlands. Also, record
the sites the team found whose domain name is
non-U.S. but that used English rather than, or in
addition to, the local language. (Note that many
non-U.S. companies use the .com and .org top-
level domains. Before you start this assign-
ment, research the web for ways to determine
the location of websites by their IP address
rather than the TLD.) Prepare a brief report
detailing what you recorded. Write your own
conclusion. How dominant is English on the
web? Do you think the web is “Americanized”?
Do you consider what you found to be cultural
imperialism?
27. “Electronic immigrants” are residents of one
country who are employed by a company in
another country. They are the result of what some
people call “offshoring” of jobs. They deliver the
results of their work through the Internet or pri-
vate communications networks. Your team
should conduct research with two companies in
four different industries, one of which is in soft-
ware development. The title of your research is
“The Electronic Immigrant: Economic and Politi-
cal Implications.” Contact the human resource
managers of the two companies, present the
issue, and ask for the managers’ opinions on the
following issues. Can the company use “elec-
tronic immigrants”? Can it be hurt if competitors
use them? Do the HR managers think the national
economy can gain or lose from the phenomenon?
Do they foresee any political ramifications? Your
team should prepare a report starting with half a
page of background on each company.
318
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Unilever Goes Streamlined
Unilever is an international company that owns brands
in the food, beverage, cleaning agent, and personal
care product industries. With 4 million consumer
connections across all of North America, the volume
of Unilever’s data is enormous. Consider this for
Dove, one of Unilever’s many brands. Depending on
what country the product is being shipped to, it must
have different packaging with a different language and
adhere to different countries’ regulations. Production
managers must work together with sales managers
from different parts of the globe to ensure that the
right order gets to the right destination with the right
labeling. One can only imagine the amount of data
Unilever accumulates from transactions for Dove and
their additional 90 brands.
Accessing
Unilever’s
large,
complex
product
information database was slowing response times to
customer inquiries and affecting sales negatively
because
the
sales
team
did
not
have
adequate
access to organized, pertinent information. Managers
were challenged because the data they needed was
not
on
their
desk
until
it
was
too
late
or
the
information was unable to be found at all. Over a
period
of
years,
Unilever
had
been
building
its
database
with
product,
health,
and
ingredient
information and made the database accessible to
agents. Agents, whose responsibility is to engage
with customers, are the faces and voices of brands.
It is easy to see why agents need access to the right
information at the right time. The problem was that
because the database had been built up over time by
many different contributors, the organization of the
database was lacking. Some information was in the
database multiple times, sometimes under different
titles. Some information was not there at all. The
internal product information database was extremely
user unfriendly. In order for the customer relations
employees to run a search, they had to go through a
‘trees’ system in which the only way to exit was to
back out, requiring six clicks. This was a time-
consuming process with a customer on the phone.
The
database’s
disorganization
and
processing
method were costly for Unilever on two levels. The
first being an internal support team costs time and
money. The second issue is that the unorganized
database was hurting the sales of the agents who
had to muck through the trees system while a
customer waited on the line for an answer to their
inquiry. The telephony system was another aspect
that
needed
to
be
updated
to
become
more
centralized. Needless to say, Unilever’s database
system had many areas for improvement.
Unilever turned to Astute Solutions to streamline
their product information. They implemented a ‘one-
click’ approach to database navigation which made it
much easier to navigate the database and thus to
accurately respond to customer inquiries in a timely
fashion. Visual images of labels and web links were
also available to inform employees of ingredients,
some of which had unpronounceable names. Not
having to leave a desk to retrieve a bottle or label
information saved a lot of time. As elementary as it
may sound, one of the most useful aspects of Astute’s
solutions was the natural language screen that caught
common
misspellings.
The telephony
system
was
upgraded to a single system with multiple contact
centers
with
call
controls
embedded
with
ePowerCenter
Customer
Relationship
Management
(CRM) applications. All calls were recorded to prevent
any ‘he said/she said’ scenarios. The Astute system
they chose to install was a “learn-by-use” system,
saving the company money in training costs that are
associated with a traditional “babysitting” system,
which requires much more over-the-shoulder training.
Although the changes were not welcomed by
Unilever employees, the changes did pay off. The
results of the changes made by Astute Solutions led to
a 50 percent reduction in calls made to the internal help
desk, a sign of a user-friendly database. Unilever has
also achieved a 95 percent web self-service accuracy
rate and has experienced a 90 percent reduction in e-
mail volume as a result of effective online self-service.
How do these results affect the bottom line? Unilever
has received an annual savings of $4.4 million in
addition to a sales impact of about $9 million.
In addition to those statistical results, an organized
and streamlined approach to product information that is
accessible across all company fields can add predictive
value to a company’s data. Unilever’s streamlined
approach to data management has reduced response
times and saved the company millions in reduced
support costs. Unilever’s next step is to move more into
social CRM.
Sources: Beck, K. (2011). Information Overload. Customer
Relationship Management, 15, 38–38. Sherlock, A. (2012).
Managing Information Overload. Pharmaceutical Executive,
32(5), 58, 60.
Thinking About the Case
1. Why is it important for an international company
to have clear lines of communication between
regional managers and manufacturing/distribu-
tion? How can this directly impact sales?
2. List the different areas in which Unilever saved
money by implementing the changes made by
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
319
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
PART
Astute Solutions. As an agent, why do you
believe that they had a positive impact?
3. What are the benefits of having all product infor-
mation visible to all fields of a company in an
organized, central location? What are the risks?
4. What can Unilever’s agents do to become more
engaged with their customers through social
CRM?
Abercrombie & Fitch Centralizes
and Expands
Abercrombie & Fitch is an international clothing
retailer that learned the importance of efficient data
management
when
expanding
internationally.
Because of the lower promotional costs and higher
profits,
international
expansion
was
attractive
to
A&F. After launching their international strategy in
Canada and the U.K. in 2006 and 2007, respectively,
A&F could see further international growth on the
horizon. However, it knew its data management was
not capable of handling the level of growth that was
expected.
A&F’s financial visibility of merchandising was
dismal. A&F managers were using spreadsheets of
data to plan future merchandise levels, making any
conclusions as to whether they were over- or under-
buying merchandise virtually inconceivable. Floor
space layouts were designed based on merchandise
allocations assigned by merchandising managers. If
the
merchandise
allocation
was
inaccurate
or
became
delayed,
the
floor
space
had
to
be
redesigned
because
the
merchandise
that
was
planned to go on display was not at the store in
time.
Store
managers
began
to
overstock
merchandise
to
prevent
these
occurrences.
All
merchandise was shipped to the A&F distribution
base in Columbus, Ohio and stayed there until it was
called upon by an individual store. This made it
difficult to efficiently restock inventory in overseas
locations.
The
previously
stated
flaws
in
A&F’s
merchandising
system
and
adjoining
distribution
system were too great to sustain the international
growth they wanted to pursue.
To support the data influx that comes with
international
growth
like
A&F
experienced,
they
needed an open operating platform and integrated
point-of-sale (POS) infrastructure in order to keep the
closest eye on transactional data. For an international
retail company, the data accessible today is used to
make decisions that have impacts far into the future.
Without the appropriate data at the appropriate time,
the wrong decisions can easily be made and the
company
can
suffer
severe
consequences.
A&F
chose to install the Oracle Retail Merchandising
system
in
its
headquarters
in
Columbus,
Ohio.
Transactional data from all store locations, domestic
and international, is centrally managed there. A&F
also implemented changes to the front lines. They
used Oracle’s Retail Point-of-Sale Software System
(ORPOS) to collect real-time data from their 1,100
store locations across the globe. Each store was
connected to a regional database that manages up to
30 stores. With all data visible to headquarters in
Ohio, A&F’s merchandising managers had all the
information
they
needed
to
make
educated
decisions, in one location. Transactional data from all
departments
including
supply
chain,
inventory
management,
and
POS
processing
are
now
all
visible on an international scale.
Since installing the platform, inventory order
accuracy has increased from
94 percent to 100
percent. Additionally, A&F’s international stores have
brought in close to $1 billion in sales.
Air shipments have decreased from 25 percent of
all shipments to only 8 percent, a huge expense
savings. A&F’s software gives them a real-time view
of transactions occurring in stores globally. The new
POS software provides benefits for many different
departments of the company including inventory
management and logistics, and store managers who
need access to this information can plan future
merchandising
levels.
If
store
managers
have
accurate merchandise levels, they can design the
most effective floor layouts without worrying about
having to change the layout at the last minute. A&F
saves money by not overstocking and does not lose
sales due to under-stocking. The improved data
management software adds predictive value to A&F
and also allows it to use data to draw conclusions on
purchasing
patterns
that
determine
future
merchandise levels.
Source: Amato-McCoy, D. (2012). Mobility 101. Chain Store
Age, 88(3), 24.
Thinking About the Case
1. Why is it important for a company that operates
internationally to have centrally located informa-
tion visible to multiple departments?
2. What are the challenges a global clothing retailer
faces in regards to maintaining proper inventory
levels?
3. How did efficient transactional data management
lead to a decrease in air shipment costs of A&F?
320
Web-Enabled Commerce
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
3
References
3M. (n.d.). History. from http://solutions.3m.com/
wps/portal/3M/en_US/3M-Company/
Information/Resources/History/#
Aistars, S. (2011, Nov 17). Rogue Websites Stifling
American Entrepreneurs, Roll Call.
Amari, R. (2012). IBISWorld Journal Industry Report
32552 Adhesive Manufacturing in the US.
Anonymous. (5 April 2012). Prohibited and Restricted
Items. Retrieved January 31, 2013, from http://
www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/travel/vacation/kbyg/
prohibited_restricted.xml
Anonymous. (2011, Aug 01). Empty wallet is no
problem in this electronic age, Irish Times,
p. 14.
Anonymous. (2012). Internet Usage Statistics.
Retrieved January 2, 2013, from http://internet
worldstats.com/stats.htm
Anonymous. (n.d.-a). Google Wallet Overview.
Retrieved June 29, 2013, from http://www.google
.com/wallet/
Anonymous. (n.d.-b). Number of Credit Cards and
Credit Card Holders. from http://www.cardhub
.com/edu/number-of-credit-cards/
Anonymous. (n.d.-c). Where can I use it? 2013, from
http://www.paywithisis.com/where-to-use.xhtml
Drucker, J. (Oct 21, 2010). Google 2.4% rate shows
how $60 billion lost to tax loopholes. from
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-10-21/
google-2-4-rate-shows-how-60-billion-u-s-revenue-
lost-to-tax-loopholes.html/
Fowler, G. A., Barrett, Devlin, and Schechner, Sam
(20 January 2012). U.S. Shuts Offshore Fileshare
‘Locker’. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014
24052970204616504577171060611948408.html
Holmes, T. (5 January 2011). How different cultures
handle credit cards. http://www.creditcards.com/
credit-card-news/credit-cards-in-different-cultures-
1267.php#globalcreditcarduse
Jackson, J. K. (2012). Foreign Direct Investment in the
United States: An Economic Analysis.
Lomas, N. (2013). Tablets Continue To Build Momen-
tum As A Place To Pay, Android & iPad Up 5%
In 10 Months. Techcrunch.com. http://techcrunch
.com/2013/06/06/adyen-m-commerce-index/
MacCullagh, D. (30 March 2012). White House calls
for new law targeting ‘offshore’ Web sites. http://
news.cnet.com/8301-31921_3-57407356-281/
white-house-calls-for-new-law-targeting-offshore-
web-sites/
Post, F. (2010). FP 500 Foreign Controlled. from http://
www.financialpost.com/news/FP500/2011/
foreign-controlled.html?sort=rank&page=1
Woolsey, B. a. S. M. (28 February 2012). Credit card
statistics, industry facts, debt statistics. http://www
.creditcards.com/credit-card-news/credit-card-
industry-facts-personal-debt-statistics-1276.php
CHAPTER 9
Challenges of Global Information Systems
321
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

four
PART
PART
4
© straga/Shutterstock.com
DECISION SUPPORT AND
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE
CHAPTER 10 Decision Support and Expert Systems 324
CHAPTER 11 Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management 358
BUSINESS CHALLENGES
New restaurants open every year. However, restau-
rants can be challenging to manage effectively and
profitably. Liz and Michael want to succeed in the
new location by making accurate and timely deci-
sions. Although their past business and cooking
experience is useful, it will be important to manage
the business efficiently as well as anticipate trends in
their operations and financial status. These impor-
tant strategic and operational decisions should be
based,
in
part,
on
their
analysis
of
the
data
processed and maintained by their business.
●
In Chapter 10, “Decision Support and Expert
Systems,” you learn how to determine the
characteristics of businesses and decisions that can
benefit from decision support systems and what is
involved in creating and using them.
●
In Chapter 11, “Business Intelligence and
Knowledge Management,” you learn
how knowledge management systems support the
business process and how data mining can be used
to establish strategic advantage.
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
323
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4
CHAPTER
Jupiterimages/Photos.com 
PART
ten
DECISION SUPPORT AND
EXPERT SYSTEMS
Learning Objectives
Decision making plays a key role in managerial work. Managers often have to consider large amounts of data,
extract and synthesize only relevant information, and make decisions that will benefit the organization. As the
amount of available data grows, so does the need for computer-based aids to assist managers in their decision-
making process.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
List and explain the phases in decision making.
●
Articulate the difference between structured and unstructured decision making.
●
Describe the typical software components that decision support systems and expert systems comprise.
●
Give examples of how decision support systems and expert systems are used in various domains.
●
Describe the typical elements and uses of geographic information systems.
●
List the benefits and risks of automated decision making.
324
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Preparing to Serve
Michael and Liz were finalizing the new menus for The
Lakeside. They decided to add several seatings to
begin branding the new location differently. They
wanted to add a Sunday breakfast/brunch, happy hour
bar appetizers, and late night dining on Fridays and
Saturdays. To create more traffic as well as gain new
customers, Tyler developed a targeted marketing cam-
paign to local businesses for after-work informal gath-
erings at the bar. After the first few weeks, they would
begin to offer the late-night menu on weekends to tar-
get customers who attended movies, theatre, and other
events. Liz hoped to start Sunday breakfast/brunch
within a month. There were only two restaurants offer-
ing breakfast: a local small diner and a restaurant about
five miles away.
Decisions at the Dinner Table
With the expanded meal offerings at the new location,
Liz and Michael knew that using some forecasting
would help them with the ordering decisions. The new
system could provide them with historical data on
meals and number of guests. However, they needed
some type of standard process to order the food neces-
sary to support the estimated meals. Liz said she could
take an educated guess. But Michael said, “Liz, we can’t
be making guesses. Also, the more time you are spend-
ing on calculating the orders, the less time you are man-
aging the kitchen operations. We need to focus our time
on important operational and management issues, not
guessing on orders.” Michael was hoping that she
would accept that. Luckily, Liz agreed.
Michael asked Liz to make a list of items that she
needed to prepare the meals for all menus. He created
a small spreadsheet page for Liz to compile those items.
She asked him, “Michael, would it be beneficial to break
down each menu item using the recipe to identify the
food needed to create the item?” Michael smiled and
conveyed to Liz that she really understood the issue.
However, she did not have the time or technical exper-
tise to accomplish it. She could compile the food items
and recipes, but didn’t know how to integrate it all
together to develop the order list.
Michael also knew that managing their suppliers as
well as their orders would be a key factor in their suc-
cess. Focusing on one supplier for specific products
would gain the lowest cost. Conversely, relying on just
a few suppliers would build a competitive environment
as well as ensure a backup supplier in case of problems.
However, he needed a standard process to calculate the
quantity and frequency of deliveries to increase his
leverage with the suppliers.
Michael has decided to ask Jim, one of Tyler’s
friends with a great deal of experience in information
technology, to build a spreadsheet model to help with
this task. Michael asked Tyler to explain the ordering
process to Jim, so Jim can develop an iterative decision
making model to help with ordering and purchasing.
Michael knows that the challenges will be to gather the
necessary data and to set up the calculations to make
efficient purchasing decisions.
Decision Support
The success of an organization largely depends on the quality of the decisions that its employees
make. When decision making involves large amounts of information and a lot of processing,
computer-based systems can make the process efficient and effective. This chapter discusses two
types of decision support aids: decision support systems (DSSs) and expert systems (ESs). In
recent years applications have been developed to combine several features and methods of these
aids. Also, decision support modules are often part of larger enterprise applications. For example,
ERP (enterprise resource planning) systems support decision making in such areas as production
capacity planning, logistics, and inventory replenishment.
Furthermore, many vendors of computer-based decision support tools, such as Pilot Software
and Cognos, Inc., no longer call their applications decision support systems. (Pilot Software was
acquired by SAP in 2007. Cognos was acquired by IBM in 2008. These acquisitions may be an
indication of how decision support software is becoming an integral part of enterprise software
and information technology applications.) These firms prefer to call them business analysis
tools, business intelligence applications, or other names. In a way, almost any system that
produces useful information is a decision aid. Decision support systems and expert systems are
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
325
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
especially designed to streamline the decision-making process by providing either a single
optimal solution to a question or problem, or a narrow set of solutions from which decision
makers can select.
The emergence of data warehouses and online processing (OLAP) technologies has enhanced
the abilities of employees at all levels to effectively use data for decision making. We discuss
OLAP in Chapter 11, “Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management.” The pervasive use of
the web prompted software developers to make practically all decision support applications
accessible through web browsers.
The Decision-Making Process
When do you have to make a decision? When you drive your car to a certain destination and
there is only one road, you do not have to make a decision. The road will take you there. But if
you come to a fork, you have to decide which way to go. In fact, whenever more than one
possible action is available, a decision must be made. If you have to decide based only on
distance, making a decision is easy. If you have to choose between a short but heavily trafficked
road and a longer road with lighter traffic, the decision is a bit more difficult.
A decision is easy to make when one option will clearly bring about a better outcome than
any other. Decisions become more difficult when more than one alternative seems reasonable
and when the number of alternatives is great. In business, there can be dozens, hundreds, or
even millions of different courses of action available to achieve a desired result. The problem is
deciding on the best alternative. You can see why problem solving and decision making are so
closely related.
Herbert Simon, a researcher of management and decision making, described decision
making as a three-phase process (Simon, 1960). As shown in Figure 10.1, in the intelligence
phase, decision makers collect facts, beliefs, and ideas. In business, the facts might be millions
of pieces of data. Second, in the design phase, the method for considering the data is designed.
The methods are sequences of steps, formulas, models, and other tools that systematically
reduce the alternatives to a manageable number. Third, in the choice phase, when there is a
reduced number of alternatives, decision makers make a choice; that is, they select the most
promising alternative. After the choice phase, the business implements and executes the
selected course of action.
F I G U R E 10.1
The three phrases of
decision making
Intelligence
• Collect data from inside the organization.
• Collect data from outside the organization.
• Collect information on possible ways to solve the problem.
Design
• Organize the data; select a model to process the data.
• Produce reasonable, potential courses of action.
Choice
• Select a course of action.
Businesses collect data internally (from within the organization) and externally (from outside
sources). They use models to analyze data. Generally speaking, a model is an abstraction of
reality. For instance, in architecture, a tabletop representation of a building or a city block is a
model of the full-sized structure. A map is a small-scale representation—a model—of a particular
geographic area that can include topographic information and political boundaries. And in
business, mathematical equations that represent the relationships among variables can be
models for how businesses respond to changes, such as: what happens to profits when sales and
expenses go up or down? Decision makers either use universal models, such as certain statistical
models, or design their own models to analyze data. Then they select what they perceive as the
best course of action.
© Cengage Learning 2015
326
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Structured and Unstructured Problems
A structured problem is one in which an optimal solution can be reached through a single
set of steps. Since the one set of steps is known, and since the steps must be followed in a
known sequence, solving a structured problem with the same data always yields the same
solution. Mathematicians call a sequence of steps an algorithm and the categories of data that
are considered when following those steps parameters. For instance, when considering the
problem of the shortest route for picking up and delivering shipments, the parameters
are shipment size, the time when shipments are ready for pickup, the time when shipments are
needed at their destinations, the distance of existing vehicles from the various destinations,
the mandatory rest times of the drivers, the capacities of the trucks, and so on.
Most mathematical and physical problems are structured. Finding the roots of a quadratic
equation is a structured problem: there is a formula (an algorithm) you can use to solve the
problem. For the same equation the roots are always the same. Predicting how hot a liquid
will get in a particular setting is a structured problem: if you know the properties of the
liquid, the size of its container, the properties of the energy source heating the liquid, and the
exact length of time the energy will be applied, you can figure out what temperature
the liquid will reach. Unfortunately, most problems in the business world cannot be solved
so easily.
An unstructured problem is one for which there is no algorithm to follow to reach an
optimal solution—either because there is not enough information about the factors that might
affect the solution or because there are so many potential factors that no algorithm can be
formulated to guarantee a unique optimal solution. An unstructured situation is closely related
to uncertainty. You cannot be sure what the weather will be tomorrow, let alone two months
from now; nobody can guarantee what an investment in a certain portfolio of stocks will yield
by year’s end; and two physicians might diagnose the same symptoms differently. These are all
areas where unstructured problems predominate.
Some management scientists refer to semi-structured problems. A semi-structured
problem is one that is neither fully structured nor totally unstructured. The problem
“Should I invest for two years $100,000 in municipal bonds that pay 3 percent per annum
tax free or should I invest in CDs (certificates of deposit) with 4 percent taxable interest?” is
structured. To find the solution you have to follow a simple algorithm that takes as
parameters your $100,000, the two years, and the 3 percent interest rate. Unless the city that
issued the bonds goes bankrupt, your calculated income is guaranteed. Similarly, it is easy to
calculate the after-tax yield of the same amount invested in the CDs. However, the problem
“Should I invest $100,000 in the stock of XYZ, Inc. and sell the stock after two years?” is
semi-structured. Too many factors must be taken into account for it to be considered
structured: the demand for the company’s products, entrance of competitors into its market,
the market of its products in this country and overseas, and so on. So many factors affecting
the price of the stocks might change over the next two years that the problem is semi-
structured at best and totally unstructured at worst. Professionals encounter semi-structured
problems almost daily in many different industries and in many different business functions
(see Figure 10.2).
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
327
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
F I G U R E 10.2
Examples of structured
and semi-structured
problems in business
Structured Problems
Semi-structured Problems
How many workers are needed to fully 
What are the benefits of merging with XYZ, Inc.?
staff production line A?
What is our optimal order quantity for raw
Where should we deploy the next five stores of
material Z, based on our production?
our retail chain?
How many turbines are needed to supply
How will the consumer react if we lower the 
power to Hickstown?
price of our product by 10 percent?
Which of our regions yields the highest
What is the best advertisement campaign to 
revenue per salesperson?
launch our new financial service?
Which money market fund currently yields
What are the benefits of opening an office in
the highest return?
Paris, France?
How much would the implementation of
Which stock will yield the highest return by 
pollution-preventing devices cost us?
the end of the year?
A manager solving a typical semi-structured problem faces multiple courses of action. The
task is to choose the one alternative that will bring about the best outcome. For example:
●
In manufacturing, managers must provide solutions to semi-structured problems such as:
(1) Which supplier should we use to receive the best price for purchased raw materials while
guaranteeing on-time delivery? (2) Assembly line B has a stoppage; should we transfer workers
to another assembly line or wait for B to be fixed? (3) The demand for product X has
decreased. Should we dismantle one of the production lines, or should we continue to manu-
facture at the current rate, stock the finished products, and wait for an upswing in demand?
●
Managers of investment portfolios must face semi-structured decision making when they
decide which securities to sell and which to buy so they can maximize the overall return on
investment. The purpose of research in stock investing is to minimize uncertainties by trying
to find patterns of behavior of stocks, among other trends. Managers of mutual funds spend
much of their time in semi-structured decision making.
●
Human resource managers are faced with semi-structured problems when they have to decide
whom to recommend for a new position, considering a person’s qualifications and his or her
ability to learn and assume new responsibilities.
●
Marketing professionals face semi-structured problems constantly: should they spend money
on print, television, web, email, or direct-mail advertisements? Which sector of the popula-
tion should they target?
Stock investment, position
recruiting, and marketing
promotion are domains for
unstructured and semi-
structured decision
making
Because of the complexities of the problems they face, managers in many functional areas
often rely on decision support applications to select the best course of action.
Brian Jackson/Photos.com
Comstock/Photos.com
Alex Slobodkin/Photos.com
© Cengage Learning 2015
328
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Be Familiar with Decision Aids
The terms “decision support systems” and “expert systems” are
mentioned less frequently these days. However, the concepts of
modeling decision-making processes and automating them and
the transformation of human expertise into software are alive
and thriving. While many situations exist in which only an expe-
rienced professional can make good decisions, much of the
decision-making process can be automated through use of
computer-based decision aids. The raw materials for many
decisions are already in corporate databases and data ware-
houses, and they can be accessed through ISs such as supply
chain management systems. Your ideas of how to automate rou-
tine decisions can save much labor and time for your organiza-
tion. Knowing how expert systems and geographic information
systems work might stimulate fresh ideas in your mind for imple-
mentation of new ISs, which can not only save labor and time
but also be a competitive tool for your organization.
Decision Support Systems
To save time and effort in their decision making, knowledge workers use several types of
decision support applications. One such type, a decision support system (DSS), is a
computer-based information system designed to help knowledge workers select one of many
alternative solutions to a problem. DSSs can help corporations increase market share, reduce
costs, increase profitability, and enhance product quality. By automating some of the decision-
making process, the systems give knowledge workers access to previously unavailable analyses.
Technically, certain analyses could be performed by managers, but it would be prohibitively
time-consuming
and
would
render
late,
and
therefore
bad,
decisions.
DSSs
provide
sophisticated and fast analysis of vast amounts of data and information. Although the use of
DSSs typically increases with the level of management, the systems are used at all levels, and
often by non-managerial staff.
The definition of a DSS has been changing over the years. The following sections discuss the
components
of
stand-alone
DSSs:
either
self-contained
applications
or
applications
that
are designed to address a rather narrow decision-making domain. You should realize that some
components of a computer-based decision aid, such as databases, might already be in place
when a new DSS is developed. Therefore, consider the following discussion a general framework
and not a rigid recipe for the development of all DSSs.
The majority of DSSs comprise three major components: a data management module,
a model management module, and a dialog module (see Figure 10.3). Together, these modules
(1) help the user enter a request in a convenient manner, (2) search vast amounts of data to
focus on the relevant facts, (3) process the data through desired models, and (4) present the
results in one or several formats so the output can be easily understood. These steps follow
the decision-making sequence described by Herbert Simon.
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
329
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
F I G U R E 10.3
The components of a DSS
and their interaction
Dialog
Data Management
Maintains alphanumeric
and graphical models,
formulas, and algorithms
that are often used in the
process of selecting the
model best suited for
typical decision-making
problems
Input tools (menus, forms, icons)
accept inquiries.
Presentation tools (tables, graphs,
animation) present analyzed
information in an appropriate or
selected form.
Retrieves and
manipulates
relevant data
Model
Management
The Data Management Module
A DSS’s data management module is a database or data warehouse that provides the data for
the intelligence phase of decision making. For example, an investment consultant always needs
access to current stock prices and those from at least the preceding few years. A data
management module accesses the data and provides a means for the DSS to select data according
to certain criteria: type of stock, range of years, and so on.
A DSS might use a database created specifically for that system, but DSSs are usually linked
to databases used for other purposes as well, such as purchasing, shipping, billing, and other
daily transactions. When organizations use a supply chain management (SCM) or customer
relationship management (CRM) system, the databases of such systems provide the data for the
DSS. In fact, the DSS itself might be part of that system. Companies prefer their DSSs to access
the data warehouse rather than the transactional database, to provide substantially more
historical data than is available in transactional databases. This enables the DSS to consider data
that covers a longer time period and/or a larger geographic area. Indeed, the major reason for
building data warehouses is to enhance decision making.
Many DSSs are now closely intertwined with other organizational systems, including data
warehouses, data marts, and ERP systems, from which they draw relevant data. For example,
Rapt, Inc. offers a decision support application that helps optimize purchasing decisions of
goods, especially for high-volume purchasers. Rapt Buy, acquired by Microsoft in 2008, is a web-
based application that captures business variables in data marts through an SAP or Oracle supply
chain management (SCM) system. The application’s analytical software builds models that
identify various elements of risk and then recommends purchasing strategies. It considers dozens
of economic variables, including demand for the raw materials and yield (the percentage of the
© Cengage Learning 2015
330
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
materials that are actually used in the final products). The system suggests how many units of
each component the company should purchase to avoid carrying too much or too little
inventory. In addition, the system provides multi-period plans for optimizing procurement into
the future. Within minutes, the application analyzes the potential effect of various procurement
and negotiation strategies. At Sun Microsystems Corp., forecasting demand for new products can
be off by up to 70 percent. Before implementing this system, procurement officers at this large
manufacturer of servers spent many hours of manual analytical work. Now, they use this system
to calculate forecasts faster and more accurately.
POINT OF
INTEREST
DSSs in Auditing
Auditing is the financial evaluation of a company conducted by accountants, similar to a check-up or a
physical at the doctor’s office. Accountants frequently use DSSs in auditing to speed up decision making
and reduce the amount of manual input needed to come up with those outputs. Auditing involves an
increasingly large amount of data and thus the automation of decision making can provide users of finan-
cial statements with significantly more accurate and timely outputs. Additionally, auditing DSSs can train
rookies to produce expert-like findings. Shareholders’ desire for real-time information drives the evolution
of continuous monitoring. In the future, data mining systems could continuously input information into an
automated auditing system. This step would lead to more effective and efficient auditing.
Source: Hunton, J. E., & Rose, J. M. (2010). 21st Century Auditing: Advancing Decision Support Systems
to Achieve Continuous Auditing. Accounting Horizons, 24(2), 297–312.
The Model Management Module
To turn data into useful information, the system utilizes its model management module,
which offers a single fixed model, a dynamically modified model, or a collection of models from
which either the DSS or the user selects the most appropriate one. A fixed variable model does
not change. A dynamically modified model is one that is automatically adjusted based on
changing relationships among variables.
A sequence of events or a pattern of behavior might become a useful model when the
relationships among its inputs, outputs, and conditions can be established well enough that
they can be used to analyze different parameters. Models are used to predict output on the basis
of different input or different conditions or to estimate what combination of conditions and
input might lead to a desired output. Models are often based on mathematical research or on
experience. A model might be a widely used method to predict performance, such as best-fit
linear analysis, or it might be built by the organization, using the experience that employees
in the firm have accumulated over time. Many companies will not divulge details of the models
they have programmed because they view them as important trade secrets and valuable assets
that could give them competitive advantages. Patterns or models might be unique to a certain
industry or even to an individual business. For example:
●
In trying to serve bank customers better, operations research experts create a model that pre-
dicts the most efficient positioning and scheduling of tellers.
●
In the trucking business, models are developed to minimize the total mileage trucks must
travel and maximize the trucks’ loads, while maintaining satisfactory delivery times. Similar
models are developed in the airline industry to maximize revenue.
●
Another model for revenue maximization in the airline industry will automatically price tickets
according to the parameters the user enters: date of the flight, day of the week of the flight,
departure and destination points, and the length of stay if the ticket is for a round-trip flight.
●
Car rental companies use similar models to price their services by car class, rental period, and
drop-off options in different countries.
●
A model can help to provide a decision on whether to purchase land (as illustrated on the
next page with Vanguard Software’s Business Analytics Suite).
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
331
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Decision support systems
can process collected
data and suggest a
solution for a land
investment problem
Among the general statistical models, a linear regression model is the best-fit linear
relationship between two variables, such as sales and the money spent on marketing. A private
business might develop a linear regression model to estimate future sales based on past
experience. For example, the marketing department of a shoe store chain might apply linear
regression to the relationship between the dollar amount spent on search website advertising
and change in sales volume. This linear relationship can be translated into a program in a DSS.
Then the user can enter the total amount to be spent on search website advertising for the next
year into the DSS, and the program will enter that figure into the model and find the estimated
change in the sales volume. The relationship between the two variables can be plotted, as shown
in Figure 10.4.
F I G U R E 10.4
A linear regression model
for predicting sales
volume as a function of
dollars spent on web
advertising
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1.1
1.3
1.2 1.5
1.4
1.4
2.5
2.8
2.8
2.8
40
Sales ($ million/month)
Advertising ($ million/month)
1.1
20.3
1.3
21
1.2
20.1
1.5
22.7
1.4
21.9
1.4
22
2.5
32
2.8
36
2.8
35
2.8
34.8
Trend Line
 Advertising
Sales
($M/month)
($M/month)
Courtesy of Vanguard Software corporation
© Cengage Learning 2015
332
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Note that the actual data points rarely lie on the regression line produced from the data.
This illustrates the uncertainty involved in many models. For instance, in Figure 10.4, if the
marketing managers tried to estimate the sales volume resulting from spending $1.4 million per
month on web advertising, their estimates for both months plotted on the graph would be more
than the actual sales. In spite of these discrepancies, the regression line might be adequate in
general for modeling, with the understanding that results are not necessarily precise. Also note
that models often describe relationships among more than two variables and that some models
can be expressed as a curve, rather than a straight line.
Usually, models are not so simple. In this advertising and sales example, for instance, many
more factors might play a role: the number of salespeople, the location of the stores, the types
of shoes offered for sale, the search keywords with which the advertising is associated, and many
more parameters. Therefore, before models are programmed to become part of a DSS, the
environment in which the decision will be executed must be carefully considered.
Not all DSS models are business-oriented. In some areas, especially engineering, DSS models
might simulate physical rather than business environments. For example, aeronautical engineers
use computer models of wind tunnels to view how a computer model of an aircraft with a new
wing design might behave. It is significantly less expensive to construct a software model than
to build a physical model. The simulation provides valuable information on vibrations, drag,
metal fatigue, and other factors in relation to various speeds and weather conditions. The
output, in the form of both animated pictures and numerical tables, enables engineers to make
important decisions before spending huge amounts of money to actually build aircraft—
decisions such as the angle in which the aircraft wings are swept, the shape of the fuselage’s
cross section, the spreading of weight over different parts of the plane, and so forth. When using
this type of model, engineers base part of their decision on visual examination of the behavior of
the simulation model.
The Dialog Module
For the user to glean information from the DSS, the system must provide an easy way to interact
with the program. The part of the DSS that allows the user to interact with it is called the dialog
module. It prompts the user to select a model, allowing the user to access the database and
select data for the decision process or to set criteria for selecting such data. It lets the user enter
parameters and change them to see how the change affects the result of the analysis. The dialog
might be in the form of commands, pull-down menus, icons, dialog boxes, or any other
approach. In essence, the dialog module is not much different from the user interfaces of other
types of applications. As an increasing number of DSSs are available for use through the
Internet, some dialog modules are especially designed to be compatible with web browsers.
Many such DSSs are accessed through corporate intranets.
The dialog module is also responsible for displaying the results of the analysis. DSSs use
various textual, tabular, and graphical displays from which the decision maker can choose. Take
the previous advertising effort scenario, for example, where the company’s marketing manager is
trying to decide how to spend promotional dollars. The dialog component of the DSS presents a
menu allowing the marketing executive to select web search advertising from a variety of
promotional choices and to choose the amount to be spent in that channel (see Figure 10.5).
Now the dialog module calls up the part of the database that holds current data on advertising
expenditures and sales volumes for the corresponding months. At this point, the system might
either present a list of models for analyzing the data from which the user can choose or, if it is
sophisticated enough, select a model automatically, based on the problem at hand. The model
projects sales figures based on the data from the database, and the dialog component presents
the results of the analysis. The output helps the executive make a decision by answering
the question, “Will the proposed amount to be spent on web ads yield a large enough boost
in sales?”
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
333
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
F I G U R E 10.5
A DSS can help marketers
make decisions on how to
spend promotion
resources
Dialog
Database Management
Model Management
Web Search Advertising
Expenditures Data
Model
Change in Sales =
(30)(amount spent) +
(5.4)(number of
viewers)
Web Search Advertising
Sensitivity Analysis
An outcome is almost always affected by more than one parameter; for instance, the sales
volume of a product is affected by the number of salespeople, the number of regional sales
representatives,
the
amount
spent
on
national
and
local
television
advertising,
price,
competition, and so on. However, outcomes rarely respond in equal measure to changes in
parameters. For instance, a small change in price per unit might result in a dramatic increase in
sales, which means sales volume has a high sensitivity to product price. However, the same sales
might increase only slightly in response to a huge investment in advertising dollars, which
means that sales have a low sensitivity to advertising expenditure. It is important to pinpoint
the parameters to which the outcome is highly sensitive, so that an organization can focus
efforts where they are most effective. Sometimes the parameters to which an outcome is most
sensitive also affect other parameters, so these interactions must be carefully tracked as well.
If a company wishes to maximize profit, managers must find the optimal combination of
many factors. To equip a DSS to help achieve this goal, an approximate mathematical formula
that expresses the relationship between each factor and the total profit is built into the DSS.
© Cengage Learning 2015
334
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Then a sensitivity analysis is conducted to test the degree to which the total profit grows or
shrinks if one or more of the factors is increased or decreased. The results indicate the relative
sensitivity of the profit to the changes. If the outcome is affected significantly even when the
parameter is changed only a little, then the sensitivity of the outcome to the parameter is said to
be high. The opposite is also true: if the outcome is affected only a little, even when the
parameter is varied widely, the outcome is said to be insensitive to the parameter. For instance, a
manager might ask, “What is the impact on total quarterly profits if television advertising is
decreased by 10 percent and the number of commissioned sales representatives is increased by
5 percent?” Because questions typically are phrased in this format, sensitivity analysis is often
referred to as what-if analysis. Note that you can use a DSS to perform what if analyses on
multiple parameters at the same time.
Equally important is the use of sensitivity tests to learn which parameters do not make a
difference. For example, based on data collected during a promotion via coupons, marketing
analysts might learn that discounts did not increase sales and/or did not bring in new
customers. The obvious decision would be not to conduct similar promotions in the near future.
You
might
be
familiar
with
sensitivity
analysis
from
using
electronic
spreadsheets.
Spreadsheets enable you to enter both data and formulas in cells. Thus, they are an excellent
tool for building both the data and the models that decision support systems need, and
therefore they make excellent tools for building decision support software. Changing data in one
or several cells will result in a different solution to a problem. This allows you to see the effect
that a change in one parameter has on the calculated outcome.
Decision Support Systems in Action
DSSs can be used on demand, when a manager needs help in making an occasional decision, or
they might be integrated into a scheme that enforces corporate policy. In either case, DSSs help
maintain standard criteria in decision making throughout the organization. A growing number
of organizations implement software applications that produce decisions automatically and in
real time. The only labor involved is the entry of relevant parameters, and when the DSS is
linked to the organization’s website, even this activity might not be performed by employees but
by clients. Following are some examples of how DSSs are used for various purposes.
Book Sales and Food Production
The retail bookselling industry is rapidly evolving, moving away from traditional brick-
and-mortar stores and toward e-readers and online libraries. Large bookstore retailers are
adjusting and adapting to the new challenges put upon them by attempting to lure customers
into their stores and keep them coming back. Barnes & Noble (B&N) reacted to the increasing
competition of online sales by implementing a warehousing system and attached analytical
capabilities allowed employees to see trends and patterns with remarkable timing value. The new
system with its wide array of out-of-the box analytical tools and tiered-access portal allowed B&N
merchandising employees to make crucial stocking and promotional decisions immediately
instead of wasting precious weeks. With only one chance to make a first impression on a
customer who enters a B&N location, it is essential that the shelves are stocked with the right
reads. The implementation of B&N’s smarter analytical system reduced the analytical query run
time by over 95 percent and the time it took for an employee to administer the business
intelligence solution was reduced by more than 70 percent. By capitalizing on the opportunity
to predict customer demands, B&N optimized its inventory through efficiently utilizing the full
potential of their stored transactional data (Anonymous, 2012a).
In the restaurant industry, managers have to forecast the number of patrons and the amount
of ingredients to purchase, as well as where to purchase it to minimize cost. FoodPro, a DSS
developed and sold by Aurora Information Systems, helps make such decisions. Based on the
historical data restaurants accumulate, the system helps with these decisions. A recipe database is
used to propose decisions on ingredients, quantities, and consolidated purchases from specific
vendors. Other components of the system include financial forecasting, invoicing, accounting,
and practically every other aspect of managing restaurants.
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
335
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
POINT OF
INTEREST
The Demise of the EIS?
As information systems were adopted heavily and management needed more knowledge of organizational
trends, executive information systems (EISs) became a popular software tool for senior management and
executives. These systems provided corporate information compacted into a summary format to aid man-
agerial decision making. These systems retrieved real-time and/or historical data to generate graphical
images providing the foundation for informed decisions. The graphical interface of these systems elimi-
nated the need to digest and review volumes of text and numbers in order to formulate the status of vari-
ous corporate success factors. In the 1980s and 90s, EIS implementations often failed due to the lack of
availability of accurate, timely, and properly structured data. In addition, the lack of effective data extrac-
tion utilities and software development tools increased the cost of implementing EISs.
So where are EISs now? Ask contemporary executives about their use of EISs. If they are leading a well-
managed business organization with effectively designed information systems, they probably use an EIS
and are not aware of it. Ultimately, EIS application software systems have been superseded by newer
technology and jargon, even though many EIS functions remain.
New buzzwords such as business intelligence, dashboards, and scorecards, as well as the laser-
focused popularity of Big Data, data marts, and warehouses have reinvented executive information
systems in the modern corporate environment. Sometimes the adoption of technology by business
professionals can be ahead of its time. Very often, a perfect nexus of factors is required before new
technology is accepted, such as (1) need (or perceived need) by businesses, (2) competitive pressures
(and keeping up with the Jones’), and (3) advances in information technology. The saying, “Timing is
everything” may be old-fashioned, but it is still appropriate when considering advances and changes in
information technology.
Source: Watson, H. J. (2011). What happened to executive information systems? Business Intelligence
Journal, 16, 4–6.
Tax Planning
Some applications that people may not think of as DSSs actually are. TurboTax, TaxCut, and
other tax-preparation applications have been developed over the years to do much more than
help fill out forms. They come with sophisticated formulas to help taxpayers plan the best
strategy in selecting options, with the final purpose of minimizing the tax paid. For example,
the applications compare filing status and deduction options: which approach would result in
a lower combined tax, filing as two individuals or joint filing as husband and wife? Itemizing
deductions, or taking a standard deduction? Taking a smaller education credit, or a larger
education deduction? Based on the taxable income and the combination of deductions taken,
the applications warn users about their chances of being audited by the Internal Revenue
Service and give them a chance to modify deductions. The applications also remind users of
optional deductions, tell them what the deductions entail (e.g., if you take deduction X you
may not take deduction Y or you increase the probability of being audited) and thereby make
it easy for filers to make decisions. And when users complete their tax preparation for the past
year, they can plan their tax for next year—based on their total income and type of income
(wages, business, capital gains, and so forth)—and make decisions on how much to contribute
to pension funds, charity, and other purposes that serve as tax shields to reduce the tax owed
next year.
Website Planning and Adjustment
Because so many companies use the web for marketing, selling, and customer support, decisions
on how to design websites are extremely important. Some companies offer DSSs specifically
designed to analyze shoppers’ behavior at their sites based on captured data such as pages, how
visitors found the site, and which search engines and keywords brought the most traffic.
iWebTrack offers web traffic analytical services to a wide array of customers that include
individual
webmasters,
universities,
Fortune
500
companies,
and
private-label
resellers.
336
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
iWebTrack monitors and records visitor trends, geographic data of website visitors, website
activity by date and time, and how visitors find the site. By extracting trends and patterns from
this data, iWebTrack customers can monitor the success of their website in real time, measure
the return on investment of their online marketing campaign, and pinpoint high-traffic times to
create an optimal promotional strategy (Anonymous, 2013d). Another company, WebCEO (see
illustration), sells decision tools that help decide which keywords to use for improved listing on
search engines, how to optimize webpages for greater conversion, submit URLs to search
engines, and analyze conversions.
Web analysis tools help
recommend decisions to
increase popularity in
searches
Yield Management
You might be surprised to learn that the passenger sitting next to you on an airplane paid a third
of what you paid for the same flight. This is the result of recommendations the airline receives
from a DSS whose purpose is to maximize revenue. The concept is called yield management
or revenue management. For each flight, revenue managers enter a myriad of data, including
departure point and time, destination point and time of arrival, the number of airports in which
the airplane stops, the airplane capacity, and information on utilized capacity from previous
operations of the particular flight. They change pricing, or let the system change prices,
according to the time a ticket is purchased, and how long before the passenger flies back. The
dilemma is between offering low prices to fill up the plane, or upping the price and risking
flying with some empty seats.
The purpose of yield management DSSs is to find the proper pricing to maximize the overall
revenue from selling seats for each flight. The result is often price discrimination, which is legal
and a common practice in the airline industry: you might pay a different price depending on
how far in advance you purchased the ticket, the fact that a companion flies with you, the
number of days between departure and return, and several other variables. Typically, airlines
double or triple the price of a ticket when it is purchased only a few days before departure,
because usually the availability of seats on competitors’ flights is limited. Also, late purchasers
Courtesy of WebCEO
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
337
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
tend to be business people who are reimbursed for their travel and therefore are less price-
sensitive. Airlines take advantage of these facts and the expectation that customers who make
a late reservation usually do so because they have little flexibility in selecting the flight
date. Other variables are less obvious, and therefore DSSs are used to model demand and
sensitivity to prices.
Similar
decision
aids
are
used
in
the
hospitality
industry.
For
example,
Harrah’s
Entertainment, the operators of a chain of hotels and casinos, uses such a system to set room
rates for its hotels and for offering different rates to different levels of members in its customer
loyalty programs. Room rates might be lower, or even free, for customers who regularly spend a
great deal of money on gambling. Like many other companies, the chain has a customer loyalty
program called Total Rewards. Harrah’s data analysis program, called Revenue Management
System, recognizes a Total Rewards member’s telephone number and allows reservation agents to
offer lower prices for rooms during a busy weekend for a high-value customer—one who usually
spends a lot—or to raise the price of a Saturday night stay for customers who don’t yield
much profit.
Financial Services
Manually deciding how much money to loan to which customer at what interest rate could
delay the decision process to a point of losing the potential customer. Loan applicants are
reluctant to wait more than a day or even a few hours for the bank’s response. Automated
decision aids can produce offers within minutes after a customer enters data. The DSS combines
this data with data retrieved from credit history databases and preprogrammed rule models to
create a rapid response.
Quicken Loans has become an industry leader in online retail mortgage lending. Potential
borrowers initiate the process by calling or submitting a request online at www.quickenloans.
com. Quicken Loans then runs a credit check that produces a report in seconds. If the
applicant is accepted, Quicken Loans creates an account that allows borrowers to access their
account information online or even with a mobile phone app. Quicken Loans takes the
responsibility of ordering an appraisal from a state certified appraiser on the borrower’s behalf
and will meet anywhere to close the deal (Anonymous, 2013a). Their step-by-step process is
easy to follow and focused on simplifying the complexity of receiving a home mortgage. In
September of 2010, Quicken Loans set a record by closing about 15,500 home loans totaling
$3.4 billion in loan volume. This mark surpassed the previous record set the previous month
of 14,000 closed for a total of $3.15 billion in loan volume (Anonymous, 2010). An increasing
amount of decision making in the financial services and many other industries are made this
way: automatically and in real time. This saves many hours of labor and ensures speedy service
for customers.
Benefits Selection
Employers can save labor costs and provide convenience to their employees by helping them
make decisions. One area where this can occur is selection of benefits, especially health care
plans. ADP, Inc., a company known for its payroll processing services, teamed with Subimo LLC
to offer an online application to help employees evaluate health care plan costs. The analysis is
based on individual medical needs. The tool uses an individual’s age, gender, geographic region,
and health condition to estimate several costs of a family’s health care. It predicts the health
services the individual or family would most likely need. The tool’s modeling is based on the
demographic data and experience of over 60 million U.S. patients. Employees can use the
predictions to select plans and to decide how to fund a flexible spending account, a health
saving account, or health reimbursement arrangement.
Similar decision support tools are offered by other companies, including some of the largest
health
care
management
organizations
(HMOs)
in
the
United
States.
A
tool
called
MyHealthcareAdvisor.com, also offered by Subimo, serves small businesses that wish to augment
their employee coverage. It is estimated that about 60 million Americans have access to tools
that help make decisions on health care plans and options within plans. Interestingly, about
95 percent of enrollment transactions are executed online.
338
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Decisions by Machines
Every year thousands of people are denied credit not because
they are bad credit risks, but because of errors that lending
institutions make. For example, a newly married woman might
be denied credit because her credit history is still only under
her maiden name. Errors in recording monthly payments are
also a common reason for denying credit; it’s possible for one
late payment to deduct many points from one’s credit score. For
some banks, if your credit score is in the 500s or even 600s on a
scale of 350–850, you are not considered a good credit risk.
Some banks might agree to give you a loan with an interest
rate that is higher than most people get.
A single late credit-card or mortgage payment could lower
your credit score severely, but you might never know that,
because the law does not require anyone to notify you. Many
people do not even know that a credit score system exists, and
that it is shared by all banks and other lenders. Chances are you
will find out about your too-low score only when you apply for a loan
and only if you ask for the reason of denial or higher offered interest
rate. And when you find out and try to explain that there was a
mitigating circumstance for the late payment, your explanation
might not help you much. That’s because American banks use
computers for credit decisions. It is often a computer program that
decides who will or will not receive credit. And the decision is final.
Every consumer in the U.S. has the right to one free credit
check per 12 months in accordance with the Fair and Accurate
Credit Transactions Act (FACT Act). www.Annual CreditReport.com
provides these credit checks and is run by the three nationwide
consumer credit reporting companies: Equifax, Experian, and
TransUnion. The website has strict fraud prevention measures
enacted to ensure consumers their information is safe (www.
AnnualCreditReport.com, 2013). It is important to review your
credit at least annually to make sure there are no mistakes or
issues that you did not know of. Sometimes mistakes can be
simple
data-entry
errors
or
they
could
be
more
serious
computer-related issues. According to a study conducted by the
University of Missouri-St. Louis, 12 percent of credit reports they
examined contained errors such as wrong birthdates, ages, or
addresses. Although it may be impossible to determine how the
errors occurred, it is not hard at all however, to correct the
mistakes. The three major consumer credit reporting companies
listed above all have a “Disputes” link on their pages. In their
research, after errors were
corrected, participants’ scores
increased as much as 40 points, enough to help them qualify for
a large loan or a better interest rate. To keep the best credit score
possible, it is important to pay bills on time, keep balances as low
as possible, and apply for new credit only when absolutely
necessary. 35 percent of your credit score is based on paying
bills on time and another 30 percent is based on your debt in
relation to your debt capacity (Stroud, 2008).
●
Who Needs Protection? To what extent should organi-
zations rely on computer-based decision aids to make busi-
ness decisions about individuals? Automated decision
making is used routinely in the United States by banks,
credit-card companies, mortgage companies, employers,
and, to some extent, educational institutions. The affected
individuals might be consumers, credit applicants, employ-
ees, job applicants, prospective students, applicants for
membership in associations, and people who are evaluated
by organizations in other capacities.
Creditworthiness is determined by processing personal finan-
cial data in models that have been developed specifically to
sort the good risks from the bad risks. A bad risk is a person
or institution that is likely to default on a loan. Should credit-
card companies, for instance, ask their officers to open a
manila folder for every American adult and make a decision
on creditworthiness only after leafing through the filed docu-
ments in it? Should they be banned from using an automated
process that makes the decision for them based on the same
criteria that the officers would use manually? And when
employers sift through hundreds and thousands of digitized
résumés of job applicants, should they be banned from using
software that retrieves the résumés with keywords that sug-
gest a good fit for the job, while eliminating those without
them? Would it be practical for Google not to use software
to sift through the 1.5 million job applications the company
receives every year?
The use of automated decision making offers not only
added efficiency but also enhanced effectiveness. When
using a DSS or an expert system, the user enjoys the
knowledge and experience that have been accumulated
by other people over many years. Thus, in addition to effi-
ciency, automated decision making might be more effective
than manual decision making.
●
Hidden Injustice. On the other hand, shifting decision
making to a machine might create injustices. Suppose
your record is among several hundred records of applicants
considered for a position. The records were obtained from
a third party, a company that sells personal information.
Your qualifications are excellent, but your record also indi-
cates a law violation. The system removes you from the
pool of eligible candidates, and you do not get the job.
Had you seen your record before its processing, you
could have told the company that this entry was an error:
you were charged once but acquitted in court. If the com-
pany had contacted you, you could have ironed out the
misunderstanding and possibly have gotten the job.
Do American organizations overuse automated decision making?
Is it practical, in the digital age, to give up the efficiency of
automated
decision
making
to
determine
an
individual’s
creditworthiness or job performance? Does a little more justice
in credit and employment justify giving up the greater efficiencies
of automated decision making?
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
339
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Expert Systems
It is not always possible to exploit expertise by coupling quantitative data from a database with
decision models. In such cases, an expert system might be required. An expert system (ES) is
developed to emulate the knowledge of an expert to solve problems and make decisions in a
relatively narrow domain. A domain is a specific area of knowledge. For example, in medicine
a domain is often a diagnosis of a specific disease or a family of related diseases, such as bacterial
diseases. The purpose of ESs is to replicate the unstructured and undocumented knowledge of the
few (the experts), and put it at the disposal of the many other people who need the knowledge,
often novices or professionals in the same domain but with far less expertise. Advanced
programs might include neural networks (computer programs that emulate the way the
human brain works) which can learn from new situations and formulate new rules in their
knowledge bases to address events not originally considered in their development. Expert
systems and neural networks are two techniques researched and implemented in a field called
artificial intelligence (AI). The field is so called because it focuses on methods and
technologies to emulate how humans learn and solve problems.
POINT OF
INTEREST
The Turing Test
Scientists continue the quest for software that will be at least as smart as humans, so that expertise can be
enhanced and delivered through information technology. In 1950, Alan Turing, a British mathematician, pub-
lished an article titled “Can Machines Think?” His own answer was yes. Today the Turing test is this: An
interrogator is connected to a person and to a machine via a terminal and cannot see either. The interroga-
tor asks both the person and the machines questions and is to determine by their answers which is a
human and which is a machine. If the machine can fool the interrogator, it is considered intelligent. In
1990, Hugh Loebner offered to grant a gold medal and $100,000 to the first person who could build such a
machine. At the annual competition, judges present the same questions to computers and people, but can-
not see either. The communication is by text, similar to online chat. Competitors try to build software whose
answers would be indistinguishable from those of humans. So far nobody has won. You can find information
about the competition at www.loebner.net/Prizef/loebner-prize.html.
Source: Oppy, G., & Dowe, D. (2011). The Turing Test. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Stanford
University.
As Figure 10.6 illustrates, the major difference between DSSs and ESs is in the “base” they
use and how it is structured. DSSs use data from databases. An ES uses a knowledge base,
which is a collection of facts and the relationships among them. An ES does not use a model
module but an inference engine. The inference engine is software that combines data that is
input by the user with the data relationships stored in the knowledge base. The result is a
diagnosis or suggestion for the best course of action. In most ESs, the knowledge base is built as
a series of IF-THEN rules.
340
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
F I G U R E 10.6
Components of an expert
system; numbers indicate
the order of processes
Dialog
Output
Fact:…
Fact:…
Relationship:…
Fact:…
Relationship:…
Relationship:…
Knowledge Base
IF…
AND IF…
AND IF…
AND IF…
THEN…
Input
Inference Engine
3
4
2
1
5
User
Menu
X
OK
Cancel
Help
Menu
Figure 10.7 provides a simple illustration of how such rules are used to conclude which
disease is infecting a tree. If the humidity is low, the average air temperature is higher than 60
degrees Fahrenheit, the tree leaves are dark green, and the tree’s age is 0-2 years, then the tree
has disease A at a probability of 90 percent. However, if the humidity is low, the temperature is
between 40 and 65 degrees Fahrenheit, the tree leaves are green, and the tree’s age is 0-2, there
is a 40 percent probability that the disease is A and 50 percent that the disease is B. The
diagnosis helps reach a decision on proper treatment to stop the disease. A real expert system for
such diagnosis would consist of many more rules, usually hundreds or thousands, because there
are many more conditions—antecedents—and combinations of factors that may cause a disease;
and there are more diseases that a particular tree may have.
F I G U R E 10.7
In IF-THEN rules,
different combinations
of conditions lead to
different conclusions
Antecedent
Conclusion
IF
Humidity usually is...
Low  Medium  High
THEN the Disease is...
AND IF
Average air temperature is...
<40  40<  >65  >60
AND IF
Leaves are...
Brown  Green  Dark Green
AND IF
Tree age (years) is...
0–2  2–10  10–15  >15
A (90%)
B (85%)
A (40%)
or
B (50%)
In a mineral exploration, for example, such rules can be: IF the drilling depth is so many
meters, AND IF the sample includes a certain percentage of carbon (and so forth), THEN there is
a 90-percent probability that so many meters further down there is oil of commercial quality
and quantity. Such rules are often not quantitative but qualitative, and therefore can only be
stored as a knowledge base rather than a database.
ES researchers continue to look for ways to better capture knowledge and represent it. They
test the results of such efforts in highly unstructured problem-solving domains, including games.
One such game that has intrigued both researchers and laypeople is chess. The game is a highly
© Cengage Learning 2015
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
341
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
unstructured environment in which the number of possible moves is enormous, and hence, the
player must be an expert to select the best move for every board configuration.
Rather than containing a set of IF-THEN rules, more sophisticated ESs use neural networks
(neural nets), programs that are designed to mimic the way a human brain learns. An ES is
constructed with a set of rules, but as data on real successes and failures of decisions is accumulated
and fed into the system, the neural network refines the rules to accomplish a higher success rate.
Business applications have increasingly combined neural nets and ES technologies in software
that monitors business processes and supply chain management. An example of this application is
Finch Paper’s implementation of Honeywell’s Process Knowledge System. Finch, a pulp and paper
mill in Glen Falls, NY, needed to focus more attention on the quality of its products while
reducing costs. Unfortunately, Finch had a variety of obsolete systems to track and report on the
quality of products manufactured. They needed key plant data in order to increase efficiency and
performance while maintaining employee safety. Through the implementation of Honeywell’s
product, Finch was able to improve plant efficiency by 1 percent for a savings of $100,000 per
year. In addition, consolidating the organization’s older systems gained increased connectivity and
sharing of information through the mill. In addition, Finch improved plant productivity by
allowing operators to “make faster, more informed decisions” (Anonymous, 2011).
Expert systems often provide intelligent agents to alert someone of a situation. An intelli-
gent agent is software that is “dormant” until it detects a certain event, at which time it
performs a prescribed action. For example, in a retail business, it is important to maintain
enough quantity on the shelf for consumers to purchase the product and avoid any stock-outs.
A stock-out is a loss of a sale as well as a potential loss in customer satisfaction. Therefore, an
information system designed with an intelligent agent could automatically reorder a product
when the shelf quantity falls below some threshold (safety stock) to eliminate a stock out. The
agent would send an order to the manufacturer or distributor for a shipment.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Who’s In Control?
Oregon State University (OSU) researchers believe that air traffic controllers (ATCs) should be aided by
smart computers to reduce congestion and avoid bottlenecks. The proposed system developed at OSU
over a five-year span would still leave the decision making aspect in the hands of experienced ATC but
they would basically receive suggestions from the computer system. After being adapted to be more flexi-
ble for voluntary use by ATCs, developers believe it should be able to improve ATC system-wide perfor-
mance by as much as 20 percent. Computers are able to compute algorithms quicker and more efficient
that humans. It may not make sense for an air traffic controller landing a plane in Chicago to be worrying
about thunderstorms in Miami and a bottleneck growing at LAX. However, computers can handle all of
these scenarios and produce data that human ATCs can use to improve air traffic efficiency.
Source: Anonymous. (2010). Smart Computers Should Assist Controllers. Air Safety Week, 24(13).
Neural nets have been very effective in detecting fraud of many types. For example, Falcon
Fraud Manager, owned by FICO, allows financial institutions to identify credit card transactions
that do not correspond with customers’ spending profiles. Under normal procedures, banks
usually call the member to verify the charge, and if it is fraudulent, deny the charge and reissue
a new credit card. However, the institution takes the loss for fraudulent transactions. CO-OP
Financial Services purchased FICO’s product to deny fraudulent transactions in real time. Using
the new expert system software, point-of-sale transactions are processed through a series of rules
and stopped immediately if they don’t successfully meet the rule criteria; Falcon or the credit
institution’s fraud team follows up on stopped transactions. The new real-time system has
reduced their losses by $940,000 for 2009 and 2010 (Rapport, 2012).
Insurance companies use neural nets to detect fraudulent claims both from the insured party
and from health-care providers. Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield has used the technology for many
years and has saved millions of dollars. In one case, it caught a doctor who allegedly provided an
annual respiratory test that normally is provided no more than twice per lifetime. In another
342
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
case, it caught a doctor who filed a claim for a pregnancy test, but the software detected that the
test was given to a man.
Another technique to use expertise is case-based reasoning; a methodology of solving a
new problem established on the solutions of similar problems. The software that supports the
technique is often called case-based ESs. The important parameters of a case to be analyzed are
compared to many cases until one or a small number of them are found highly similar to the
analyzed case. The system then brings up the decision made in those cases, and a successful
decision is applied. The knowledge base is a database of cases. Instead of an inference engine,
the system uses software that searches key parameters in the archival case reports.
Case-based reasoning is useful especially in medical decision making. Comparison with
previous, similar cases helps to diagnose a symptom and recommend remedial action such as
medication and other treatments.
Expert Systems in Action
ESs have been implemented to help professionals in many different industries, such as health
care, telecommunications, financial services, and agriculture. The following is a small sample.
Medical Diagnosis
Because medicine is one of the most unstructured domains, it
is not surprising that many of the early ESs were developed to
help doctors with the diagnosis of symptoms and treatment
advice, as mentioned earlier. MYCIN (diagnosis of bacterial
diseases), CADUCEUS (internal medicine diagnostics), and
PUFF (diagnosis of pulmonary diseases) are only a few of
these systems. PUFF includes instrumentation that connects
to the patient’s body and feeds various data about the
patient’s condition into the ES to be analyzed for pulmonary
diseases. As shown in the picture, doctors can utilize expert
systems for patient medical diagnosis.
German scientists developed an ES that enhances the
accuracy in diagnoses of Alzheimer’s disease, which gradually
destroys memory. The system examines positron emission
tomography scans of the patient’s brain. The scans provide
images that can be reliably interpreted only by experienced
physicians. Based on the expertise of such experts, the ES can detect Alzheimer’s before the
appearance of behavior typical of the disease. More than 5 million Americans suffer from Alzheimer’s,
and the proportion of the U.S. population that suffers from this yet incurable disease is growing. An
early, accurate diagnosis helps patients and their families plan and gives them time to discuss care
while the patient can still take part in decision making. When tested on 150 suspected patients, the ES
performed as well as the experts. Now it can serve any doctor in early diagnosis of the disease.
Medical Management
In addition to diagnostic ESs, some hospitals use systems that help discern which tests or other
initial treatment a patient should receive. Some of the decisions might be administrative. For
example, The University of Illinois at Chicago Medical Center uses an application called Discern
Expert. It monitors patient data and events and recommends action, such as admission, transfer
to another ward or hospital, discharge, or order of tests or treatments. For instance, a set of rules
in the system can look like this:
IF: An order for a contrast-enhanced CAT SCAN is received
AND: The patient’s BUN level is HIGH
AND: The patient’s CREATININE level is HIGH
THEN: Send a message to the patient’s physician via electronic
mail indicating a possible adverse effect of contrast agent use in
this setting.
Medical expert systems help diagnose patients and suggest
treatments
Alexander Raths/Photos.com
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
343
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is caused by the breakdown of blood, muscle, and protein. High
levels of it might indicate kidney disease. Creatinine is a protein produced by muscle tissue and
released into the blood. High levels of it might indicate kidney failure. Discern Expert helps staff
members prevent complications or unnecessary testing. Once a medical ES is composed, it can
be used anywhere, bringing expertise to poor regions of the world, where expert doctors are in
dire shortage.
In addition to testing, health information management (HIM) solutions are being adopted
by healthcare providers. With an increased focus on reducing the skyrocketing costs in health
care, the integration of reimbursement for healthcare services and the delivery of quality health
care will continue to dominate the dialogue. In addition the U.S. federal government is placing
more emphasis on electronic health records and exchange of health information. The exchange
of information and compliance with new regulations will determine how much healthcare
providers will receive for reimbursement. To assist with health information management, it is
clear that several technologies will be used including natural-language processing, and expert
systems will provide an important role (Klein, 2010).
POINT OF
INTEREST
ES, You’re Practicing Medicine!
IBM software development experts have teamed up with doctors to develop new technology that will
aid doctors in saving the lives of premature babies. First used in an ICU unit in Canada, the early warn-
ing system alerts healthcare professionals at the first sign premature babies could be developing poten-
tially life-threatening complications. The revolutionary advancement in computing software will be
capable of processing 512 readings per second including heart rate, temperature, respiration, and
more, and will provide clinicians with the most real-time analytical data possible. This way, when an
infant’s condition suddenly changes, clinicians and doctors will have the best data possible to make
difficult decisions.
Source: Frean, A. (2011, Jun 16). Big Blue and the endless pursuit of blue sky thinking, The Times, p. 53.
Credit Evaluation
Holders of American Express (AmEx) credit cards can potentially charge the card for hundreds of
thousands of dollars per purchase. Obviously, most retailers and restaurateurs will not process a
charge before they contact AmEx for approval. The AmEx clerk who considers the request uses
an ES. The system requests data such as account number, location of the establishment, and
amount of the purchase. Coupled with information from a database that contains previous data
on the account, and a knowledge base with criteria for approving or denying credit, the ES
provides a response.
Another expert system called RiskAnalyst, developed by Moody’s Analytics, provides data
storage and credit analysis (Anonymous, 2013c). The system is used by asset managers, banks
and insurers worldwide. It consolidates into one software platform the ability to collect, analyze
and store credit information coupled with assessment tools for risk and credit evaluation
(Anonymous, 2013c).
The system provides complex analysis of the data contained in applicants’ financial reports.
The expert system not only provides English-language interpretation of the historical financial
output but also prepares the assumptions for annual projections and produces text output
linkable to word-processing software. It eliminates much of the tedious writing of analytical
reports, producing standard financial statement reviews.
Loan officers periodically update the knowledge base to customize it for a bank’s current
loan policy, as well as national and local economic forecasts and interest rate projections.
The system consistently and reliably interprets the relationship of these variable factors and the
levels of sensitivity that the loan officers associate with a particular financial statement.
344
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Detection of Insider Securities Trading
Like other similar institutions, the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) has a special department to
prevent insider trading of the securities under its supervision. Insider trading is the trading of
stocks based on information available only to those affiliated with a company, not to the
general public. This practice is a serious breach of U.S. federal law. To detect insider trading, the
department receives information from several sources on unusual trading activity and uses this
information to identify a stock it might want to investigate. Using an ES, the department’s
analysts access a large database of the stock’s history and choose a time period of interest. The
system provides questions that the analysts can answer with the information they received from
the database. The questions are formulated to reflect the experience of expert investigators. After
the analysts finish answering all the questions, the system provides two numbers: the
probability that a further investigation is warranted, and the probability that it is not.
Detection of Common Metals
Metallurgists are experts, and their time is expensive. Also, they usually work in laboratories, which
are expensive, too. General Electric Corp. developed an expert system that helps nonexperts to
identify common metals and alloys outside laboratories. The user provides information on density,
color, and hardness of the metal and results of simple chemical tests that can be performed by
novices outside the laboratory setting. If the user provides sufficient information, the system will
positively identify the metal or alloy. If the information is insufficient, the system will provide a
list of possible metals in order of likelihood. Even such a list can be helpful in some situations,
saving much time, labor cost, and the need to wait for lab testing.
Diagnosis and Prediction of Mechanical Failure
A vehicle that can diagnose its own mechanical failures has obvious benefits. But what about
vehicles that can alert you to an approaching traffic jam, entertain passengers, and diagnose its
own mechanical failures? Now that is more like it. For example, the HawTai Bu sedan and the
Geely EC825 car are the first two mass-produced Chinese cars with in-vehicle infotainment
systems. The systems, run by Intel Atom processors, support a fully connected driving
experience including navigation, entertainment, and Internet services. The system can recognize
traffic maps in real time and recommend alternative travel routes. These features build on the
basic diagnostic system that is found in most vehicles. Owners can even receive alerts while
away from the car, which provides surveillance video of the situation (Hoffmann, 2011).
POINT OF
INTEREST
A Tweet from Your Car?
In the future, cars may be able to “tweet” their mechanical issues to their drivers. The technology already
partially exists. GM’s telematics system has been around for over a decade and Ford has technology that
allows the car to read incoming text messages from the driver’s mobile phone. The potential exists, there-
fore, for a vehicle’s system to be able to check diagnostics and alert the driver via tweet such as, ‘check
brakes’ or ‘change oil.’ Although it would be a revolutionary step for a car to specifically diagnose its own
mechanical issues, it would still be the responsibility of the owner/driver to actually get the car fixed.
Source: Howell, D. (2010, June 23). Your Car Could Soon Tweet You With Its Latest Diagnostics Report,
Investor’s Business Daily.
The remote diagnostics increasingly found in some Toyota and Ford vehicles goes beyond
being a core safety and security feature. Interaction with the car in the form of vehicle self-
diagnostics
is
becoming
a
method
for
car
companies
to
develop
customer
relationship
management (CRM). The interaction, communication, and experience of the car are just as
important as the physical features of the car itself. In the future, look for vehicles’ intelligence to
evolve, just as the cell phone has (Anonymous, 2012b).
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
345
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Group Decision Support Systems
When a team of people are to make decisions, a group decision support system (GDSS) can
be useful. The systems are often named group intelligence systems, collaborative systems, or
simply group systems. Their purpose is to facilitate the contribution of ideas, brainstorming, and
choosing promising solutions. Often, one person serves as a facilitator of the entire process.
Typically, a session starts by defining a problem to be resolved or a decision to be made;
followed by contribution of ideas, evaluation of the ideas (such as pros and cons of each idea),
and some method of voting on the ideas. The voting determines the ranking of ideas to solve
the problem or make a decision. The entire list of suggested decisions is then submitted to the
final decision maker. If the group is authorized to make the decision, then the top-ranked
offered decision is adopted. FacilitatePro, offered by Facilitate.com (see illustration), is a typical
example of such application software. Electrogrid, a company that manages electrical power
grids, used FacilitatePro
to
deal with challenging
organization
dynamics
to enable and
implement a strategic planning process (Anonymous, 2009).
FacilitatePro, a group
decision support system,
enables decision makers
to brainstorm, evaluate
ideas, and vote to reach
a decision
Like many other application software systems, group decision support systems have also
migrated to the cloud. For example, Analytica Cloud Player (ACP) from Lumina Decision
Systems, combines the advantages of GDDSs while eliminating the need to update software as
changes are available (Anonymous, 2013b).
Courtesy of facilitatePro
346
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
The process not only helps in structuring the group decision-making process, it also creates
an environment different from sitting around a table. GDSSs allow participants to maintain
anonymity during the entire session or parts of it. This removes the fear of putting forth ideas
that might be dismissed or ridiculed. It also puts all the participants on equal footing
regardless of rank or seniority. Anonymity helps elicit more creative ideas and a more open
and thorough decision-making process. It also results in a consensus or at least a decision by a
majority. Such decisions are less politically motivated and therefore garner more support when
implemented.
Geographic Information Systems
As mentioned in Chapter 5, “Business Software,” some decisions can be made only when
examining information on a map. Many business decisions concern geographic locations—as
input, output, or both. For example, consider the process of choosing the best locations for new
stores or determining how to deploy police forces optimally. For map-related decisions,
geographic information systems (GISs) are often the best decision aids. GISs process
location data and provide output. For instance, a GIS could be used to help a housing developer
determine
where
to
invest
by
tracking
and
displaying
population
changes
on
a
map,
highlighting in color increases of more than 10 percent over the past three years. With this
information, a developer could easily decide where to invest on the basis of population growth
trends. Other examples include the following:
●
Delivery managers looking for the shortest distance a truck can travel to deliver ordered goods
at the lowest cost.
●
School district officials looking for the most efficient routes for busing school children to and
from their homes.
●
A retailer gathering information on population and demographics to locate a new store.
●
City planners looking to deploy services to better serve residents, which might include police
officers deciding how to deploy their forces on the basis of precinct maps indicating levels of
criminal activity.
●
Healthcare agencies analyzing which areas of a community need more or less attention and
resources for treatment of certain diseases or injuries that result from criminal violence.
●
Oil companies looking to determine drilling locations on the basis of geological tests.
●
Mapping concentrations of people at work and in shopping centers to help banks decide
where to install new ATMs.
In Springfield, Massachusetts, for instance, healthcare professionals integrated data collected
for Hampden County with information from the area’s two major medical centers and the city’s
health, planning, and police departments to use in combination with the region’s map. They
use models that help identify geographic areas and population groups that need health-care
intervention in youth violence and late-stage breast cancer detection. Healthcare provider Kaiser
Permanente utilizes a GIS to gather data that will impact the delivery of their services. Their
enterprise-level GIS uses data about the location of its members to better understand where to
locate new medical offices. The GIS integrates demographic and socioeconomic information
provided by the U.S. Census Bureau (Kehoe, 2011).
A typical GIS consists of (1) a database of quantitative and qualitative data from which
information is extracted for display, (2) a database of maps, and (3) a program that displays the
information
on
the
maps.
The
digitized
maps
are
produced
from
satellite
and
aerial
photography. Displays might be in the form of easily understood symbols and colors or even
moving images. For instance, an oil exploration map might show different concentrations of
expected crude oil deposits in different hues of red. Or, population density might be similarly
displayed on a map using different hues of blue. A more sophisticated GIS might display, in
colors or icons, concentrations of specific consumer groups by age, income, and other
characteristics. As shown in the following illustration, Microsoft MapPoint integrates sales data
into a mapping, geographic context.
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
347
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Microsoft MapPoint
shows an example of a
GIS integrating sales data
by state
POINT OF
INTEREST
Maps, Please
ESRI is a leading developer of geographic information systems. Its website provides a list of GISs that you
can use online. Go to www.esri.com/software/internetmaps/index.html and peruse the maps. Some are
used for location of real estate for sale or lease; others for environmental protection; and others for
water resource management, disaster handling (such as floods and fire), and many other purposes.
Many of the sites are run by local governments for the use of their administrators and citizens.
Web technology helps promote the use of GISs by private organizations and governments
alike. Intranets allow employees to bring up thousands of maps from a central repository on
their own PCs. HTML and XML, the primary languages used to compose and retrieve webpages,
support the presentation of pictures with marked areas, which makes them ideal for retrieval of
marked maps. Clicking different areas of a map can zoom in and out as well as bring up related
information in the form of other maps or text, utilizing the multimedia capabilities of the web
to the fullest.
For example, sales managers can bring up maps of continents and see how past sales have
performed over different territories. They can zoom in and zoom out on a territory. With the
touch of a finger or click of a mouse they can receive detailed information on who serves the
territory and other pertinent information. Indeed, more and more retail chains are adopting GISs
for decision making. Pollo Tropical, a Hispanic-Caribbean restaurant chain, operates 125
restaurants throughout the southeastern U.S. and abroad. Its managers used “gut feeling” to
determine where to open new restaurants. Now they use a GIS with geo-demographic data
purchased from MapInfo (now a division of Pitney Bowes), a leader in location intelligence
software. The system helps them pinpoint where their best customers live and work in the
company’s effort to expand outside Florida.
In government work, a city clerk can bring up a map of the neighborhood of a resident,
zoom in on the resident’s house pictured on the map, click on the picture, and receive
information such as real-estate taxes owed and paid over the past several years. Further
information, such as whether a neighborhood uses septic tanks or a sewage system, might be
rendered by different colors. The map can also show different zoning codes, such as land
Courtesy of Microsoft Corporation
348
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
designated for residential, industrial, or commercial purposes. GISs could also be used to assist
law-enforcement officials to analyze crime statistics.
A GIS tool enables law-
enforcement officials to
determine spatial patterns
and hotspots for various
types of crimes
You may be familiar with some popular web-based GISs: Google Earth, Mapquest, Yahoo
Maps, and others. Some of the companies that own these applications have opened the software
for anyone to create specialized GISs through mashups. Recall our discussion of mashups in
Chapter 5, “Business Software.” Mashups are applications that combine features of two or more
online applications. Often, one of these applications shows maps. Combining the maps with
data such as the location of certain information—events, clubs, real estate for sale—creates a
specialized GIS. For example, www.zillow.com mashes a map with up-to-date estimates of real
estate prices. The web has hundreds of similar mashups involving maps. One site where you can
see over a hundred of such mashups is www.programmableweb.com/mashups.
Courtesy of Caliper Corporation
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
349
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Summary
●
Decision aids include decision support systems,
expert systems, group decision support systems,
geographic information systems, and any other
software tool that helps with decision making auto-
matically or on demand. Some are stand-alone sys-
tems, and others are part of larger systems. Most
are accessible through a web browser.
●
The
decision-making
process
combines
three
major phases: intelligence, design, and choice. In
the first phase, data is collected from which rele-
vant information will be gleaned. In the design
phase, the data is organized into useful information
and processed by models to analyze it and produce
potential courses of action. In the final stage, the
decision
maker
selects
an
alternative,
that
is,
makes the decision.
●
Problems
span
a
continuum
between
two
extremes: structured and unstructured. A struc-
tured problem is one for whose solution there is a
proven algorithm. An unstructured problem is one
for which there are multiple potential solutions. A
semi-structured problem is one that is neither fully
structured nor totally unstructured.
●
Most DSSs have three components. The data man-
agement module gives the user access to data-
bases from which relevant information can be
retrieved. The model management module selects,
or lets the user select, an appropriate model
through which the data are analyzed. The dialog
module serves as an interface between the user
and the other two modules. It allows the user to
enter queries and parameters, and then presents
the result in an appropriate or selected form, such
as tabular or graphical.
●
DSSs provide a quick way to perform sensitivity
analysis. The user can change one or several para-
meters in the model and answer “what if” ques-
tions, called what-if analysis.
●
Powerful software tools such as electronic spread-
sheets let users with little expertise in systems
development create their own DSSs.
●
Expert systems are developed to emulate the knowl-
edge of an expert. Developers use artificial intelligence
techniques. An expert system consists of a knowledge
base, inference engine, and a dialog module.
●
Neural network software is often integrated into an
expert system to enable the system to learn and
refine decision rules based on success or failure.
●
Expert systems are used in narrow domains in
which typical diagnosis and decisions are unstruc-
tured, such as health care, mineral exploration,
stock investment, and weather forecasting.
●
When decisions involve locations and routes, pro-
fessionals can use geographic information systems
(GISs). GISs provide maps with icons and colors to
represent measurable variables such as population
concentrations, potential natural resources, deploy-
ment of police forces, pinpointing concentrations of
diseases, and other factors that involve locations
and routes.
●
Computerized decision aids practically leave deci-
sion making to machines. When machines deter-
mine whom to hire, whom to accept for higher
education,
or
to
whom
to
extend
credit,
the
decision-making process could overlook important
circumstances, in which case the decisions might
not be accurate or fair.
350
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Michael found the Simon model helpful to organize
developing
the
ordering
process;
intelligence,
design, and choice. Michael knows that the point-
of-sale system for the restaurant collected data
from the dining sales. He can identify the data
maintained by the system and has exported it
several times. At the same time, he also is aware
that external data was needed from the suppliers:
products sold, order quantity, price and product
number. All of this data is the intelligence. The
restaurant
had
several
suppliers
that
they
purchased
various
categories
of
food
products;
vegetables, meats, fish, beverages, condiments and
cooking spices.
When Jim and Michael brainstormed some ideas,
it was clear that data from a variety of sources needed
to be consolidated to form a warehouse of data. The
consolidated data was one of two elements of the
design phase. The second element would then use
the consolidated data that would form the basis of
the algorithms and process to report the products
needed. The various courses of action could then be
developed to ultimately lead to the third phase,
choosing a course of action; determining the actual
orders
to
suppliers
for
various
quantities
and
products.
With
this
process,
Michael
hoped
to
provide
Kimball’s
with
an
accurate,
timely
purchasing decision making process.
What Is Your Advice?
1. What are the various sources of the data main-
tained
internally?
Externally?
Some data may
need to be gathered and entered manually into
the system. Identify these sources also.
2. From these sources, what data fields would then
be needed from these sources to form the ware-
house of data? List what would be needed to use
as input to the design process.
3. What types of calculations and decisions could
you recommend to help Michael and Jim with
this new model?
New Perspectives
1. Do you believe that this decision making process
could be completed using a spreadsheet? Or is
there
a
pre-developed
software
product
that
could help with this function?
2. Could you recommend any types of hardware and
software you learned about in earlier chapters to
allow more efficient data entry?
Key Terms
algorithm, 327
artificial intelligence (AI), 340
case-based reasoning, 343
data management module, 330
decision support system (DSS),
329
dialog module, 333
expert system (ES), 340
geographic information system
(GIS), 347
group decision support system
(GDSS), 346
inference engine, 340
intelligent agent, 342
knowledge base, 340
model, 326
model management module, 331
neural networks, 340
parameter, 327
semi-structured problem, 327
sensitivity analysis, 335
structured problem, 327
unstructured problem, 327
what-if analysis, 335
yield management, 337
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
351
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Review Questions
1. What is a decision? When does a person have to
make a decision?
2. DSSs use models to process data. Explain what a
model is. Give an example that is not mentioned
in the chapter.
3. Many DSSs are not stand-alone anymore, but are
embedded in other ISs. What are those ISs?
4. What is a sensitivity test? Give three examples.
5. The travel industry uses DSSs for yield manage-
ment. What is yield management, and what is the
output of a yield management DSS? How does
it affect revenue and operations?
6. What is the purpose of an expert system?
How can it serve as a competitive tool?
7. Explain how expert systems can distribute
expertise.
8. How could an ES be used to detect probable fraud
committed by a bank employee?
9. What is the advantage of combining ES and
neural net technologies?
10. What is a GIS? What purpose does it serve?
11. Name the three major elements that are
combined to make up a GIS.
Discussion Questions
12. DSSs and ESs give structure to an often unstruc-
tured decision-making process. Explain this
statement.
13. Bank officers use DSSs to make decisions on
extending or denying credit. Universities might
use DSSs to decide which applicant to admit and
which applicant to reject. Would you agree to use
DSSs for such decisions without human
intervention?
14. Some companies use DSSs to make decisions for
their knowledge workers. The decisions are based
on previous experience and on corporate policy.
Would you prefer to work for a company that
requires you to use a DSS for the decisions you
have to execute, or would you rather work for a
company that lets you make decisions on your
own? Explain.
15. Some managers say that you should never accept
the output of any computer-based decision aid
without scrutiny. Do you agree? Explain.
16. Give three examples of a business decision for
which you would not use a decision support sys-
tem or any other software. Give three nonbusi-
ness examples. Explain your choices.
17. Think of executives in human resources, finance,
marketing, and information systems. In which of
these areas could executives benefit the most
from using GIS technologies? Explain.
18. Some DSSs allow the user to select a model for
an analysis. Would you like to have the final say
in determining which model would be used, or
would you prefer to let the software use whatever
model it chose for the analysis, and then produce
a decision? Why?
19. Credit scoring firms such as Fair Isaac base their
scoring only on electronic data collected from
financial sources. A low credit score may signifi-
cantly affect a person’s or a family’s life. What
information that may be relevant is not consid-
ered in the scoring?
20. How could you use a GIS for scheduling your
classes? What would be the likely sources of data
for such a system?
21. Some GISs are used for very small geographic
areas, such as a campus or a single building. Can
you think of how a GIS could help the mainte-
nance department of a university campus?
22. As an increasing amount of decision making is
carried out by software, do you think the demand
for college-educated workers will diminish?
23. You noticed that the family doctor and the spe-
cialists that you see consult their PC and hand-
held computers for practically every diagnosis
they make and for every prescription they give
you. Does this make you trust these physicians
less than physicians who do not consult their
computers?
24. Many software packages offer expertise in a
multitude of areas, such as investment, nutrition,
and writing your own will. Do you trust the advice
of such software?
25. “The more professionals use ESs, the less exper-
tise they accumulate, because the less actual
352
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
hands-on experience they gain. This is akin to a
pilot who spends most of his flying time watching
an autopilot system rather than flying the airplane
with his own hands.” Do you think that ESs can
decrease real expertise for its users? Why or
why not?
Applying Concepts
26. Make a list of six daily activities you perform.
They might include preparing homework assign-
ments, shopping, and other activities. Ensure that
three of the activities call for decision making that
is unstructured (or semi-structured) and that three
involve structured decision making. Prepare a
one-page report listing the activities, stating what
decision making is required, and explaining why
the decision making is unstructured or structured.
27. Prepare a one-page report on the career you
intend to pursue. Give at least four examples of
activities involved in such a career that call for
problem solving. Explain which problem solving
is structured and which is unstructured.
28. You are the head of a medical team that wants to
learn about the spread of a new disease in your
state. You decide to engage a company that
designs GISs. List the types of data that would be
needed for the system and which agencies are
likely to have collected the data. Suggest visual
effects to make it easy to identify concentrations
of sick people and the spread of the disease.
Hands-On Activities
29. Use an electronic spreadsheet such as Excel to
design a DSS for solving the following problem.
A publisher makes and sells books that have dif-
ferent titles but have the same format and are
made of the same materials (paper, ink, binding,
and so forth). Three types of costs are involved in
the process:
Fixed cost per title: $15,000 for setting up the
press, regardless of how many pages a title has
or how many copies will be made of that title.
Fixed cost per page: Setting the plates for printing
costs $2.00 per page, regardless of the number
of books. (Thus, for a book of 324 pages, the
per-page fixed cost would be $648.)
Variable cost per page: The printing and binding
of each page of each copy of a title costs 7 cents.
Assume that no other costs are involved (such as
shipping and handling). Prepare a decision model
that allows the publisher to decide the following:
a. For a given number of copies, what should be
the book’s minimum retail price per copy to
break even?
b. For a given retail price, what is the break-even
quantity of copies?
Test your decision tool for a title that has 250
pages. If the publisher intends to sell 40,000 cop-
ies, what is the break-even price? If the publisher
decides to price the book at $18.00, what is the
break-even quantity that must be sold?
Email your spreadsheet to your professor,
attached to a message in which you answer the
two test questions.
30. Use a spreadsheet or download a free ES shell for
this assignment. Build a simple ES that determines
the eligibility of an applicant for a bank loan of
$50,000 for 30 years. Eligibility is determined by
the number of points the applicant accumulates in
several risk categories, based on the following:
Loan size
No points are deducted for a $10,000 loan.
Henceforth, 2 points are deducted from the total
score for each additional $10,000 of the requested
loan.
Loan life
No points are deducted for the first 5 years of the
loan’s life (years to repay the loan). Henceforth,
1 point is deducted for every 5 years.
Rule
If the applicant’s total number of points is equal to
or exceeds 60, grant the loan.
31. For a small business with an Internet presence,
the data capturing technology they need to max-
imize web exposure and thus profits may be
financially unfeasible. However, with the creation
of Google Analytics, small businesses now have
access to the big data they need to monitor vital
site data. Google Analytics includes many tools
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
353
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
such as Content Analytics, which shows which
parts of your website are performing well, and
Conversion Analytics to display how many visi-
tors your site is attracting. Go to the Google
Analytics site and browse its features. Then, use
what you have learned in this chapter to make
some insights into the artificial intelligence
behind Google Analytics. Explain what systems
drive analytics, what the outputs are, and how
small businesses use the outputs.
32. Even if you don’t have a credit card, you probably
still have a credit report. If you have any bills in
your name such as a telephone or cell phone bill
or have a savings account or checking account at
a bank, you have a credit report. Banks use your
credit report to determine if they will lend you
money or issue you a line of credit. In reality, the
time when people often find out they have a poor
credit report is when they try to apply for a loan
or credit card. Even if there are mistakes in your
credit report, it may take months or even a year to
fix the mistakes. The delay in accessing credit has
obvious consequences. Additionally, clearing up
any mistakes in your report could enhance your
borrowing capacity or decrease your borrowing
interest rate. Go to www.AnnualCreditReport
.com, select your state, input your information,
and request your free credit report. Review your
report for errors and see which companies
inquired about you. Print it out and bring it into
class. Lead a discussion with a small group on
what computer intelligence systems are behind
collecting all of the personal information that
makes up your credit report. Does reviewing your
credit report increase or decrease worries about
identity theft or fraud?
Team Activities
33. Team up with two other students. Contact a local
stockbroker. Ask the broker to give you a list of
the most important points he or she considers
when predicting appreciation of a stock. Ask how
each point (such as last year’s earnings per share,
percentage of appreciation/depreciation over the
past six months, and the like) affects the net
result, as a percentage. Use the input to formalize
the model in a spreadsheet application. Select a
portfolio of 100 units of 10 traded stocks. Use the
model to predict the increase in the price of each
stock and the value of the entire portfolio a year
into the future. If you know how to use macros,
embellish your new DSS with a user-friendly dia-
log module.
34. Team up with another student. Obtain a digitized
map of your campus. If you cannot copy one, you
can use a scanner to digitize a paper map. Use a
web design application to create a simple GIS. On
the map page, mark 10 areas so that when
clicked, another page comes up with additional
information about the building or part of a build-
ing you marked. Examples of marked areas that
you could include: registrar’s office, school of
business building, the student union, and the
computer lab. Email your GIS to your professor.
354
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Transporting a Transparent and Nimble
Cash Flow Forecasting System
The Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT)
was facing one of the most basic financial dilemmas:
can current obligations be fulfilled with available
resources? Facing a ten-year, $6 billion highway
maintenance
and
restoration
project,
the
KDOT
needed to be able to have clear visibility over the
impact of declining cash balances, budget cuts, and
weather-related expenditures. Their old data system
consisted of a plethora of spreadsheets requiring
manual inputs and changing data could take up to
six weeks. All signs pointed to a redesigned system
that
could
respond
to
cash
flow
shifts
quickly,
accurately, and easily. Their dilemma led to the
creation of the Cash Availability and Forecasting
Environment (CAFE) and the overhaul of their project
managing system.
The KDOT needed a cash flow forecasting system
that
could
provide
the
agency
with
transparent
management
of
cash
forecasting
models
and
assumptions
and
produce
timely
forecasts
to
increase visibility across multiple departments. Due
to the large number of variables affecting future cash
flows, the necessity to quickly realize the impact of a
change to any one of those variables required a
system that could run extensive contingency plans.
Additionally, the CAFE system would have to be
connected
to
the
updated
project
management
system, which was being updated to enhance and
streamline the communication of interrelated data
between adjacent departments.
KDOT’s first step was to hire an independent
consultant to guide the process of transforming their
project management and forecasting systems. The
project
managers
and
cash
flow
forecasters
collaborated to determine the needs for the new
system. The two sides ensured the success of the
new system by recognizing the “big picture” that
the two divisions had to be separate yet connected.
The agency selected a vendor that had complex
statistical
process
that
took
into
consideration
curvilinear data rather than just linear data, which
means data could be more precise. The vendor could
create
complex
models
that
could
incorporate
external factors automatically. The vendor worked
with KDOT administrators to ensure that the project
management system was compatible with the CAFE
cash
forecasting
system.
Additionally,
it
was
important that the new system included an intuitive
user interface for model builders and users and have
great analytics. Because CAFE is accessible through a
web
browser,
the
vendor
could
easily
make
adjustments, upload the new system for agency to
critique, and let the agency provide feedback. This
refining process was ideal for the back-and-forth
exchanges necessary to create the finished product.
KDOT’s
success
relates
to
their
future
cash
payouts, thus signifying the importance that the
models representing these payouts are accurate and
timely. Payout curve models determine the sum of
the KDOTs cash needs. The original system had 13
different curves with tables and lacked uniformity,
making
drawing
conclusions
difficult.
The
new
models had to be able to accommodate fluctuations
in variables and adjust for changing biases. The
payout model used today in CAFE was made by
using historical data from every payout scenario
available to KDOT. CAFE automatically applies the
payout model to every project and managers can
alter variables such as delayed start time or cost
estimates to see how the scenarios play out.
The culture of KDOT’s communication prior to the
implementation of CAFE was ancient. Project data
used for cash flow forecasting was distributed on
CDs only once a month and that was after the bids
were in place. The manual requirements of the
previous
system
significantly
reduced
the
data
sharing that was even possible. CAFE automatically
updates when changes are made with project data.
Changes
made
to
the
project
management
system (PMS) automatically change in the cash flow
system and are changed in all forecast models thus,
eliminating the tedious manual inputting of data,
which only slows response time and leads to errors.
Managers can instantly see future cash flow reports
produced for any cash payout over the lifetime of a
project
or
just
one
day.
They
can
also
test
contingency
models
and
create
payout
curve
adjusted for biases, seasonality, project length, and
other variables. CAFE can also help the municipality
determine when a bond issuance would yield the
highest payout.
The
implementation
of
CAFE
allows
project
managers to understand their impact on the KDOT’s
cash
balance.
Although
under
the
prior
system
project managers acknowledged their actions had
consequences on the cash flow, it is difficult to
comprehend the capacity of those consequences
without the right data system in place. Now when
project managers ask KDOT cash flow analysts if
they can change the start time of a project for
example, CAFE can make that decision instantly.
CAFE has proven to efficiently handle cash and
predict future cash availability for KDOT. Without
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
355
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CAFE, the state agency would not have been able to
plan and support the 10-year $8 billion program for
highway maintenance and preservation.
Source: Ferrill, M., Malcom, K., & Suggs, R. (2012). The
Kansas Department of Transportation Builds a Transparent
and Nimble Cash Flow Forecasting System. Government
Finance Review, 28(6), 14–18.
Thinking About the Case
1. The planning stage of creating a new ES may be
the most important stage. What did KDOT do in
the planning stage that led them to success in the
long run?
2. Comment on the flaws in the communication
practices of KDOT’s previous system. What was
the issue with distributing the cash flow informa-
tion after the bids had already been placed?
3. Explain why the payout curve models in today’s
CAFE use historical data from every KDOT project
available.
4. Why was the integration of CAFE to KDOT’s proj-
ect management system important?
Decisions to Support Health Care and
Patients
Decision support systems can provide many benefits
and efficiencies for operational and tactical decision
making. From marketing to employees during open
enrollment for health insurance to the delivery of
quality patient care, decision support tools can add
value to health care.
The cost of delivering health care in the U.S. is a
topic
receiving
a
lot
of
attention
and
national
dialogue. This issue is complex and widespread,
both economically and personally. It affects every
individual, family, and business in the U.S. and
probably will require many solutions and approaches
to address the problem. The effect of “consumerism”
has influenced the debate associated with the costs
and delivery of health care.
In some industries such as education and health
care, the word “sales” has never been a term used in
operations and management, probably because the
connotation would not be appropriate to identify
with customers and their transfer of funds. However,
revenue into a business organization still remains as a
sale. In an increasingly competitive marketplace for
many industries, it is important to attract and retain
customers in a long-term, profitable relationship. The
integration of business process management (BPM)
methodologies and decision support systems can
provide the methods for developing relationships with
customers.
When
businesses
offer
their
employees
the
selection
of
benefits
alternatives
during
open
enrollment,
it
is
important
that
health
insurers
promote a personalized environment. Considering
that the consumer has the power of the purchase,
communicating effective choices to the prospective
employee may heavily influence the enrollment (or
the sale) in the health plan. BPM systems can collect
crucial data on the consumer, such as demographics
and past claims, to personalize the process. Using
decision support systems and predictive analytics,
“the
best
sales
experience
for
the
consumer,
including
portal
designs,
product
offerings
and
transactional navigation tailored for the best fit.”
(Hart, 2011) The system could compile a low-cost
product offering and highlight gym memberships for
a young adult employee. The demographics and
lower claims potential would target their need for a
reduced-benefit insurance plan. In a similar manner
to Amazon’s recommendations, the personalization
of product offerings based on data and a structured
decision-making
process
can
increase
the
lead-
to-close ratio and increase sales.
After the marketing and enrollment is done,
decision support systems can also gain positive
benefits also for the actual delivery of health care
while maintaining the quality of care and safety of
patients. The “first step” of the process is to provide
the appropriate and accurate data to the nurses and
doctors treating the patient in a timely manner. Carle
Foundation Hospital, in Urbana, IL, has implemented
a system to “put tools into physicians’ and nurses’
hands to provide the right information at the right
time.”
(Page,
2011)
Carle
installed
an
inpatient,
emergency
department,
and
pharmacy
electronic
medical record system.
A crucial component of the implementation related
to how the project was managed and approached.
Rather than branding the new initiative as an IT
project, Carle managed the project as a “clinical
transformation initiative.” Improving medical care was
the objective, rather than improving efficiency. Tools
were
developed
that
focused on
clinical
decision
support methodologies and best practices became the
“core measures” of the new system. A series of data
points are analyzed by the decision support tools to
assess patients’ need for medical attention.
Sources: Hart, E. (2011). A new era promises better outcomes.
Health Management Technology, 32(11), 14–15; Page, D.
(2011). ‘Most Improved’ Take Similar Steps to Reach New
Heights. Hospitals & Health Networks, 85(1), 42–42, 44.
Thinking About the Case
1. Consider the various data elements that would be
gathered for prospective health insurance custo-
mers. Think about other approaches that could be
developed to target customers and the associated
structured decisions.
PART4 356
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
2. Why did Carle Foundation Hospital’s approach of
implementing the new system create a successful
project? Why would the approach of “improving
efficiency” have altered the implementation of
this project?
3. Are there any risks of integrating DSS tools to
help diagnose patient health care? If so, how
could these risks be minimized?
4. Can DSS tools have a positive effect on the
delivery of health care? How?
References
Anonymous. RiskAnalyst. Retrieved July 8, 2013, from
http://www.moodys.com/sites/products/Product
Attachments/RiskAnalyst%20Fact%20Sheet%
20English.pdf
Anonymous. (2009). Electrogrid Uses FacilitatePro to
Spark Collaborative Strategic Planning. http://
facilitate.com/solutions/case-studies/electrogrid-
corporation.html
Anonymous. (2010, Oct 14). Quicken Loans Reports
25-Year All-Time Record Closed Loan Production
of $3.4 Billion in September 2010, U.S. Newswire.
Anonymous. (2011). FACING UP TO THE CHALLENGE.
PPI, 53(11), 29–30.
Anonymous. (2012a). Barnes & Noble (White Paper).
Retrieved 12 Feb, 2012, from http://www-01.ibm.
com/software/success/cssdb.nsf/CS/JHUD-
92JRDT?OpenDocument&Site=corp&cty=
en_us
Anonymous. (2012b, Sep 24). Remote Diagnostics
Springboard for Car OEMs to Full CRM Service
Approach, Toyota and Ford Leading the Way,
Says ABI Research, Business Wire.
Anonymous. (2013a). Amazing Mortgage Process.
Retrieved Feb 14, 2013, from http://www.quick
enloans.com/about/amazing-mortgage-process
Anonymous. (2013b). Analytica Cloud Player.
Retrieved July 9, 2013, from http://www.lumina.
com/products/analytica-cloud-player/
Anonymous. (2013c). RiskAnalyst. Retrieved July 8,
2013, from http://www.moodys.com/sites/
products/ProductAttachments/RiskAnalyst%
20Fact%20Sheet%20English.pdf
Anonymous. (2013d). Why iWebTrack. Retrieved 12
Feb, 2013, from http://www.iwebtrack.com/
why.asp
Hart, E. (2011). A new era promises better outcomes.
Health Management Technology, 32(11), 14–15.
Hoffmann, J. (2011). In-vehicle infotainment evolves
for safe, efficient connectivity on wheels. Electronic
Engineering Times(1607), 37–38, 40, 42, 44.
Kehoe, B. (2011). BENDING the Cost Curve. Hospitals
& Health Networks, 85(8), 42–43, 42.
Klein, J. (2010). The Year of HIM. Health Management
Technology, 31(1), 17–17.
Page, D. (2011). ‘Most Improved’ Take Similar Steps to
Reach New Heights. Hospitals & Health Networks,
85(1), 42–42, 44.
Rapport, M. (2012). CO-OP Shifts to Real-Time Fraud
Monitoring. Credit Union Times, n/a.
Simon, H. A. (1960). The new science of management
decision: Harper & Brothers.
Stroud, J. (2008). Study shows importance of checking
your credit report, St. Louis Post - Dispatch, p. E.3.
www.AnnualCreditReport.com. (2013). About Us.
Retrieved Feb 14, 2013, from https://www
.annualcreditreport.com/cra/helpabout
CHAPTER 10
Decision Support and Expert Systems
357
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4
CHAPTER
© bloomua/Shutterstock.com
PART
eleven
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE AND
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
Learning Objectives
As more and more business operations are managed using information from information systems and sometimes
automatically by information systems, large amounts of data are collected and stored electronically. With proper
software tools, data stored in databases and data warehouses enables executives to glean business intelligence—
information that helps them know more about customers and suppliers—and therefore helps them make better
decisions. Information technology also makes it possible to organize stored knowledge and garner knowledge from
vast amounts of unstructured data.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Explain the concepts of data mining and online analytical processing.
●
Explain the notion of business intelligence and its benefits to organizations.
●
Identify needs for knowledge storage and management in organizations.
●
Explain the challenges in knowledge management and its benefits to organizations.
●
Identify possible ethical and societal issues arising from the increasing globalization of information technology.
358
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Building and Developing Loyalty
Michael and Tyler have discussed a customer loyalty
program for the new location. They believe that a
solid program can be a crucial component in the new
location’s
success.
Kimball’s
will
need
additional
clientele to be profitable. A well-designed loyalty pro-
gram will incentivize customers to patronize the new
location and increase customer retention. Dining out
is heavily dependent on disposable income. In a diffi-
cult economy, Kimball’s must build affinity with new
customers
while
encouraging
current
customers.
However, Michael also noted that their focus should
include
multiple
revenue
streams
for
the
new
location.
Takeout for Success
Tyler was visiting the current location to get some
paperwork. He decided to sit at a table and have some
breakfast, knowing that it might be the only meal he
would have that day. He remembered what his father
said about multiple revenue streams for the new opera-
tion. He started to jot down some ideas on his tablet
while he ate. Michael and Tyler had already developed
a series of menus and advertising for group events tar-
geted for special occasions, banquets, and business
meetings. He was pondering if there were any other rev-
enue sources that Kimball’s could develop. As he sat
there, he overheard a customer talking. The customer,
Brooke, was a frequent customer of the restaurant. She
is a busy professional with a husband and two children.
Tyler heard her say, “Gee, these pastries are delicious.
I never have time to bake anymore. Maybe I should take
a few home for the kids.”
Brooke’s comment started Tyler thinking. He knew
his mother was an excellent baker as well as a cook. He
remembers how often Liz was complimented during the
holidays and parties about her cakes and pastries. Could
the extra kitchen space at the new location be used to
offer fresh-baked pastries and cakes? If Brooke enjoyed
the pastries, it is reasonable to conclude that other
customers also enjoyed the baked goods. Why couldn’t
they market the new location to take orders for baked
goods?
Always the conversationalist, Tyler decided to sit
with Brooke and ask her those questions. He asked
Brooke if he could join her and her husband Randy.
The conversation quickly developed into something
interesting. With their busy schedules, they did not
have the time to make baked goods. They also enter-
tained a great deal and would love to be able to order
cakes for special events or holidays. Brooke said, “It
would be great to order great food like this to pick up.
The closest bakery is about six miles from here–and
your mom is a much better cook than I am!” Tyler
laughed. But then he had an interesting thought. She
used the words “great food” in her conversation. Why
focus just on baked goods? Would a family meal to go
be something they were interested in? Brooke and
Randy thought it was a great idea. They said that the
convenience of quality food at a reasonable price
would help them a lot. Fast food can be convenient,
but a family style meal for takeout would be a nice alter-
native. Also, they were excited about the possibility of
ordering special items when they were entertaining
friends.
What an idea … Kimball’s on the Go! This would
create
a
new
revenue
stream
and
leverage
the
expanded capabilities of the new location. Liz’s food
and baked goods were already very popular at the cur-
rent location; why not offer takeout food for customers?
The breakfast break was worth Tyler’s time. It also
proved that sometimes you have to be a good listener
and remain attentive to customers’ needs. The new
location would have multiple “products” to join into a
loyalty program—lunch, dinner, late-night dining, after-
work gatherings, group events, Sunday brunch, and
now, take out. These various products could be covered
in one loyalty program and create significant cross-
marketing strategies. He could not wait to discuss his
idea with his parents.
Data Mining and Online Analysis
Recall from our discussion in Chapter 7, “Databases and Data Warehouses,” that data warehouses
are large databases containing historical transactions and other data. However, data warehouses
in themselves are useless. To make data warehouses useful, organizations must use software tools
to process data from these huge databases into meaningful information. Because executives can
obtain
significantly
more
information
about
their
customers,
suppliers,
and
their
own
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
359
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
organizations, they like to call information gleaned with such tools business intelligence (BI)
or business analytics. The two main uses of these databases are data mining and online
analytical processing. These terms are often used interchangeably.
Data Mining
Data warehouses could be regarded as a type of mine, where the data is the ore, and new useful
information is the precious find. Data mining is the process of selecting, exploring, and
modeling large amounts of data to discover previously unknown relationships that can support
decision making. Data-mining software searches through large amounts of data for meaningful
patterns of information.
Some data-mining tools are complex statistical analysis applications, and others use
additional tools that go beyond statistical analysis and hypothesis testing. While some tools
help find predefined relationships and ratios, they do not answer the question that more
powerful data-mining tools can answer: “What are the relationships we do not yet know?”
This is because the investigator must determine which relationships the software should look
for in the first place. To answer this question, other techniques are used in data mining,
including artificial intelligence techniques, described in Chapter 10, “Decision Support and
Expert Systems.”
To illustrate the difference between traditional queries and data-mining queries, consider
the following examples. A typical traditional query would be: “What is the relationship
between the amount of product X and the amount of product Y that we sold over the past
quarter?” A typical data-mining query would be: “Discover two products most likely to sell
well together on a weekend.” The latter query lets the software find patterns that would
otherwise not be detected through observation. Although data has traditionally been used to
see whether this or that pattern exists, data mining allows you to ask what patterns exist.
Thus, some experts say that in data mining you let the computer answer questions that you
do not know to ask. The combination of data-warehousing techniques and data-mining
software makes it easier to predict future outcomes based on patterns discovered within
historical data.
Data mining has four main objectives:
●
Sequence or path analysis: Finding patterns where one event leads to another, later event.
●
Classification: Finding whether certain facts fall into predefined groups.
●
Clustering: Finding groups of related facts not previously known.
●
Forecasting: Discovering patterns in data that can lead to reasonable predictions.
These techniques can be used in marketing, fraud detection, and other areas (see
Figure 11.1). Of the four types of analysis, you may be most familiar with clustering. When
you search for a certain item, you often see a list of other items with a message similar to
“Customers who purchased this item also bought…”. Data mining is most often used by
marketing managers, who are constantly analyzing purchasing patterns so that potential
buyers can be targeted more efficiently through special sales, product displays, or direct mail
and email campaigns. Data mining is an especially powerful tool in an environment in which
businesses are shifting from mass-marketing a product to targeting the individual consumer
with a variety of products that are likely to satisfy that person. Some observers call this
approach “marketing to one.”
360
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
F I G U R E 11.1
Potential applications of
data mining
DATA-MINING APPLICATION
DESCRIPTION
Consumer clustering
Identify the common characteristics of customers
who tend to buy the same products and services
from your company.
Customer churn
Identify the reason customers switch to competitors;
predict which customers are likely to do so.
Fraud detection
Identify characteristics of transactions that are most
likely to be fraudulent.
Direct marketing
Identify which prospective clients should be included
in a mailing or email list to obtain the highest
response rate.
Interactive marketing
Predict what each individual accessing a website is
most likely to be interested in seeing.
Market basket analysis
Understand what products or services are commonly
purchased together, and on what days of the week.
Trend analysis
Reveal the difference between a typical customer this 
month and a typical customer last month.
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Learn About BI and KM Tools
Information technology has advanced from fast calculation
machines to systems that produce useful information using
structured data and then to software that turns unstructured
information into knowledge. Knowing how to use BI tools
will help you to independently produce highly useful infor-
mation from data warehouses and other large data sources.
In your work you will also need to use other peoples’
knowledge. Much of this knowledge exists in the recorded
work and in the minds of coworkers and experts outside
your organization. Knowing how to use these tools will
help you as well as others perform better. As a knowledge
worker you will be able not only to use your own, limited
knowledge but also augment it with the experiences of other
people.
Predicting Customer Behavior
In banking, data mining is employed to find profitable customers and patterns of fraud. It is also
used to predict bankruptcies and loan payment defaults. For example, when Bank of America
looked for new approaches to retain customers, it used data-mining techniques. It merged
various behavior patterns into finely tuned customer profiles. The data was clustered into smaller
groups of individuals who were using banking services that didn’t best support their activities.
Bank employees contacted these customers and offered advice on services that would serve them
better. The result was greater customer loyalty (measured in fewer accounts closed and fewer
moves to other banks).
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
361
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
POINT OF
INTEREST
Keeping Cards Close to the Chest
Large Internet retailers such as eBay, Google, and Amazon.com collect massive amounts of data on their
website visitors and consumers. However, because this consumer data is at the core of their competitive
advantage, they admit very little of what information they hold. Amazon records products bought, looked
at (and for how long), put in the checkout cart, and those taken out of the checkout cart. They use this
information to ‘push’ new products on website visitors. For instance, if you look at laptop computers on
Amazon.com, you might see a list of products at the bottom of the Amazon.com home screen under the
‘Recommended Based on your Browsing History’ banner. The list would most likely include more laptop
computers, desktop computers, keyboards, or other computer accessories. Consumers may not always
know what they want to buy, but Amazon.com does.
Source: Clicking for gold. The Economist, 394, 9-S.11 (Feb 2010).
Businesses are continually implementing technology initiatives to approach strategic,
tactical, and operational effectiveness. The compilation of accurate, timely, and relevant
information to analyze using data mining techniques is gaining significant attention in the
marketplace. A recent McKinsey & Co. study estimates that the amount of global digital data
increased by 40 percent in 2012 alone (Holm, 2012). The key is how to harness and analyze the
growing amount of data gathered from business activities. The American International Group
(AIG) has invested heavily in data mining techniques to realize benefits to their insurance
operations. AIG’s initiatives have created an analytics team of approximately 100 professionals.
The
team
studies
its
information
about
marketing
efforts,
customer-service
practices,
underwriting assumptions, and fraud-detection programs by “digging” through their mountains
of data in search of knowledge. It is all about revealing the knowledge hidden in their data. The
benefit? From increasing customer loyalty through decreasing the number of telephone rings
before answering to more competitive pricing to increase sales (Holm, 2012).
To ensure a steady flow of customer data into their data warehouses, companies in almost
every industry—from airlines to lodging, dining, and gambling—operate customer loyalty
programs similar to the original frequent-flier programs. Membership is often free, and customers
leave a record every time they make a purchase even if they do not use a credit card to pay. In
many cases, mining such data provides business intelligence to target individual customers.
A large U.S. airline collects every possible piece of data on passengers in a central data
warehouse, from frequent-flyer numbers through reservations and flight details. The airline uses
data-mining tools to extract information that helps retain frequent flyers. For example, the
executives can query the data warehouse to see how many flight disruptions, cancellations, or
delayed arrivals its best customers experience in a given month. This helps the airline to
proactively contact these customers and offer them incentives to ensure their continued business.
POINT OF
INTEREST
We Know What You’re Thinking…
In 2011, Pitney Bowes announced a version upgrade in its Portrait Customer Analytics software called
Portrait Miner 6.0. It is advanced analytical software that allows users to identify customers most likely
to defect, most likely to purchase, and provides valuable insight into customer lifetime values. Portrait
Miner 6.0 is a visual and automated software solution for predicting consumer behavior and provides a
360 degree view of the customer base. Consumer insight teams now have the ability to profile customers
and make educated business decisions faster than ever. The data produced by the software will be used
to determine which customers will defect in the next months, whether they can be saved, and how to
possibly save them.
Source: Computer software; pitney bowes business insight releases Portrait Miner 6.0 for predicting
customer behavior. (2011). Marketing Weekly News
362
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
UPS has an organizational unit called Customer Intelligence Group. The group analyzes
patterns of customer behavior so it can make predictions that help the company enhance
services and retain customers. For example, the group is able to accurately predict customer
defections by examining usage patterns and complaints. When the data of a specific customer
indicates that the customer might defect, a salesperson contacts that customer to review and
resolve any problems. The software helped to significantly reduce the loss of customers.
Identifying Profitable Customer Groups
Financial institutions, especially insurance companies, often dismiss high-risk customers. Better
analysis of such customers can yield good business, as Progressive Casualty Insurance Company
has proven. Progressive uses proprietary analytical software and widely available insurance
industry data. The company defines narrow groups or “cells” of customers, for example, college-
educated motorcycle riders ages 35 and older whose credit scores are above 650 and who have
no accidents recorded. For each cell, the company performs a statistical regression analysis to
identify factors that most closely correlate with the losses that this particular group causes. For
each cell, the company then sets premiums that should enable the company to earn a profit on
its portfolio of customer groups. The company uses simulation software to test the financial
implications of accepting the analyzed groups as customers. This way, Progressive can profitably
insure customers in traditionally high-risk categories. Other insurance companies reject such
applicants and refuse to renew the contracts of customers who became high-risk because of
claims such as for car accidents. These companies do so without bothering to analyze the data
more deeply.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Have Plastic, Will Be Loyal
The most efficient and effective way to collect customer data for BI is loyalty programs. CVS, the largest
U.S. pharmacy chain, operates ExtraCare, a customer-loyalty program with over 70 million members. This
is the largest loyalty program in the United States. CVS fills more than one of every seven retail prescrip-
tions in America, and one of every five in the states where it has stores.
Source: Caremark (2013). CVS/pharmacy Expands ExtraCare Program with New Pharmacy & Health
Rewards. http://info.cvscaremark.com/newsroom/press-releases/cvspharmacy-expands-extracare-program-
new-pharmacy-health-rewards
Utilizing Loyalty Programs
Loyalty programs such as frequent flier, travel, and consumer clubs help organizations collect a
significant amount of data about their customers. Some grocery chains, for example, issue
discount coupons only to the most loyal customers. Loyalty programs such as frequent flier,
travel, and consumer clubs help organizations collect a significant amount of data about their
customers. Some grocery chains, for example, issue discount coupons only to the most loyal
customers. The Marriott Corporation, the hotel and resort chain, uses data from its rewards
program (see illustration on the next page) to develop customized email newsletters targeted to
individual customers, rather than to groups. Marriott believes that a “well-designed email
newsletter keeps its audience interested and engaged” in order to increase customers’ response to
its offers. Their system customizes content including targeted special offers and partner specials
based on customer interaction with Marriott (Anonymous, 2011). Ultimately, this initiative
provides Marriott with a low-cost strategy using technology and data warehouses to increase
revenue at their properties. Customers who are Marriott rewards program members also get a
customized webpage for discounted rates and special deals at Marriott properties.
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
363
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Collecting and mining
data though its customer
loyalty program has
helped Marriott
Corporation customize
customer offers and
increase revenue
Inferring Demographics
Some companies use data-mining techniques to try to predict what customers are likely to
purchase in the future. As mentioned in previous chapters, Amazon.com is a leader in exploiting
customer data. The company registered U.S. Patent Number 6,865,546, titled “Methods and
systems of assisting users in purchasing items.” The software developed by Amazon determines
the age of the recipient of an item purchased by a customer. The age range is estimated based at
least in part on a customer order history of gifts purchased for the recipient. The first gift is
associated with the first “age appropriateness designation.” The second gift is associated with a
second age appropriateness designation. An age range associated with the recipient is estimated.
The software also captures and analyzes any data that may indicate the recipient’s gender. The
recipient’s age progression is calculated, and the company uses it to offer the customer gifts for
that person when the customer logs on to the site. So, if you purchase gifts from Amazon.com
for your baby niece, do not be surprised if Amazon entices you to purchase items for a young
girl, a young woman, and an older woman over the next few decades. Here is another example
of what this data-mining tool can do: if you purchased perfume a week before Valentine’s Day,
it will infer that you bought the item as a Valentine’s gift for a woman and offer certain colors
for the wrapping paper.
Online Analytical Processing
Online analytical processing (OLAP) is another type of application used to exploit data
warehouses. Although OLAP might not be as sophisticated in terms of the analysis conducted, it
has extremely fast response time and enables executives to make timely decisions. Tables, even if
joining data from several sources, limit the review of information. Often, executives need to view
information in multiple combinations of two dimensions. For example, an executive might want
to see a summary of the quantity of each product sold in each region. Then, she might want to
view the total quantities of each product sold within each city of a region. And she might also
Courtesy of Marriott Corporation
364
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
want to view quantities sold of a specific product in all cities of all regions. OLAP is specially
designed to answer queries such as these. OLAP applications let a user rotate virtual “cubes” of
information, whereby each side of the cube provides another two dimensions of relevant
information.
The Power of OLAP
Figure 11.2 on the next page shows the interface of a web-based OLAP application whose purpose
is to provide information about federal employees. You can go to www.fedscope.opm.gov and
receive information about federal personnel in almost any imaginable dimension for several years.
Dimensions include region of employment, level of service, occupation, salary range, and many
more. The middle table shows number of employees by department and region. Clicking the
Cabinet Level Agencies link produces more detailed information for all cabinet-level departments,
using the same dimension as before, but only for this department (bottom table). You could also
view similar data for a specific cabinet-level agency such as the Department of Education. This
would be an example of drilling down, a process by which one starts with a table that shows
broad information and successively retrieves tables of more specific information. The OLAP
application lets you receive the information in numbers of employees or as their percentages in
each region, department, or organizational units within the department.
OLAP applications operate on data organized especially for such use or process data from
relational databases. A dynamic OLAP application responds to commands by composing tables
“on the fly.” To speed up response, databases can be organized in the first place as dimensional.
In dimensional databases—also called multidimensional databases—the raw data is
organized in tables that show information in summaries and ratios so that the inquirer does not
have to wait for processing raw data. Many firms organize data in relational databases and data
warehouses but also employ applications that automatically summarize that data and organize
the information in dimensional databases for OLAP. Cognos (a subsidiary of Oracle) and many
other companies sell multidimensional database packages and OLAP tools to use them.
OLAP applications can easily answer questions such as, “What products are selling well?” or
“Where are my weakest-performing sales offices?” Note that although the word “cube” is used to
illustrate the multidimensionality of OLAP tables, the number of tables is not limited to six,
which is the number of sides of a real cube. It is possible to produce tables showing relationships
of any two related variables contained in the database, as long as the data exists in the database.
OLAP enables managers to see summaries and ratios of the intersection of any two dimensions.
As mentioned in Chapter 7, “Databases and Data Warehouses,” the data used by OLAP
applications usually comes from a data warehouse.
OLAP applications are powerful tools for executives. For example, consider Figure 11.3 on
page 367. Executives of a manufacturing company want to know how the three models of their
product have sold over the past quarter in three world regions. They can see sales in dollar terms
(top table) and then in unit terms (second table). They can then drill down into summaries of a
particular region, in this case North America, and see the number of units sold not only by
model but by model and color, because each model is sold in three colors. This information
might lead them to recommend to the dealer to stop selling Model 3 in blue in North America,
because sales of blue units of this model are quite low in this region. While still investigating
last quarter’s sales in North America, the executives might want to examine the sales
performance of each dealer in this region. It seems that Dealer 3 enjoyed brisk sales of Model 1,
but not of Models 2 and 3. If the sales picture is the same for another quarter or two, they
might decide to stop sales of these models through Dealer 3 and increase the number of Model 1
units they provide to that dealer.
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
365
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
F I G U R E 11.2
FedScope is an online
OLAP application
maintained by the U.S.
government’s Office of
Personnel Management
Courtesy of FedScope
366
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
F I G U R E 11.3
Using OLAP tables to
compare the sales of
three product models
by continent
Sales ($ 000)
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
North America
115800
136941
53550
South America
72550
63021
25236
Asia
65875
53781
17136
Total
254225
253743
95922
Sales (Units)
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
North America
4632
6521
2975
South America
2902
3001
1402
Asia
2635
2561
952
Total
10169
12083
5329
North America (Units)
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Red
2401
1785
2512
Blue
1766
527
52
White
465
4209
411
Total
4632
6521
2975
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Dealer 1
102
556
2011
Dealer 2
1578
2450
108
Dealer 3
2358
0
10
Dealer 4
20
520
57
Dealer 5
574
2995
789
Total
4632
6521
2975
North America Dealerships (Units)
In a similar manner, Ruby Tuesday, the restaurant chain, solved a problem at one of its
restaurants. Managers who examined performance by location discovered that a restaurant in
Knoxville, Tennessee, was performing well below the chain’s average in terms of sales and profit.
Analyzing the store’s information revealed that customers were waiting longer than normally for
tables, and for their food after they were seated. There could be many reasons for this: an
inexperienced cook, understaffing, or slow waiters, to name a few.
Managers at headquarters decided to take a look at the average time between when a check
was opened at the cash register and the time the customer paid. In the restaurant industry this is
an indication of an important factor: how long it takes to move from one party to another at a
given table. The shorter the time, the better. The average time “to close a check” at Ruby
Tuesday’s restaurants is 45 minutes. At this particular location it was 55–60 minutes. Examining
additional information, management concluded that the reason for the longer wait was
increased demand thanks to an economic boom in the region. The company sent people to
change the layout of the kitchen, positions of the cooks, and the placement of food. Cooking
took less time, serving was faster, and the wait time decreased by 10 percent. More customers
could be served, and revenue went up.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
367
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Restaurants can use
business intelligence
software to improve
service and increase
revenue
0
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000
Appetizers
Salads
Burgers
Combos
Entrees
Units
Count of Items Sold
Region 1
Region 2
Region 3
OLAP applications are usually installed on a special server that communicates with both the
user’s computer and the server or servers that contain a data warehouse or dimensional
databases (although OLAP might also process data from a transactional database). Since OLAP
applications are designed to process large amounts of records and produce summaries, they are
usually significantly faster than relational applications such as those using SQL (Structured
Query Language) queries. OLAP applications can process 20,000 records per second. As
mentioned before, when using preorganized dimensional tables, the only processing involved is
finding the table that corresponds to the dimensions and mode of presentation (such as values
or percentages) that the user specified.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Meet Your New Co-Worker, BI
Experts have made predictions on the advancements and evolution of business intelligence (BI) in the
workplace by 2020. A growing commonality among a majority of Americans and people across the globe
is their degree of hyperconnectedness. People no longer just retrieve information while sitting alone at a
desktop computer. They are on the go and in contact with a network of communication channels through
mobile devices. BI comes into play in delivering that information in an interpretable manner. Screen sizes
of mobile devices vary and mobile BI will be a key player in ensuring mobile users can receive personal-
ized content in formats designed for their connection methods. In other words, BI will be responsible for
making a ‘one size fits all’ format for personalized connection methods. Another influence of BI that is
expected to be seen in the workplace by 2020 is de-routinization. The routine work currently performed
by humans on an everyday basis will soon be a daily automated function of BI. It is predicted that by
2017 the amount of non-routine work will increase from 25 to 40 percent of an employee’s day. This leaves
humans more time for innovating, teaming, selling, and leading; tasks that can’t be easily automated.
Source: Henry, H., & Hiltbrand, T. (2012, First Quarter). The 2020 Workplace and the Evolution of Busi-
ness Intelligence. Business Intelligence Journal, 17, 13-19.
OLAP in Action
OLAP is increasingly used by corporations to gain efficiencies. For example, executives at Office
Depot, Inc. wanted to know how successful sales clerks and stores were at cross-selling certain
items. A store succeeds in cross-selling when it convinces customers to buy paper when they buy
pens, or to purchase computer peripherals when they purchase a computer. The company used
© Cengage Learning 2015
368
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
OLAP on its data warehouse, which saves transactions from 1,629 stores and by more than
38,000 employees in 59 countries. During its first use of OLAP software, Office Depot compiled
the proper conclusions to help the company increase annual sales revenues by $117 million.
Management now knows better which items cross-sell with other items and therefore makes
better decisions on placing items on shelves in proximity.
Managers in some companies now track information about their products from the
purchasing of raw materials to the receipt of payment, not only for operations but so they can
learn more about their clients and their own business. For example, Ben & Jerry’s, one of the
largest U.S. ice cream makers, collects data about every container of ice cream it sells, starting
with the ingredients. Each container is stamped with a tracking number, which is stored in a
relational database. Using OLAP software, salespeople can track how fast new types of ice cream
gain popularity, and which remain stagnant, on an hourly basis. Matching such information
with about 200 telephone calls and email messages the company receives weekly, managers can
figure out which supplier’s ingredients might have caused dissatisfaction with a certain product.
Employees who know very little about programming and report design are discovering that
BI software is becoming easier to use. Intelligent interfaces allow them to enter questions in free
form or close to free form. A part of the application that is called the semantic layer parses the
question, which has been written as if you were speaking to a person, translates it into
instructions to the computer to access the appropriate data mart or the proper columns of a data
warehouse, and produces the answer, which is a number of charts showing trends. In a few
seconds, a manager at Lands’ End can find out which type of denim pants was the company’s
best-seller over the past six months. BI software has become so popular in large companies that
Microsoft has integrated such software into its popular database management system, SQL
Server.
More Customer Intelligence
We have discussed customer relationship management (CRM) in several previous chapters. A
major effort of most businesses, especially retail businesses, in using such systems is to collect
business intelligence about customers. Both data-mining and OLAP software are often integrated
into CRM systems for this purpose. Since an increasing number of transactions are executed
through the web, managers can use data that is already in electronic form to analyze and
strategize. The challenge is to address the right customer, at the right time, with the right offer,
instead of spending millions of dollars in mass marketing or covering numerous websites with ads.
Clickstream software has become almost a standard feature of the server management
software used by many companies. Clickstream software tracks and stores data about every visit
to a site, including the site from which the visitor has come, which pages have been viewed,
how long each page has been viewed, which items have been clicked, and so on. The data can
then be analyzed to help redesign the site to make visits of all or certain demographic groups
more attractive. The purpose may be to have the visitors spend more time at the site so its
potential for advertising revenue from other companies grows, and/or to entice visitors to make
more purchases.
Many companies find that using only the data collected directly from consumers does not
provide a full picture. They approach third parties, companies that specialize in collection and
analysis of consumer data. The companies, such as Razorfish, DoubleClick, and Engage Software,
use cookies and spyware (explained in Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise”) to collect
consumer data, which can be combined with the individual’s clickstream data.
By compiling billions of consumer clickstreams and creating behavioral models, these
companies can determine individual consumers’ interests from the sites they visited (what do
they like?), the frequency of visits (are they loyal?), the times they surf (are they at work or at
home?), and the number of times they click on ads or complete a transaction. Then, sites can
display ads that match the typical interests at sites where the likely customers tend to visit. They
can use software that will change the ad for each visitor by using cookies that identify the user.
OpenTracker is software that analyzes clickstream data. In the illustration on the next page, a
business can analyze from what countries (or states) visitors gained access to their website.
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
369
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Using OpenTracker can
help businesses track the
geographic location of
website visitors
Consider the challenge that was facing Drugstore.com, a web-based drugstore headquartered in
Bellevue, Washington. Management wanted to reach more customers who were likely to purchase
its products, but they did not have the tools to discover who those people were. While
Drugstore.com had plenty of information about customers—including name, address, and a list of
past purchases—the company still did not know where exactly to find those customers on the web
or where to find more people who have the same buying habits. Management hired Razorfish, Inc.,
a firm that specializes in consumer profiling. Razorfish managers say they know where 100 million
web users visit, shop, and buy. This information comes from data they have collected for several
years, not for any specific client. During a previous marketing campaign for Drugstore.com,
Razorfish had compiled anonymous information about every Drugstore.com customer who made a
purchase during the campaign. Razorfish knew what specific ad or promotion a given customer
had responded to, what that customer had browsed for on the Drugstore.com site, whether the
customer had made a purchase, and how many times the customer had returned to purchase.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Amazon’s Tablet May Infringe on Privacy
Amazon has grown from an online bookstore to an Internet retailing giant in a short period of time. One
aspect of Amazon’s business that is not regularly visible is their Amazon Web Services division, which
stores and delivers Amazon’s massive base of online books, movies, and songs, as well as rents out com-
puting storage and power. This is known as Amazon Cloud Drive. Amazon’s newest tablet, the Kindle Fire,
uses its web browser, Amazon Silk, to access the web through the Amazon Cloud Drive. Cloud Drive is
used for the grunt work of loading the page and then the information is zapped back to the tablet. The
issue? Every site the tablet user goes to is sent to the Cloud, a massive storage base. Amazon can record
unthinkable amounts of consumer web browsing data, more than the average tablet user might feel com-
fortable with. Privacy advocates have already raised concerns because Amazon can see what customers
are looking at and where they are looking.
Sources: Woo, S., & Fowler, G. A. (2011, Sep 30). Amazon Cloud Boosts Fire; Computing Network Cuts
Costs, Adds Power to Tablet, but Stirs Privacy Concerns, Wall Street Journal (Online).
Using its Web Affinity Analysis software, Razorfish could track Drugstore.com’s individual
customers across more than 3000 websites. Razorfish then constructed common themes in the
customers’ online behavior, such as the general websites they visited, visits to competing online
drug retailers, and the likelihood that those individuals would click on ads. The company gave
Drugstore.com a list of 1.45 million “high-quality prospects,” shoppers with a high potential of
purchasing from Drustore.com. Drugstore.com managers used the information to build a
marketing strategy, assuming that those common characteristics and habits would be shared by
as-yet-unconverted customers. A converted customer is a shopper that is convinced to buy.
Courtesy of OpenTracker.net
370
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Using similar software helped Eddie Bauer, Inc. to decrease its marketing cost per sale by
74 percent over three months, and the Expedia, Inc. travel site to cut its cost per sale by 91
percent over eight months.
Dashboards
To make the use of BI tools convenient for executives, companies that develop BI tools create
interfaces that help the executives and other employees to quickly grasp business situations.
In the early 1990s, these systems were called executive information systems (EISs) and were
used only sporadically. However, with the contemporary popularity of Big Data and analytics,
EISs transformed into a more contemporary interface. The popular name of such an interface is
dashboard, because it looks something like a car dashboard. Car dashboards provide information
in the form of clock-like indicators and scales. BI dashboards use similar visual images. They
include speedometer-like indicators for periodic revenues, profits, and other financial information;
plus bar charts, line graphs, and other graphical presentations whenever the information can be
presented graphically. Figure 11.4 shows a dashboard from MicroStrategy, a provider of BI
software. Similar dashboards are parts of BI tools offered by other vendors, including Cognos and
SAS. ERP vendors, such as SAP and Oracle, also include dashboards in their applications.
F I G U R E 11.4
BI dashboards like this
one from MicroStrategy
help executives quickly
view organizational
metrics, ratios, and trends
on one screen
One of the most important responsibilities of any organization’s senior management is to
develop, guide, and monitor the strategic initiatives of their business. These initiatives are
evaluated to determine the costs, savings, and benefits to be derived from their implementation.
Since these factors are developed prior to implementation, they are estimated based on a
series of assumptions and calculations. When implemented, it is important to view these key
performance indicators (KPIs) as real data is captured, comparing the data to benchmark or
historical values. Dashboards are designed to quickly present predefined KPIs. Sometimes called
metrics, some examples of KPIs are occupancy ratios in hotels and hospitals, inventory turns in
retail, or customer phone hold time in customer relations. The dashboard in the figure shows a
“speedometer” and other graphs to illustrate KPIs such as performance and analysis by categories
Courtesy of Microstrategy
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
371
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
and subcategories. These graphic indicators often use corporate-defined zones to show whether
the current value is acceptable (or not) by color, in an easy-to-read environment.
GCAN Insurance Company, based in Toronto, sells casualty and property insurance to
businesses in Canada. The insurer wanted to provide management with current data in order to
make more effective decisions. Using Microsoft SharePoint Server, GCAN built a business
intelligence dashboard. The entire development and implementation process, from prototype to
product delivery, was completed in only one month. The dashboard provides 25 managers
access to the dashboard through a browser with real-time data from their financial systems. The
project created one repository of data so that all managers were viewing the same data.
Previously, managers needed about four hours to assemble and validate data across several data
sources. The BI dashboard provides the data to managers proactively rather than having to
compile and wait for the information (Anonymous, 2010).
Knowledge Management
Imagine you work for a consulting firm. Your supervisor assigns you to a new client. As a smart
professional, the first thing you want to check is whether your firm has had previous experience
with this client and what knowledge has been accumulated about the experience. You heard that
two ex-employees had contact with this client several years ago. It would be great to discuss it
with them, but they are gone. Their knowledge is no longer available to the firm, because it is not
recorded anywhere. The data recorded about the financial transactions with this client cannot
provide the knowledge you are seeking: How easy or difficult was the interaction with the client’s
executives? What are the strengths and weaknesses of that organization? In engineering
companies, engineers might want to see if colleagues have already encountered a problem they are
trying to solve, and what the solution to that problem was. IT professionals might want to know if
their colleagues have encountered a similar repeating failure with a network management system.
An organization can learn much about its customers, sellers, and itself by mining data
warehouses and using OLAP software, but such techniques still do not satisfy another important
challenge: how to manage knowledge, expertise that is created within and outside the organization.
As discussed in Chapter 10, “Decision Support and Expert Systems,” expertise in narrow domains can
be programmed in expert systems. However, organizations would like to garner and manage much
more knowledge. Effective management of knowledge can help both employees and customers.
Samuel Johnson, the author of an early English dictionary, said that one type of knowledge
is what we know about a subject, and the other type is knowing where to find information
about the subject. The purpose of knowledge management is mainly to gain the second type of
knowledge. Knowledge management (KM) is the combination of activities involved in
gathering,
organizing,
sharing,
analyzing,
and
disseminating
knowledge
to
improve
an
organization’s performance.
POINT OF
INTEREST
With Age Comes Wisdom
There are two kinds of knowledge: knowing what and knowing how. The former can be taught; the latter
can only be learned. As the large number of baby boomers continues to punch their tickets for retirement
on the green golf courses of Florida, they take their years of expertise with them. Knowledge-driven orga-
nizations that rely and operate on their expertise and on-the-job acquired knowledge are scrambling to
mine that human information and store it for future use. The importance of knowledge management can
be seen in a parable. One day at a factory, the production line came to a screeching halt. The manager
called in his trusty technician. The technician walked around the machine line a bit, tapped it once with
a hammer, and the production line jumped back to life. The technician handed the manager an invoice
that read $1,000. The manager called out, “$1,000? But all you did was tap it once!” The technician took
the invoice and revised to read, “Tapping with hammer—$10; knowing where to tap—$990.”
Source: Tryon, C. (2010). Employers must bridge knowledge gap, Tulsa World, Aug 05.
372
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Information that can be gleaned from stored data is knowledge, but there is much more
knowledge that organizations would like to store that they currently do not. The knowledge that
is not maintained in information systems is typically of the type that cannot be extracted from
readily captured data at websites or other electronic means of transactions. It is accumulated
through experience. Much of it is kept in people’s minds, on paper notes, on discussion
transcripts, and in other places that are not readily accessible to a company’s employees.
Therefore, knowledge management is a great challenge. Knowledge management is the attempt
by organizations to put procedures and technologies in place to do the following:
●
Transfer individual knowledge into databases.
●
Filter and separate the most relevant knowledge.
●
Organize that knowledge in databases that allow employees easy access to it or that “push”
specific knowledge to employees based on pre-specified needs.
Knowledge management software facilitates these activities. As the cost of storage media
continues to decrease and database management packages are increasingly more sophisticated
and affordable, storage and organization of unstructured information have been less of a
challenge. The more difficult issue is development of tools that address the third challenge:
quickly finding the most relevant information for solving problems.
Capturing and Sorting Organizational Knowledge
The research company IDC argues that almost half of the work that knowledge workers do in
organizations has already been done, at least partially. This work includes researching a certain
subject, preparing a report, and providing information as part of a consulting contract. It
estimates that labor worth $3,000–5,000 per knowledge worker is wasted annually because
workers try to solve the same problem that other workers have already solved. Organizations
could save this duplication, or replication, by collecting and organizing knowledge that is gained
by members of the organization.
To transfer knowledge into manageable online resources, some companies require workers to
create reports of their finding. Others, especially consulting firms, require their employees to
create reports about sessions with clients. However organizations collect information, the results
might be several terabytes of potential knowledge, but the challenge for employees is to know
how to find answers to specific questions. Some software tools have been developed to help.
For example, the Bank of Montreal needed to provide more information to its corporate credit
card managers and sales force. In its old system, the credit card division created spreadsheets to
consolidate data gathered from approximately 60 reports. As you can imagine, the effort required
for this process was cumbersome and time-consuming. New application software replaced over a
hundred reports with only a few dashboards. Bank managers need to understand which types of
credit cards are most active and gauge their performance. The new application provides purchase
volume and number of transactions over a series of months by region and city (within region).
The user can view a different location’s data on the graph by simply clicking on a region and then
“drilling down” into a city within that region. A manager can view the purchases both in dollars
as well as the number of transactions as the region and city is changed. Further analysis can be
viewed by selecting a specific zone of a city. A smaller graph illustrates the volume within a city
zone filtered from the city volume data. In addition, the user can “slide” a marker to customize
the time range displayed by the graph (Howson, 2012).
Employee Knowledge Networks
While some tools build knowledge bases and help employees access them, others put the
emphasis on directing employees to other employees who have a certain expertise. The
advantage of this approach is that an expert can provide expertise that has not been captured in
information systems (see Figure 11.5). Large companies, especially multisite ones, often waste
money because employees in one organizational unit are not aware of the experience of
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
373
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
employees in another unit. For example, one energy company spent $1 million on a product
designed to work on oil rigs to prevent sediment from falling into wells. When the equipment
was installed, it failed. The executives of another unit decided to purchase the same equipment,
which, not surprisingly, failed in the other location. Then a third unit, elsewhere, purchased the
equipment, which also failed. While one can justify the loss of the first $1 million as legitimate
business expense in the course of trying a product, the other $2 million was lost because
decision makers did not know that the equipment had already been tried and failed. To alleviate
similar problems, some software companies, such as Tacit Systems (acquired by Oracle),
Hivemine (currently owns AskMe software) and Safeharbor Knowledge Solutions have developed
employee knowledge networks, tools that facilitate knowledge sharing through intranets.
Recall that an intranet uses web technologies to link employees of the same organization.
F I G U R E 11.5
An employee knowledge
network can capture
information and distribute
information not captured
in an information system
Site 2
Salesperson C
Site 3
Knowledge Base
A
B
C
Employee
who
knows
Employee’s
activity on
the topic
Site 1
Scientist B
Scientist A
Who knows
about protein
xyz?
Tacit Systems’ ActiveNet tool continuously processes email, documents, and other business
communications and automatically “discovers” each employee’s work focus, expertise, and
business relationships. The tool “mines” this unstructured data to build a profile of each
employee in terms of topics and interests. The goal is to ensure that two people who might
benefit from creating a connection in a workplace do so, so that one can learn from the
experience of another about a specific issue. By analyzing email and documents, the tool
extracts the employee’s interests and solutions to problems, and that information is added to the
employee’s profile. Other employees who seek advice can access the profile, but they cannot see
the
original
email
or
document
created
by
the
employee.
This
ensures
uninhibited
brainstorming and communication.
AskMe’s software also detects and captures keywords from email and documents created by
employees. It creates a knowledge base that holds the names of employees and their interests.
© Cengage Learning 2015
374
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
An employee can access a webpage at which the employee enters a free-form question. The
software responds by listing the names of other employees who have created email, text
documents, or presentations on the subject, and the topics of their work. The employee can
view the activity profiles of these people, and then contact them via the website, email, instant
messages, or paging. The responder can use the same website to respond and attach documents
that might help the inquirer. AskMe’s tool captures the communication, including attached
documents, and adds them to the knowledge base. (Note that in this context the knowledge
base is not organized as the knowledge bases in expert systems are.)
Knowledge from the Web
Consumers keep posting their opinions on products and services on the web. Some do so at the
site of the seller, others at general product evaluation sites such as epinions.com, and some on
blogs. Consumer opinions are expressed in billions of webpages. This information is difficult to
locate and highly unstructured. If organizations could distill knowledge from it they could learn
much more than they do from conducting market research studies, such as focus groups, both
about their own products and those sold by competitors.
Knowledge and Globalization
In the Middle Ages, Venice considered its expertise in making
glassware not only a business trade secret but also a state
secret. Divulging glassmaking knowledge to anyone outside
the republic of Venice was punishable by death, because
much of the state’s economy depended on excluding other
states and countries from such knowledge. Venice, like
other states in that era, would never “offshore” any of the
work to another country. Nowadays, matters are completely
different. What was expertise a year ago has become routine
work this year and may become automated next year. At that
point, the expertise value in the product will have diminished,
and to make a profit the organization that once had a
comparative advantage in producing the product will have to
use the least expensive labor available. Then, the business
will offshore manufacturing to a factory in a country where
labor is cheaper. The industry in the original country will
lose jobs.
Information technology helps create knowledge but also
expedites the turning of knowledge into routine, automated
processes
that
can
be
carried
out
elsewhere.
IT
also
expedites the transfer of knowledge from countries that
created it to countries that can quickly use it. Software used
to be developed almost exclusively in the United States. Much
of the software that the world uses now has been developed in
Germany, India, Ireland, Israel, and Russia. A growing amount
of the software developed for U.S. companies is created in
India and China. The programmers’ expertise is similar, but the
wages earned by programmers in those two countries are a
fraction of what American programmers would be paid for the
same work. This is a pivotal element in what is called
globalization—moving from national economies to a global
economy. Is this bad for countries such as the United States
and good only for countries such as India and China?
BI and KM software is developed mainly in the United States,
Germany, and the United Kingdom. However, these systems are
sold anywhere and can help companies in other countries
compete with companies in those “developed” countries. This
puts developing countries in position to gain knowledge much
faster than before and compete better. Now, the competition is
not only in the manufacturing and service areas but also in R&D.
In the United States, some observers view the issue in the
following light: America used to be a world leader in
manufacturing, but other countries now have a comparative
advantage in manufacturing, and their workers have taken the
jobs that American laborers used to perform. For some time
Americans had an advantage in providing services, but many
of these services are now provided over the Internet and
telephone lines by workers in other countries, so the service
sector’s advantage has diminished. The United States is still
ahead in terms of innovation and creation of know-how, they
say, but we are starting to see this advantage slipping away,
too. And when other countries beat us in creation of
knowledge, they ask, what’s left with which to compete?
Should governments take measures—legal or otherwise—that
protect their economic advantages? Should they penalize
companies that offshore manufacturing jobs? Should they forbid
the sale of know-how to other countries? Should they adopt the
Venetian model? Or, should we look at the world as one large
economy where each worker and each organization should
compete for a piece of the pie regardless of national borders, so
that consumers everywhere can enjoy products of the highest
quality for the lowest price possible?
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
375
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
POINT OF
INTEREST
Webwise
Businesses have a choice when looking for the top-of-the-line BI service provider of data gleaned from the
Internet. LexisNexis provides its customers with the most reliable collection of information that allows them to
make educated business decisions in a timely fashion. Customers gain access to a wide range of authoritative
news and business information, legal documents, and public records, some of which are unavailable to the gen-
eral public. An integrated open-web search gives users access to over 1,000 sources, all supported by Lexis-
Nexis editors as truthful and industry relevant. Having the BI service that can glean the most pertinent data
from the web on your side can be the competitive advantage a company needs to beat the competition.
Source: LexisNexis. (2012). Your First Choice for Reliable Information. www.lexisnexis.com/pdf/
NexisOverview.pdf
Factiva, a subsidiary of Dow Jones, promotes a software tool by the same name. Factiva is
accessible through a website and gathers information online from over 10,000 sources—newspapers,
journals, market data, and newswires—information that amounts to millions of documents. About 60
percent of the information is not accessible to the general public. It screens every piece of new
information that is posted at any of these websites for information specified by a subscribing
organization. The search can be more tailored and specific than searches performed through free
search engines such as Google or Yahoo! The software helps organizations add to their knowledge
base, especially in terms of what others say about their products and services. The tool takes into
account factors such as the industry and context in which an inquirer works to select and deliver the
proper information. For example, a key word such as “apple” means one thing to an employee of a
hardware or software organization and something completely different to an employee in agriculture
or a supermarket chain. The Factiva illustration shows a consolidation of technology publications
and web news content summarized by companies and executives for reading and review.
KM tools like Factiva help
to extract and consolidate
knowledge from millions
of web documents
Courtesy of Dowjones.com
376
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Autocategorization
To categorize knowledge into manageable data, companies use autocategorization software.
Autocategorization or automatic taxonomy automates the classification (taxonomy) of
data into categories for future retrieval. Practically all search engine sites, such as Google and
Yahoo!, use autocategorization software, and continue to improve the software to provide more
precise and faster responses to queries. Many companies have installed such software at their
corporate websites.
For example, U.S. Robotics (USR), a large manufacturer of networking devices, operates in
a market with narrow profit margins, and thus one call to the support personnel about a
purchased item might wipe out the profit on that sale. Therefore, reducing support personnel
labor is important. The firm’s surveys showed that 90 percent of clients calling technical support
had visited the USR website before calling. USR purchased autocategorization software from
iPhrase Technologies, Inc. (a subsidiary of IBM) to help customers help themselves in searching
for answers to their questions at the website so that customers would not have to telephone the
support staff. The software can help interpret customer queries even if the queries are misspelled.
The software improved the accuracy and responsiveness of the support database at USR’s website.
Consequently, support calls decreased by a third, saving the company more than $135,000
monthly.
Google, Yahoo!, and other companies in the search engine industry have developed
applications that sift through documents both online and offline, categorize them, and help
users bring up only links to the most relevant documents. These companies sell their products to
corporations to use at their websites, intranets, and extranets.
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
377
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Summary
●
Business intelligence (BI) or business analytics is
any information about the organization, its custo-
mers, and its suppliers that can help firms make
decisions.
In
recent
years
organizations
have
implemented a growing number of increasingly
sophisticated BI software tools.
●
Data mining is the process of selecting, exploring,
and modeling large amounts of data to discover
previously unknown relationships that can support
decision making. Data mining helps sequence anal-
ysis, classification, clustering, and forecasting.
●
Data mining is useful in such activities as predict-
ing customer behavior and detecting fraud.
●
Online analytical processing (OLAP) helps users
peruse two-dimensional tables created from data
that is usually stored in data warehouses. OLAP
applications are said to provide a virtual cube that
the user can rotate from one table to another.
●
OLAP either uses dimensional databases or calcu-
lates desired tables on the fly.
●
OLAP facilitates drilling down, moving from a
broad view of information to increasingly detailed
information about a narrow aspect of the business.
●
Dashboards interface with BI software tools to help
users quickly receive information such as business
metrics.
●
Knowledge management involves gathering, orga-
nizing,
sharing,
analyzing,
and
disseminating
knowledge that can improve an organization’s
performance.
●
The main challenge in knowledge management is
identifying and classifying useful information to
be gleaned from unstructured sources.
●
Most
unstructured
knowledge
is
textual,
both
inside an organization and in files available to the
public on the web.
●
Employee knowledge networks are software tools
that help employees find other employees who
have expertise in certain areas of inquiry.
●
Autocategorization
(automatic
taxonomy),
the
automatic
classification
of
information,
is
one
important element of knowledge management.
Autocategorization has been used in online cus-
tomer
support
webpages
to
reduce
the
labor
involved in helping customers solve problems.
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Tyler
thought
of
a
loyalty
program
that
would
integrate the various dining options and takeout
business. And he knows that there is a tight balance
between offering promotions and benefits with a
loyalty program, but it cannot erode profits without
gaining sustainable business.
The point-of-sale system stores a great deal of
data from the daily activities of the business. Tyler is
aware that the system can process takeout orders as
well as advance food orders. He needs to understand
the data stored by the system. From this research, the
system maintains data on each table with the number
of diners, the day and time of their seating, how long
they were seated, the total check and the individual
items ordered; all the normal data points associated
with dining.
What Is Your Advice?
1. What other data elements do you believe would
assist
Kimball’s
to
implement
a
successful
customer loyalty program? Define these data ele-
ments and give a rationale for their use.
2. The best analysis to develop a successful business
intelligence strategy is to compile a series of ques-
tions. The answers to these questions will provide
a foundation to develop the data elements, report-
ing, and presentation of data to monitor business
operations and strategies. What questions can be
developed for Tyler to build an effective customer
loyalty program?
3. What data mining techniques or examples could
be designed for a business intelligence system at
Kimball’s?
New Perspectives
1. What types of strategies can Tyler implement to inte-
grate the social media and advertising programs?
2. How can Tyler evaluate the effectiveness of their
social media and advertising efforts?
378
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Key Terms
autocategorization, 377
automatic taxonomy, 377
business analytics, 360
business intelligence (BI), 360
clickstream software, 369
dashboard, 371
data mining, 360
dimensional database, 365
drilling down, 365
employee knowledge
network, 374
key performance
indicator (KPI), 371
knowledge management
(KM), 372
knowledge worker, 373
multidimensional database, 365
Online analytical processing
(OLAP), 364
Review Questions
1. What is business intelligence?
2. What is OLAP, and why is it often associated with
visual cubes?
3. What is the advantage of using a dimensional data-
base rather than on-the-fly processing in OLAP?
4. Why is online analytical processing usually con-
ducted on warehoused data or dimensional data-
bases rather than on data in transactional
databases?
5. What is “drilling down”?
6. What are data-mining techniques expected to find
in the huge data warehouses that they scour?
7. Explain dimensional databases and the rationale
behind their name. What is their use?
8. What is knowledge, and how does it differ from
other information?
9. In general, what is the purpose of knowledge
management in organizations?
10. What is the purpose of employee knowledge
networks?
11. What is the benefit of tools that direct employees
to experts rather than to stored knowledge?
12. What is autocategorization (automatic taxon-
omy)? How can autocategorization software help
companies to serve customers and employees?
13. Context is a major factor when using tools to
glean knowledge from web sources. How so?
14. Data mining helps mainly in four ways: sequence
analysis, classification, clustering, and forecast-
ing. Data mining helps determine whether a per-
son has committed fraud. Which of the four types
of analysis help do that? Explain why.
15. The web is a huge resource from which almost
any organization could derive knowledge, yet few
do. What is the major challenge?
Discussion Questions
16. What does intelligence mean? Do you accept the
use of the word in “business intelligence software
tools,” or do you think the use of this word is
exaggerated compared with what these tools
provide?
17. You are an executive for a large retail chain. Your
IT professionals use data-mining software. They
tell you of the following relationship the software
found: middle-aged single men tend to purchase
personal grooming products and light bulbs
together. Should you assign employees to
research the reason for this? How will you use
this information?
18. Employee knowledge network software keeps
tabs of much of what employees create on their
computers and all the email they send. As an
employee, would you be comfortable with such
software? Why or why not?
19. The term “business intelligence” has been used
by IT professionals to mean many different
things. What might be the reason for this?
20. Can businesses use free search engines, such as
those provided by Google, Bing, and Yahoo!, to
efficiently gather useful knowledge for better
decision making?
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
379
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
21. Recall the discussion of expert systems in
Chapter 10, “Decision Support and Expert
Systems.” In what sense are employee knowl-
edge networks similar to expert systems and in
what sense are they different?
22. Consider data-mining software, which infers
demographic information about the recipients of
gifts. Is letting software infer demographics less
of an invasion of privacy than questionnaires or
other forms of direct questioning? Is such infer-
ence more effective in obtaining customer infor-
mation? Why or why not?
23. Consider the discussion of autocategorization and
smart search engines, like the one used by US
Robotics. Suppose you purchased an electronic
device and have a problem with it. You turn to the
company’s website and find either a FAQ (fre-
quently asked questions) section or a webpage that
invites you to enter a free-form question about your
problem. Which option do you prefer, and why?
24. Companies would like to have systems that
would allow them to store all the business-related
knowledge that their employees have accumu-
lated. Do you expect that such systems will exist
in your lifetime? Why or why not?
Applying Concepts
25. Search the web for a story on an organization that
successfully used data-mining techniques. Write
a two to three-page paper in which you describe
what the software was able to do for the organi-
zation and how the results benefited the organi-
zation. Emphasize what information the
organization now has that could not be obtained
without data-mining techniques.
26. Write a one-page report explaining what one can
do with a business intelligence application that
cannot be done with the same data in a spread-
sheet or a relational database. Give at least two
examples. Discuss why a BI application or dash-
board would be more effective.
Hands-On Activities
27. Go to www.fedscope.opm.gov. Produce the fol-
lowing tables for the latest year for which data is
available:
a. Number of U.S. federal employees by category
size (large, medium, small) by country of
service.
b. Number of U.S. federal employees by category
size, only for employees working in Australia.
c. Number of U.S. federal employees by depart-
ment within the large agency category, only
for employees working in Australia.
Is the sequence in which you produced the three
tables considered drilling down? Explain why or
why not.
28. Select an organization and research what it pro-
duces and where and how it operates. Using a
pen and paper or graphical software, design three
to six dashboards that the senior executives (vice
president level) could use to receive up-to-date
information to improve the organization’s perfor-
mance. Explain the purpose of each indicator.
380
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
Team Activities
29. Team up with another student. Select a specific
company and write a report about its knowledge
management needs. Start with a description of
the activities that take place. List the types of
employees who could benefit from access to
documented expertise. Say which expertise you
would take from internal sources and which from
external sources. Give examples of knowledge
that the company could use.
30. Team up with two other students. The team is to
prepare a plan for The Researcher Connection, an
employee knowledge network, to help the pro-
fessors at your institution develop research ideas
and conduct their research. List the elements of
your proposed system and convince potential
users in your report how it will help them (1) find
relevant literature on a research subject, (2) learn
who in the institution has done a similar study, (3)
learn who in the institution would be interested in
collaborating in the research, and (4) perform any
other activity that is involved in conducting
research and publishing the resultant article.
Explain which of the resources to be used in the
system already exist and will only need to be
tapped (and how).
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
381
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
No Guessing: Dressing for Decisions
The apparel company Guess?, Inc. is constantly striving
to be on the forefront of the fashion world. This mission
requires
members
from
several
branches
of
the
company to have easy and immediate access to
influential, decision-making information. To solve this
issue, Guess used Apple iPads and mobile BI software
from MicroStrategy to create a BI app that provided
Guess buyers and executives with vital information
from
any
location.
The
project,
headed
by
the
innovative director of BI, Bruce Yen, and his team,
focused on content, ease-of-use, and the visual aspect
of the app. Content is always the main focus when
developing BI, but they also wanted their app to be
easy to use and visually appealing.
Guess needed a better method to provide its
buyers and executives with crucial information that
could influence buying activities. Excel spreadsheets
were too bulky and were not useful when trying to
quickly locate specific details. Starting in 2008, Guess
began using RIM Blackberry devices to provide info to
executives and corporate directors at headquarters and
to regional directors in the field. In 2009, they added
dashboards to mobile BI offerings and supplied the
information to nontraditional BI users such as buyers
and planners. This was the first attempt at increasing
the emphasis placed on visual layout. In 2010, Bruce
Yen attended a MicroStrategy conference. Guess had
already used some software from MicroStrategy, a BI
company, but Yen noticed MicroStrategy’s mobile app
for the iPad and thought he could use it to solve
existing business problems. The problem Yen aimed
to solve with this technology was helping Guess
buyers, who are constantly on the road traveling to
retail locations, gain the information necessary to
make purchasing decisions. The information-sharing
power and high degree of intuitiveness of the project
would make it a tremendous asset to the company.
Software Application
Although Yen initially thought the app would be used
by buyers at Guess retail locations, it was discovered
that some store locations did not have wireless
connectivity. While traveling, buyers were using the
iPad app more frequently before they arrived at the
store, at hotspots in hotels and restaurants where
they would brief themselves for their upcoming
meetings. They would surf the app prior to arriving
at store locations to get up-to-date information on
sales patterns and store management history. The
app was also widely used in the office, as it was
much easier to snag specific snippets of information
via the app than from a full-blown report.
They did run into many issues throughout the
designing
and
launching
process.
Once,
they
submitted
over
50
enhancements
and
issues
to
MicroStrategy to refine the software! The popularity
and increasing use of the app spurred an inquiry of
how Yen and management could access and use the
BI app on personal iPads. This raised security risks for
Yen and his team. To solve the issue, Yen turned to
third-party mobile device management that can close
off access to the app if the iPad is reported stolen or
lost, in addition to using traditional security passcodes.
The security system encourages app use on personal
iPads without jeopardizing corporate assets.
It was no surprise that this fashion leader placed
heavy focus on the design of the app. Every pixel on
every slide of every page was scrutinized. The app
provides users with so much different information
from so many different angles that it can be used by
a wide range of users, from top-level executives to
buyers in the field. Besides the fact that the app runs
on an already intuitive device, the final result is an app
that can be picked up and used by almost anyone in
the company. Bruce Yen conducted informal test-runs
with the software simply by asking some of his
design-savvy
colleagues
to
play
with
it
for
ten
minutes. Yen even followed buyers around as they
visited Guess retail locations to see if they had any
visible performance or connectivity problems. Most
likely due to his arduous research and first-hand
testing, he has not received any requests for formal
training on how to use the app. While content was a
key
focus
throughout
the
app’s
development,
aesthetics and visual layout were a close second.
Yen constructed a BI mobile app that is intuitive,
visually appealing, and content efficient. Through
collaboration,
communication,
and
extreme
fine-
point critiquing, the app surpassed expectations and
has
successfully
aided
Guess
in
maintaining
its
leadership in the fashion industry, even in hard
economic times. What started out as a solution to
existing problems turned into a staple of Guess’s
technological assets.
Source: Briggs, L. L. (2011, Fourth Quarter). BI Case Study:
Apparel Company App Melds Fashion, Mobile BI. Business
Intelligence Journal, 16, 39-41.
Thinking About the Case
1. Some app planners may use second-hand
research to fuel their system planning. List at
least three instances in which Yen used hands-on
experience to gain insight on how to alter the
product. Why is that first-hand experience so
valuable? Explain how a buyer’s access to
382
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
4
real-time sales patterns of a specific retail location
can influence their purchasing decisions.
2. To what other branches of Guess?, Inc. could the
app be useful besides top-level executives and
buyers?
Monkeying Around with Business
Intelligence
Zoos, parks, aquariums, and museums are known for
their cultural and educational value. They provide a
wealth of information and knowledge about animals,
artifacts, history, religion, and sciences. But what
about the information on their business operations?
Marketing? Increasing visitors? With the reductions
of government grants, this industry needed to be
more proactive on expanding their revenue sources.
The Cincinnati Zoo (CZ) draws 1.3 million visitors
and $26 million in revenue annually with about 400
full and part-time employees. After reviewing their
current systems, they found that their information
technology infrastructure was preventing revenue
growth and service to customers. Over the years,
their systems became isolated islands of technology
processing
ticketing,
retail
and
food
service
on
separate systems. Their entire multi-million sales
operation was operated though non-networked cash
registers.
The
information
source
for
retail
and
ticketing
sales
were
gained
from
register
tapes.
Therefore,
it
sometimes
required
two
weeks
to
generate sales report for food and beverage sales.
The Zoo knew a change was needed.
Ultimately, they developed two objectives: (1)
increase attendance and (2) increase spending per
guest. Using some incentives, CZ’s management
believed that they could increase revenue per guest.
However, the key was to understand “what types of
customers were spending, how much and on what.”
These questions would provide the data points that
would provide a foundation to create these incentives
and promotions.
The Zoo embarked to implement several point-
of-sales systems to integrate ticketing, retail and food
services. One of the systems, Gateway Ticket Systems,
offered a ticketing system specific for their industry.
After this system was fully implemented, the Zoo then
purchased IBM’s Cognos business analytics software
for the data analysis. Instead of providing information
about the various animals in their property, they
focused on compiling data on their visitors.
The next step was to create a customer loyalty
program. Management began to analyze customer
purchasing transaction data at every point in the zoo.
The customers’ buying patterns were identified by
collecting visitors’ zip codes. Using this data, the Zoo
could identify specific geographic areas having low
spenders. At this point, specific geographical areas
could be targeted with loyalty promotions to increase
their spending patterns. The availability and scope of
the data collected from these new systems have
created new questions. They can “drill down” to very
detailed data such as how many members are buying a
hot dog. Or management can identify who is not
visiting the zoo. Targeted mailings and offers could
then be sent to incentivize them to visit the zoo.
Segments of their visiting population can also
achieve
benefits.
The
transactional
data
can
be
categorized into season pass holders and non-pass
holders. The season pass customers clearly indicate
that they attend evening events and purchase food
while not purchasing from the Zoo’s retail venues.
Therefore, coupons and sales could be offered to
season
pass
holders
to
promote
additional
purchases in the retail stores. The historical data can
also provide some insight on the items that they may
be more inclined to purchase, hopefully increasing the
likelihood of increased retail sales and reducing
unwanted promotions.
Additional features have been integrated into the
customer loyalty program. Bar-coded membership
cards can be scanned in at every venue. Member
discounts
and
benefits
can
then
be
applied
to
purchases. This process encourages member visitors
to use their membership cards for purchases and
creates the “linkages” in the data warehouse to
identify customers’ purchases. Text alerts are now
integrated
into
the
systems
based
on
specific
triggers. For example, when a large donor or VIP
enters the Zoo, a text message is sent to specific
personnel to alert the Zoo of the visit. When supplies
are running low at concessions, another text message
can identify actions to be taken.
Dashboards and reports are accessed using a
simple
web
browser
so
that
the
data
can
be
accessed on any technology device. The Zoo’s staff
uses
Apple
iPhones
so
that
text
messages
can
maintain
communication
and
a
connection
to
operations. The reporting and dashboards help to
integrate a variety of data sources, including budget
information, in order to analyze and synthesize the
real-time information.
Within a few months after implementation, the
Zoo reported an additional 50,000 annual visitors to
the Zoo along with an additional $350K in revenue.
They believe that the return on their investment in
the technology initiatives has been positive for the
Zoo. Business intelligence has turned the attention
from visitors looking at the Zoo’s animals to the Zoo
looking at customers.
Sources: Briggs, L. L. (2011). BI Case Study: Business
Analytics Helps Tame Data at Cincinnati Zoo. Business
Intelligence Journal, 16, 36-38; Klie, L. (2011). Cincy’s Zoo
Goes Ape for IBM. Customer Relationship Management, 15,
37-38.
CHAPTER 11
Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management
383
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART4
Thinking About the Case
1. Do you believe that many companies use an iso-
lated information technology infrastructure such
as the Cincinnati Zoo? How does this structure
hinder efficient operations? Why would busi-
nesses continue to operate in this environment?
2. The convergence of business intelligence data
and texting can provide several creative
operational and strategic initiatives. What
other examples of integrating text messaging
with technology solutions could the Zoo
implement?
3. What types of business intelligence analysis
could be done with food, retail, and ticketing data
to increase the value of the data? What type of
OLAP analysis could be accomplished?
References
Anonymous. (2010). Insurer Builds Business
Intelligence Tool in One Month, Enables Better
Decisions. Microsoft Case Studies. http://www.
microsoft.com/casestudies/Case_Study_Detail.
aspx?CaseStudyID=4000006733
Anonymous. (2011). Lodging Companies; Marriott
Rewards Marketing Gets the Gold at Marketing-
Sherpa Email Awards. Marketing Weekly News,
1231.
Briggs, L. L. (2011). BI Case Study: Business Analytics
Helps Tame Data at Cincinnati Zoo. Business Intel-
ligence Journal, 16, 36-38.
Holm, E. (2012). Hoping to Strike Profit Gold, AIG
Ramps Up in Data Mining, Wall Street Journal
(Online).
Howson, C. (2012). Dashboards and Visual Discovery:
More than Just Pretty BI. Tysons Corner, VA.
384
Decision Support and Business Intelligence
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
1
five
PART
PART
5
© Rob Melnychuk/Digital Vision/Getty Images
George Doyle/Photos.com 
PLANNING, ACQUISITION,
AND CONTROLS
CHAPTER 12 Systems Planning and Development 386
CHAPTER 13 Choices in Systems Acquisition 420
CHAPTER 14 Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery 450
BUSINESS CHALLENGES
After studying the next three chapters, you will know
the basics of systems development efforts. You’ll
explore the issues of planning, systems develop-
ment and alternatives for acquiring systems, and
security
and
disaster
recovery.
The
owners
of
Kimball’s believe that they need to implement addi-
tional information technology initiatives to operate
more efficiently and strategically. However, it is
important for businesses to plan and analyze the var-
ious methods of acquiring technology.
●
In Chapter 12, “Systems Planning and
Development,” you learn the steps to creating a
plan for a new system, and what steps to follow
to develop new systems, including feasibility
studies and defining the essential functions of the
new system.
●
In Chapter 13, “Choices in Systems Acquisition,”
you learn how to evaluate the benefits and
risks of alternative methods of acquiring an
information system, including purchasing
or leasing a program to create an integrated
system.
●
In Chapter 14, “Risks, Security, and Disaster
Recovery,” you learn about the risks threatening
information systems, especially those dealing
with financial transactions on the web, and ways
to protect systems against attack.
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
385
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
CHAPTER
© ecco/Shutterstock.com
PART
twelve
SYSTEMS PLANNING
AND DEVELOPMENT
Learning Objectives
Planning and developing new information systems can be complex. Systems planning often requires creating or
adjusting strategic plans because of the great impact of IT on business models and operations. Those involved in
development have to translate a business opportunity, a solution to a problem, or a directive into a working set of
hardware, software, and networking components. Once a development project is under way, many people from
different disciplines are usually involved in the effort. Communications skills are extremely important for successful
results.
When you finish this chapter, you will able to:
●
Explain the importance of and steps in IT planning.
●
Describe the systems development life cycle, which is the traditional approach to systems development.
●
Explain the challenges involved in systems development.
●
List the advantages and disadvantages of different system conversion strategies.
●
Enumerate and explain the principles of agile systems development methods.
●
Be able to contribute a meaningful set of requirements when serving on a project development team for a new
or modified IS.
●
Explain the concept of systems integration.
●
Discuss whether IT professionals should be certified.
386
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Planning Loyalty
After discussing the customer loyalty program for the
new location with his parents, Tyler wanted to investigate
the implementation of an information system to fulfill
this strategy. He knows that the strategy has two major
objectives: (1) give customers incentive to visit the new
location and (2) build customer loyalty, which would lead
to an increase in sales. Tyler researched area competitors
and found that no other restaurant within 20 miles had
implemented such a program. He was convinced that
this initiative would help “lock in” customers to patronize
the restaurant when they wanted to dine out.
Tyler told his father about his research on the restau-
rant’s competitors and their lack of customer loyalty pro-
grams.
He
explained
that
while
there
were
both
operational and start-up costs from this new initiative,
he believed that it could add positive dividends to the
new location. Michael thought he was right, but he said
that he was a “numbers guy” and that he needed more
details to make an informed decision. Tyler explained,
“Dad, I learned in school that when you provide incen-
tives to customers, it alters their approach to buying
something. Once you have successfully altered their buy-
ing decision, it will encourage repeat business.” Michael
asked for some examples. Tyler gave examples including
gambling casinos, hotels, airlines, and credit cards.
Michael said, “Go for it, but I need additional details
on the costs against potential increase in sales.”
Failure to Plan Is a Plan to Fail
Tyler researched the point-of-sale system that the res-
taurant has installed to see if he could use it to help
implement the loyalty program. His investigation of
the POS’s features was disappointing; the system did
not have any ability to track and maintain customer
activity and incentives. A dead end! He felt a bit
deflated. He realized that he should have done this
research prior to discussing the loyalty program with
his family. While the concept was great, he now either
had to admit that the current system could not do this
function and abandon this initiative or find another way
to implement the program. Both options had down
sides. He was embarrassed that his parents would
know he did not analyze this properly. At the same
time, implementing a totally new system would have
additional costs in money and time. He did not want
to admit failure, but he also needed to present a more
comprehensive proposal to his family in order to move
forward.
He contacted one of his college friends, Becky, who
majored in information technology. She had graduated
one year before him and could provide some advice on
how to approach this task. He scheduled a meeting with
Becky and compiled some notes and ideas that would
help the discussion.
Planning Information Systems
In recent years, a growing number of corporations have implemented enterprise ISs such as
ERP
systems,
mobile
systems,
CRM
systems,
or
other
systems
that
serve
the
entire
organization or many of its units. The investment of resources in such systems, both in
financial and other terms, is substantial, as is the risk in implementing such large systems. If
the implementation is successful, the new system can significantly change the manner in
which the organization conducts business and even the products or services it sells. For all
these reasons it is necessary to plan the implementation of information systems, whether they
are developed in-house, made to order by another company, or purchased and adapted for the
organization. When planning, it is important to align IT strategies with the overall strategies
of the organization. (In this discussion, the terms “IT planning” and “IS planning” are used
interchangeably.)
Steps in Planning Information Systems
IT planning includes a few key steps that are a part of any successful planning process:
●
Creating a corporate and IT mission statement.
●
Articulating the vision for IT within the organization.
●
Creating IT strategic and tactical plans.
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
387
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
●
Creating a plan for operations to achieve the mission and vision.
●
Creating a budget to ensure that resources are available to achieve the mission and vision (see
Figure 12.1).
F I G U R E 12.1
The steps associated with
information systems
planning
Corporate
Mission
IT Mission
IT Vision
IT Strategic Plan
Plan for Operations
Budget
The role of the IT
organization in the
corporation
The ideal technology
(hardware, software,
communications)
for the corporation
Goals to be achieved
  Projects
Priorities
Staffing
Purchases
Funding
IT Tactical Plans
Objectives and ways to
achieve them
A mission statement is a paragraph that communicates the most important overarching
goal of the organization for the next few years. Although the ultimate mission of any
organization is to survive and—if it is a for-profit organization—to produce profit for its owners,
mission statements are rarely limited to these points. Rather, they say how the organization
intends to survive and thrive. For example, in Amazon.com’s early years, its mission was to
brand itself as the most recognized retailer on the web and to create the largest possible market
share. Management pursued this mission, though it resulted in years of financial loss.
An important part of an organization’s overall mission statement is an IT mission statement
that is compatible with the larger mission. It is usually a paragraph, or several paragraphs,
describing the role of IT in the organization. Often, the IT mission and IT vision are combined
into one statement. The IT vision includes the ideal combination of hardware, software, and
networking to support the overarching mission. For example, Amazon.com’s management
continues to recognize that innovative IT, especially web and fulfillment technologies, is the
most important resource for the organization’s success.
At its founding, Amazon was known for selling products in physical form (books, music
CDs, computer software, and DVDs). Over the years, however, their strategy has shifted to
providing electronic-based media content and services to its customers in direct competition
with Apple’s iTunes, as well as providing cloud storage for individuals and businesses. Amazon
has accumulated the distribution rights for a collection of mobile/tablet apps, books, videos,
© Cengage Learning 2015
388
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
audio, and music for its customers to purchase and download directly. Through its Amazon
Prime program, customers pay an annual subscription fee and receive free two-day shipping as
well as access to its electronic media library for free or paid ebooks, video, and audio. Their
Kindle product line of tablets and e-readers uses the “razor and blade” strategy. This common
strategy, named for shaving holder and blade replacements, involves two co-dependent
products. The initial product is highly discounted or sold at cost while the second dependent
product is not discounted. Amazon sets Kindle prices at cost in order to “lock in” customers,
who
purchase
Amazon’s
electronic
media
offerings
using
their
web-based
technology
distribution already in place. Printer manufacturers often sell the hardware at cost in order to
build a “lock-in” customer for the purchase of replacement ink cartridges.
The CIO, with cooperation of senior management as well as managers in the IT unit, devises
a strategic plan for implementation of IT in the organization. The plan addresses what
technology will be used and how employees, customers, and suppliers will use it over the next
several years. Since IT advances so quickly, strategic IT plans are typically prepared for no longer
than five years.
The goals laid out in the strategic plan are broken down into objectives, which are concrete
details of how to accomplish those goals. The objectives typically include resources to be
purchased or developed; timetables for purchasing, developing, adapting, and implementing
those resources; training of employees to use the new resources; and other details to ensure
timely implementation and transition.
The objectives are further broken down into specific operational details. For each project,
management assigns a project manager and a team; vendors are selected from whom available
components of hardware, software, and services will be purchased; and funding is requested.
When the financial requests are approved, the corporate budget includes the money to be spent
over several months or years on these projects.
IT planning is not much different from planning any other acquisition of resources—starting
with a vision of how the resources will be used to accomplish goals and breaking those ideas
down into projects and the resources to be allocated to carry the projects to successful
completion. In recent years, a growing proportion of IT funds have been spent on software, with
most of the funds going to purchase and adapt software, rather than developing it in-house or
assigning development to another company.
Inspiration for development and/or implementation of new information technologies comes
from several sources, including users like you. Figure 12.2 displays typical sources for new
systems. Competitive pressure inspires many members of the organization, not only senior
managers, to come up with creative ideas. Often, such ideas are included in IT planning. In
many organizations a steering committee oversees IT planning and the execution of IT projects.
Steering committees are composed of users, IT professionals, and senior managers. There is high
probability that in your career you will find yourself on such a committee.
Information technology projects often involve redefining organizational processes and
procedures. IT systems are usually developed in response to changes in the competitive,
economic, and industry environments, and can require employees, suppliers, customers, and
other stakeholders to change their operational tasks. Change management is a structured,
disciplined approach that facilitates the adoption of new or modified systems by various groups
and individuals within an organization. Change management increasingly is being implemented
on a global scale by businesses, governmental entities, and nonprofit organizations.
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
389
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
F I G U R E 12.2
IT planning can be driven
by a variety of sources in
the marketplace
Senior Management
Line Managers
IT Professionals
Users
IT
Planning
Competitive Environment
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Understand the Principles of Systems Development
By and large, organizations have recognized the need to let
non-IT professionals play major roles in systems development.
You might be called on to participate in this process, not just to
provide input here and there but as a member of a develop-
ment team. The IT professionals on the team need your insight
into the business processes in which you participate. They
need your advice on ways to improve these processes through
the use of new or improved ISs. One approach to development,
agile methods, actually views the users as sharing at least half
of the responsibility for the effort.
Software developers count on you and your coworkers to pro-
vide them with proper requirements and feedback. You should
be knowledgeable, active, and assertive in software develop-
ment projects, because you will have to live with the products
of these efforts. Also, when your organization decides to dis-
card one IS and adopt a new one, your understanding of the
implementation process and your proper cooperation will be
highly valuable. Your knowledge will be solicited regularly
and will play a valuable role in decision making if you work
for a small organization.
The Benefits of Standardization in Planning
One major goal—and advantage—of planning is standardization. When management decides to
adopt a certain IT resource for all its units, regardless of function or location, it standardizes its
IT. Standardization results in several benefits:
●
Cost savings. When the organization decides to purchase the same hardware or software for all
its units, it has better bargaining power and therefore can obtain lower prices from vendors.
This applies to purchasing or leasing computers of all classes—mainframe, midrange, and per-
sonal computers—as well as licensing software.
●
Efficient training. It is easier to train employees how to use a small variety of software than to
train them how to use a large variety. Less training time is required, and—more importantly—
employees spend less time on training and more time on their regular assignments. This also
saves cost in the form of fewer labor hours spent on training. Even if each employee only uses
a single application, but the organization maintains several applications for the same purpose,
training time is extended.
© Cengage Learning 2015
390
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
●
Efficient support. Standardizing for a small number of computer models and software applica-
tions enables the IT staff to specialize in the hardware and software they have to support. The
more focused skills required for a standard suite of hardware and applications make it easier for
the organization to recruit support personnel, and results in more satisfactory service to users.
Hewlett-Packard’s IT services division decided to consolidate and modernize its offerings to
be more attractive to existing and potential customers. From 2010 to 2013 it planned to invest
$1 billion to standardize its enterprise data centers, build modernized facilities to wean clients
away from the old services that are expensive to run and maintain, and lure them into using its
ultramodern, highly secure, highly dense, green, sustainable infrastructure. HP planned to cut
service management platforms from nine to just one and cut 9,000 jobs (but add 6,000 jobs as
part of the services restructuring). The standardization of HP’s IT services division cost HP up
front but will save them money down the road through the efficiencies of using fewer man-
hours and resources to achieve a higher output (Yeo, 2010). Another example of standardized
planning is the use of one aircraft model (Boeing 737) for Southwest Airlines’ fleet. This decision
allows Southwest to focus its training efforts for mechanical, maintenance, and inflight
operations on one aircraft, and to reduce parts inventory, labor, and costs. They can implement
economies of scale as well as specialize on one type of aircraft to deploy their operations. In
addition, their central reservation system is simplified by having just one seating structure, for
the Boeing 737.
From Planning to Development
After planning a new IS or a set of ISs, management decides how to obtain the systems. In a
great majority of cases, “systems” means software. For example, CRM and SCM systems rarely
require specialized hardware (although they may require more, or more powerful, hardware). An
increasing number of new systems are purchased and adapted for an organization’s needs rather
than
developed
in-house,
although
in-house
development
still
takes
place
in
many
organizations. The approaches to systems development are the same regardless of who develops
the system—the organization or its vendor.
Systems development generally is conducted in two approaches: the systems development
life cycle (SDLC) and nontraditional methods, among which are many gathered under the
umbrella of agile methods. SDLC is the more traditional approach and has been used for several
decades. In certain circumstances, it should still be used. Agile methods developed out of
prototyping, an application development approach that emerged in the 1980s aimed at cutting
costs and time. Prototyping involves fast development of an application based on initial user
requirements and several cycles of user input and developer improvements. Practicing the
philosophy of prototyping—that coding should start as soon as possible and that users should
be involved throughout the process—led to several methods of software development called
agile methods. The two development approaches are not necessarily mutually exclusive. System
development projects can begin using an agile method, such as prototyping, to either develop a
working system model to gain knowledge about an evolving initiative or develop a subset of a
larger system that may involve more end-user involvement. Systems development often involves
progressive elaboration, where a vision of an initiative continually develops and influences
the final product over time as more information and knowledge is available. In this respect, agile
methods may have an advantage over traditional development approaches. The following
sections discuss both approaches.
The Systems Development Life Cycle
Large ISs that address structured problems, such as accounting and payroll systems and
enterprise software applications, are usually conceived, planned, developed, and maintained
within a framework called the systems development life cycle (SDLC). The SDLC approach
is also called “waterfall” development, because it consists of several distinct phases that are
followed
methodically,
and
the
developers
complete
the
phases
sequentially.
Described
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
391
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
graphically, the phases look like a waterfall from the side. The developers do not deliver pieces of
the system before the entire system is fully completed. Although textbooks might refer to the
various phases and subphases of the SDLC by different names, or organize them slightly
differently, in general, the process follows the same steps. While the SDLC is a powerful
methodology for systems development, organizations are sometimes forced to take shortcuts,
skipping a step here or there. Occasionally, time pressures, funding constraints, or other factors
lead developers to use different approaches to systems development.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Keys to Success
It has been estimated that over 80 percent of software projects fail due to being over budget, being
delayed, missing functions, or a combination of these factors. But what makes a successful project?
According to IBM industry experts, two important factors lead off the list: (1) choose the development pro-
cess appropriate to the project at hand, and (2) establish the requirement(s) of the system. These steps
are critical to the beginning stages of the systems development lifecycle (SDLC) because the decisions
you make there will outline the path you take for the entire project. The requirements of the system are
the purpose for creating the system to begin with, so it is critical that the requirements are established
at the beginning of the project and that they are established correctly. By following these tips and others,
developers can improve the chance of a successful outcome for their project.
Source: Perks, M. (2006). Best practices for software development projects. http://www.ibm.com/
developerworks/websphere/library/techarticles/0306_perks/perks2.html
The SDLC approach assumes that the life of an IS starts with a need, followed by an
assessment of the functions that a system must have to fulfill that need, and ends when the
benefits of the system no longer outweigh its maintenance costs, or when the net benefit of a
new system would exceed the net benefits of the current system. At this point the life of a new
system begins. Hence, the process is called a life cycle. After the planning phase, the SDLC
includes four major phases: analysis, design, implementation, and support. Figure 12.3 depicts
the cycle and the conditions that can trigger a return to a previous phase. The analysis and
design phases are broken down into several steps, as described in the following discussion.
F I G U R E 12.3
The systems development
life cycle
Support
Implementation
Analysis
Design
System is obsolete or
maintenance exceeds beneﬁts
Augmentation,
modiﬁcation,
interfacing
with other systems
Planning
Analysis
The systems analysis phase is a five-step process (summarized in Figure 12.4) that is designed
to answer these questions:
© Cengage Learning 2015
392
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
F I G U R E 12.4
Phases in systems
analysis
Investigation
Technical
Feasibility Study
Requirements
Definition
Economic
Feasibility Study
Operational
Feasibility Study
NEW CUSTOMER
SERVICE SYSTEM:
REQUIREMENTS
Labor :
Materials :
O/M :
$ 3,042
$ 1,569
$    282
Investigation
●
What is the business process or functions that the system is to support?
●
What business opportunity do you want the system to seize, what problems do you want it to
solve, or what directive must you fulfill?
Technical Feasibility Study
●
Is technology available to create the system and result you want?
●
Which of the available technologies should we use? Are these technologies mature enough to
provide stability to the system?
Economic Feasibility Study
●
What resources do you need to implement the system?
●
Will the system’s benefits outweigh its costs? Will the system provide specific value to the
organization and its stakeholders?
Operational Feasibility Study
●
Will the system be used appropriately by its intended users (employees, customers, suppliers)?
●
Will the system be used to its full capacity?
Requirements Definition
●
What features do you want the system to have?
●
What interfaces will the system have with other systems, and how should the systems
interface?
●
Can it support other systems such as web and mobile technologies?
Investigation
The first step in systems analysis is investigation, which determines whether there is a real need
for a system and whether the system as conceived is feasible. Usually, a small ad hoc team—
consisting of a representative of the sponsoring executive, one or two systems analysts, and
representatives of business units that would use the new system or be affected by it—is put
together to perform a quick preliminary investigation.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
393
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
The team spends time with employees at their workstations to learn firsthand about the way
they currently carry out their duties, and interviews the workers about problems with the current
system. This direct contact with users gives workers the opportunity to express their ideas about
the way they would like a new IS to function and to improve their work. The investigative team
prepares a written report summarizing the information gathered. The team members also
forward their own opinions on the need for a new system. They will not necessarily agree that a
new system is justified.
If the preliminary report concludes that the business situation warrants investment in a new
IS, a more comprehensive investigation might be authorized. The sponsoring executive selects
members for a larger analysis team. Usually, members of the original team are included in this
augmented group to conduct feasibility studies. The objective of the larger investigation team
is to determine whether the proposed system is feasible technically, economically, and
operationally.
The Technical Feasibility Study
A new IS is technically feasible if its components exist or can be developed with available tools.
The team must also consider the organization’s existing investment in hardware, software, and
telecommunications equipment. For example, if the company recently purchased hundreds of
units of a certain computer, it is unlikely that management will approve the purchase of
computers of another model for a single new application. Thus, the investigators must find out
whether the proposed system can run properly on existing hardware.
The Economic Feasibility Study
Like any project, the development of a new IS must be economically justified, so organizations
conduct an economic feasibility study. That is, over the life of the system, the benefits must
outweigh the costs. To this end, the analysts prepare a cost/benefit analysis, which can be a
spreadsheet showing all the costs to be incurred by the system and all the benefits that are
expected from its operation.
The most accurate method of economic analysis is the fully quantitative return on
investment (ROI), which is a calculation of the difference between the stream of benefits and
the stream of costs over the life of the system, discounted by the applicable interest rate, as
shown in Figure 12.5. To find the ROI, the net present value of the system is calculated by
combining the net present value of the costs of the system with the net present value of the
benefits of the system, using calculations based on annual costs and benefits and using the
appropriate interest rate. If the ROI is positive, the system is economically feasible, or cost
justified. Remember that during the time the system is developed, which might be several years,
there are no benefits, only development costs. Operational costs during the system’s life include
software license fees, maintenance personnel, telecommunications, power, and computer-related
supplies (such as hardware replacement, software upgrades, and paper and toner purchases). If
the system involves a website, the cost of revising and enhancing the site by webmasters and
other professionals must also be included.
Figure 12.5 presents a simplified example of a cost/benefit spreadsheet and analysis for a small
system. Since the net present value of the system is positive ($45.18 million), and therefore the
benefits exceed the investment, the development effort is economically justified. In the figure, in
the year 2020, the net present value decreases significantly. As this value continues to diminish,
the organization should reconsider the value of the system. If the system is not replaced or
significantly upgraded, the existing system will become a drain on the organization over time. The
analysis shown in the figure represents the total cost of ownership (TCO) for a new
information system implementation. TCO is a financial estimate for business leaders to objectively
and accurately evaluate the direct and indirect costs of a new organizational project. Many
business organizations evaluate the short-term and long-term financial, operational, and other
effects of a new IT initiative prior to its approval. Just as you must consider the entire cost and
savings when purchasing an automobile (insurance, maintenance, taxes, and so on), the total
costs and savings of an IT initiative must be considered in addition to the simple “purchase” price.
394
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
F I G U R E 12.5
Estimated benefits and
costs of an information
system (in thousands)
Year
Benefits
Increase in sales
    Reduction in costs
Total Benefits
Costs
Analysis
Design
Implementation
Hardware
Operation/
maintenance costs
Total Costs
Difference
Discounted at 5%
Net present value
(6 years)
2016
0
60,000
25,000
0
85,000
(85,000)
(77,098)
2017
60,000
30,000
90,000
5,000
5,000
85,000
73,426
2019
40,000
20,000
60,000
5,400
5,400
54,600
42,781
2020
20,000
10,000
30,000
5,700
5,700
24,300
18,133
2015
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
(60,000)
(57,143)
45,183
2018
40,000
20,000
60,000
5,200
5,200
54,800
45,084
Often, it is difficult to justify the cost of a new IS because too many of the benefits are
intangible, that is, they cannot be quantified in dollar terms. Improved customer service, better
decision making, and a more enjoyable workplace are all benefits that might eventually
increase profit but are very difficult to estimate in dollar amounts. This inability to measure
benefits is especially true when the new IS is intended not merely to automate a manual
process but to support a new business initiative or improve intellectual activities such as
decision making. For example, it is difficult to quantify the benefits of business intelligence
(BI) and knowledge management (KM) systems. Software vendors often promote “fast ROI” as
a selling point, and express it in terms of the short period of time over which the adopting
organization can recoup the investment. Still, such claims are difficult, if not impossible, to
demonstrate. Therefore, the economic incentive for investing in a new IS is often “we must use
it because our competitors use it” and a general expectation that the new IS will benefit the
organization in at least one way.
When laws or regulations dictate the implementation of a new IS, no ROI analysis is carried
out. For example, when companies implement software to comply with the record keeping and
financial procedures of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the question is not whether to implement the
system. The economic analysis becomes which software is the least expensive and which
personnel—internal or hired from consulting firms—would implement the system for the least
cost while maintaining the required standards.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
395
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
POINT OF
INTEREST
Internet Infrastructure Restricts Innovation
In recent years the World Health Organization (WHO) has determined that the economic cost of road
crashes in low-income, middle-income, and upper-income countries accounts for 1, 1.5, and 2 percent,
respectively, of their gross national products, making road crashes a significant global economic issue.
WHO is looking at a potential information-systems-based solution called intelligent transportation systems
(ITS). ITS collects and analyzes data on people, roads, and vehicles in ways that are far superior to the
existing system, which relies on motion sensors. ITS can also use artificial vision systems to analyze traf-
fic. The ITS uses the Internet as the communication link and provides digitally enhanced connectivity
using Bluetooth technology as well as embedded systems built into cars, bridges, tunnels, and roads.
However, the artificial vision system in road-traffic analysis is yet to be highly implemented because of
feasibility concerns. Because the ITS requires Internet connectivity, the infrastructure is not universally
established and currently is not economically feasible. With further research and testing, ITS may reach
a stage in which the benefits outweigh the costs and it will replace the current system.
Source: Barrero, F., Toral, S., Vargas, M., Cortés, F., & Milla, J. M. (2010). Internet in the development of
future road-traffic control systems. Internet Research, 20(2), 154–168.
The Operational Feasibility Study
The purpose of the operational feasibility study is to determine whether the new system will be
used as intended. More specifically, this analysis answers the following questions:
●
Will the system fit into the culture of this organization?
●
Will all the intended users use the system to its full capacity?
●
Will the system interfere with company policies or statutory laws?
Organizational culture is an umbrella term referring to the general tone of the corporate
environment. This includes issues such as tendency to share or not to share information among
units and people, willingness to team-play, and the proclivity of employees to experiment with
new ideas and technologies. The development team must consider culture to ensure that the
new system will fit the organization. For example, if the system will be used by telecommuters,
the organization must be open to telecommunications via the Internet. The analysts must find
out whether this need would compromise information security and confidentiality, and
implement the proper security measures.
Another point the team considers is compliance with statutory regulations and company
policy. For example, the record-keeping system the staff wants to use might violate customer
privacy or risk the confidentiality of government contracts with the company. If these issues
cannot be overcome at the outset, then the proposed system is not operationally feasible.
Requirements Definition
When the analysts determine that the proposed system is feasible, the project team is assembled.
Management or the consulting firm nominates a project leader who puts together a project team
to develop the system until it is ready for delivery. The team includes systems analysts,
programmers, and, often, representatives from the prospective groups of users.
One of the first pieces of information the analysts need to know is the system requirements.
System requirements are the functions that the system is expected to fulfill and the features
through which it will perform its tasks. In other words, system requirements are what the system
should be able to do and the means by which it will fulfill its stated goal. This can be done
through interviews, questionnaires, examination of documents, and on-the-job observations. Once
facts are gathered, they are organized into a document detailing the system requirements.
The managers of the business unit, or business units, for which the system is to be
developed often sign the document as a contract between them and the developers. This formal
sign-off is a crucial milestone in the analysis process; if the requirements are not well defined,
resources will be wasted or under-budgeted, and the completion of the project will be delayed.
396
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
Design
With a comprehensive list of requirements, the project team can begin the next step in systems
development, designing the new system. The purpose of this phase is to devise the means to
meet all the business requirements detailed in the requirements report. As indicated in Figure
12.6, systems design comprises three steps: a description of the components and how they
will work, construction, and testing. If the decision is to purchase ready-made software, the
description of components details how certain components will be adapted for the particular
needs of the purchasing organization, and construction is the actual changes in programming
code.
F I G U R E 12.6
Phases in systems design
Description of Components
Testing
Construction
Private Sub CalculatePay()
 
RegularPay = RegularHours * HourlyRate
 
OvertimePay = OvertimeHours * HourlyRate * 1.5
 
GrossPay = RegularPay + OvertimePay
End Sub
To communicate ideas about data, processes, and information gleaned from data, systems
analysts and programmers use conventional symbols. The advantage of such conventions is that
visual information can be grasped much faster and more accurately than text, much as a
blueprint for a building conveys specifications more efficiently than the equivalent text. One
such convention is the data flow diagram.
Data Flow Diagrams
A data flow diagram (DFD) is used to describe the flow of data in a business operation, using
only four symbols for these elements: external entities, processes, data stores, and the direction
in which data flows (see Figure 12.7). External entities include individuals and groups of people
who are external to the system, such as customers, employees, other departments in the
organization, or other organizations. A process is any event or sequence of events in which data
is either changed or acted on, such as the processing of data into information or the application
of data to decision making. A data store is any form of data at rest, such as a filing cabinet or a
database. Data flows from an external entity to a process, from a process to a data store, from a
data store to a process, and so on. Thus, a carefully drawn DFD can provide a useful
representation of a system, whether existing or planned.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
397
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
F I G U R E 12.7
Data flow diagram (DFD)
symbols
Entity
or
Process
Data Store
Flow of Data
or
New customer
record
Symbol
Example
2.1
Add new
customer
record
C3 Customer
Database
Customer
The use of only four symbols and the simplicity of DFDs are their great advantage. Often,
systems analysts produce several levels of DFDs for a system. The highest level contains the least
number of symbols and is the least detailed. A lower level is more detailed; what might be
represented only as a general process in the higher level is exploded into several sub-processes
and several databases. The lowest-level diagram explodes some processes further and is the most
detailed; it shows every possible process, data store, and entity involved. Usually, the first- and
second-level diagrams are presented to non-IS executives, and the lowest-level DFD is considered
by the IS professionals while they analyze or develop the system.
The DFD in Figure 12.8 shows a process of calculating a sales bonus. A salesclerk is an entity
entering data (in this case, salespeople’s ID numbers), which flows into a process, namely, the
bonus calculation, which also receives data from the salespeople database (in this case, the dollar
amount each salesperson sold over the past year). The result of the process, the bonus amount
for each salesperson, is information that flows into a bonus file. Later, the company’s controller
will use the information to generate bonus checks.
F I G U R E 12.8
A data flow diagram to
represent a sales bonus
system
Salesclerk
Salesperson I.D.
Salesperson
Annual Sales
Salespeople
Database
Bonus
File
Bonus
Amount
Bonus
Calculation
DFD symbols are suitable for describing any IS, even if it is not computer-based. A DFD of
the existing system helps pinpoint its weaknesses by describing the flow of data graphically and
allowing analysts to pinpoint which processes and databases can be automated, shared by
different processes, or otherwise changed to strengthen the IS. If a new IS is needed, a DFD of
the conceptualized new system is drawn to provide the logical blueprint for its construction.
© Cengage Learning 2015
© Cengage Learning 2015
398
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
While DFDs are easy to learn and use, they have shortcomings—like any diagramming
method—and
cannot
describe
a
system
completely.
For
example,
they
do
not
specify
computations within a process or timing relationships among data flows. A payroll DFD, for
instance, cannot specify whether employee time sheets are checked as they are submitted or at
the end of the week. Such details usually accompany DFDs as text comments.
Unified Modeling Language (UML)
As an increasing number of developed applications became object oriented, a new way to describe
desired software was needed. Several diagramming sets were developed by the 1970s, but in the late
1990s a de facto standard emerged: Unified Modeling Language (UML). UML is a graphical
standard for visualizing, specifying, and documenting software. It helps developers to communicate
and logically validate desired features in the design phases of software development projects. It is
independent of particular programming languages, but it does provide standard visual symbols and
notations for specifying object-oriented elements, such as classes and procedures. It also provides
symbols to communicate software that is used for constructing websites and web-based activities,
such as selecting items from an online catalog and executing online payments.
UML consists of diagrams that describe the following types of software: use case, class,
interaction, state, activity, and physical components. A use case is an activity that the system
executes in response to a user. A user is referred to as an actor. Use case diagrams communicate the
relationships between actors and use cases. Class diagrams describe class structure and contents and
use the three-part symbol for class: name, attributes, and methods (see the example in Chapter 5,
Figure 5.4). Interaction diagrams describe interactions of objects and the sequence of their activities.
State charts communicate the states through which objects pass, as well as the objects’ responses to
signals (called stimuli) they receive. Activity diagrams represent highly active states that are
triggered by completion of the actions of other states; therefore, they focus on internal processing.
Physical diagrams are high-level descriptions of software modules. They consist of components
diagrams, which describe the software, including source code, compilation, and execution, and
deployment diagrams, which describe the configuration of software components when they are
executed. Figure 12.9 shows an example of modeling in UML.
F I G U R E 12.9
A sample Unified
Modeling Language
diagram and its
explanation
Order
Shipment
Customer
createOrder
verifyCustomer
Sequence diagram
for Create new order use case
Use case diagram
Class diagram
Order clerk
Order clerk
order
customer
Enter new
customer
Statechart diagram for Order class
Items being
entered
Ready to ship
Create new
order
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
399
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Construction
Once the software development tools are chosen, construction of the system begins. System
construction is predominantly programming. Professional programmers translate input, output,
and processes, as described in data flow diagrams, into programs. The effort often takes months
or even years (in which case the users might not be served well due to changes in business
needs). When a program module is completed, it is tested. Testing is performed by way of walk-
through and simulation.
In a walk-through, the systems analysts and programmers follow the logic of the program,
conduct processes that the system is programmed to execute when running, produce output,
and compare output with what they know the results should be. In simulation, the team
actually runs the program with the data. When all the modules of the application are completed
and successfully tested, the modules are integrated into one coherent program.
System Testing
Although simulation with each module provides some testing, it is important to test the entire
integrated system. The system is checked against the system requirements originally defined in
the analysis phase by running typical data through the system. The quality of the output is
examined, and processing times are measured to ensure that the original requirements are met.
Testing should include attempts to get the system to fail, by violating processing and
security controls. The testers should try to “outsmart” the system, entering unreasonable data
and trying to access files that should not be accessed directly by some users or—under certain
circumstances—by any user. This violation of typical operating rules is a crucial step in the
development effort, because many unforeseen snags can be discovered and fixed before the
system is introduced for daily use. If the new system passes the tests, it is ready for
implementation in the business units that will use it.
Testing tends to be the least respected phase in systems development. Too often project
managers who are under time pressure to deliver a new IS either hasten testing or forgo it
altogether. Because it is the last phase before delivery of the new system, it is the natural
“victim” when time and budget have run out. This rush has caused many failures and,
eventually, longer delays than if the system had undergone comprehensive testing. A thorough
testing phase might delay delivery, but it drastically reduces the probability that flaws will be
discovered only after the new system is delivered.
Implementation
The implementation of a new IS, also called delivery, consists of two steps: conversion and
training. Although training might precede conversion, if training is done on the job it can
occur after conversion. Conversion takes place when an operation switches from using an old
system to using a new system. Conversion can be a difficult time for an organization.
Operators need to get used to new systems, and even though the system might have been
thoroughly tested, conversion can hold some unpleasant surprises if bugs or problems have
not been discovered earlier. Services to other departments and to customers might be delayed,
and data might be lost. Four basic conversion strategies can be employed to manage the
transition (see Figure 12.10).
400
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
F I G U R E 12.10
Strategies for converting
one IS to another
Old and new
systems run
in parallel
Old System
New System
Module 1
Module 2
Module 3
Module 4
New System
Old System
Old System
New System
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3
Unit 4
Unit 5
Unit 6
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3
Unit 4
Unit 5
Unit 6
Old System
New System
New System
Parallel
Phased
Cut Over
Pilot
Parallel Conversion
In parallel conversion, the old system is used along with the new system for a prede-
termined period of time. This duplication minimizes risk because if the new system fails,
operations are not stopped and no damage is caused to the organization. However, parallel
conversion is costly because of the expenses, especially labor costs, associated with running
two systems. It is also labor intensive because users must enter data twice, into the new and
old systems. By and large, parallel conversion is rarely used nowadays. When it is, parallel
conversion is used for internal applications used only by employees, not customer or business
partners.
Phased Conversion
ISs, especially large ones, can often be broken into functional modules and phased into
operation one at a time, a process called phased conversion. For example, conversion of an
accounting IS can be phased, with the accounts receivable module converted first, then the
accounts payable, then the general ledger, and so on. A supply chain management system
might be implemented one module at a time: first, the customer order module, then the
shipment module, then the inventory control module, and so on, up to the collection module.
This phased approach also reduces risk, although the benefits of using the entire integrated
system are delayed. Also, users can learn how to use one module at a time, which is easier than
learning the entire system at once. However, when parts of both systems are used, there might
be data inconsistencies between the two.
Cut-Over Conversion
In a cut-over conversion—also called flash cut conversion or direct conversion, or direct
cut-over—the old system is discarded and the new one takes over the entire business operation
for which it was developed. This strategy is highly risky, but it can be inexpensive, if successful,
because no resources are spent on running two systems in parallel, and the benefits of the entire
new system are immediately realized.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
401
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Pilot Conversion
In a pilot conversion, the new system is introduced for a period of time in a single unit or
limited arena, where problems can be addressed and the system can be polished before
implementing it in other business units. This trial conversion is also possible for systems shared
by many departments and disparate sites, as is increasingly the case due to the growing
popularity of intranets and extranets. Obviously, piloting reduces risks because it confines any
problems to fewer units. It is especially useful for determining how comfortable staff members
and other users, such as suppliers and customers, are with a new system—a lesson that can be
applied to the later units. As with the parallel strategy, the pilot strategy means that benefits of
the full implementation of the system are delayed.
When a system is developed by a software vendor for a wide market rather than for a
specific client, conversion often takes place at beta sites. A beta site is an organization whose
management agrees to test the new system for several months and provide feedback. (In the
Greek alphabet, beta is the second letter. Alpha, the first letter, is used for an Alpha site, the
developing organization.)
POINT OF
INTEREST
Out of this World Auditing
Training for auditing information systems has reached a whole new level. In one case study, a virtual
data center was constructed in the online 3-D world of Second Life and populated with multiple risks
and exposures for an organization. Auditing information systems students were to conduct a site visit
in Second Life and apply what they had learned about auditing principles to discover these faults and
weaknesses. The exercise fulfilled several learning objectives: The students were to be able to demon-
strate their general knowledge of physical security of information systems, implement basic principles
of IS auditing, demonstrate their knowledge of Institute of Internal Auditors’ (IIA) guidelines, develop
skill and practice in accessing exposures and their potential consequences on an organization, and
more. Afterwards, students were required to present their results in a professional manner as specified
by the IIA. Because of their training in the virtual world, students entering this field could be better
equipped with the skills and tools they need to be successful in protecting organizations and seeking
out threats.
Source: Moscato, D. R., & Boekman, D. M. E. (2010). Using 3-D Virtual Worlds as a Platform for an
Experiential Case Study in Information Systems Auditing. Communications of the IIMA, 10(1), 19–26.
Support
The role of IT professionals does not end with delivery of the new system. They must support
the system and ensure that users can operate it satisfactorily. Application systems support
includes two main responsibilities: maintenance and user help. Maintenance consists of post-
implementation debugging and updating (making changes and additions), including adding
features that were originally desired but later postponed so budget and time limits could be met.
Usually, updating is the greater effort.
Debugging is the correction of bugs or problems in programs that were not discovered
during tests. Updating is revising the system to comply with changing business needs that occur
after the implementation phase. For example, if a company collects personal data for market
analysis, managers might want to use the new IS to collect more data, which might require new
fields in the databases.
Although maintenance is viewed by IS professionals as lacking in glamour, it should not be
taken lightly or left to less-experienced professionals. Company surveys show that up to 80
percent of IS budgets is spent on maintenance, the cost of which varies widely from system to
system. The major reason for this huge proportion is that support is the longest phase in a
system’s life cycle. While development takes several months to about three years, the system is
expected to yield benefits over many years.
402
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
Efficient and effective system maintenance is possible only if good documentation is created
while the system is being developed, and if the code is written in a structured, easy-to-follow
manner. Documentation consists of three main types: paper books, electronic documents, and
in-program documentation. The latter covers non-executable comments in the code, seen only
when reviewing the application’s source code. You can see this type of documentation when
you retrieve the source code of many webpages. In-program documentation briefly describes
what each module of the program does and sometimes who developed it. Printed and electronic
documentation is prepared both for programmers, who can better understand how to revise
code, and for users who want to learn about the various features of the application.
Agile Methods
While the full approach of the SDLC or similar waterfall methods are used to develop ISs, it is
widely recognized that these methods are lengthy, expensive, and inflexible. Systems developed
on the SDLC model are often unable to adapt to vague or rapidly changing user requirements.
To overcome these challenges, alternative methods have emerged that are collectively called
agile methods. As Figure 12.11 illustrates, agile methods treat software development as a series
of
contacts
with
users,
with
the
goal
of
fast
development
of
software
to
satisfy
user
requirements, and then improving the software shortly after users request modifications. Agile
methods make extensive use of iterative programming, involving users often, and keeping
programmers open to modifications while development is still under way. The better known
methods
are
Extreme
Programming
(XP),
Adaptive
Software
Development
(ASD),
Lean
Development
(LD),
Rational
Unified
Process
(RUP),
Feature
Driven
Development
(FDD),
Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM), Scrum, and Crystal Clear. FDD and DSDM are
more structured than other agile methods.
F I G U R E 12.11
Agile methods emphasize
continuous improvement
based on user
requirements
Identify
preliminary
requirements
of the system
Construct a
working model
Deliver
the system
System is unsatisfactory
System is satisfactory
The users
try the system
Identify
additional
requirements
and refine the
system
The differences among the methods are outside the scope of this discussion. However, the
major advantage of all agile methods is that they result in fast development of applications so
that users can have them within weeks rather than months or years. Users do not have to wait
long for system modifications, whether they are required because of programmer errors or
because users have second thoughts about some features.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
403
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
However, the benefits of agile methods do not come without risks. First, the analysis phase is
minimal or is sometimes eliminated completely. Reducing or skipping a thorough formal
analysis increases the risk of incompatibilities and other unforeseen mishaps. Also, the
developers devote most of their time to construction and little time to documentation, so
modification at a later date can be extremely time consuming, if not impossible. Because of the
inherent risks, there are times when agile methods are appropriate and others when they are not
(see the discussion later in this section).
Software developers who espouse the approach usually subscribe to the Manifesto for Agile
Software Development (Anonymous, 2001), which expresses the following priorities: individuals and
interactions over processes and tools; working software over comprehensive documentation;
customer collaboration over contract negotiation; and responding to change over following a
plan. You can find the full Manifesto at http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html. The software
developed should primarily satisfy users, not business processes, because users must be satisfied
with
the
applications
they
use
even
if
that
means
changing
processes.
While
program
documentation is important, it should not come at the expense of well-functioning software,
especially when time is limited and the programmers must decide how to allot their time—on
better software or on better documentation. The customers of software development, the users, are
not an adverse party and should not be negotiated with but regarded as co-developers and co-
owners of the software. Plans are good but might stand in the way of necessary changes.
Responding to changing user requirements is more important than following a plan. If there is a
development plan at all, it is fine to change it often.
All agile methods aim to have “light but sufficient” development processes. Therefore,
project teams avoid use of formal project management plans, financial spreadsheets for
budgeting, task lists, or any other activity that does not directly contribute to development of a
functioning application.
While the SDLC or any other waterfall approach requires users to sign off on their
requirements and then wait for the system to be completed, agile methods encourage users’
involvement throughout the process and encourage developers to change requirements in
response to user input if needed. The purpose of agile methods is not to conform to a static
contract with the users but to ensure that the users receive an application with which they are
happy. To avoid costly redesign, agile methods encourage developers to test each module as
soon as it is complete.
For example, Extreme Programming (XP) includes the following principles: produce the
initial software within weeks (rather than months) to receive rapid feedback from users; invent
simple solutions so there is less to change and necessary changes are easy to make; improve
design quality continually, so that the next “story” is less costly to implement; and test
constantly to accomplish earlier, less expensive defect detection. (A story is a requirement or set
of requirements delivered by the users.) Instead of formal requirements, developers encourage
the users to give examples of how they would like to use the application in a certain business
situation. Communication with users is highly informal and takes place on a daily basis.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Participation: the Path to Success
The Copenhagen Business School of Frederiksberg, Denmark conducted an investigative study on the role
of the users and customers in an agile software development project. The research was performed as a
semi-structured case study and interviews were administered to an assortment of key players including
future users and a third of the development team. The findings concluded that the direct and indirect cus-
tomer and user participation in a structured form of planning games, user stories, and story cards contrib-
uted to the success of the final software project. In the planning stages of agile software development,
the participation of users and customers is important because they will be the end users of the software
and thus, know what the software needs to accomplish to be successful.
Source: Kautz, K. (2011). Investigating the design process: participatory design in agile software develop-
ment. Information Technology & People, 24(3), 217–235.
404
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
Unlike more traditional methods, XP encourages two programmers to work on the same
module of code on the same computer. This fosters constructive criticism and feedback. The
constant communication between the two coders is meant to ensure cross-fertilization of ideas
and high-quality software. The idea is that two minds, working on the same code, create
synergy. Two people are more likely to identify bugs than a single person.
Critics of agile programming in general and XP in particular argue that the relaxed approach
to planning as well as ceding decision making and accountability to clients (users) might result
in disasters, especially if such methods are applied to large, complex projects. The critics cite the
DaimlerChrysler payroll system (Chrysler Comprehensive Compensation, known as C3). C3 was
the first large application developed with the XP method and was eventually canceled. The
software never delivered more than one-fourth of the features it was supposed to have.
On the other hand, supporters give examples of success. One is a system developed by
British Airways. The airline believed that information about passengers could be used by in-flight
personnel. Instead of relying on paper reports, they developed an iPad app to relay information
about club status, ticket class, and dietary requirements to the in-flight crew, which they hoped
would increase the level of customer service. Using the agile software development methodology,
they deployed iPads to its senior crew members on their routes and released software updates
about once a month (Zetlin, 2012).
When to Use Agile Methods
Agile methods are an efficient approach to development when a system is small, when it deals
with unstructured problems, and when the users cannot specify all the requirements at the start
of the project. They are also useful when developing a user interface: the developers can save
time by quickly developing the screens, icons, and menus for users to evaluate instead of forcing
the users to provide specifications.
When a system to be developed is small in scale, the risk involved in the lack of thorough
analysis is minimal, partly because the investment of resources is small. (A small system is one
that serves one person or a small group of employees. A large system is one that serves many
employees, who might be accessing the system via a network from different sites.) If the small-
system development takes longer than planned, the overall cost is still likely to be smaller than
if a full SDLC were performed.
When users cannot communicate their requirements, either because they are not familiar
with technological developments or because they find it hard to conceptualize the system’s
input and output files, processes, and user interface, developers have no choice but to use agile
methods. In this case the users are often able to communicate their requirements as the
development proceeds. For example, it is easier for marketing personnel to evaluate webpages
designed for a new electronic catalog and promotion site than to describe in detail what they
want before seeing anything. Without being shown actual examples, users often can offer little
guidance beyond “I will know it when I see it.” It is easier for future users to respond to screens,
menus, procedures, and other features developed by IT professionals than to provide a list of
requirements for them.
When Not to Use Agile Methods
Agile methods might not be appropriate for all systems development. If a system is large or
complex, or if it is designed to interface with other systems, using agile methods might pose too
great a risk because the methods skip feasibility studies. Some experts do not recommend the use
of agile methods for large systems (with the possible exception of Crystal, which accommodates
scalable software development) because such systems require a significant investment of
resources; therefore, system failure could entail considerable financial loss. The systematic
approach of the SDLC is recommended if the system is complex and consists of many modules,
because extra care must be applied in documenting requirements and the manner in which
components will be integrated, to ensure smooth and successful development.
For the same reasons, use of agile methods should be avoided when a system is to be
interfaced with other systems. The system requirements and integration must be analyzed
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
405
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
carefully, documented, and carried out according to a plan agreed on by the users and developers
before the design and construction phases start. This early consensus reduces the risk of
incompatibility and damage to other, existing systems. Therefore, accounting ISs, large order-
entry systems, and payroll systems as whole systems are rarely developed under agile methods.
Other factors that should encourage use of waterfall methods are the size of the development
team, how often the application is expected to be modified, how critical it is in terms of
affecting people’s lives and key organizational goals, and how tight the development budget is.
An additional risk with any type of prototyping is the difference between visible and
nonvisible features of the software. Users tend to judge software by its visible elements and be
less concerned about features such as database integrity, security measures, and other invisible
but important elements. They may discover too late that some features are either missing or do
not function to their satisfaction.
Figure 12.12 summarizes factors in deciding when and when not to use agile methods.
F I G U R E 12.12
Characteristics for
deciding to use (or not
use) agile methods
When to use agile methods
Small-scale system
System solving unstructured problems
When it’s difficult for users to specify system
requirements
When the development team is small and
co-located
System requirements are dynamic
System will not put people and critical
organization goals at risk
Development project budget is tight
When not to use agile methods
Large-scale system
Complex system
System with interfaces to other systems
When the team is large or distributed in
multiple sites
System requirements are fairly static
System will significantly affect people’s
well-being and critical organizational goals
Development is well-funded
Outsourcing
Outsourcing is steadily being used by organizations to maximize their value as well as reduce
costs. Outsourcing is the formal business relationship to transfer internal business processes
and functions to a third-party business. IDC expects that the business process outsourcing
market will reach $202 billion worldwide by 2016, with the U.S market reaching $92 billion
(Anonymous, 2012a). IDC has found that many of the vendors providing these services will
focus on process solutions relating to information technology such as business analytics, bid
data, and cloud delivery. At the same time, IDC also found that the expansion of outsourcing
services has created extreme competition, causing some businesses to reduce the number of
service providers that they use (Anonymous, 2012b).
Many industries and businesses seek third-party outsourcing vendors to create efficiencies.
Ferro Corporation, a supplier of performance materials and chemicals, wanted to improve
operational efficiencies, reduce costs while creating value (Anonymous, 2013). Ferro contracted
with
Capgemini
to
provide
a
variety
of
information
technology
and
business
process
outsourcing services expected to return $70 million of operational cost savings through 2014.
Capgemini will support Ferro’s enterprise-wide SAP environment as well as oversee its global
finance and accounting processes.
Universities and even governments have followed the private sector to embrace outsourcing
processes and functions. Accenture is helping the University of Michigan by analyzing its
finance and human resource operations to develop a business case for a shared services delivery
© Cengage Learning 2015
406
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
model. Yale University is also receiving assistance from Accenture to expand its shared services
organization’s various institutional functions as well as create a grant management function for
its College of Arts and Sciences (Anonymous, 2011).
Outsourcing initiatives can fail. In 2010, UBS Global Asset Management found it was relying
on older technology (Steinert-Threlkeld, 2012). They did not want to develop a new system, and
replacing the system with a purchased alternative was estimated to take five years, so they
considered outsourcing with the appealing “no cost” (incremental) approach. They requested
information from a variety of outsourcing companies. They believed that the annual operating
costs, even including the outsourcer’s fee, would result in a cost-neutral proposal. Even with
these benefits, however, UBS never announced their choice for outsourcing the system. The
reason for the reversal? UBS realized the importance of retaining the privacy of their data, and
the control of storing it internally. When they realized they needed to design a method of
anonymizing the data so that no client information would be maintained by outsourced
systems, they found that the business case “started to deteriorate” and was simply not worth it.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Smart IT Outsourcing
Although outsourcing may sound engaging and simplistic, it must be approached with proper planning
and analysis. Sometimes outsourcing IT functions is not a good idea. Some industry experts contend that
businesses can, and should consider, outsourcing functions that are not associated with their core com-
petencies. The authors of The Discipline of Market Leaders believe that organizations must establish their
competency in one of three areas: product and innovation leadership, customer service and intimacy, or
operational excellence; and should not try to excel at all three.
Some, like J. Ditmore, believe that information technology is crucial to all three areas. The tight and fun-
damental integration to these competencies should not be compared to other organizational functions
such as security or legal. Business organizations must retain control over their intellectual properties and
business functions that provide strategic value for their stakeholders. Even when outsourcing, businesses
should always retain and develop the key design and management internally.
Sources: Ditmore, J. (2012). Why IT Outsourcing Often Fails. InformationWeek(1339), 5–6; Treacy, M.,
& Wiersema, F. (1997). The Discipline of Market Leaders: Choose Your Customers, Narrow Your Focus,
Dominate Your Market. Jackson, TN: Basic Books.
Project Planning and Management Tools
Several tools exist to help plan and manage development projects. Some of the tools encompass
planning and managing the development of many ISs. IBM’s Rational Project Coordinator is
software that helps organizations plan investment in a new system, and then plan and manage
the development project and delivery. All who are involved in the projects can track the
progress and the sums spent on resources. Similarly, Oracle’s Primavera P6 provides integrated
project portfolio management (PPM) software. Project portfolio management is a set of
processes and methods used by project managers to determine which projects will meet the
organization’s operational and financial goals in relation to its strategic objectives as well as the
needs of its customers. As discussed in Chapter 2, organizations strive to find that perfect mix of
projects that fulfill their strategic and tactical goals.
While some tools, such as Rational Project Coordinator, are geared to help with software
development projects, others, such as Clarizen, Project Insight, AtTask, Microsoft Project, and
many others, are designed to accommodate planning and management of any type of project.
These software products plan and track the progress of project execution in order to reduce or
eliminate time and cost overruns. As shown in the illustration of AtTask project management
software on the next page, a Gantt chart depicts the effort, schedule, and status of a series of tasks
on a project. A Gantt chart is an efficient and visual method of understanding the interrelationships
between tasks (predecessors and successors) and the effort required to complete the task.
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
407
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
AtTask project
management software
helps plan and control the
costs, schedule, and
resources of projects
POINT OF
INTEREST
Software for Software
In today’s cutthroat business world, time is money and money is money and neither can be wasted. IT
project development management software has emerged as a key factor in a company’s development of
new software technologies. Project management provides a process for maintaining the path while
achieving an economic balance between three factors: cost, time of project implementation, and quality
during project implementation. However, developing the best software imaginable is virtually worthless if
the period in which it is required has already passed.
Source: Gilaninia, S., Mousavian, S. J., et.al. (2012). Position IT in Project Management (Case study:
municipalities of Namin). Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research in Business, 3(9), 751–757.
Systems Integration
Firms often must wrestle with highly distributed, heterogeneous environments populated with
applications for special tasks, which cannot be accessed by systems used for other tasks. Often,
the disparate systems cannot “talk to each other” because they run on different operating
systems (or, as IS professionals say, on different platforms).
Much of what IT professionals do is systems integration, rather than analysis and
development of a stand-alone IS. Systems integration looks at the information needs of an
entire organization, or at least of a major division of it. The analysts consider the existing, but
often disparate, ISs and then produce a plan to integrate them so that data can flow more easily
among different units of the organization and users can access different types of data via a single
interface. Consequently, many IS service companies call themselves systems integrators. Systems
integration has become increasingly important mainly because more and more ISs are linked to
websites, because more legacy databases are integrated into new enterprise applications such as
SCM and ERP systems, and because of the growing linking of ISs between organizations (see
Figure 12.13). Legacy systems are older systems that organizations decide to continue to use
because the investment in a new system would not justify the improved features, or because the
old systems have some advantage that cannot be obtained from newer systems. In addition,
Courtesy of AtTask.com
408
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
with the rapid adoption of smartphones, social media, and tablets, existing legacy systems need
to be integrated into these new customer-centric systems.
F I G U R E 12.13
Organizational initiatives
requiring system
integration
• 
Linking existing ISs to websites, smartphones, and tablet applications
• 
Linking databases to websites, smartphones, and tablet applications
• 
Linking legacy databases with enterprise applications
• 
Integrating legacy systems with new systems
• 
Integrating media content (videos) and social media into existing websites
• 
Sharing information systems and data among organizations and trading partners
Systems integration is often more challenging than systems development. In fact, some IT
professionals regard systems development as a subspecialty of systems integration because the
integrator must develop systems with an understanding of how data maintained in disparate
systems can be efficiently retrieved and used for effective business processes, and because legacy
systems must often be interfaced with recently acquired systems.
For example, marketing managers can have richer information for decision making if they
have easy access to accounting and financial data through their own marketing IS. The better the
integration, the better they can incorporate this information into their marketing information.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Want to Be Certified?
If you are willing to take the test, you can add one or several of the following titles to your name: CCP,
CBIP, CSIH, CDMP, ISA, ACP, CITC, CITCP, CITGP ISP. The Institute for Certification of Computer Profes-
sionals tests IT professionals and provides them with certificates. To see the goals of this not-for-profit
organization and how the certification process is carried out, as well as what these acronyms stand for,
visit www.iccp.org. Similarly, those interested in achieving the Project Management Professional (PMP)
credential should investigate more on the Project Management Institute’s site: http://www.pmi.org/default
.aspx or computer security certification (CSIH) at http://www.cert.org/certification/.
Sources: Anonymous. (2012). Eligibility for Certification. Retrieved March 28, 2013, from http://iccp.
org/certification/becoming-certified/eligibility; Anonymous. (2013). Project Management Professional
(PMP). Retrieved March 28, 2013, from http://www.pmi.org/Certification/Project-Management-Professional-
PMP.aspx
Systems integrators must also be well-versed in hardware and software issues, because
different ISs often use incompatible hardware and software. Often, overcoming incompatibility
issues is one of the most difficult aspects of integration. Consider business intelligence systems,
which were discussed in Chapter 11, “Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management.” The
concept of extracting business intelligence from large data warehouses often involves integration
of several ISs. The challenges are significant, and by some estimates more than half of all BI
projects are never completed or fail to deliver all the expected features and benefits.
Systems integration has become increasingly complex because it now involves the ISs not
only of a single organization but of several organizations. In the era of extranets, the challenge
is many times more difficult because IT professionals must integrate systems of several different
companies so that they can communicate and work well using telecommunications. Imagine
how difficult it is to integrate disparate legacy systems of several companies. For this reason,
companies often contract with highly experienced experts for such projects.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
409
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Should IS Professionals Be Certified?
When organizations commit millions of dollars to developing
systems, they count on IT professionals to provide high-quality
systems that will fulfill their intended purposes without harming
their businesses, their employees, or their consumers. But the
products of IT professionals often fail and cause serious
damage. Some people argue that because of the high
investment and high risk usually associated with systems
development
and
operation,
IT
professionals,
like
other
professionals, should be certified. These people argue that
certification would minimize problems caused by ISs. Others
argue that certification might stifle free competition and
innovation, or even create a profession whose members will
make it difficult to pass certification examinations so that
current members can continue to enjoy high income.
Certification is meant to guarantee that the experts have
passed tests that ensure their skills. The government or other
authorized bodies are expected to license experts, thereby
certifying which people have knowledge and skills in a
particular discipline that are significantly greater than those of
a layperson. Proponents of the measure argue that certification
could reduce the malfunctioning of ISs.
Certification Pros.
Some experts say certification could
minimize the number and severity of IS malfunctions. Civil
engineers must be certified to plan buildings and bridges.
Doctors
pass
rigorous
exams
before
they
receive
their
licenses and begin to practice without supervision. Public
accountants must be licensed to perform audits. Lawyers must
pass the bar exams to practice. Why, these people ask, should
IS professionals be allowed to practice without licensing?
Software experts do possess all the characteristics of
professionals. They work in a field that requires expertise, and
the public and their clients usually are not qualified to evaluate
their skills. Certification could help the following groups in their
relationships with IT specialists:
●
Employers often hire software professionals without knowing
what they are getting. They count on the information included
in the candidate’s résumé and, sometimes, on letters of rec-
ommendation. Mandatory certification might protect potential
employers against charlatans. Also, certification would pro-
vide potential employers with information on a candidate’s
suitability for different levels of performance. For example, a
professional might be qualified to participate in a systems
development team but not to head the project team.
●
Clients could realize even greater benefit from mandatory cer-
tification. While employers can learn, in time, of the real capa-
bilities of their personnel, businesses that hire consultants
have no previous employment experience on which to rely.
●
Society might enjoy fewer software-related failures. Only
those who are qualified would be allowed to engage in
development and maintenance of information systems,
thereby improving the overall integrity of ISs. Certification
is especially needed for those holding key development
positions for systems whose impact on society is signifi-
cant, such as medical ISs and software embedded in weap-
ons systems.
Certification Cons. Three arguments are raised against
mandatory certification:
●
It is difficult, if not impossible, to devise a way to measure
software development competence. For instance, there are
many different methods for developing applications, and
there is no proven advantage of one over another. A com-
puter professional might be very experienced in one
method but not in others. It would be unfair to disqualify
that individual merely on this basis.
●
Some argue that mandatory certification might create a
“closed shop” by using a single entry exam designed to
admit very few people. In such a scenario, the status and
income of those admitted would be enhanced at the
expense of those excluded. With little fear of competition
within the closed group, there is often little incentive to
improve skills.
●
IT progresses very fast, faster than many other fields.
Ensuring that a specialist knows how to use certain infor-
mation technologies and methods today does not ensure
that this person will know how to use technologies and
methods two years from now. This person’s knowledge
may be obsolete and render the certificate useless.
Where We Operate Now.
Mandatory certification or
licensing of IT professionals is rare. Only Texas, British Columbia,
and
Ontario
require
licensing
of
software
development
professionals. In fact, the industry cannot reach agreement about
who should be considered an IT professional. Some organizations,
such as the Institute for Certification of Computer Professionals
(ICCP), test and certify people who voluntarily take their tests.
(About 55,000 people have been certified by ICCP globally, out of
millions
who
consider
themselves
IT
professionals.)
Some
software companies certify analysts and programmers to install
their companies’ tools. However, there are no certification
regulations for IT professionals in the United States or anywhere
else that are similar to those for many other professions.
The increasing issues and challenges associated with
computer security have also created related certifications for
410
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
IT professionals. The CERT program (at Carnegie Mellon) offers
the computer security incident handler (CSIH) certification to
help security, system, and network administrators to gain
knowledge and training to avert security intrusions and other
malicious acts.
Importance of Certifications.
A
study
completed
by
CompTIA finds that certifications are important when hiring
information technology professionals. A significant number of
hiring managers (64 percent) consider certifications as a “high
value” to validate information technology skills. The study posits
that these certifications will continue to grow as employers
recruit technology professionals. However, the study also
reports that human resources departments do not completely
understand technology-based certifications. IT hiring managers
believe that education and certifications rank high when
reviewing applicants for information technology positions.
Source: Anonymous. (2011, Feb 07). IT Certifications Grow in
Importance in Hiring Process, but Employers Challenged by
Evaluation, Validation Issues, CompTIA Study Finds, Business Wire.
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
411
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Summary
●
IT planning is important especially because invest-
ing in IT is typically substantial and because of the
high risk in implementing enterprise applications.
●
Standardization is often an important part of IT
planning. Standardization helps save costs, provides
efficient training, and results in efficient support.
●
The systems development life cycle (SDLC) and
other waterfall methods consist of well-defined
and carefully followed phases: analysis, design,
implementation, and support.
●
The purpose of systems analysis is to determine
what needs the system will satisfy.
●
Feasibility studies determine whether developing
the system is possible and desirable from a num-
ber of viewpoints. The technical feasibility study
examines the technical state of the art to ensure
that the hardware and software exist to build the
system. The economic feasibility study weighs the
benefits of the system against its cost. The opera-
tional feasibility study determines whether the sys-
tem will fit the organizational culture and be used
to full capacity.
●
System requirements detail the features the users
need in the new system.
●
In systems design, developers outline the systems
components graphically and construct the soft-
ware. Tools such as data flow diagrams and the
Unified Modeling Language (UML) are used to cre-
ate a model of the desired system.
●
When the system is completed, it is implemented.
Implementation includes training and conversion
from the old system to the new system. Conversion
can take place by one of several strategies: parallel,
phased, cut-over, or piloting.
●
The systems life cycle continues in the form of sup-
port. The system is maintained to ensure operabil-
ity
without
fault
and
satisfaction
of
changing
business needs.
●
Agile methods are a popular alternative to the tra-
ditional
systems
development
life
cycle.
Agile
methods place considerable emphasis on flexible
requirements and frequent interaction with users.
These methods skip detailed systems analysis and
aim at delivering a new application in the shortest
possible time.
●
Several applications help plan and manage devel-
opment projects. Some are geared toward plan-
ning and management of software development.
Some are web-based, allowing remote access.
●
Systems integration is often much more compli-
cated
than
systems
development,
because
it
requires the IT professionals to make different
applications communicate with each other seam-
lessly. The complexity is multiplied when integrat-
ing ISs of several organizations that must work
together over the web.
●
Because of the major responsibility of IS profes-
sionals, the question of whether certification is
needed has come up. If doctors, civil engineers,
lawyers, and public accountants are subject to
mandatory certification, many people argue that
IS professionals should be, too.
412
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
Tyler
met
with
Becky
at
the
new
location.
He
explained his vision of the new loyalty program.
After listening to him, she began to convey her
thoughts and questions. She separated the issues
and
challenges
of
the
new
program
into
two
categories: functional and technological.
Functional
●How would the structure of the program work? How
would it incentivize or create loyalty?
●Would customers be incentivized by dining only?
What about takeout? Bakery?
●What could customers receive for their loyalty?
●What data is needed to support the structure of the
program?
Technological
●For the data needed to support the new system,
what is already processed and stored by the current
POS?
●Does the POS system support data access by exter-
nal systems? Does the database support open
access or is it proprietary?
●For the data not maintained by the POS system,
how would it be created and updated?
Tyler was fairly overwhelmed by the questions,
even though he knew they were all reasonable. He
said “Geez, I didn’t realize planning an information
system was so complex. I thought that you could
just build it with ‘wizards’. I thought it was more
technical. I now know it isn’t.” However, he was
pleased that he took a “step back” to analyze the
problem first. Becky said, “Look Tyler, this is not
rocket science. But you need the answers to these
questions to build a solid system, fulfill what you
want to achieve, and reduce your risk.”
What Is Your Advice?
1. Using the information on structuring data (marketing,
financial, and operational) from Chapter 11, define
how the structure and functional issues would frame
the design of the Kimball’s information system.
2. It is clear that the POS system does not maintain
enough customer information to support the new
loyalty system. Analyze this challenge and provide
a recommendation to overcome it.
New Perspectives
1. Consider the various hardware components from
Chapter 4. What types of hardware devices could
be used to implement this system?
2. If the POS system allowed for open access to its
database, how would this affect the design of the
new system and minimize data entry on the part of
the wait staff?
Key Terms
agile methods, 403
application systems support, 402
beta site, 402
change management, 389
conversion, 400
cost/benefit analysis, 394
cut-over conversion (flash cut
conversion), 401
data flow diagram (DFD), 397
feasibility studies, 394
implementation, 400
mission statement, 388
organizational culture, 396
outsourcing, 406
parallel conversion, 401
phased conversion, 401
pilot conversion, 402
progressive elaboration, 391
project portfolio management,
407
prototyping, 391
return on investment (ROI), 394
system requirements, 396
systems analysis, 392
systems design, 397
systems development life cycle
(SDLC), 391
systems integration, 408
total cost of ownership (TCO),
394
Unified Modeling Language
(UML), 399
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
413
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Review Questions
1. Why is IT planning so important?
2. As part of their IT planning, many organizations
decide to standardize. What does standardization
mean in this context, and what are its potential
benefits?
3. Why is traditional systems development referred
to as a “cycle”? What determines the cycle’s end?
4. Systems developers often use the term “applica-
tion development” rather than “systems devel-
opment.” Why?
5. What are the benefits of using data flow dia-
grams? Who benefits from DFDs?
6. SDLC is usually recommended for developing an
IS that interfaces with other ISs. Give two exam-
ples of an IS that is interfaced with at least two
other ISs.
7. Recall the discussion of IT professionals in Chap-
ter 1, “Business Information Systems: An Over-
view.” Of the following professionals, who does
the majority of the systems construction job: the
CIO, systems analyst, database administrator
(DBA), or programmer? Why?
8. What are the advantages of agile methods over
waterfall development methods, such as the tra-
ditional SDLC? What are the risks?
9. Are agile methods more important in today’s
business environment? Why or why not?
10. Why are agile methods so helpful when users
cannot define system requirements?
11. An increasing number of IS professionals prefer
to call the end users of their creations “custo-
mers,” even if the developers and users are
employees of the same organization. Why?
12. What is systems integration?
13. Why is systems integration more complicated
when the systems involve the web than when
they do not? Smartphones? Tablets?
14. The emergence of the web, social media, and
mobile devices as vehicles for business increased
the need for systems integration. How so?
Discussion Questions
15. The modern view of systems development is
that it should be a continuation of IS planning.
Why?
16. Consider a new chain of shoe stores. The mar-
keting department of the corporation would like
to know the customers and their preferences.
What questions would you ask before developing
an IS for data collection and analysis?
17. The analysis phase of systems development
includes fact finding. Suggest ways to find facts,
other than the ways mentioned in this chapter.
18. In data flow diagrams, a process is always labeled
with an action, while entities and data stores are
labeled with nouns. Why? Give two examples for
each of these elements.
19. You are asked to recommend a conversion strat-
egy for a new accounts receivable system. The
system will be used only by the controller’s office.
Which strategy will you recommend, and why?
20. You are asked to recommend a conversion strat-
egy for a new ERP system that includes account-
ing, sales, purchasing, and payroll modules.
Which strategy will you recommend, and why?
21. What are the elements that make the responsibil-
ities of IT professionals similar to those of other
professionals, such as engineers and financial
analysts?
22. Many software companies (such as Microsoft,
Oracle, and SAP) certify people as consultants for
their products. For instance, you might become a
certified SAP R/3 Technical Consultant. Is this
type of certification the same, in principle, as the
certification of a physician, lawyer, or certified
public accountant (CPA)? Explain.
23. Suppose you are the IT director for a hospital.
You have a small crew that helps the medical and
administrative staffs with their computers and
applications, but when a new system must be
developed, you must hire IT professionals. How
would you conduct your search for reliable IS
developers? Whom would you contact, and what
questions would you ask?
24. You are the CIO for a large university hospital.
The medical staff of the cardiac ward would like
to build an expert system for diagnosis. Your
preliminary review shows that the financial
414
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
investment would be considerable. What ques-
tions do you ask (of both the doctors and your
staff) to decide whether to use a thorough SDLC
or agile methods to develop the system? List and
explain your questions.
25. You are trying to explain to your supervisor the
general details of a proposed IS. The IS involves
a server connecting many PCs. Your supervisor
is not an IS professional and has no idea what
a DFD is. How would you prefer to communicate
your ideas: verbally; in writing, but without
diagrams; with a DFD; or with a combination
of some or all of these means? Explain
your choice.
26. During development of a new IS, professional
jargon might facilitate communication among IS
professionals, but it might be detrimental when
used to communicate with users. Explain.
Applying Concepts
27. Prepare a 10-minute software-based presentation
(use PowerPoint or another application) to make
a presentation on the topic: “Factors that have
made IS planning difficult over the past five
years.” Include in your presentation develop-
ments in hardware, software, and telecommuni-
cations; globalization; the Internet; the IT labor
force; and any other area that has had an impact
on IT planning.
28. You were hired as an IS consultant by a small
chain of stores that rents domestic appliances.
Partly because operations are run with paper
records, one store does not know what is going
on in the other stores. The president of this small
company thinks that the chain doesn’t utilize its
inventory efficiently. For example, if a customer
needs a lawnmower and the appliance is not
available in store A, the salespeople cannot tell
the customer if the mower is available at another
outlet or offer to bring it for the customer from
another outlet. The president would like an IS that
would allow the chain to serve the customers
better and that would help with tracking and bill-
ing, too. She would like to take advantage of the
web to help both employees and customers. Both
should know what is available for rent and at
which store at any given time. List the questions
you would ask in your fact-finding effort and
indicate who in the organization would be asked
each question.
29. Assume you are the leader of a team that has just
completed construction of a website that provides
information but also allows online purchasing of
your company’s products. Enumerate and explain
the steps you would take to test the system.
Prepare a software-based presentation (using
PowerPoint or a similar application) to explain all
the testing steps and why each must be taken.
(Hint: Keep in mind different operating systems,
web browsers, screen sizes, and so forth.)
Hands-On Activities
30. Prepare a DFD that describes the following appli-
cation: Gadgets, Inc. sells its items through trav-
eling salespeople. When a salesperson receives a
signed contract from a client, he or she enters the
details into a notebook computer. The salesper-
son later transmits the record to the company’s
mainframe computer at its headquarters. The
program records the details in four files: sales,
shipping, accounts receivable, and commissions.
If the buyer is a new customer (one who is not yet
in the customer database), the program enters
the customer’s record into the customer database
and generates a thank-you letter. The program
also calculates the 4 percent commission, which
is recorded in the commission file with the sales-
person’s code. At the end of the month, the pro-
gram produces a paper report with the records
of all the new customers. In addition, if the total
monthly sales of the salesperson exceed
$300,000, the program generates a congratulatory
letter showing that total. If the total is less than
$10,000, the program produces a letter showing
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
415
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
the total and the sentence: “Try harder next
month.”
31. Find a business organization that provides a
multi-level (in-house, mobile, web, tablet, social
media) approach to the delivery of information
systems. Compile some research to outline the
various activities and functions that this
organization provides to its customers. Create a
diagram illustrating all of the various compo-
nents of the organization’s information technol-
ogy offerings and how they interact with the
“central” information system (data, functions,
etc.). Compile a report describing the
integration.
Team Activities
32. Team up with another student. Each of you
should select a different agile method from the
list appearing in this chapter. Each should write
a one-page summary of the principles, benefits,
and shortcomings of the method. Then, sit
together and write a one-page summary of the
differences between the two methods along the
three points.
33. Team up with another student to search the web
for tools that facilitate software development, and
choose three tools. List the features provided in
each of the tools. Assume that the vendors’
claims are true. Which phases and activities of
the systems development life cycle does each
tool support? Which would you prefer to use
in systems development? Why? Prepare a
5-minute software-based presentation (using
PowerPoint or a similar application) to
present your findings and explain your
recommendations.
416
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Change for the Sake of Change?
The word change does not usually evoke comfortable
feelings or create a warm impression. When change is
mentioned in business organizations, it often creates
anxiety or, in its worst case, resentment or opposition.
Change can be implemented in many ways: through
imposition or edict; consensually or democratically;
gradually or precipitously. The approach or tone of
the execution of change is as important as the basis
for change itself.
Consider the example of Chesterfield County,
Virginia and employee timecard entry. The County,
consisting of 3,000 employees and 600 supervisors,
embarked on the implementation of a new online
system for employees to enter their timecard data.
The timecard entry process involved approximately
60 timekeepers.
The County replaced several legacy systems with
the new online system. The new system combined
two
systems:
an
internally
developed
time
and
attendance system and an “off the shelf” payroll and
human resources system. The challenges of the new
information technology system extended beyond its
technology components: Employees would have to
learn a new process of entering their hours into the
system and being paid. System developers often
forget
to
assess
how
familiar
the
system’s
stakeholders are with the computer and other skills
they would need to use the new system, but County
administrators knew they needed a sensible and
reasonable approach to manage the change. A well-
developed
information
system
without
an
appropriately
planned
implementation
with
its
stakeholders can often fail.
The County created a team to manage the change
to the new system and develop a change management
strategy. The team used several methodologies to
ensure that stakeholders were involved throughout
the
implementation,
communicating
with
key
department personnel to “build on existing processes,
drawing up communication plans and creating a well-
thought-out training plan.” The team was comprised of
several
managers
from
the
various
financial,
operational, and payroll functional departments as
well as their local educational institution, Chesterfield
University.
From this team, they established a communication
process to connect with customer departments. This
network was responsible for determining training
needs, analyzing a security procedure, coordinating
training, and gaining valuable input from the various
stakeholders. Ultimately, the goal of this process was
to maintain the lines of communication among the
employees
and
other
stakeholders.
The
process
involved
not
simply
words,
but
also
actions.
In
addition, since quality training was an important
component of the system rollout, the Information
Systems department worked closely with Chesterfield
University to develop and conduct training sessions as
well as to provide technical assistance to support
employees through the installation.
An essential component of change management
is to gain acceptance by the system’s stakeholders.
The
County
understood
that
appropriate
communication
would
help
gain
acceptance
and
reduce employee anxiety. The final version of the
communication plan changed “substantially” from
the
initial
version.
As
input
was
received
and
evaluated, so did the methods and approach to how
and
what
they
communicated.
Constant
and
interactive
communication
through
newsletters,
emails,
surveys,
meetings
and
an
intranet
site
provided timely and constant information flow.
Over 300 issues were reported and tracked during
the first parallel test run of the new system. A total of
four
system
changes
were
approved
to
be
implemented, resolving 285 issues, with only seven
issues unresolved before the second parallel test. At
the final implementation, the employees successfully
used the new timecard system with only six payroll
checks processed in error for the first payroll period.
Sources: Brown, P. J. (2013). Change Management Makes
the Difference in Chesterfield County. Government Finance
Review, 29(1), 60–62.
Thinking About the Case
1. Consider the statement “A well-developed infor-
mation system without an appropriately planned
implementation with its stakeholders can often
fail.” Why? Provide examples and details.
2. The County’s initial approach to assembling their
plan for change was a critical factor to the success
of the implementation. Taking the role of a
County employee, discuss how the County’s
approach would reduce anxiety as well as create
an environment for success with the new infor-
mation system.
3. Communication is a critical factor to any new ini-
tiative and to change management. Does too
much communication adversely affect an initia-
tive? Why or why not?
4. Considering the 300 issues that arose during the
parallel pilot, did the change management system
work effectively? Should the number of issues
have been less? Discuss your position.
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
417
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Video Apps Changing the Status Quo
of Television
Video app development has rapidly expanded in
recent years due in great part to the explosive sales
of mobile tablets and smartphones. In fact, the desire
for video apps has spread and apps are being created
for set-top-boxes and other connected devices. Three
companies are making some noise with their newly
developed and successful video applications. Their
main mission: reach more people, on more devices,
more quickly.
SyncTV is an online video streaming company
backed by television manufacturers. It delivers a live
and on-demand pay TV service to a connected device.
Devices can include Macs, PCs, connected TVs, Blu-ray
players, iPods, iPads, Android devices, Roku and Boxee
boxes, and more. SyncTV has built the infrastructure to
support as many Netflix-type channels as the market
desires. They are a small company but have high
output.
Their
automated
workflow
ingests
and
reformats content on the fly so it can be appropriately
distributed
to
specified
devices.
SyncTV’s
initial
purpose was to provide an option for TV watchers to
get the content they desire while circumventing the
traditional cable companies. An added benefit is that
subscribers
get
access
to
their
favorite
shows
wherever they are connected to the Internet, instead
of just at their home. Users subscribe to only the
channels they want from content providers. As long
as users have a TV with an IP address, SyncTV will
work. No cable or satellite connections are required–
just TV when, where, and what you like.
Brightcove is a B2B video app that is similar to
YouTube
but
includes
additional
expertise
and
analytics. Brightcove’s app VideoCloud has device
detection so it can format content to the screen size
of a device whether it is a PC, Mac, tablet, or
smartphone.
Brightcove
is
a
total
platform
for
developing, deploying, and operating mobile content
apps. Businesses can design an entire website and
place
their
videos,
connected
to
Brightcove
VideoCloud, on the site. Businesses outsource video
hosting to Brightcove and embed videos on their
own page while Brightcove provides the specialized
engineering to get their customers’ content delivered
to multiple devices. Brightcove has made its niche
through providing this multi-platform service along
with
real-time
analytics
and
data
about
clients’
videos. VideoCloud was designed and built from the
perspective of a web developer and includes the App
Cloud Workshop app, so video developers can use
tools
with
which
they
are
already
familiar.
Brightcove’s VideoCloud has become a relied upon
asset to businesses with an online presence.
HBO GO is the mobile platform for HBO Premium
and the baby of the HBO app family. The app is offered
to all HBO subscribers at no extra cost. Released in April
of 2011, the app was being used by only 10 percent of
HBO’s subscriber base. By the end of the month, 80
percent
had
begun
using
the
app.
HBO
GO
is
accessible through mobile devices including laptops,
iPads, iPhones, iPods, and Android devices, as well as
Macs and PCs. HBO has huge brand recognition,
premium content, and a large customer base, which is
why offering a mobile app for their content was deemed
a superior way to increase their bottom line. HBO
makes it convenient for customers to watch what they
want, when they want, and where they want. One
challenge they faced was that content had to be
suitable
for
a
wide
range
of
bandwidth—low-
bandwidth to high-definition depending on the device
on which the app was being used. By focusing on
exceptional consumer experience and developing new
platforms for delivering that experience, HBO has
successfully built a video app that is attractive to new
and existing users.
With the advances in video technology, what’s in
store for the future? The motivations that drove the
technologies we have today include providing content
to as many devices as possible and to as many people
as possible. It is likely that this theme will expand in the
future. More devices, like game consoles and Blu-ray
players, will continue to be added as platforms to
deliver
video
apps.
App
stores
created
by
TV
manufacturers such as Samsung, LG, and Vizio will
become more popular platforms for video apps. It is
also likely that the success of video apps such as
SyncTV and HBO GO may force changes in traditional
cable and satellite TV distribution models.
Sources: Anonymous. (2013a). Brightcove. Retrieved March
29, 2013, from http://www.synctv.com/; Anonymous. (2013c).
SyncTv. Television. Unleashed; Klejna, T. (2011). The App’s
the Thing. Streaming Media Magazine, 40–42, 44, 46–47.
Thinking About the Case
1. How does the information technology develop-
ment for video-based businesses differ from
traditional businesses?
2. What challenges do these types of companies
face in relation to the rapid changes in consumer
adoption of hardware devices?
3. How do the technological changes to these
devices affect the planning and development of
these companies?
4. Discuss the changes to consumer media viewing
patterns from video app technology. Will televi-
sion be outdated? Will the Internet be able to
support this technology if adoption increases?
418
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
References
Anonymous. (2001). Manifesto for Agile Software
Development. Retrieved March 27, 2013, from
http://agilemanifesto.org/iso/en/
Anonymous. (2011, Mar 28). Accenture Helping U.S.
Universities Target Administrative Efficiency,
Business Wire.
Anonymous. (2012a, May 16). Global Business Process
Outsourcing Market to Reach $202.6 billion in
2016, PR Newswire.
Anonymous. (2012b, Nov 28). New IDC Report
Analyzes Profitability Trends in the Worldwide
Services Market, Assisting Service Vendors in Their
Strategic Planning Process, Business Wire.
Anonymous. (2013). Ferro Chooses Capgemini
for Global Delivery of Business Process and
Information Technology Outsourcing Services.
Entertainment Close-Up.
Steinert-Threlkeld, T. (2012). No Surefire Success When
Outsourcing. Money Management Executive, 20(23),
1-n/a.
Yeo, V. (2010, June 24). Standardization floats HP’s
next wave of services growth. http://www.zdnet
.com/standardization-floats-hps-next-wave-of-
services-growth-2062200998/
Zetlin, M. (2012). British Airway’s iPad App Improves
Customer Service. Computerworld, 46(2), 16.
CHAPTER 12
Systems Planning and Development
419
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
CHAPTER
© ChameleonsEye/Shutterstock.com
PART
thirteen
CHOICES IN SYSTEMS
ACQUISITION
Learning Objectives
Developing systems, in-house or hiring a software development firm, is the most expensive way to acquire ISs.
Other alternatives might be less expensive and offer different benefits. Some of the alternatives have been
mentioned in previous chapters, but they are discussed in more depth here and will provide a deeper understanding
of systems acquisition.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Explain the differences among the alternatives to tailored system development, which include outsourcing,
licensing ready-made software, using software as a service, and encouraging users to develop their own
applications.
●
List the business trade-offs inherent in the various methods of acquiring systems.
●
Describe which systems acquisition approach is appropriate for a particular set of circumstances.
●
Discuss organizational policies on employee computer use.
420
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Technology for Customer Loyalty
Tyler and Becky have met and made significant prog-
ress on the design of the customer loyalty system.
They have explored many of the options associated
with the hardware, data requirements, and any system
integration that may be needed with the current point-
of-sale system. They are confident that they have docu-
mented the requirements well in order to move forward.
Tyler believes strongly that the new system is crucial
to the success of the Lakeside location to incentivize cur-
rent customers to continue their loyalty as well as build a
“buzz” for new customers. The new menu and expanded
hours, as well as the picturesque location, are a solid foun-
dation. Now Tyler believes the “word of mouth” approach
needs to be expanded with a solid marketing promotion
campaign coupled with a new logo for the Lakeside.
Being More Mobile
Becky and Tyler discussed how to proceed. Then, she
thought of a related initiative. “Tyler, have you thought
of how a mobile app would add to your new location?”
He thought, “How could I have missed that?!” Then, he
sighed. “Is this too much to accomplish too soon?”
They took a piece of paper and started to plan out how
these technology initiatives would work together with
their existing plans for marketing, operations, and tech-
nology infrastructure.
After an hour, they had an initial diagram to show the
various components of the plan. From this, they discussed
the relationships between the components and how they
would align with an overall strategy. They were unsure of
how the various components should be sequenced for
implementation. Tyler decided to apply a concept he had
learned in school, about “hard logic” tasks that must be
completed in a specific order. He and Becky continued to
analyze and apply that principle to the initiatives.
She then thought and added, “Tyler, have you devel-
oped a mobile app before?” He said “No, but I use them a
lot!” She replied, “Then if you really want the restaurant
to have a mobile app, we have to look at the options.”
Options and Priorities
In Chapter 12, “Systems Planning and Development,” you learned about software development
and that few companies develop their own ISs in-house. Recall, also, that “systems” almost
always means “applications,” and therefore the terms will be used interchangeably in this
chapter, as in Chapter 12. The four alternatives to in-house development by IT specialists, as
illustrated in Figure 13.1, are outsourcing, licensing, using software as a service (SaaS), and
having users develop the system. However, there are many tradeoffs to consider when analyzing
the various development alternatives.
If an application of the desired features and quality can be obtained from more than one of
these sources (and that’s a big “If”), then several factors need to be weighed such as cost, impact
on current technology infrastructure, and time to implement. The total cost of ownership
should be determined to include total cost of design, development, implementation, and
maintenance. Just as you must consider after-purchase costs such as gas, insurance, and
maintenance when you purchase a car, businesses must document the costs after purchase to
accurately compare the costs of various alternatives. Because so many organizational systems are
integrated and rely on other systems, a thorough analysis of how each alternative would
interface with all current systems, and appropriate costs, is also important. And, in today’s
economic and competitive environment, the ability for an organization to gain first mover
status and a competitive advantage can potentially be a more important factor than the cost of
the project. For example, a more costly development approach, with appropriate quality and
functionality, might be implemented earlier to gain a strategic or operational advantage.
If the application cannot be licensed, the next choice would usually be to obtain use of the
system as a service from an application service provider (ASP) because the system is immediately
available for use and the organization does not have to lay out a large sum up front for such use.
However, even with the increased use of ASPs, this alternative might not be the best fit for all
organizations and development projects. If an ASP alternative would cause significant, complex,
or widespread changes in an organization’s operations, branding, or stakeholder branding, then
in-house (or contracted) development could be more suitable.
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
421
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
F I G U R E 13.1
Alternative approaches to
the in-house development
of information systems
?
Licensing Applications
Software Packages
Corp.
User-developed
Applications
1100110
0011001
0011011
1101100
1010101
0000011
Outsourcing
Data Systems, Inc.
Software as a Service
If ASPs do not offer the desired IS and it can be developed by non-IT employees, then this
would usually be the chosen alternative. If non-IT employees cannot develop the IS, the choice
might then be to outsource IS development. However, as you will see, outsourcing is a concept
that might encompass more than just commissioning the development of an application.
Many factors must be considered in addition to quality and cost. Therefore, these
alternatives are not fully comparable and often cannot be prioritized as simply as they have
been here. The purpose of this discussion is to clarify the advantages and disadvantages of these
options. As you will see, a variety of factors drive organizations to decide how they acquire ISs
and the service that supports the maintenance and use of the systems.
Outsourcing
As discussed in Chapter 12, outsourcing in general means hiring the services of another
organization or individual to perform some of the work that otherwise would be performed by
you or your employees. In the IT arena, outsourcing has two meanings. One is to commission
the development of an application to another organization, usually a company that specializes
in the development of this type of application. The other is to hire the services of another
company to manage all or parts of the services that otherwise would be rendered by an IT unit
of the organization. The latter concept might not include development of new applications.
However, the notion that “one size fits all” in IS development needs to be reconsidered. For any
new implementation, a mixed approach can be an effective alternative when there are
limitations as compressed implementation timeframes, lack of expertise, or limited resources. For
example, senior management may require that a new system be deployed in a rapid timeframe
for
market
and
competitive
reasons.
After
reviewing
the
resource
requirements
and
organizational resources, the project may simply need more people. Or, in some cases, a project
may require the use of new technology knowledge that current employees do not have.
Outsourcing to a third party can provide that expertise directly as well as transfer that
knowledge to in-house professionals. Each of these examples is an effective use of mixed-
approach development methods.
© Cengage Learning 2015
422
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
POINT OF
INTEREST
The Death of Outsourcing
The outlook for traditional outsourcing is grim. A 2011 Forrester survey of 568 companies, mostly from the
United States and some from France, Germany, and the U.K., found that the cost savings associated with
outsourcing were lower than expected. Cloud-based technologies are emerging as a major competitor to
traditional outsourcing. Cloud-based technologies provide customers with access to services and applica-
tions over the Internet, which are usually more cost-effective than traditional outsourcing. The decreased
cost-savings associated with outsourcing combined with the rise of better technologies could lead to the
extinction of outsourcing as we know it today.
Source: Anonymous. (2011, Jul 19). Forrester predicts death of traditional outsourcing, Mint Magazine.
Outsourcing Custom-Designed Applications
Often, an organization has a need that no existing software can satisfy. For example, if the cost-
accounting procedures of a particular company are so specific that no commercially available
software can perform them, the company must develop custom-designed, or tailored,
software. In recent years, the number of companies developing applications in-house has
declined. The majority of custom-designed applications are developed by companies that
specialize in providing consulting and software development services to other businesses.
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Understand Alternative Avenues for the Acquisition of
Information Systems
As an increasing number of business activities are supported
and enhanced by ISs, it is extremely important for organiza-
tions to acquire systems that best fit their needs and are avail-
able as soon as possible, and to minimize the cost of systems
acquisition and maintenance. As explained in Chapter 12,
“Systems Planning and Development,” employees should
involve themselves in the process of deciding which ISs will
be introduced into their business units and what features they
will have. Since there are several ways to obtain ISs, profes-
sionals like you must understand the advantages and disad-
vantages of each. If you have a concern with a certain
approach to acquire the system you need, you should voice
it and be able to propose other options.
While custom-designed applications are more expensive than purchased ones, they have
several advantages (see Figure 13.2).
●
Good fit to need: The organization enjoys an application that meets its needs exactly, rather
than settling for the near fit of a ready-made program.
●
Good fit to culture: When custom-developing a system, developers are more sensitive to the
organizational culture. Employees enjoy an application that fits their work. When licensing a
packaged application, employees sometimes must change their work to accommodate the
software.
●
Dedicated maintenance: Because the programmers are easily accessible to the company, they are
familiar with the programs and can provide customized software maintenance. Maintenance
includes modification for business changes (including mergers with and acquisition of other
organizations) and upgrading of the software when new technologies become available.
●
Seamless interface: When a system is custom-made for an organization, special requirements
can be implemented to ensure that it has proper interfaces with other systems. Specifically, it
is important to transfer data between systems in an accurate and timely manner. New systems
need to communicate seamlessly with other systems, eliminating any human intervention.
●
Specialized security: Special security measures can be integrated into the application. Because
the program is custom designed, security measures are known only to the organization.
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
423
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
●
Potential for strategic advantage: Recall from the discussion in Chapter 2, “Strategic Uses of
Information Systems,” that companies gain a strategic advantage when they can employ an
IS that their competitors do not have. A unique application might give a business a strategic
advantage because it is the only business that can enjoy the application. For example, no
CRM application can do for a business what an enterprise application that was developed spe-
cifically to serve its customers in a unique way can do.
F I G U R E 13.2
Advantages and
disadvantages of custom-
designed applications
Advantages
Good fit of features to business needs
Good fit of features to organizational culture
Personnel available for maintenance
Seamless interfaces with other information systems
Availability of special security measures
Disadvantages
High cost
Long wait for development if IS personnel are busy with other projects
Application may be too organization-specific to interface with systems of
other organizations
Potential for a strategic advantage
The greatest disadvantage of tailored applications is their high cost. Tailored software
development requires an organization to fund all development costs; in contrast, costs of
developing off-the-shelf and other ready applications are distributed over a larger number of
expected
purchasers.
Another
disadvantage
of
custom-designed
development
is
that
the
production schedule can be delayed because IS personnel might not be available for long
periods. Another important downside is that custom-designed software is less likely to be
compatible with other organizations’ systems. If organizations with different tailor-made systems
decide to link their systems, they might incur significant cost to modify one or both of the
systems.
Clients of outsourced software development should also be aware of an inherent conflict of
this option: on one hand they want the developing firm to conform to a contract that includes
specific requirements of the software. On the other hand, specific requirements may make the
development effort inflexible and potentially costly: if the client company needs to change
requirements as the development progresses, the developers might either refuse to deviate from
the original requirements or might agree to make the changes for hefty additional charges.
Contracts
for
outsourced
software
development
might
also
be
incompatible
with
some
development methods, such as agile methods, discussed in Chapter 12, “Systems Planning and
Development.” The essence of such methods is the clients’ ability to request modified or new
features as the development moves forward, which might stand in stark contrast to the contract.
Many North American and European countries have outsourced development of well-
defined applications to professionals in other countries, an act often referred to as offshoring.
Gartner identified the top 30 offshoring countries including Costa Rica, Indonesia, and
Columbia (Anonymous, 2010c). Programmers in India, China, and the Philippines earn a
fraction of their colleagues in Western countries while often mastering the same level of skills.
Hiring these programmers might reduce the cost of development significantly. Offshoring has
caused layoffs of programmers in Western countries and created much bitterness among those
professionals and supporters of local labor. However, this is apparently an inevitable result of the
growing scope of economic globalization.
© Cengage Learning 2015
424
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
POINT OF
INTEREST
Is Cost Really Most Important?
A study on outsourcing and offshore outsourcing of information technology in major corporations was
conducted based on analyzing secondary data obtained from surveys of financial executives. The study
differentiated itself from previous studies on the subject by avoiding the traditional standpoint of examin-
ing outsourcing from a theoretical standpoint and chose to view outsourcing from a top financial execu-
tive’s standpoint. This study found evidence supporting the idea that outsourcing actually does not
provide higher returns because of hidden costs and contract management. According to executives, the
most important attribute of service provider preference was client loyalty. This result indicates that execu-
tives are more focused on quality, consistency, and support than strictly on cost. Another result of the
study was that if IT was a core competency of the company, the company was less likely to outsource
offshore. Companies with IT as a core competency would most likely want to have more control and
power over such an influential and important business area. Outsourcing and offshore outsourcing of IT
are options for many companies yet they may not be the right choice depending on the core competen-
cies of the company.
Source: Peslak, A. R. (2012). Outsourcing and offshore outsourcing of information technology in major
corporations. Management Research Review, 35(1), 14-31.
Outsourcing IT Services
A large number of businesses have turned to IT companies for long-term services: purchasing and
maintaining
hardware;
developing,
licensing,
and
maintaining
software;
installing
and
maintaining
communications
networks;
developing,
maintaining,
and
operating
websites;
staffing help desks; running IT daily operations; managing customer and supplier relations;
developing and maintaining mobile applications; and so on. An organization might use a
combination of in-house and outsourced services. It might outsource the development of an IS,
but then put its own employees in charge of system operation, or it might outsource both the
development and operation of the system. When a business outsources only routine business
processes, such as customer order entry or human resource transactions, the practice is
sometimes called business process outsourcing. Note, however, that this term refers to the
outsourcing of many activities, whereas this discussion is limited to only IT services.
In considering whether to outsource IT services, management should ask the following
questions:
●
What are our core business competencies? Of the business we conduct, what specialties
should we continue to practice and refine ourselves?
●
What do we do outside our specialties that could be done better for us by organizations spe-
cializing in that area?
●
Which of our activities could be improved if we created an alliance with IT organizations?
●
Which of our activities should we work to improve internally?
●
What are the risks to the organization’s operations?
●
Does our organization compromise our competitive advantage by outsourcing any activities?
Many companies have come to realize that IT is not their core competency and should not
be a focus of their efforts. In addition, the pace of developments in IT might require more
expertise than is available within many organizations. Some organizations also consider the loss
of internal expertise and personnel development by outsourcing activities.
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
425
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
POINT OF
INTEREST
Taking Outsourcing Too Far?
Outsourcing is one of the most popular methods for reducing costs and allowing businesses to focus on
their core competencies. However, too much outsourcing can destroy an industry through fragmenting
and disintegrating the supply chain and inviting new competitors into the industry. The more activities out-
sourced by a firm, the less cohesive their business as it moves towards becoming just a group of sepa-
rated, independent activities. Outsourcing also allows competitors to enter the arena that can undercut
pricing and thus reduce industry profitability. Outsourcing is a fairly simple concept to be replicated by
competitors and adds no true value to a business. The process of transferring functions to a third party
can also lead to corporate complacency as well as weaken an organization’s relationship with its stake-
holders. It is important for businesses to refrain from abusing outsourcing and to try to limit outsourcing to
non-core competencies so as to preserve the integrity of their industry and their business.
Source: Mourdoukoutas, P. (2011). The Unintended Consequences of Outsourcing. Retrieved from http://
www.forbes.com/sites/panosmourdoukoutas/2011/12/09/the-unintended-consequences-of-outsourcing/
A growing portion of corporate IS budgets is allocated for purchased (outsourced) services. IT
companies that made their reputation by providing hardware and software, such as IBM and
Unisys, have seen revenue from the outsourcing service portion of their business grow faster
than the revenue from hardware and software sales. Among the largest IT service providers are
IBM,
Fujitsu,
Accenture,
Computer
Sciences
Corp.
(CSC),
Northrop
Grumman,
Hitachi,
Capgemini, Perot Systems, NEC, and Hewlett-Packard (Verberne, 2010). For the sake of
simplicity and clarity here, such companies are called vendors, and the organizations to which
they
outsource
are
called
clients.
Some
trade
journals
refer
to
vendors
as
outsourcers.
Outsourcing is typically a long-term contractual relationship in which the vendor assumes the
responsibilities over some or all of a client’s IT functions. Businesses can also outsource
transaction activities, such as credit-card processing, to reduce internal resources. Typical
outsourced functions are listed in Figure 13.3.
F I G U R E 13.3
Typical outsourced IT
services
Application development and software maintenance
Hardware purchasing and hardware maintenance
 
Telecommunications installation and maintenance
Help desk services
Website design and maintenance
Staff training
Data storage (cloud) and backup services
Transaction processing
IT outsourcing contracts are typically signed for long periods of time, usually for 7 to 10
years. The sums of money involved are very large, some reaching billions of dollars. For
example, Idea Cellular Ltd., India’s fourth largest mobile phone operator by subscribers,
extended its outsourcing contract with IBM in 2012 for an additional 8 years and $700 million.
The contract was signed in 2007 and was initially expected to expire in 2017. The extension
pushes back the end of the contract date to 2020. The reason behind the mid-contract extension
is that IBM will avoid a formal bidding process when the contract was previously set to expire in
2017. IBM will provide Idea Cellular Ltd. with IT infrastructure and applications. IBM has also
begun outsourcing contract extension negotiations with India’s biggest telecom company, Bharti
Airtel Ltd., which is currently set to expire in 2014. Negotiations with Indian telecos are
© Cengage Learning 2015
426
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
complicated by revenues that are tied to subscribers yet the increase in costs has hindered profit
margins (Anonymous, 2012c). In July 2010, CSC announced that MBDA, a world leader in
missile systems, agreed to an outsourcing contract extension spanning until December of 2014 if
all options are exercised. The agreement marks the continuation of a relationship between the
two companies that began in the U.K. in 1994. Under the extended contract, CSC will provide
MBDA with a full range of IT services including infrastructure and applications management.
CSC was named in Fortune Magazine as one of the Most Admired Companies for Information
Technology Services in 2010 (Anonymous, 2010b). In July 2012, IBM signed a 10-year, $1 billion
outsourcing contract with Cemex to take care of the building supplier’s IT operations in
Monterrey, Mexico (McDougall, 2012). In January 2010, Perot Systems signed a 5-year,
$42 million contract to provide network operations, desktop services, email and information
assurance services for the U.S. Army (Mark, 2010).
There is a peculiar—and paradoxical—aspect to IT outsourcing: while contracts are signed for
long periods of time, they typically involve rapidly changing technologies. Vendors often agree
to sign outsourcing contracts only if the period is at least 5 years because of the human resource
commitment they have to make, but strategic IT plans—as discussed in Chapter 12, “Systems
Planning and Development”—are for only 3–5 years. As a result, clients sometimes find
themselves bound by contracts that no longer satisfy their needs or believing that the contract
services are not being fulfilled. Then litigation is the next step. For example, in 2012, the State
of Indiana sued IBM for $437 million it paid for a failed welfare information system
development. The State contended that IBM breached its 2006 contract originally valued at $1.6
billion. However, Indiana failed to convince the court that IBM breached its contractual
responsibilities. It was a rare judgment in favor of an outsourcing provider. Very often, large
service providers are not willing to endure the adverse publicity of litigation. In this situation,
that was not the case. Cases such as these are very difficult to resolve through litigation in court
due to complex contracts, various data points, and a multitude of documents to review. Various
sources maintain that neither party “won” this litigation (Overby, 2012b).
In another example in April 2013, Walsh College of Troy, Michigan renewed its contract
with CareTech Solutions, an information technology and web products service provider to
hospitals
and
higher
education
institutions.
The
contract
would
expand
CareTech’s
responsibilities to include providing all IT infrastructure operations and most of the application
support services for the college. CareTech has been praised by Walsh College for its exceptional
service in providing day-to-day IT operations and strategic insight into the future needs of the
students, faculty, and staff. The 5-year outsourcing contract renewal extends the relationship
between the partners until 2017 (Anonymous, 2013).
Renegotiation of outsourcing contracts is not unusual. Several companies that signed long-term
contracts have found that the financial burden was too heavy or that the expected benefits had not
materialized. In April 2004, Sears, Roebuck and Co. signed a 10-year, $1.6 billion outsourcing
contract with CSC. Eleven months later, in May 2005, Sears terminated the agreement, claiming
that CSC failed to perform some of its obligations. In late 2007, CSC and Sears, Roebuck, and Co.
amicably reached an agreement to settle the contract dispute that they entered into in May 2004.
Sears paid an undisclosed amount to CSC who did not expect any impairment costs to the assets
associated with the Sears contract. The parent company of Sears, Roebuck, and Co., Sears Holdings
Corporation, created a reserve for the foreseen settlement by Sears and thus did not expect the
settlement to have a material impact on its 2007 financial statements (CSC, 2007).
Making educated decisions on outsourcing IT services has been a major success factor for
organizations. However, trends in offshore outsourcing could mean a reduction in the success a
business experiences with offshore outsourcing of IT services. Global IT outsourcers have been
shrinking the number of onsite and onshore staff who act as liaisons between customers and
service providers. To ensure that businesses continue receiving solid offshore IT services, they
should follow these tips (Overby, 2012a):
●
Conduct a process design review to make sure that essential onsite roles will still be filled, and
possibly investigate bringing some IT roles back in-house.
●
Reevaluate the possibility of near-shore alternatives. Due to the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), IT workers can be more easily transferred across borders than across
oceans.
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
427
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
●
Review the firm’s infrastructure to make sure it is compatible with that of the offshore service
provider.
●
Revisit the price if the IT service provider is moving onsite roles overseas.
It is crucial for companies utilizing outsourced IT services to stay up to date with evolving
technologies and the tactical actions of the service providers to ensure they are receiving the
appropriate services at a reasonable price.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Software for SOX
Since the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Corporate Governance Act passed in 2005, some companies have made a
living off of creating software that aids businesses manage risk and comply with the Act’s corporate
financial reporting requirements. OpenPages was one of those companies until they were bought out by
information technology giant IBM in 2010. OpenPages’ services were merged into IBM’s SoftWare Group.
With fines for noncompliance of financial reporting mandates soaring into the millions of dollars, there is
a significant market opportunity to provide software solutions that help businesses avoid those hefty fines.
Source: Cody, T. (2010). OpenPages Sold to IBM. Mergers & Acquisitions Report, 23(38), p. 21.
Advantages of Outsourcing IT Services
Clients contract for IT services to offload in-house responsibility and to better manage risks.
When a client outsources, management knows how much the outsourced services will cost;
thus, the risk of miscalculation is eliminated. Additional advantages make the contracting option
attractive:
●
Improved financial planning: Outsourcing allows a client to know exactly what the cost of its IS
functions will be over the period of the contract, which is usually several years. This allows
for better financial planning.
●
Reduced license and maintenance fees: Professional IS firms often pay discounted prices for CASE
(computer-aided software engineering) tools and other resources, based on volume purchases;
they can pass these savings on to their clients.
●
Increased attention to core business: Letting outside experts manage IT frees executives from
managing it. They can thus concentrate on the company’s core business—including develop-
ing and marketing new products.
●
Shorter implementation cycles: IT vendors can usually complete a new application project in less
time than an in-house development team can, thanks to their experience with development
projects of similar systems for other clients. (However, they are not likely to use less time if
they lack experience with such systems, or if they insist on a waterfall development process
rather than an agile method.)
●
Reduction of personnel and fixed costs: In-house IS salaries and benefits and expensive capital
expenditures for items such as CASE tools are paid whether or not the IS staff is productive.
IS firms, on the other hand, spread their fixed and overhead costs (office space, furnishings,
systems development software, and the like) over many projects and clients, thereby decreas-
ing the expense absorbed by any single client.
●
Increased access to highly qualified know-how: Outsourcing allows clients to tap into one of the
greatest assets of an IT vendor: experience gained through work with many clients in different
environments.
●
Availability of ongoing consulting as part of standard support: Most outsourcing contracts allow
client companies to consult the vendor for all types of IT advice, which would otherwise be
unavailable (or only available from a highly paid consultant). Such advice might include guid-
ance on how to use a feature of a recently purchased application or on how to move data
from one application to another.
428
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
As you can see, cost savings is only one reason to outsource IS functions. In fact, studies
show that saving money is not the most common reason for outsourcing. Surveys have shown
that executives expect several benefits from an outsourcing relationship. Figure 13.4 shows the
most cited expectations, such as access to technological skills and industry expertise. To many
executives, these anticipated benefits are more important than cost savings, especially in light of
reports that in many cases outsourcing did not save the client money.
F I G U R E 13.4
Benefits to be gained from
IT outsourcing
Acquire technology
skills
Gain industry
expertise
Increase application
expertise
Add flexibility/reliabilty
Improve IT
performance
Improve competitive
position
Link IT and business
strategy
Share risk
Reduce costs
Cost
Time
Risks of Outsourcing IT Services
Despite its popularity, outsourcing is not a panacea and should be considered carefully before it
is adopted. In some situations, organizations should avoid outsourcing. The major risks are as
follows:
●
Loss of control: A company that outsources a major part of its IT operations will probably be
unable to regain control for a long time. The organization must evaluate the nature of the
industry in which it operates. While outsourcing can be a good option in a relatively stable
industry, it is highly risky in one that is quickly changing. Although the personnel of an IT
service company might have the necessary IS technical skills, they might jeopardize the cli-
ent’s core business in the long run if they cannot adapt to constantly changing business reali-
ties in the client’s industry. Sometimes when this problem becomes clear, the client might
have disposed of all personnel who could react properly to such developments. Moreover,
even if the client organization still employs qualified IT professionals, the vendor might
object to their involvement in activities that, according to the outsourcing contract, are out-
side their jurisdiction.
●
Loss of experienced employees: Outsourcing often involves transferring hundreds, or even thou-
sands, of the organization’s employees to the IS vendor. For example, as part of the outsour-
cing contract between Motorola and CSC in 2003, CSC absorbed 1300 of Motorola’s IT
employees, and when the Wall Street company JPMorgan outsourced its IT functions to IBM
in 2003, IBM hired its client’s 4000 IT employees. The organization that absorbs the workers
can usually employ them with lower overhead expenses than their former employer and use
their skills more productively. The client eliminates this overhead cost, but it also gives up
well-trained personnel. In addition, if most of the vendor’s personnel serving the client are
the same employees that the client maintained until the outsourcing contract was signed, the
company’s ability to gain new expertise from outsourcing could be compromised.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
429
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
●
Risks of losing a competitive advantage: Innovative ISs, especially those intended to give their
owners a competitive advantage, should not be outsourced. Outsourcing the development of
strategic systems is a way of disclosing trade secrets. Confidentiality agreements can reduce,
but never completely eliminate, the risk. A competitor might hire the same vendor to build
an IS for the same purpose, thereby potentially eliminating the first client’s advantage. In
addition, assuming that these systems incorporate new business or technical concepts, ven-
dors will bring less than their usual level of experience—and therefore fewer benefits—to the
project. Outsourcing strategic or core business ISs incurs more risk than outsourcing the rou-
tine tasks of operational ISs (see Figure 13.5).
●
High price: Despite careful pre-contract calculations, some companies find out that outsour-
cing costs them significantly more than they would have spent had they taken care of their
own ISs or related services. Several clients have pressured vendors to renegotiate their outsour-
cing contracts or have found a way to terminate the contract because executives believed they
could enjoy the same level of service, or higher-quality service, by maintaining a corporate IT
staff. To minimize such unpleasant discoveries, the negotiating team must clearly define
every service to be included in the arrangement, including the quality of personnel, service
hours, and the scope and quality of services rendered when new hardware and software
are adopted or when the client company decides to embark on new ventures, such as
e-commerce initiatives or establishment of an intranet.
F I G U R E 13.5
Risks of outsourcing are
higher at higher levels of
decision making
Payroll, Accounting, and Logistics ISs, Web Design
Network Management
Hardware Procurement and Maintenance
IS Help Desk Data Centers
Tax, Audit, and Legal ISs
Strategic ISs,
Core Competence
ISs, and IS Services
Outsourcing
is more risky.
Outsourcing
is less risky.
Higher-level
Management
Lower-level
Management
The most important element of an outsourcing agreement for both parties, but mostly for
the client, is what professionals call the service-level agreement. The negotiators for the
client must carefully list all the types of services expected of the vendor as well as the metrics to
be used to measure the degree to which the vendor has met the level of promised services.
Clients should not expect vendors to list the service level and metrics; the clients must do it. It is
in the client’s interest to have as specific a contract as possible, because any service that is not
included in the contract, or is mentioned only in general terms, leaves the door open for the
vendor not to render it, or not to render it to a level expected by the client.
Considering Outsourcing IT Services
When approaching outsourcing, review the following points to make sure that it is the
appropriate choice for your organization and that you are prepared to deal with any issues that
come up:
●
Research: Review outsourcing contracts from other business organizations, especially those
contracts for similar industries and services. It is important to consider and integrate lessons
© Cengage Learning 2015
430
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
learned from other situations in order to eliminate faulty approaches and methodologies, and
technology issues.
●
Contractual requirements and scope of services: The single most important facet of executing a
project or contract is its scope. When two parties engage in an outsourcing relationship, it
is crucial to specifically outline the boundaries of the contractual requirements and the
responsibilities of all parties. In some business situations, too many details or minutia can
be ineffective. However, when compiling an IT outsourcing services contract, no detail
should be overlooked or minimized. And as important as it is to define what is required, it
is also crucial to define any exclusions that are outside the scope or responsibilities of
either party.
●
Commitment and engagement in change: As with any information technology initiative, change
is inevitable. With the addition of an outside entity as a service provider, both parties should
be engaged in a discussion of the issues involved in the outsourcing initiative. In many cases,
business organizations do not outsource what is working well and efficiently. Patients do not
visit a doctor when they are feeling well. Therefore, businesses outsource to gain the resources
and expertise to assume the responsibility for activities that are currently being completed in
a less than optimum fashion by organizational personnel and departments. It is important to
discuss any issues or problems with the current environment clearly and honestly with the
outsourcing company before beginning the contract. Additionally, make sure the service pro-
vider can document or show its ability to complete the services—do not take a simple “yes”
as evidence of competence.
●
Monitoring and conflict resolution: Any new initiative should not be viewed as a potential con-
flict or failure. At the same time, both parties must be invested in its success. It is crucial to
monitor and track the progress with measureable performance measures for both parties. A
frequent and consistent dialogue on these measures should be the focus during the term of
the contract. When conflicts arise (and they will), the conflict is not the important issue.
Both parties must “come to the table” in order to gain a resolution in a timely manner. This
process is often easier said than done; however, agreement on monitoring and conflict resolu-
tion can avoid relationship issues and litigation.
●
Refrain from outsourcing the world: Simply said, the more expensive the contract or the more
services that are being provided, the greater the risk of contract failure. Contracts for outsour-
cing IT services that include a scope of services that are limited and well-defined have the
best opportunity for success. Businesses should not view outsourcing IT services as a panacea
that will rid management of responsibility. In some cases, businesses try to resolve organiza-
tional issues and costs with “quick” outsourcing solutions. Sometimes, the outsourcing
contract is simply not feasible. Corporations often view outsourcing decisions to focus solely
on the reduction of costs while not considering short- and long-term challenges.
Licensing Applications
Businesses can select from a growing list of high-quality packaged software, from office
applications that fit on a CD to large enterprise applications. Therefore, purchasing prepackaged
software should be the first alternative considered when a company needs to acquire a new
system. Recall that “purchased” software is almost always licensed software. The purchaser
actually purchases a license to use the software, not the software itself. Thus, here the term
“licensing” means purchasing a license to use. Unless an IS must be tailored to unique needs in
an organization, licensing a prepackaged system might well be the best option.
Ready-made software can be classified into two groups: one is the relatively inexpensive
software that helps in the workplace, such as Microsoft Office and similar suites, including
software that supports more specific tasks such as project management and tax preparation.
Such software usually costs tens of dollars to several hundred dollars for a single user or
thousands of dollars for a company with many employees. The other group includes large
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
431
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
software applications that support entire organizational functions, such as human resource
management and financial management, or enterprise applications that span the entire
organization. Such packages include ERP, SCM, and CRM applications and typically cost millions
of dollars.
Software as a service (SaaS; see more on this later in the chapter) is licensed as a recurring
monthly or annual cost. In most cases, an SaaS application operates over the Internet using a
standard browser and a cloud computing architecture. In addition, some software publishers are
licensing both delivery models (installed vs. cloud computing) for their application software
products. Intuit, for example, still markets its QuickBooks product to install on your local
computer system for a one-time licensing cost as well as an online version with a monthly cost.
The online version requires less up-front expense and does not require the purchase of updated
software, as this is automatically included in the monthly licensing fee.
Software Licensing Benefits
When licensing a software package, the buyer gains several benefits: immediate system
availability, high quality, low price (license fee), and available support. Immediate availability
helps shorten the time from the decision to implement a new system and the actual
implementation. If the company maintains an IT staff that develops applications, purchasing
software frees the staff to develop the systems that must be specifically tailored to its business
needs.
High-quality software is guaranteed through purchase partly because the software company
specializes in developing its products and partly because its products would not survive on the
market if they were not of high quality. Large developers often distribute prerelease versions,
called beta versions, or simply betas, of software to be tested by companies (called beta sites)
that agree to use the application with actual data for several months. The beta sites then report
problems and propose improvements in return for receiving the fully developed software free or
for a reduced license fee. By the time the software is released to the general market, it has been
well tested.
Because software companies spread product development costs over many units, the price
to a single customer is a fraction of what it would cost to develop a similar application in-
house or to hire an outside company to develop it. Also, instead of devoting its own
personnel to maintain the software, the buyer can usually contract for long-term service and
be notified of new, advanced versions of the application. All software development companies
provide after-the-sale support. Often, buyers enjoy a period of three months to one year of free
service.
Even large companies that could afford to develop ISs on their own often elect to purchase
when they can find suitable software. For example, CMS Energy, a $9 billion energy producer in
Jackson, Michigan, decided to install a web-based supply chain management system to link with
the company’s equipment suppliers. The company’s information technologists wanted to build
the system themselves. The executive vice president and chief financial and administrative
officer, whose professional background is in IT, nixed the idea. He estimated that the cost of a
homegrown system—about $20 million—would be greater than the savings it would deliver in
its first few years of operation. Instead, he suggested the company use packaged software. This
alternative cut the cost of the system in half.
You might be more familiar with off-the-shelf applications than with larger, more complex
packaged applications. However, in recent years, enterprise applications have constituted a far
larger part of IT expenditures on packaged software. As mentioned earlier, enterprise applications
are complex applications that serve many parts of an organization, often several departments.
They consist of several modules, each of which can be interfaced with another module from the
same vendor.
Organizations cannot simply purchase such large applications and install them; they must
employ professionals who specialize in the installation of the software, which might take
months. Within limits, the providers of these large applications agree to customize part of the
432
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
applications to the specific needs of a client. However, such customization is very expensive and
is often risky. In some cases, customization has taken significantly longer than planned and was
not completed to the full satisfaction of the client.
Software Licensing Risks
Although licensing a ready-made application is attractive, it has its risks:
●
Loose fit between needs and features: Ready-made software is developed for the widest common
denominator of potential user organizations. It might be useful to many, but it will be opti-
mal for few. Companies must take extra care to ensure that ready-made software truly com-
plies with company needs, including organizational culture. Obtaining input from many
potential users in the selection process reduces this risk. Therefore, it is important to clearly
and completely define the functional, information and reporting requirements. Categorize
and prioritize each of these requirements in order to evaluate and rate the various software
products.
●
Difficulties in modifications: Many companies find that they must have packaged software such
as ERP and SCM applications modified to meet their specific needs, and too many of them
find that the vendor does a poor job. For example, Nike spent $400 million to have i2 Tech-
nologies implement i2’s SCM software. Nike claimed that the software did not work properly,
causing shortages of high-demand products and overstocks of less popular items. Nike’s man-
agement said that the software, which was supposed to lower operating costs and streamline
communication with suppliers and buyers, failed both in performance and functionality.
i2 blamed difficulties on customizing the software and Nike’s inappropriate implementation
of the software according to i2’s suggested methods. Nike found the methods too rigid and
did not implement them. The mishap reduced Nike’s sales in the first quarter after implemen-
tation by $100 million. Apparently, “just do it” did not suffice. “Do it right” would have been
a better approach.
●
Dissolution of the vendor: If the vendor goes out of business, the purchaser is left without sup-
port, maintenance service, and the opportunity to purchase upgrades to an application to
which it is committed. Except for checking the financial strength of potential vendors, there
is not much the purchaser can do to reduce this risk.
●
High turnover of vendor personnel: Turnover among IS professionals is significantly higher than
in other occupations. If a substantial number of employees involved in application develop-
ment and upgrading leave a vendor, support is likely to deteriorate, and upgrades will be of
poor quality. Purchasers can do little to reduce this risk.
●
Custom modifications vs. vendor updates: One of the benefits of acquiring pre-developed soft-
ware is the broad functionality of the software. Contracting with a solid software developer
can provide the opportunity to gain software updates including new features and functional-
ity designed for a mass market. However, these updates may not be able to be implemented
locally depending on the degree of the modifications to be applied. Any new updates could
require tedious “weaving” into the current system with the local modifications. By imple-
menting the unmodified software, software updates can be implemented without significant
resources.
Steps in Licensing Ready-Made Software
When selecting a particular software package, companies invest a lot of money and make a long-
term commitment to conducting their business in a particular manner. Factors such as the
complexity of installation, cost of training, and quality and cost of after-sale service must be
considered in addition to the demonstrable quality of the software (refer to Figure 5.9 in
Chapter 5 for an example of a software evaluation checklist). Once a company decides that it
will purchase a ready-made application, a project management team is formed to oversee system
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
433
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
implementation and handle all vendor contact. The project management team has the following
responsibilities (see Figure 13.6):
F I G U R E 13.6
Steps in licensing software
●
Identifying the problem or opportunity: This step is similar to the initial inquiry and fact-finding
step in the systems development life cycle (SDLC), discussed in Chapter 12, “Systems Plan-
ning and Development.” The inquiry results in the identification of gross functional require-
ments and key integration points with other systems. The report generated often serves as a
basis for a request for information from potential vendors.
●
Identifying potential vendors: On the basis of information in trade journals (printed and on the
web) and previously received promotional material, as well as client references, vendors who
offer applications in the domain at hand are identified. In addition to these sources, IS people
might gather information at trade shows, from other organizations that have used similar
technology, and from colleagues.
●
Soliciting vendor information: The project manager sends a request for information (RFI) to
the vendors identified, requesting general, somewhat informal information about the product.
●
Defining system requirements: The project manager lists a set of functional and technical
requirements and identifies the functional and technical capabilities of all vendors, highlight-
ing the items that are common to both lists as well as those that are not. The project manage-
ment team involves the users in defining system requirements to ensure that the chosen
application will integrate well with existing and planned systems.
●
Requesting vendor proposals: The team prepares a request for proposal (RFP), a document
specifying all the system requirements and soliciting a proposal from each vendor contacted.
The response should include not only technical requirements but also a detailed description
of the implementation process as well as a timetable and budget that can be easily trans-
formed into a contractual agreement. The team should strive to provide enough detail and
vision to limit the amount of pre-contract clarification and negotiation.
●
Reviewing proposals and screening vendors: The team reviews the proposals and identifies the
most qualified vendors. Vendor selection criteria include functionality, architectural fit, price,
services, and support.
●
Visiting sites: The complexity of the RFP responses might make evaluation impossible without
a visit to a client site where a copy of the application is in use. The team should discuss with
other clients the pros and cons of the application.
Identifying Potential
Vendors
Requirement
Definitions
Request for
Information
Proposal Review and
Vendor Screening
Implementation
Contract
Negotiations
Vendor Selection
Benchmarking
Postimplementation Support
Request for
Proposal
Technical
Requirements
RFI
?
??
?
?
Expert
VENDORS
Problem Identification
Site Visits
© Cengage Learning 2015
434
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
●
Selecting the vendor: The team should rank the remaining vendors. The selection factors are
weighted, and the vendor with the highest total points is chosen for contract negotiation.
Sometimes make-or-break factors are identified early in the process to eliminate vendors that
cannot provide the essential service. By now, the team has gathered enough information on
the functionality of the various systems.
●
Benchmarking: Before finalizing the purchasing decision, the system should be tested using
benchmarking, which is comparing actual performance against specific quantifiable crite-
ria. If all other conditions are the same for all the bidders, the vendor whose application best
meets or exceeds the benchmarks is selected.
●
Negotiating a contract: The contract should clearly define performance expectations and include
penalties if requirements are not met. Special attention should be given to the schedule, budget,
responsibility for system support, and support response times. Some clients include a clause on
keeping the source code in escrow. If the vendor goes out of business, the client will receive the
source code, without which the system cannot be maintained. The client should tie all payments
to completion of milestones by the vendor and acceptance of deliverables.
●
Implementing the new system: The new system is introduced in the business units it will serve,
and user training is conducted.
●
Managing post-implementation support: Vendors expect buyers of their large applications to
request extensive on-site post-implementation support. Unexpected lapses or unfamiliarity
with the system might require fine-tuning, additional training, and modification of the soft-
ware. It is best to develop an ongoing relationship with the vendor because a solid relation-
ship will foster timely service and support.
When choosing a vendor, organizations look for the quality and reliability of the product,
but several additional factors, such as quality of service and support, vendor’s support for
industry standards, and vendor financial soundness, are extremely important. In surveys, IS
managers have almost invariably revealed the importance of factors considered in selecting a
vendor, as shown in Figure 13.7 (in descending order). Product quality and reliability stand well
ahead of the price/performance ratio.
F I G U R E 13.7
How IT management can
rank the importance of
product purchase factors
FACTOR
Quality and reliability
Product performance
Quality of after-sale service and support
Trustworthiness of vendor
Price/performance ratio
Ease of doing business with vendor
Vendor’s support for industry standards
Openness of future strategies and plans
Vendor financial stability
RATING
Software as a Service
In an age when virtually every employee knows how to use a web browser and access
applications online, why should companies install applications at all? Salesforce.com was
founded by Mark Benioff and three partners in March 1999 in a one-bedroom apartment in San
Francisco.
The
concept
was
simple:
offer
intuitive,
easy-to-use
customer
relationship
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
435
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
management (CRM) software on demand via the Internet, and charge customers per use, per
month for access to the software. The company has 104,000 customers (as of July 2011) and 1.5
million subscribers (as of July 2009), the employees of these customers (Anonymous, 2011).
Salesforce.com offers many more types of on-demand software than just CRM.
An organization that offers the use of software through a network (the Internet or private
network) is called an application service provider (ASP). The concept is called software as
a service (SaaS) or software on demand. Salesforce.com, CSC, IBM Global Services, NetSuite, Inc.,
Oracle Corp., Microsoft Corp., and RightNow Technologies, Inc. (now owned by Oracle) are
among the better known players in this industry, but many other companies offer such services.
According to the IT research firm Gartner, SaaS revenues are expected to reach more than
$22 billion by 2015 (Anonymous, 2012b).
An ASP does not install any software on a client’s computers. Rather, the application is
installed at the ASP’s location, along with the databases and other files that the application
processes for the client. However, clients can choose to save all the files produced by the
application on their own local storage devices. The clients’ employees access the application
through the web. They call up the application, enter data, process the data, produce reports
online and on paper, and in general use the application the same way they would had it been
installed at their location. SaaS interface software enables thousands of users from multiple
corporate clients to use the same application simultaneously.
ASPs do not necessarily offer their own software packages. They often offer software
developed by other companies. For example, USinternetworking (a subsidiary of AT&T) provides
on-demand software by Oracle, Microsoft, and Ariba. On-demand service may cost several tens
or hundreds of dollars per month per user, depending on the software rented.
POINT OF
INTEREST
IBM: Not Only Computers
IBM is the world’s largest information technology services company. That’s “services,” not “computers.”
For several years the main stream of revenue for the company has been its software development, con-
sulting services, and outsourcing services rather than sales of computers. Consider the company’s reve-
nue for the fourth quarter of 2012 by activity: Global Technology Services (outsourcing and software
development): $10.28 billion; Global Business Services (business consulting): $4.72 billion; Systems and
Technology (including sales of mainframe computers, servers, and microchips): $5.76 billion. IBM signed
22 outsourcing contracts worth over $100 billion in the first quarter of 2013.
Source: Anonymous. (2013). International Business Machines Corp. Brokerage Research Digest, 11.
http://www.zacks.com/ZER/rd_get_pdf.php?r=IBM
As Figure 13.8 shows, renting and using software through the web has benefits as well as
risks. As in any time-limited rental, the client does not have to commit large sums of money up
front. No employees have to devote time to learning how to maintain the software, nor to
maintaining it once it is installed. No storage hardware is required for the applications and
associated data, because the vendor uses its own hardware. And the software is usually available
significantly sooner than if installed at the client’s location; while it might take years to install
and test enterprise applications on-site, an online renter can use the same application within
days after signing a contract. And even if an organization is willing to pay for the software, it
might not find skilled personnel to install and maintain the software.
436
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
F I G U R E 13.8
Benefits and risks of
Software as a Service
(SaaS)
Benefits
• Eliminate the need to maintain the application software
• Eliminate the reliance on hired experts for installation and maintenance
• No need to purchase or maintain hardware for the installation
• Significant reduction of implementation time
• Low financial risk
Support provided by SaaS vendor
•
Risks
• Possible long transaction response time through the Internet
• Information security, such as interception by competitors
• Potential integration issues between SaaS applications and other internal systems
For many small companies this option is clearly the best. Holden Humphrey Co. is a lumber
wholesaler in Chicopee, Massachusetts. It has 24 employees. The company’s president decided it
made no financial sense to hire IT personnel or pay for licensed software. The company pays
$1,000 per month to an ASP, which enables nine of the employees to remotely access inventory
management, accounting, and CRM applications.
The “software on demand” approach is attracting a growing clientele. Clients are mainly small
and medium corporations, but some large organizations also prefer this option. The obvious risk is
that the client cedes control of the systems, the application, and possibly its related data to
another party. Although some vendors are willing to make minor changes to suit the client’s
needs, they will not make all requested changes. Some experts argue that by using SaaS, clients
have less control over their systems, and that it is better to retain the ability to modify applications
in-house. Response time might become a problem as well, because neither the ASP nor the client
has full control over traffic on the Internet. Also, as with all activities through a public network,
there are security risks, such as interception of information by a competitor.
For this reason, some clients prefer to use a leased line rather than the Internet to connect to
the ASP. For instance, Simpson Industries, a manufacturer of auto parts in Plymouth, Michigan,
uses an ERP system offered by IBM Global Services. But employees use the application through a
leased line (a network connection for their exclusive use) to connect directly to IBM’s service
center in Rochester, New York. When considering using a leased line, IT managers should
consider the cost. While a DSL, cable, or optical fiber link costs $30 to $50 per month, a leased
line with the same capacity costs $1000 to $2000 per month. Organizations should also consider
the type of application and data their company is about to use.
Caveat Emptor: Buyer Beware
In recent years, faster links to the Internet and a more stable ASP industry have made SaaS an
attractive option. However, even with reputable providers, some subscribers were disappointed
because the scope of services and level of reliability were not what they had expected when they
signed the contract. Managers in organizations considering ASPs should heed the following
“commandments”:
●
Research the ASP’s history. Ask the provider for a list of references, and contact these customers
to ask about their experience. Ask how soon the provider switched to a new version of the
application they rented. Talk to the references to gain detailed information on the vendor
and its product.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
437
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
●
Validate the ASP’s financial strength. Request copies of the ASP’s financial reports. Ensure that it
has enough funds or secured funding to stay in business for the duration of your planned
contract.
●
Ensure you understand the price structure. Ask whether the price changes when you decide to
switch to another application. Ask whether the price includes help desk services.
●
Get a list of the provider’s infrastructure. Ask to see a list of the ASP’s hardware, software, and
telecommunication facilities. Ask the ASP to identify its business partners for hardware, soft-
ware, and telecommunication services. Ask how data, including sensitive data such as credit-
card account numbers, are stored and protected. Ask about security measures.
●
Craft the service contract carefully. Ensure that the contract includes penalties the ASP will pay
if services are not rendered fully. Ensure that your organization will not have to pay penalties
for early termination.
One important point to check when examining the list of facilities is uptime. Uptime is the
proportion of time that the ASP’s systems and communication links are up and running. Since
no provider can guarantee 100 percent uptime, ASPs often promise 99.9 percent (“three nines,”
in professional lingo) uptime, which sounds satisfactory, but it might not be. Three nines mean
that downtime might reach 500 minutes per year. This is usually acceptable for customer
relationship management systems. Human resource managers or sales representatives, who
typically use ISs less than 50 hours per week, might settle even for two nines (99 percent
guaranteed uptime). However, experts recommend that organizations look for ASPs that can
guarantee five nines—99.999 percent uptime—for critical applications. This high percentage of
uptime ensures downtime of no more than five minutes per year. Some firms specialize in
monitoring the uptime of ASPs.
Who hires the services of ASPs? Although you will find a variety of companies among ASP
clients, the majority of clients fall into four categories:
●
Companies that are growing fast and rely on software for deployment of their operations.
●
Small companies that do not have the cash to pay up front, but who must use office, tele-
communications, and basic business operations applications.
●
Medium-sized companies that need expensive software, such as enterprise applications, for
their operations but cannot afford the immediate payment of large sums (examples are ERP
applications from companies such as SAP and Oracle).
●
Organizational units at geographical sites where it is difficult to obtain desired software or
personnel to install and maintain the software. These sites are typically located far away from
a regional headquarters in a less-developed country. The office at that site can then use appli-
cations from a more developed country.
Another type of service provider, similar to an ASP, started to catch the attention of
businesses in need of IT services: the storage service provider (SSP). An SSP does not rent
software applications, but rents storage space. Instead of spending money on the purchase of
data storage devices, a company can contract with an SSP and have all or some of its files stored
remotely on the SSP’s devices. The storage and retrieval are executed through communication
lines, in most cases the Internet. SSPs charge by the number of terabytes used per month. Some
of the leading SSPs are StorageNetworks, HP, and Amazon.com. Storage service providers for
both consumer and commercial customers are expected to grow significantly over the next
several years. Gartner believes that consumers will store more than a third of their digital files in
the cloud by 2016, growing to 4.1 zettabytes in 2016 (Anonymous, 2012a).
User Application Development
If an adequate application is not available on the market, or if an organization does not wish to
take the risks discussed earlier with purchasing or renting, and if the application is not too
complex, another alternative to software development is available. In user application devel-
opment, nonprogrammer users write their own business applications. Typically, user-developed
438
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
software is fairly simple and limited in scope; it is unlikely that users could develop complex
applications such as ERP systems. If end users do have the necessary skills, they should be
allowed to develop small applications for immediate needs, and when they do, such applications
can be maintained by the end users. They should be encouraged to develop applications that will
be used for a brief time and then discarded. End users should not develop large or complex
applications, applications that interface with other systems, or applications that are vital for the
survival of the organization. They should also be discouraged from developing applications that
might survive their own tenure in the organization (Figure 13.9).
F I G U R E 13.9
Guidelines for end-user
development of
information technology
applications
End users should develop if...
End users should not develop if...
End users have the necessary skills
The application is large or complex
The application is small
The application interfaces with other systems
The application is needed immediately 
The application is vital for the organization’s survival
The application can be maintained by the users
The application will survive the user-developer tenure
The application will be used briefly and discarded
Managing User-Developed Applications
The proliferation of user-developed applications poses challenges to managers, both in IT units
and other business units. In addition to the rules outlined in Figure 13.9, management must
cope with the following challenges:
●
Managing the reaction of IT professionals: IT professionals often react negatively to user develop-
ment because they perceive it as undermining their own duties and authority. To solve this
problem, management must set clear guidelines delineating what types of applications end
users may and may not develop.
●
Providing support: To encourage users to develop applications, IS managers must designate a
single technical contact for users. It is difficult to provide IT support for user-developed appli-
cations, because the IT staff members are usually unfamiliar with an application developed
without their involvement. Yet, IT staff should help solve problems or enhance such applica-
tions when end users think their own skills are not adequate.
●
Compatibility: To ensure compatibility with other applications within an organization, the
organization’s IT professionals should adopt and supply standard development tools to inter-
ested users. Users should not be allowed to use nonstandard tools. Note that compatibility in
this context is for the purpose of transferring data among end users; interfacing user-
developed applications with other organizational systems should be discouraged.
●
Managing access: Sometimes, users need to copy data from organizational databases to their
own developed spreadsheets or databases. If access to organizational databases is granted for
such a purpose, access should be tightly controlled by the IT staff to maintain data integrity
and security. Users should be forewarned not to rely on such access when developing their
own applications if this is against the organization’s policy.
Advantages and Risks
User development of applications offers several important advantages:
●
Shortened lead times: Users almost always develop applications more quickly than IS personnel,
because they are highly motivated (they will benefit from the new system); their systems are
usually simpler in design; and they have a head start by being totally familiar with the busi-
ness domain for which they are developing the application.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
439
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
●
Good fit to needs: Nobody knows the users’ specific business needs better than the users them-
selves. Thus, they are apt to develop an application that will satisfy all their needs.
●
Compliance with culture: User-developed software closely conforms to an individual unit’s sub-
culture, which makes the transition to a new system easier for employees.
●
Efficient utilization of resources: Developing software on computers that are already being used
for many other purposes is an efficient use of IT resources.
●
Acquisition of skills: The more employees there are who know how to develop applications, the
greater an organization’s skills inventory.
●
Freeing up IS staff time: User-developers free IS staff to develop and maintain an organization’s
more complex and sophisticated systems.
However, with all the advantages, application development by users also has some
drawbacks. They must be considered seriously. The risks are as follows:
●
Poorly developed applications: User-developers are not as skilled as IS personnel. On average, the
applications they develop are of lower quality than systems developed by professionals. Users
are often tempted to develop applications that are too complex for their skills and tools,
resulting in systems that are difficult to use and maintain.
●
Islands of information: An organization that relies on user development runs the risk of creating
islands of information and “private” databases not under the control of the organization’s IS
managers. This lack of control might make it difficult to achieve the benefits of integrated ISs.
●
Duplication: User-developers often waste resources developing applications that are identical or
similar to systems that already exist elsewhere within the organization.
●
Security problems: Giving end users access to organizational databases for the purpose of creat-
ing systems might result in violations of security policies. This risk is especially true in client/
server environments. The creation of “private databases” known only to the individual user is
risky. The user might not be aware that the information he or she produces from the data is
“classified” under an organization’s policy.
●
Poor documentation: Practically speaking, “poor documentation” might be a misnomer. Usu-
ally, users do not create any documentation at all because (1) they do not know how to write
documentation, and (2) they develop the application on their own to have it ready as soon
as possible, and they don’t want to take the time to document it. Lack of documentation
makes system maintenance difficult at best and impossible at worst. Often, applications are
patched together by new users, and pretty soon nobody knows how to iron out bugs or mod-
ify programs.
440
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
Computer Use Policies for Employees
The increasing numbers of PCs and the pervasive use of email
and the web in businesses have exposed more people to ISs. In
2010, the U.S. Census Bureau found that over 50 percent of
employed
Americans
could access
a
computer
at
their
workplace (Anonymous, 2010a). Although computers enable
workers to be more productive, they are often used for
unproductive, or even destructive, activities. A study on
workplace activity has found that 40 percent of Internet
access is non-work-related while 60 percent of all purchases
are
completed
during
working
hours
(Griffiths,
2010).
In
another research study, over 50 percent of employees have
accessed social media at work (Ashling, 2009). If an employee
uses a company car without permission, the act is obviously
wrong. But if an employee uses a company computer to store
private files, is this wrong? Accessing a company’s intranet is
legitimate and encouraged. Accessing another employee’s file
might be wrong. However, some employees might not be aware
of the differences. What are the appropriate personal uses of
company computers? Is the answer to this question already
covered in existing laws? Should companies have policies that
define the appropriate uses of their IT resources? Do we need
new laws to ensure a law-abiding workforce? The answers to
these questions vary.
●
When There Is No Corporate Policy. Although unau-
thorized use of computers might be considered theft,
authorities usually do not deal with it as such. Perhaps
this is why most state statutes do not specifically address
unauthorized use of computers.
If someone from outside a company accessed the com-
pany’s computer without authorization and used it for any
purpose whatsoever, the act would clearly be criminal
under the laws of many countries and of every state in the
United States. However, if an employee uses the same com-
pany computer after hours to prepare a homework assign-
ment for a college class, the act might not be considered
unethical, let alone criminal, unless the organization has a
clear policy against such activity. What about creating a
résumé or writing a letter as part of a job search? Without
a company policy, the answer to this question is not clear.
Widespread access to the web makes the issues even
more complicated. Employees have been fired for surfing
the web for their own personal purposes during work
time. Some have been fired for surfing the web during
lunch breaks or after work hours; while they did not waste
company-paid time, management objected to the specific
sites they accessed, mostly those displaying pornographic
images.
●
Company Policies Work. To avoid misunderstanding,
employers should provide clear guidelines, stating that
any computer use not for the company’s direct benefit,
without the prior approval of the company, is forbidden.
One simple measure that some organizations have taken
is to have a written policy that is conspicuously posted,
signed by employees upon hiring, or both. The notice
could read as follows:
“Company policy forbids any employee, without prior autho-
rization of the employee’s supervisor, to (a) access or use
any equipment or data unless such access is work-related
and required to fulfill that employee’s duties, or (b) alter,
damage, or destroy any company computer resource or
property, including any computer equipment, system, termi-
nal, network, software, data, or documentation, including
individual employee computer files. Any such act by an
employee might result in civil and criminal liability under
federal, state, and local laws.”
Many companies do not object to recreational or educa-
tional use of their computers by employees outside of com-
pany time. If this is the case, the policy should say so.
Without a policy, companies should not be surprised
when their employees’ interpretation of reasonable per-
sonal use differs from their employers’. However, if there
is no clear policy, employees should always remember
that a PC is a work tool that their employer put at their
disposal for responsible use as part of their job. It is not
there to help their own business, shop on the web, or enter-
tain them either during or outside of paid time. Thus, for
example, they should not use email or instant messaging
to chat with their friends or browse the web for their enjoy-
ment. Yet, is sending a personal email message during
lunch break really much different from using a company
pen to write a personal note during lunch break? Perhaps
the best way to avoid misunderstanding is to simply ask
your employer if what you intend to do is objectionable.
To enforce their policies—explicit or implicit—many com-
panies resort to means that are, in some minds, question-
able. They use surreptitious surveillance software to
monitor employee use of IT. Consider BeAware, an applica-
tion offered by Ascentive LLC. The software tracks all
employee PC activity with live, real-time monitoring of
emails, web surfing, chats, and program usage, recording
screen shots, time used, and content (Anonymous, 2009).
Everything that you do with your computer can, at the same
time, be tracked and recorded, and everything that you see
on your monitor is also seen on the monitor of the person
who tracks you. The same software is often used to monitor
children’s web surfing activities and spouses’ suspected of
infidelity. The question is, should employees be treated as
undisciplined children or cheating spouses? An equally fair
question is, should employers not have the right to monitor
what’s done with their equipment, especially on paid time?
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
441
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Summary
●
The alternatives to having applications developed
in-house are outsourcing, licensing ready-made
software, using software as a service, and user
application development.
●
Outsourcing has two meanings in IT: commission-
ing the development of a tailored application to an
IT company, and assigning all or some of the IT
services of the organization to a vendor of IT
services.
●
Outsourcing custom-designed applications might
afford the organization good fit of the software to
need, good fit to culture, dedicated maintenance,
seamless interface, specialized security, and poten-
tial for strategic advantage.
●
The potential advantages of outsourcing IT services
include improving cost clarity and reducing license
and maintenance fees, freeing the client to concen-
trate on its core businesses, shortening the time
needed to implement new technologies, reducing
personnel and fixed costs, gaining access to highly
qualified know-how, and receiving ongoing con-
sulting as part of standard support. However, out-
sourcing IT services has some potential risks: loss
of control, loss of experienced employees, loss of
competitive advantage, and high price. To ensure
that the client enjoys all the expected services and
their quality, a detailed service-level agreement
must be signed with the IT service vendor.
●
When an organization purchases a license to use
ready-made software, it enjoys high-quality soft-
ware that is immediately available at a low price
(license fee). However, licensed ready-made soft-
ware has some potential risks: loose fit between
needs and the software features, difficulties in
modifications, bankruptcy of the vendor, and high
turnover of the vendor’s employees.
●
Using software as a service (SaaS) has become
popular. The client pays monthly fees based on
the type of application used and the number of
users, and its employees use the applications via
a network, mostly through the Internet. ASP clients
enjoy availability of applications, avoid the costs of
storage hardware and large IT staffs, and do not
have to make a long-term commitment of capital
to software that might become obsolete in two or
three years. The downsides of using an ASP are the
loss of control over applications, the potentially low
speed of interaction, and the security risks associ-
ated with using an IS via a public network.
●
The advantages to user application development
include a short lead time, good fit of application
capabilities to business needs, good compliance
with organizational culture, efficient utilization of
computing
resources,
acquisition
of
skills
by
users, and the freeing of IS staff to deal with the
more complex challenges of the systems. Disad-
vantages of user-developed applications include
the risk of poorly developed applications, undesir-
able islands of information and private databases,
duplications of effort, security problems, and poor
documentation. Thus, user development of applica-
tions needs to be managed. IS managers need to
determine the applications that users should and
should not develop and dictate the tools that
should be used.
●
A majority of America’s office workers now have
rich computer resources at the tips of their fingers.
Often, employees do not know which activities are
welcomed and which are not. If an organization
lacks a clear policy, employees are not discouraged
from abusing computers. This abuse is especially
true when employees access websites that are
objectionable to their employer or when employ-
ees use email for purposes not intended by the
employer. If no policy has been established, the
simple rule is that employees should not use their
computers for anything but work.
442
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
The initial advertising and promotional campaigns
have been developed for the grand opening as well
as a tentative schedule for implementation. However,
Tyler
was
unsure
how
he
should
approach
the
development and implementation of the customer
loyalty and mobile application technology projects.
Becky discussed the various development approaches
as well as potential suppliers of these applications.
Tyler considered that each approach would include a
different set of costs, time, benefits, and risks. How
should he approach this important decision?
What Is Your Advice?
1. Tyler and Becky developed a detailed set of infor-
mation and functional requirements for the cus-
tomer loyalty system. They believe that they have
prioritized their early needs as well as some “nice
to haves” for the new system. List some of the
advantages of each acquisition approach for this
new system as well as the risks. What advice
would you give to Tyler on how to continue?
2. Tyler and Becky also discussed the need for a
mobile application for the Lakeside. Is the acquisi-
tion approach for this application different than the
customer loyalty system? Compile a list of advan-
tages and disadvantages of the various approaches,
along with your recommendation.
New Perspectives
1. List some mobile application functions that would
be helpful to a new restaurant. Establish a priority
of the various functions to implement in various
versions of the mobile application.
2. If you were Tyler, considering the customer
loyalty system and mobile app along with limited
resources, which initiative would you decide to
implement
first?
Consider
both
the
strategic
and operational importance of each initiative
along with the estimated complexity (time to
implement,
cost,
etc.)
and
discuss
your
recommendations.
Key Terms
application service provider
(ASP), 436
benchmarking, 435
beta version, 432
custom-designed (tailored)
software, 423
offshoring, 424
request for information (RFI), 434
request for proposal (RFP), 434
service-level agreement, 430
software as a service (SaaS), 436
storage service provider (SSP),
438
uptime, 438
user application development,
438
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
443
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Review Questions
1. List and explain all the various options now
available for an organization to enjoy the services
of an IS.
2. Few organizations would develop an application
in-house or pay another company to develop it if
a similar application can be licensed. Why?
3. What are the benefits and risks of outsourcing IT
services?
4. The major hardware and software makers, such
as IBM and Hewlett-Packard, derive an increasing
portion of their revenue from outsourcing con-
tracts. Analyze and explain why they focus more
of their efforts in this direction.
5. What might cause a client to ask to renegotiate a
long-term outsourcing contract?
6. You are the CIO of a large manufacturing com-
pany. A software vendor approaches you with an
offer to have your company serve as a beta site
for a new human resource application. What
would you consider before making a decision?
7. What is an RFI? What is the difference between an
RFI and an RFP? The ideal response to an RFP is
one that can be easily transformed into a contract.
Why?
8. What is the purpose of benchmarking? Often,
benchmarking involves visiting other
organizations that have applied the system under
consideration. Why?
9. What would you benchmark in a system whose
purpose is to enter customer orders and accept
customer credit-card account numbers for pay-
ment at your web-based site?
10. When purchasing an off-the-shelf application,
to which phase of the SDLC is the post-
implementation support and service equivalent?
11. Some organizations charge the purchase price of an
application that serves only a particular organiza-
tional unit back to the unit. Why does the existence
of a charge-back arrangement create an incentive to
have users develop their own applications?
12. Why don’t users commonly document the appli-
cations they develop? Why is poor documenta-
tion a problem?
13. List and explain the benefits and risks of using the
services of an on-demand software provider.
14. Some companies use software as a service
(SaaS) because they want to concentrate on core
competencies. What is a core competency? How
would you determine what an organization’s core
competencies are?
15. What is a storage service provider (SSP)? How is
it different from an ASP?
Discussion Questions
16. Some outsourcing clients have devised contracts
that incentivize their vendors to develop new,
innovative ISs for the client. What elements
would you include in a contract like this if you
were a manager for an outsourcing (client)
company?
17. Vendors like to market themselves as “partners”
with their outsourcing clients. Why?
18. Do you think that development of ISs by end
users should be encouraged? Do the benefits of
the practice outweigh its risks?
19. Will ready-made software applications ever meet
all the needs of all businesses? Explain.
20. The volume of the software as a service (SaaS)
market is growing and predicted to reach one-
fourth of the software market. In addition to the
benefits listed in the chapter, what are the tech-
nological developments that cause this growth?
21. One of Salesforce.com’s slogans is The End of
Software. Do you agree that the term describes the
concept of SaaS? Why or why not? Do you think
that SaaS will eventually become the only way in
which corporations use software? Why or why not?
22. A CIO said that while he would not use a public
network such as the Internet with an ASP for
some types of ISs, he would allow employees to
use the web for other types, such as an account-
ing application. Give three examples of applica-
tions that you would recommend and three that
you would not recommend for use through the
web. Explain your choices.
23. Except for Salesforce.com, the industry leaders in
the SaaS market are companies that have been
software leaders before the concept emerged.
What do you think is the reason for this? Has this
business environment suppressed innovation?
444
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
24. Explain why you agree or disagree with the fol-
lowing statement: “Employees are smart enough
to know what they should and should not do with
their computers. A conduct policy will not prevent
wrongdoing.”
25. When using the services of an ASP, the client
gains an important element that is often over-
looked: support service. Considering only support
service, would you prefer to have the rented soft-
ware installed on your own company’s hardware
or leave it installed at the vendor’s site? Explain.
26. Should employees be allowed to use their
employers’ email for private communication at
all? Should they be allowed to do so outside of
paid time?
27. Assume that you are the CEO of a company that
provides computers and access to email and the
web to almost all of its employees. You are about
to circulate a new IT use policy in the company.
List and explain your “ten commandments” (or
fewer, or more) for employees’ use of software,
email, and the web.
Applying Concepts
28. You are a manager for a new company that is
about to start selling textbooks to college book-
stores via the web. Several firms specialize in
software that supports transactions and data col-
lection on the web. Prepare an RFI for an appli-
cation to support your new company’s effort on
the web, including posted catalogs, orders, ship-
ment tracking, payment, and data collection for
future marketing.
Submit the list of questions you want prospective
bidders to answer, and be ready to provide an
explanation for including each of the questions.
29. A small company considering three storage ser-
vice providers (SSPs) has asked for your advice.
Research the various SSPs mentioned in this
chapter and compile your recommendations to
the company. Consider cost, flexibility, length of
client commitment, communication speed, secu-
rity, reputation, and any other relevant informa-
tion. Base your recommendation on your analysis
of all the relevant strengths and weaknesses of
each provider.
Hands-On Activities
30. In recent years several companies experienced
either a total failure or major mishaps when try-
ing to have vendors implement enterprise appli-
cations. Consider “failure” as inability to
complete the project or a project that ended up
costing the client significantly more than
expected, including lost revenue. Find at least
three sources about such a case. Synthesize, list,
and explain what happened and why. Conclude
with your own recommendations of what could
be done to avoid or minimize the damage. The
recommendations should be written so that
potential clients of such projects could take
proper precautions. Your report should be about
1,500 words long.
31. In recent years a growing amount of software has
been outsourced by U.S. companies to other
countries, such as India and China. Research the
web and write a two-page paper that lists and
explains the benefits and the disadvantages
of offshoring application development. If you
conclude that there are some benefits or
advantages to offshoring of specific types
of applications, say so and explain your
conclusion.
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
445
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Team Activities
32. Every online retailer (e-tailer) uses a virtual shop-
ping cart application. Team up with another stu-
dent, research the web for companies that sell such
applications, and write a 1,500 to 2,000-word report
that summarizes the following points: (a) Who are
the major companies that sell these applications?
(b) What are the prices of these packages? (c) How
long does it take to install the applications? (d) How
is the relationship with the bank processing the
credit-card payments established? (e) Are there
ASPs that offer the use of such systems over the
Internet? (Namely, the e-tailer uses a shopping cart
application installed at the ASP’s location.) (f) If
there are ASPs that rent such systems, what are the
payment schemes? Note: Many web-hosting com-
panies offer shopping carts as part of their
packages. You may use these companies, but if
you do, report whether the shopping cart service
must be tied to the purchasing of other services.
33. Throughout this book, many organizations that
provide information and advice on IT have been
mentioned. Explore the websites of these orga-
nizations and the websites of IT-related maga-
zines to find the latest statistics on the different
alternatives for obtaining business applications
or the use of business applications. Create a
PowerPoint presentation to answer the following
questions, and express your answers in pie
charts:
a. What was the dollar amount spent on IT in
your country in each of the past three years,
and what percentage of this amount was spent
on software acquisition?
b. How was the amount spent on software
distributed among in-house development,
purchased (or licensed) ready-made software,
and outsourced development?
446
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Outsourcing Call Centers
Contact centers have failed to keep up with the times.
While most people have adapted to advancements in
telephony technologies by forgetting that cellphones
were the size of a briefcase only a short decade ago,
some companies are still subjecting customers to
virtually
prehistoric
call
center
technologies.
The
question which arises is, if the people who use contact
centers are using the most modern technology, why
aren’t the call centers? Outsourcing call center duties
to a reputable and distinguished company can make
all the difference in customers’ call center experience.
Businesses
today
know
more
about
their
customers
than
ever
before.
Through
cookies,
websites, and smartphone applications, companies
have been able to acquire more customer data than
was ever thought possible. However, while these
internal channels are highly advanced, businesses still
leave customers hanging out to dry with their lower-
cost, self-service contact center systems. Customers
hate calling a service provider for assistance, only to
be directed to a self-service, voice automated system.
Repeating information via website or smartphone app
is continually among the top three most irritating
attributes of call centers in most all customer feedback
surveys. Yet executives are resistant to change their
system for two main reasons. The first is cost, followed
by
risk.
They
assume
that
potential
replacement
solutions put their current telephony infrastructure and
delivery capabilities at risk. This is false.
There are simple, low-risk, and cost-effective
ways
to
modernize
a
contact
center
through
outsourcing. Executives looking to do so should
conduct a little research into what web callback and
smartphone offerings are available. Fonolo, Radish,
and Virtual Hold are three companies with reputable
contact center solutions.
Fonolo
improves
call
center
experience
for
customers
yet reduces the cost.
In 2011, Sirius
Canada,
a
leader
in
the
country
for
audio
entertainment, reached an agreement with Fonolo to
provide
improved
calling
services
for
their
subscribers. Another large company using Fonolo is
RBC. Fonolo connects the call center with a website,
which
is
necessary
for
providing
a
satisfying
experience. Customers can choose the link on the
webpage that matches the reason for their call and
they will be contacted back when the right agent is
available. This technique addresses the issue of long
wait times on the phone, which customers despise.
Sirius Canada has praised Fonolo for its dedication
to staying on the cutting edge of customer service.
Radish’s ChoiceView is their new app, which
allows
callers
to
talk
to
ChoiceView-enabled
businesses while receiving visual information on
their smartphone, either from a human business
representative
or
an
interactive
voice
response
system.
The
live
visual
communication
during
smartphone calls results in faster communication
and thus faster and increased user comprehension.
ChoiceView allows users to visually comprehend the
process
they
are
attempting
to
undertake
while
having the aid of a human voice on the line.
Virtual Hold, as the name implies, focuses on
reducing hold time. Customers can skip the wait
time by hanging up and receiving a call back when a
representative
is
available.
The
recording
the
customers hear alerts them of estimated callback
time, so the system has a 90 percent successful rate
of connection. Virtual Hold service is cloud-based and
thus does not require a severe upfront cost.
In addition to these companies, webcasts are
offered
on
how
to
connect
web
presence
and
smartphone apps with CSRs. All of the previously
listed offerings use the callback model for their
smartphone and web-to-call
offerings.
Instead of
talking to a computer, customers can get a callback
from a fully briefed CSR and speak with a real
human. Implementing these technologies can bring a
contact center up to date with what customers want:
human answers from humans.
Even short periods of time on hold can seem
endless when customers have an urgent question.
There
are
low-cost,
low-risk
outsourcing
options
available for renovating a business’s call center. If
executives would have to suffer like end-users of call
centers do, they would call for change as well.
Sources: Anonymous. (2011, Mar 08). Sirius Canada Selects
Fonolo to Enhance the Calling Experience for its Subscribers,
Canada NewsWire; Anonymous. (2012b, May 10). Can We
Talk* Verizon and Virtual Hold Technology Help Organizations
Dial Down Hold Times; New Voice Call-Back Solution Improves
Customer Experience, M2 Presswire; Brown, K. (2013). Raise
Your Mobile Profile. Speech Technology, 18(1), 6-6; Thomas, J.
(2011). Radish sprouts visual application for smartphones.
Boulder County Business Report, 30(19), 1-5B.
Thinking About the Case
1. What are the consequences of having an out-
dated contact center?
2. How should executives decide on when to
outsource a contact center? Which outsourced
contact center solution should they choose?
3. What problems do some of the technological
advances exhibited by Fonolo’s, Radish’s
and Virtual Hold’s new call center solutions
solve?
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
447
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Hearing the Sound of Cost Savings
Business organizations are focused on creating value
for their customers, developing or refining their
products and expanding their revenue sources. At
the same time, management wants to reduce costs
and
labor
resources
and
create
operational
efficiencies. While these are lofty and reasonable
objectives, without careful and thoughtful planning,
these
goals
are
a
challenge
to
implement
collectively.
The reliance on custom-designed information
technology applications is dwindling. Flat budgets
and organizational pressures to achieve more with
the same (or less) personnel continue to be the
marquee headlines for most business organizations.
Information technology is being asked to assess its
operations
and
associated
costs,
especially
with
implementation of new application systems.
Information Week’s recent State of the Data
Center Survey (Marko, 2012) shows a shift from
planning and renovating physical plants, including
the
traditional
issues
of
heating,
cooling,
and
maximizing processing power with existing space.
The large-scale projects are more difficult to justify in
today’s economic and business environment. The
“old days” where corporate application development
projects
that
heavily
influenced
large
hardware
purchases appear to be disappearing.
The survey respondents, consisting of 256 people
responsible
for
data
center
management
and
decision-making,
are
faced
with
guiding
their
organizations with a new data center strategy. Sixty
percent
of
the
respondents
spend
less
than
30
percent of their total IT budget on their data center
facilities, hardware, and operations; with 30 percent
spending less than 20 percent. IT managers are
taking a “best of the breed” approach by evaluating
each
request
to
find
the
appropriate
software.
However, less than 2 percent of the respondents
develop
applications
in-house.
The
application
development
landscape
is
changing,
and
SaaS
seems to be at the forefront of this change.
One such situation involves the American Society
of
Composers,
Authors
and
Publishers
(ASCAP).
Founded in 1914, ASCAP chartered its founding with
John Philip Sousa (no relation to this book’s author)
and Irving Berlin as a performing rights organization
to maintain licensing agreements for its 435,000
members and individuals. Its licensing personnel
negotiate music usage licenses, collect royalties, and
pursue
legal
matters
as
necessary.
Like
many
businesses in the beginning, ASCAP operated with
ledger
cards,
migrated
to
a
mainframe
system,
transitioned to SQL Server, and finally to Lotus
Notes to process their operational transactions. Its
deployment of Notes in 1993 was, at the time, the
leading edge of technology. It allowed ASCAP to
centralize its databases in the Nashville location for
its
26
offices
around
the
country.
The
implementation
achieved
its
objective.
However,
over time, the system evolved into multiple Notes
databases spread across several servers. So, like the
evolution of music from vinyl records, to eight-track
tapes,
to
CDs,
to
MP3s
and
now
to
Internet-
streaming
services,
their
technology
needed
to
transition as well.
ASCAP decided to purchase Salesforce.com SaaS
CRM
service,
purchasing
about
200
licenses
to
interact into both the Sales Cloud as well as sales
tools
for
maintaining
its
account
and
contact
information. They also adopted the Sales Cloud to
facilitate business collaboration similar to a “social
networking-like customer service platform.” Through
the implementation of the Salesforce.com products,
they were able to use tablet computers for users to
generate
documents
in
the
cloud
and
integrate
marketing
with
sales
activities.
As
all
of
these
functions were completed by its licensing personnel,
the
data
was
being
maintained
by
the
SaaS
application with the data centralized in the cloud.
The use of the new product has realized cost
savings by reducing the need for IT to maintain and
administer
the
Notes
system.
The
cost
savings
associated with that labor appears to have paid for
the licensing cost of the Salesforce.com product.
However, the cost savings has translated beyond the
technology function. John Johnson, vice president of
licensing operations conveys that the most significant
cost savings is “…what it would have cost us to do
business with the agility that we have now without
having SaaS in the picture.” The new “out of the
box” functionality has altered the manner in which
ASCAP does its business.
The implementation of Salesforce.com was not
their only use of cloud technology. ASCAP has also
utilized both Amazon and Google to consolidate a
2,000 square-foot warehouse of filing cabinets into a
130 GB database of scanned documents stored and
maintained by Amazon’s Simple Storage cloud for
$20 per month, resulting in $100K in savings.
The transition from using in-house services and
resources to cloud-based application software and
document retention has been music to the ears of
ASCAP.
Source: Anonymous. (2012a). ASCAP ROCKS THE CLOUD.
Network World, 29(11), 27-28.
Thinking About the Case
1. Why would the use of a SaaS product provide
more agility over an in-house developed product?
What do you believe is meant by the increased
agility by using Salesforce.com?
448
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
2. Do you believe that storing documents in the
cloud can create any challenges for a business
organization? What do you believe are the key
points to consider and analyze before imple-
menting a cloud approach?
3. Will the implementation of SaaS-based applica-
tions eliminate any in-house development? Will
it allow companies to redeploy their information
technology efforts to gain more value? Discuss
your thoughts.
References
Anonymous. (2009). Ascentive BeAware Home Inter-
net Monitoring Software Updated, from http://
www.ascentive.com/about_us/ascentive/
press090817_beawareupdate.html
Anonymous. (2010a). Computer and Internet Use in
the United States. Washington, DC.
Anonymous. (2010b, Jul 12). CSC Signs IT
Outsourcing Contract Extension with MBDA,
Business Wire.
Anonymous. (2010c). Gartner Identifies Top 30 Coun-
tries for Offshore Services in 2010-2011 Retrieved
April 9, 2013, from http://www.gartner.com/
newsroom/id/1500514
Anonymous. (2011). Company Milestones Retrieved
April 9, 2013, from http://www.salesforce.com/
company/
Anonymous. (2012a). Gartner Says That Consumers
Will Store More Than a Third of Their Digital
Content in the Cloud by 2016 Retrieved April 9,
2013, from http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/
id/2060215
Anonymous. (2012b). Gartner Says Worldwide Software-
as-a-Service Revenue to Reach $14.5 Billion in 2012
Retrieved April 9, 2013, from http://www.gartner
.com/newsroom/id/1963815
Anonymous. (2012c, Dec 13). Idea extends IT out-
sourcing contract with IBM, Mint.
Anonymous. (2013, Apr 09). Walsh College Renews IT
Outsourcing Contract with CareTech Solutions,
Business Wire.
Ashling, J. (2009). Internet Use: Analysis and Abuse.
Information Today, 26(1), 22-23.
CSC. (2007). CSC and Sears Settle Contract Dispute
Retrieved April 10, 2013, from http://www.csc
.com/newsroom/press_releases/3285-csc_and_
sears_settle_contract_dispute
Griffiths, M. (2010). Internet abuse and internet
addiction in the workplace. Journal of Workplace
Learning, 22(7), 463-472. doi: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1108/13665621011071127
Mark, R. (2010). Dell Perot Systems Wins $42M Army
Contract. eWeek. Retrieved from http://www
.eweek.com/c/a/Government-IT/Dell-Perot-
Systems-Wins-42M-Army-Contract-495610/
McDougall, P. (2012). IBM Cements $1 Billion Out-
sourcing Deal With Cemex. InformationWeek.com.
Retrieved from http://www.informationweek
.com/services/outsourcing/ibm-cements-1-billion
-outsourcing-deal-w/240004580
Overby, S. (2012a). 5 Tips to Keep IT Outsourcing on
Track as Global Providers Cut Staff. Retrieved from
http://www.cio.com/article/698063/5_Tips_to_
Keep_IT_Outsourcing_on_Track_as_Global_
Providers_Cut_Staff?page=2&taxonomyId=3195
Overby, S. (2012b). IBM Beats Indiana in Outsourcing
Case No One ‘Deserves to Win’. CIO.com.
Retrieved from http://www.cio.com/article/
712259/IBM_Beats_Indiana_in_Outsourcing_
Case_No_One_Deserves_to_Win
Verberne, B. (2010). Services Top 100: The World’s
Largest IT Services Companies (2009) Retrieved
April 10, 2013, from http://www.servicestop100.
org/services-top-100-the-world-s-largest-it-services-
companies.php
CHAPTER 13
Choices in Systems Acquisition
449
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
CHAPTER
Maksim Kabakou/Photos.com 
PART
fourteen
RISKS, SECURITY, AND
DISASTER RECOVERY
Learning Objectives
As the use of computer-based information systems has spread, so has the threat to the integrity of data and the
reliability of information. Organizations must deal seriously with the risks of both natural and human menaces.
Alexander Dewdney once noted, “The only truly secure system is powered off, cast in a block of concrete, and
sealed in a lead room with armed guards. And even then I have my doubts.” (Dewdney, 1989) Indeed, there is no
way to fully secure an information system against every potential mishap, but there are ways to significantly reduce
risks and recover losses.
When you finish this chapter, you will be able to:
●
Describe the primary goals of information security.
●
Enumerate the main types of risks to information systems.
●
List the various types of attacks on networked systems.
●
Describe the types of controls required to ensure the integrity of data entry and processing and uninterrupted
ecommerce.
●
Describe the various kinds of security measures that can be implemented to protect data and ISs.
●
Improve the security of your personal information system and the information it stores.
●
Recognize online scams.
●
Outline the principles of developing a recovery plan.
●
Explain the economic aspects of information security.
450
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
KIMBALL’S RESTAURANT: Plating the Opening
Tyler visited the Lakeside location and found that all the
renovations were done. His father was very pleased that
all of the planning and expense for the move to the new
location had worked well to make it a reality. Tyler asked
his father to meet and review the final list of items that
needed their attention in order to open the new location.
They first reviewed the marketing and promotion
campaign for the opening. They agreed that the market-
ing was well planned and would help the opening to be
successful. All of the branding for the location was
developed strategically and integrated into the various
media, web, and social media venues. Feeling comfort-
able with the marketing, they then reviewed the renova-
tions and operations. They decided to walk through the
restaurant and simulate the opening to see if they
missed any operational issues.
As they were walking through, one of the contrac-
tors knocked over a water bottle on one of his electronic
tools and it shorted out and sent sparks flying. Luckily
no harm was done to the restaurant, but the tool no lon-
ger functioned. With all of the food and beverages at the
restaurant, Michael wondered if they were properly pre-
pared for any equipment malfunctions due to break-
down or accidental spills. At the same time, Tyler was
talking to someone on his cell phone. In the middle of
the conversation, the call was disrupted when his cell
phone battery ran out; he was always forgetting to
charge his phone. Tyler laughed it off at first, but then
he thought of the business, “I have pictures and other
files on my phone backed up to the cloud, but what
would happen if our business data was destroyed or
unavailable?”
Goals of Information Security
In 2009, hackers took over Twitter twice, allowing them to steal personal user information and
infiltrate accounts to send out phony tweets. Among the Twitter accounts accessed by the
hackers were those of President Barack Obama, Britney Spears, and then-CNN anchor Rick
Sanchez (Sarno, 2011). On April 20, 2011, Sony Corp was forced to shut down its PlayStation
Network, an online gaming network that allows console owners to compete against other
players online. The company reported that a hacker had stolen names, birth dates, and possibly
credit-card numbers from 77 million accounts on the PlayStation Network. Less than two
weeks later, Sony’s PC-Game service, Sony Online Entertainment, was also shut down due to
hacker invasions in which the company believed names, birth dates, and addresses of users
were stolen. Additionally, hackers acquired access to data from 12,700 non-U.S. credit card
accounts and 10,700 bank account numbers (Sherr, 2011). In total, the cyber-attacks on Sony
Corp resulted in data from over 100 million accounts being accessed by hackers in a period of
only days. This is a small sample of what can happen to information systems and the data
stored on them.
As you have already seen, the development, implementation, and maintenance of ISs
constitute a large and growing part of the cost of doing business; protecting these resources is a
primary concern. The increasing reliance on ISs—combined with their connection to the outside
world through a public network, the Internet—makes securing corporate ISs increasingly
challenging. Adding to the challenges is the increased tendency to store data on portable
devices. The role of computer controls and security is to protect systems against accidental
mishaps and intentional theft and corruption of data and applications. They also help
organizations ensure that their IT operations comply with the law and with expectations of
employees and customers for privacy. The major goals of information security are to:
●
Reduce the risk of systems and organizations ceasing operations.
●
Maintain information confidentiality.
●
Ensure the integrity and reliability of data resources.
●
Ensure the uninterrupted availability of data resources and online operations.
●
Ensure compliance with policies and laws regarding security and privacy.
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
451
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
To plan measures to support these goals, organizations first must be aware of the possible
risks to their information resources, which include hardware, applications, data, and networks;
then, they must execute security measures to defend against those risks.
In recent years, the U.S. Congress passed several laws that set standards for the protection
of patient, student, and customer privacy and compliance with corporate internal controls.
They include the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and
Sarbanes-Oxley
Act
of
2002
(SOX).
These
laws
have
an
important
effect
on
securing
information and, therefore, on securing information systems. Other countries have similar laws
that have similar implications for information security. However, corporate concern should be
focused not only on complying with the law, but also on ensuring that their information
resources are secure. Organizations would then be able to minimize situations that might
compromise their business operations.
One of the foundational concepts associated with information systems security is known as
the CIA triad, defined as confidentiality, integrity, and availability (Chia, 2012):
●
Confidentiality—Preventing the disclosure of information to unauthorized people, entities and
systems. For example, maintaining the privacy of individual health care information would
be an important characteristic of any newly developed information system.
●
Integrity—Ensuring the accuracy and consistency of data throughout the life cycle of the data.
The data should not be modified or deleted without authorization or detection. For example,
a bill of $150 paid online should not be altered and processed for $1,500.
●
Availability—Data must be accessible to authorized parties, entities, and systems when needed
and at an appropriate time. A business might allow employees to access financial data only
during business hours and through authorized workstations. These restrictions would prevent
an employee from gaining access to data from an external location during off-hours.
The U.S. government, as well as many states, have adopted several laws that focus on the
privacy and security of personal and corporate information. Some of the federal legislation
passed includes: the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA), HIPAA (see
above), and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 (GLBA). FERPA specifically protects the privacy
of a student’s educational records for all colleges receiving federal funds.
WHY YOU
SHOULD
Understand Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery Planning
Some time ago you started working for a small company. You love
your new job. It’s Monday 10:00 a.m., and the IS you use is down.
Apparently, there’s a blackout, and in a freak accident the backup
generators don’t work. Do you know what you are supposed to
do? As explained and demonstrated throughout this book, infor-
mation is the lifeblood of any modern organization. Practically
every aspect of business depends on the currency of processed
data and the timely provision of information. This fluent process
can be achieved only if information systems are protected against
threats. As a professional, you must be aware of what might
happen to the ISs upon which you and your colleagues or sub-
ordinates depend. You must protect the systems against events
that threaten their operation and make it impossible to carry out
critical business activities. When a new system is developed, you
should ask the developers to provide a system that not only sup-
ports the functions of your business unit but also incorporates
controls that will minimize any potential system compromises.
You also need to be prepared for a disaster, and should know
how to implement your part of the business recovery plan to
help restore operations as soon as possible.
Risks to Information Systems
Cloud computing and data storage are popular technology “buzzwords” with today’s information
technology and corporate executives. However, business organizations must evaluate the risks as
well as the benefits of these technologies. On Christmas Eve 2012, Netflix’s online system went
down and remained unavailable for more than 12 hours (Finkle, 2012). The system outage for the
popular video rental company was caused by Amazon Web Services (AWS), which operates
452
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
systems to provide data storage and Internet services for businesses. AWS reported that the outage
was from one of its operations in Virginia, which was also the cause of an outage to Netflix earlier
that year in June (Bensinger, 2012; Finkle, 2012).
In recent years, especially because of the growth of online business, corporations have
considered protection of their IS resources an increasingly important issue, for good reasons. Down-
time, the time during which ISs or data are not available in the course of conducting business, has
become a dreaded situation for almost every business worldwide. By some estimates, U.S. businesses
lose $26 billion annually because of downtime (Harris, 2011). The organizational cost of a cloud
outage can be significant. For example, according to Amazon.com’s earnings report, the company
posts $10.8 billion per quarter. Therefore, one hour of downtime can be estimated at about
$5 million per hour (Linthicum, 2013). According to research by Gartner, the cost per hour of
downtime to small or medium-sized businesses is approximately $42,000 (Anonymous, 2012d). The
costs are averages and depend on industry, the size of the company, and other factors. These costs
may be much larger in many cases. The following section discusses the most pervasive risks to IS
operations. In addition to the threats discussed here, it is important to remember that terrorism has
posed a serious threat to all aspects of ISs: hardware, software, and data.
Risks to Hardware
While stories about damage to ISs by malicious Internet attacks grab headlines, the truth about
risks to ISs is simply this: the number one cause of systems downtime is hardware failure. Risks
to hardware involve physical damage to computers, peripheral equipment, and communications
media. The major causes of such damage are natural disasters, blackouts and brownouts, and
vandalism.
Natural Disasters
Natural disasters that pose a risk to ISs include fires, floods, earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes,
and lightning, which can destroy hardware, software, or both and cause total or partial paralysis
of systems or communications lines. Floodwater can ruin storage media and cause short circuits
that burn delicate components such as microchips. Floods, in this context, include those
occurring as a result of plumbing problems inside buildings. Lightning and voltage surges cause
tiny wires to melt and destroy circuitry. In addition, wildlife and human error occasionally
destroy communications lines; animals gnaw cables, and farmers and construction workers
occasionally cut cables inadvertently.
Blackouts and Brownouts
Computers run on electricity. If power is disrupted, the computer
and its peripheral devices cannot function, and the change in
power supply can be very damaging to computer processes and
storage. Blackouts are total losses of electrical power. In
brownouts, the voltage of the power decreases, or very short
interruptions occur in the flow of power. Power failure might not
only disrupt operations, but it can also cause irreparable damage
to hardware. Occasional surges in voltage are equally harmful,
because their impact on equipment is similar to that of lightning.
The popular way of handling brownouts is to connect a
voltage regulator between computers and the electric network. A
voltage regulator boosts or decreases voltage to smooth out drops
or surges and maintains voltage within an acceptable tolerance.
To
ensure
against
interruptions
in
power
supply,
organizations use uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
systems, which provide an alternative power supply for a
short time, as soon as a power network fails. The only
practical measure against prolonged blackouts in a public
electrical network is to maintain an alternative source of
UPS units are a solution to unplanned changes in voltage and can
provide alternative power to technology hardware
Mile Atanasov/Photos.com
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
453
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
power, such as a generator that uses diesel or another fuel. Once the main power stops, backup
batteries provide power until the generator starts, gets up to speed, and produces the power
needed for the computer system.
Vandalism
Vandalism occurs when human beings deliberately destroy computer systems. Bitter customers
might damage ATMs, or disgruntled employees might destroy computer equipment out of fear
that it will eliminate their jobs or simply to get even with their superiors. It is difficult to defend
computers against vandalism. ATMs and other equipment that are accessible to the public are
often encased in metal boxes, but someone with persistence can still cause severe damage. In the
workplace, the best measure against vandalism is to allow access only to those who have a real
need for the system. Sensitive equipment, such as servers, should be locked in a special room.
Such rooms usually are well equipped with fire-suppression systems and are air-conditioned, and
thus protect against environmental risks.
Risks to Data and Applications
The primary concern of any organization should be its data, because it is often a unique
resource. Data collected over time can almost never be recollected the same way, and even when
it can, the process would be too expensive and time consuming. The concern for applications,
especially if the applications are not tailor-made, should come second. All data and applications
are susceptible to disruption, damage, and theft. While the culprit in the destruction of
hardware is often a natural disaster or power spike, the culprit in damage to software is almost
always human.
Theft of Information and Identity Theft
Sometimes the negligence of corporations and the careless use of technology, especially on
public links to the Internet, create security “holes” or vulnerabilities. A university student
admitted to using software to capture his professors’ passwords to gain access to the records
system and change his grades. In another case, a young man installed a program called Invisible
KeyLogger Stealth on public-use computers in 14 Kinko’s stores, where customers can access the
Internet. Personal computers connected to the Internet are widely available in hotels, public
libraries and airports. Keystroke logging—or simply keylogging—software records individual
keystrokes. For one year, his software secretly recorded more than 450 usernames and passwords,
which he used to access existing bank accounts and create new ones. He was caught when he
used an application called GoToMyPC. Subscribers to the GoToMyPC service can use an
application by the same name to link to a PC from another PC and fully control the remote one
as if they were sitting in front of it. Using the application, he remotely accessed and used one of
his victims’ PCs. Using the PC at home, this person noticed that the cursor was moving “by
itself.” The cursor opened files and subscribed to an online payment transfer service. The
perpetrator pled guilty in court.
Keylogging has also been put to work on a much more massive scale by criminal rings.
Computer users might click a link that appears innocent, but actually installs spyware and
keyloggers on their computers. The keylogging application records communication with the
victim’s bank, insurance company, or other financial institutions. The collected data might
include credit-card details, Social Security numbers, usernames, passwords, instant-messaging
chat sessions, and search terms. This collected data is saved in a file hosted on a server that is
likely not registered in the United States. This security threat continues to be a challenging issue
that often goes undetected by antivirus software (Collins, 2012).
In some cases it is employees who unwittingly give away important information such as
access codes. Con artists use tricks known as social engineering. They telephone an employee
who has a password to access an application or a database, introduce themselves as service
people from a telephone company or the organization’s own IT unit, and say they must have
the employee’s password to fix a problem. Employees are often tempted to provide their
password. The “social engineers” then steal valuable information.
454
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
Once criminals have a person’s identifying details, such as a Social Security number, driver’s
license number, or credit-card number, they can pretend to be this person. This crime is called
identity theft. The imposter can easily withdraw money from the victim’s bank accounts, put
charges on the victim’s credit card, and apply for new credit cards. Since an increasing number of
applications for such instruments as well as financial transactions are executed online, identity theft
has become a serious problem. These thieves sift through your garbage or deceive you to obtain
your personal information. The Federal Trade Commission put identify theft at the top of its
consumer complaint list for a fifth year, logging over 2 million complaints in 2012 (Christman,
2013). According to research firm Javelin Strategy & Research, 8.1 million U.S. adults were identity-
theft victims in 2011, and their combined financial loss was $37 billion (Anonymous, 2011). While
the number of incidents declined in 2011, in 2010 the costs increased by 63 percent to about $631
per incident, compared to $387 per incident in the previous year (Anonymous, 2011). The National
Health Care Anti-Fraud Association estimates that about 3 percent of all health care costs are
attributed to fraud by providing false information (Turner, 2012).
Both social engineering and hacking to steal data from online databases have caused huge
damage to corporations. Connecting databases to the Internet is necessary for proper operation
of multisite organizations and organizations that must share data remotely with business
partners. The only way to minimize hacking into such systems is to improve security measures.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Like Handing Your Home Key to a Burglar
According to SplashData, a password management company, the three most common passwords that
people use to access their computers, in descending order of frequency, are “password,” “123456,” and
“12345678.” The company published a list of the 25 worst passwords of the year. Their CEO reported that
hacking tools are becoming more cutting-edge every year. A strong password is one that takes a long
time to figure out by an unauthorized party, even if that party uses sophisticated software to crack it.
Stronger passwords are longer, and contain a mix of letters, digits, and special characters (e.g., the char-
acters +*&^%$#@!). Thus, a password such as hockeyGoalwins4now would be a strong password. Sev-
eral websites provide tools to measure the strength of your password. Try Microsoft’s Safety & Security
Center at http://www.microsoft.com/security/online-privacy/passwords-create.aspx
Source: Ngak, C. (2012). The 25 most common passwords of 2012. April 25, 2013. Retrieved from http://
www.cbsnews.com/8301-205_162-57539366/the-25-most-common-passwords-of-2012/
In recent years, identity theft has been more prevalent as part of phishing, a crime discussed
in Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise.” Crooks spam millions of recipients with bogus
messages, supposedly from legitimate companies, directing them to a site where they are
requested to “update” their personal data, including passwords. The sites are ones constructed by
the criminals who steal the personal data and use it to charge the victim’s credit account, apply
for new credit cards, or—in the worst situations—also apply for other documents such as driver’s
licenses and online loans.
In a more recent form of phishing, spear phishing, criminals use personal information to
attack organizational systems. The illustration on the next page shows a sample phishing email
shown on PayPal’s website with tips on how to recognize such emails. If you place your mouse
pointer over the “Please register here” hyperlink, you would view a link to a web address not
associated with PayPal. Not surprisingly, financial institutions are the most targeted sector. Spear
phishers strive to steal money from online accounts.
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
455
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
POINT OF
INTEREST
Most Phished For
A January 2013 Kaspersky Lab research report named the top 100 organizations targeted by phishers.
Leading off the list and accounting for 39.62 percent of phishing attacks were social media sites. Follow-
ing with 16.81 percent of attacks were search engines; e-pay organizations and banks rounded out the top
three at 12.94 percent (despite being targeted 7 percent less than the previous month). Search engines
and IT vendors experienced the greatest increase in attacks at 3.6 and 1.2 percent, respectively. In the
past five years, there has been a dramatic shift in the most targeted organizations from banks and finan-
cial institutions to social networking sites. One possible reason for the shift is that people are easier to
con than a bank’s online security system.
Source: Kaspersky Lab. (January 2013). Spam in January 2013. Retrieved from
http://www.securelist.com/en/analysis/204792282/Spam_in_January_2013
Cyber Terrorism
In
recent
years,
business
organizations’
information
systems
have
been
targeted
for
terrorist
attacks,
sometimes referred to as cyber terrorism. In 2003, a
survey conducted by Dataquest found that most U.S.
businesses were not prepared to respond appropriately
when faced with a cyber attack on their technology
infrastructure
(Rapport,
2003).
Since
then,
more
attention
has
been
focused
on
the
topic
by
both
government
and
business
organizations.
Research
conducted by ABI Research estimates that worldwide
spending on security technology will increase to $10
billion
in
2016,
compared
to
$6
billion
in
2010
(Simpkins, 2011). The U.S. Defense Department alone
will invest more than $3 billion to counter cyber
terrorism threats. A security expert, Dr. Frank Umbach
states, “for the first time, cyber-attacks have been listed
ahead of international terrorism in the catalogue of
dangers.” (Anonymous, 2013b) Cyber attacks could be
used to disrupt network communication, implement
denial of service attacks, as well as destroy or steal
corporate and government information. It is not a topic
discussed in detail or highlighted in the media due to the
secretive nature of the attacks, probably due to classified
intelligence and federal government involvement.
Data Alteration, Data Destruction, and Web
Defacement
Alteration or destruction of data is often an act of
mischief. As mentioned before, an organization’s data
is often the most important asset it owns, even more important than its hardware and
applications. Even if data is altered or destroyed as a prank, the damage to the organization is
considerable. The effort to reinstate missing or altered records from a backup copy might entail
expensive labor. Even if the actual damage is not substantial, IT staff must spend a lot of time
scanning the data pools to ascertain the integrity of the entire resource, and they must also
figure out how the perpetrator managed to circumvent security controls. This activity itself
wastes the time of high-salaried employees.
Often, the target of online vandals is not data but the organization’s website. Each day,
some organizations find their websites defaced. Defacement causes several types of damage: first-
time visitors are not likely to stay around long enough or revisit to learn about the true nature
Phishers send emails with links to sites that look legitimate, but are phony
Courtesy of Paypal
456
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
of the site, and they might associate the offensive material with the organization; frequent
visitors might never come back; and shoppers who have had a good experience with the site
might leave it forever because they no longer trust its security measures.
To deface a website, an intruder needs to know the site’s access code or codes that enable the
webmaster and other authorized people to work on the site’s server and update its pages.
The intruder might either obtain the codes from someone who knows them or use special “brute
force” software that tries different codes until it succeeds in accessing the pages.
The
best
measure
against
defacement,
of
course,
is
software
that
protects
against
unauthorized access, or as it is more commonly known, hacking. However, since such software
might fail, the public damage can be minimized by ensuring that members of the organization
monitor the home page and other essential pages frequently. When the defacement is detected
shortly after it occurs, the defaced pages can be replaced with backups before too many visitors
have seen the rogue pages. An increasing number of websites are restored within hours or even
minutes from the defacement.
The cure to any unauthorized entry to an IS is for the organization to find the weakness in
its security software and fix it with the appropriate software. Such software is often called a
“patch.” Software companies that sell server management applications often produce patches
and invite clients to download and install them.
To combat hackers, organizations use honeytokens. A honeytoken is a bogus record in a
networked database that neither employees nor business partners would ever access for
legitimate purposes. When the intruder copies the database or the part of the database that
contains that record, a simple program alerts security personnel, who can start an investigation.
The program that detects the incident might also reside on a router or another communications
device that is programmed to send an alert as soon as it detects the honeytoken. To entice the
intruder to retrieve the honeytoken when only searching for individual records, the honeytoken
might be a bogus record of a famous person, such as a medical record of a celebrity in a medical
database or the salary of the CEO in a payroll database.
To learn of security holes and methods of unauthorized access, organizations can establish
honeypots. A honeypot is a server that contains a mirrored copy of a production database (a
database that is used for business operations), or one with invalid records. It is set up to make
intruders think they have accessed a production database. The traces they leave educate
information security officers of vulnerable points in the configuration of servers that perform valid
work. In some cases, security people have followed an intruder’s “roaming” in the honeypot in
real time. Note, however, that different sources have different definitions of the terms honeypot
and honeytoken. For example, some define honeypot as any trap set for abusers, including a
physical computer, and a honeytoken as a special case where the trap is only data.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Sounds Vishy
Vishing is a method of stealing money or information from people over the telephone. It works like this.
Typically the scammer will implement a technique called ‘caller ID’ spoofing to make it look like they are
calling from a familiar or legitimate source. The caller is then directed by a recorded message to call a
toll-free number, similar to how a phishing attack tells a person to go to a fraudulent website. The caller
is asked to dial in personal information such as a credit card or Social Security number. In 2009, two tele-
marketing firms in Florida were sued by the Federal Trade Commission for using this method of theft to
sell bogus automobile warranties for between $2,000 and $3,000 each. In the two years they were in oper-
ation, they made approximately 1 billion calls and generated more than $10 billion. Until the Truth in Caller
ID Act of 2009 (signed into law in 2010), caller ID spoofing was legal. The overdue FCC rules “prohibit any
person or entity from transmitting misleading or inaccurate caller ID information with the intent to defraud,
cause harm, or wrongfully obtain anything of value.” The rules do however, provide exceptions that allow
law enforcement officials to manipulate their caller ID with a court’s permission.
Sources: Federal Communications Commission. (2013). Caller ID and Spoofing. Retrieved from http://
www.fcc.gov/guides/caller-id-and-spoofing; Reardon, Marguerite. (19 May 2009). Protecting yourself
from vishing attacks. Retrieved from http://news.cnet.com/8301-1035_3-10244200-94.html
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
457
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Computer Viruses, Worms, and Logic Bombs
Computer viruses are so named because they act on programs and data in a fashion similar to
the way viruses act on living tissue: computer viruses easily spread from computer to computer.
Because so many computers are now connected to one another and many people share files,
people unknowingly transmit to other computers viruses that have infected their own files.
Once a virus reaches a computer, it damages applications and data files. In addition to
destroying legitimate applications and data files, viruses might disrupt data communications: the
presence of viruses causes data communications applications to process huge numbers of
messages and files for no useful purpose, which detracts from the efficiency of transmitting and
receiving legitimate messages and files. The only difference between a computer virus and a
worm is that a worm spreads in a network without human intervention. A worm attacks
computers without the need to send email or open any received files. Most people refer to both
types of rogue code as viruses, as does this book.
Almost as soon as email became widespread, criminal minds used it to launch viruses. The
Melissa virus of 1999 was an early demonstration of why you should be suspicious of email
messages even when they seem to come from people or organizations you know. In the Melissa
case, an innocent-looking email message contained an attached Microsoft Word document that,
when opened, activated a macro that sent an infected message to the first 50 entries in the
victim’s
Microsoft
Outlook
address
book.
Many
other
viruses
spread
in
a
similar
way:
the recipient is tempted to open—and thereby activate—a file that is attached to a message. The
program in that file then destroys files, slows down operations, or does both, and uses
vulnerabilities in the operating system and other applications to launch copies of itself to other
computers linked to the Internet. Since Melissa, there have been thousands of virus and worm
attacks, and millions of computers continue to be infected.
There are many more viruses waiting for victims. In April 2012, Kaspersky Labs estimated that 280
million malicious programs were detected, 134 million web-based infections were prevented, and
more than 24 million malicious URLs were found
(Anonymous, 2012b). According to the report, the two
web-based applications with the greatest number of
virus
detections
are
Adobe’s
Acrobat
Reader
and
Oracle’s Java.
One way to protect against viruses is to use anti-
virus software, which is readily available on the
market from companies that specialize in developing
this kind of software, such as Kaspersky, Symantec,
and McAfee (see figure), or the free AVG and free open
source ClamWin. Subscribers can regularly update the
software with code that identifies and deletes or
quarantines new viruses, or choose automatic updates,
in which virus definitions are updated automatically
when the computer is connected to the Internet.
However, if a new virus is designed to operate in a way
not yet known, the software is unlikely to detect it.
Most virus-detection applications allow the user to
automatically or selectively destroy suspect programs.
Another way to minimize virus threats is to program
network software, especially email server software,
to reject any messages that come with executable
files that might be or contain viruses. Some email
applications,
such
as
Microsoft
Outlook,
are
programmed to reject such files.
Some
viruses
are
called
Trojan
horses,
analogous
to
the
destructive
gift
given
to
the
ancient Trojans, as described in Greek mythology. In
their war against Troy, the Greeks pretended they
were abandoning the city’s outskirts and left behind
Antivirus software is an important application for blocking computer viruses
Courtesy of McAfee, Inc
458
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
a big wooden horse as a present. The Trojans pulled the horse into the city. When night fell,
Greek soldiers hidden within the horse jumped out and opened the gates for thousands of their
comrades, who conquered the city. In computer terms, a Trojan horse is any virus disguised as
legitimate software or useful software that contains a virus. Many people also refer to spyware
that comes with useful software as Trojan horse software.
A growing number of viruses and worms take advantage of vulnerable features of operating
systems, most notably Microsoft Windows. Most attack this company’s operating systems because
the large majority of organizations worldwide use Microsoft operating systems to run their servers
and computers. Software vendors provide patches against direct intrusion into computer systems and
distribute security patches against viruses and worms. However, it is up to security professionals and
network administrators to implement the patches as soon as they become available.
Some rogue computer programs do not spread immediately like a virus but are often
significantly more damaging to the individual organization that is victimized. A logic bomb is
software that is programmed to cause damage at a specified time to specific applications and data
files. It lies dormant until a certain event takes place in the computer or until the computer’s inner
clock reaches the specified time; the event or time triggers the virus to start causing damage. Logic
bombs are usually planted by insiders, that is, employees of the victimized organization. In one case,
a former employee at the U.S. Transportation Security Administration (TSA)’s Colorado Springs
Operations Center (CSOC) was convicted of planting a logic bomb in 2009 after he was given notice
that his job was being terminated. The infected system was set to cause damage to data on CSOC’s
database, creating malfunctions in airline passenger screening. Fortunately, the disruption was
found by TSA personnel and disabled before it manifested its damage (Zetter, 2011).
Non-malicious Mishaps
Unintentional damage to software occurs because of poor training, lack of adherence to backup
procedures, or simple human error. Although unintentional damage rarely occurs in robust
applications, poor training might result in inappropriate use of an application so that it ruins data,
unbeknownst to the user. For instance, when faced with an instruction that might change or
delete data, a robust application will pose a question such as: “Are you sure you want to delete the
record?” or issue a warning such as “This might destroy the file.” More common damage is caused
by the failure to save all work and create a backup copy. Destruction of data often happens when
using a word-processing program to create or change text files and when updating databases.
Unauthorized downloading and installation of software that might cause damage can be
controlled by limiting administration rights to employees. Many organizations instruct operating
systems to deny such rights to most employees. They program ISs to accept new software
installation only when the proper access codes are entered.
Risks to Online Operations
The massive movement of operations to the Internet has attracted hackers who try to interrupt
such operations daily. In addition to unauthorized access, data theft, and defacing of webpages,
there has been a surge in denial-of-service attacks and hijacking of computers.
Denial of Service
In July 2011, Internet shoppers trying to access their PayPal accounts could not do so due to a
denial-of-service attack (Bryan-Low, 2011). Denial of Service (DoS) occurs when a website
receives an overwhelming number of information requests, such as merely logging on to a site.
The intention of high-volume log-on requests is to slow down legitimate traffic on the site’s
server; business can slow to a halt. The server’s frantic efforts to handle the massive amount of
traffic denied legitimate visitors and business partners access to the site.
In most such attacks, the perpetrator launches software that uses other people’s computers
for the attack—unbeknownst to them; thus the attacks are sometimes known as distributed
denial-of-service
(DDoS)
attacks.
Professionals
call
the
computers
used
in
these
attacks
“zombies.” Zombie computers not only exacerbate the volume of traffic but also make it
impossible to track down the generator of the attack.
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
459
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
DoS attacks continue to be a major problem. These attacks affect every business and
industry. In the annual reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission, at least 19 financial
institutions have reported that they were targeted by DoS attacks. The SEC has asked that
companies disclose “significant computerized theft or disruption” based on public knowledge of
this issue (Nakashima & Douglas, 2013). In early 2013, Bank of America struggled to restore
service to 40 million households without access to its electronic banking services (mobile, online
and telephone) because of a DoS attack (Reckard, 2013). Citigroup’s website was affected by a
DoS attack where some customers had difficulty accessing their accounts (Browdie, 2012). It is
clear from these and other examples that financial institutions continue to be the target of
technology crimes to disrupt and deny services to their customers.
Because it is impossible to stop anyone from trying to log on to a website, there is no full
cure for a DoS attack, but equipment is available that can filter most illegitimate traffic targeting
a site. The equipment detects repeated requests that come from the same IP addresses at an
abnormal frequency and blocks them, and it can be programmed to block all incoming
communication from suspected servers. The equipment can filter about 99 percent of false
requests, but using the equipment slows down communication, so the site’s response is slowed.
In addition, blocking requests might also deny access to legitimate visitors from suspected
servers, especially if the server is used by an ISP that provides Internet access to thousands of
people and organizations. One way to mitigate DoS attacks is for an organization to use multiple
servers, which is a good idea anyway to handle periods of legitimate traffic increases.
No organization is immune to DoS. Some of the most visible websites have been attacked,
including those of eBay, Amazon, CNN, and the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (Bryan-
Low, 2011). All had to shut down their sites for several hours. Amazon, eBay, and other
commercial sites have lost revenue as a result. Neustar, Inc., a real-time information provider,
reported that of the 1,000 North American IT professionals surveyed on DoS attacks, over 300
respondents reported their organizations had been attacked. Of those attacked, 35 percent
reported attacks lasting longer than 24 hours and 11 percent lasting over a week (Anonymous,
2012c).
Computer Hijacking
You might not be aware of it, but there is a good chance your networked computer has been
hijacked. No, nobody would remove it from your desk, but if it is connected to the Internet, it is
used by other people. Hijacking a computer means using some or all of the resources of a
computer linked to a public network without the consent of its owner. As you have seen, this
has been done for DoS, but it is also done for other purposes.
Hijacking is carried out by surreptitiously installing a small program called a bot on a
computer. Like many viruses, these programs are downloaded unwittingly by people who use
chat
rooms
and
file-sharing
networks.
When
your
computer
is
hijacked,
your
Internet
connection might slow to a crawl. The damage to corporations in the form of reduced
productivity can be great. The main purpose of hijacking computers is spamming: using hijacked
computers to send unsolicited commercial email to large numbers of people, often millions of
addresses. Spammers do so for two reasons: they hide the real source of the email so that they
cannot be identified and pursued, and they take advantage of the hijacked machines’ computer
resources—CPU time, memory, and communications link—to expedite the distribution of spam.
Nobody knows how many computers are infected with bots. With the increased popularity
of social media, companies like Facebook are experiencing the influence of bots, which impact
their click statistics. Facebook believes that 1.5 percent of its monthly active users are there for
the purpose of spamming and violating its terms. One of their accounts claimed that 80 percent
of clicks on its Facebook ad campaign were initiated by bots (Darwell, 2012).
To
hijack
computers,
spammers
exploit
security
holes
in
operating
systems
and
communications software, and then surreptitiously install email forwarding software, much as
one would install a virus. Most users do not notice the extra work their computers do. One
precaution is to check why a computer continues activity (such as hard disk work) when the
owner does not use it. Computer owners can also install special software that detects email
forwarding applications.
460
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
Computer hijacking is also done to turn computers into zombies to help a DoS. Instead of
exploiting the computers to send email, they are used to send repeated service requests to web
servers.
Controls
Controls are constraints and other restrictions imposed on a user or a system, and they can be
used to secure systems against the risks just discussed or to reduce damage caused to systems,
applications, and data. Figure 14.1 lists the most common controls. Controls are implemented
not only for access but also to implement policies and ensure that nonsensical data is not
entered into corporate databases.
F I G U R E 14.1
Common controls used to
protect systems from risks
Program robustness and data entry controls
Backup
Access controls
Atomic transactions
Audit trail
Application Reliability and Data Entry Controls
Apart from performing programmed functions, reliable applications can resist inappropriate
usage, such as incorrect data entry or processing. The most reliable programs consider every
possible misuse or abuse. A highly reliable program includes code that promptly produces a clear
message if a user either makes an error or tries to circumvent a process. For example, a website
invites users to select a username and password, and the operators demand passwords that are
not easy to guess. The application should be programmed to reject any password that has fewer
than a certain number of characters or does not include numerals. A clear message then must be
presented, inviting the user to follow the guidelines.
Controls also translate business policies into system features. For example, businesses use
their IS to implement a policy limiting debt for each customer to a certain level. When a
customer reaches the debt limit and tries to purchase additional items, a message appears on the
cash register screen alerting the sales associate of the issue.
Thus, the policy is implemented by using a control at the
point of sale. Similar systems do not allow any expenditure to
be committed unless a certain budgetary item is first checked
to ensure sufficient allocation. A spending policy has been
implemented
through
the
proper
software.
Information
technology systems are highly effective in implementing and
enforcing business policies and procedures.
Backup
Probably the easiest way to protect against loss of data is to
automatically duplicate all data periodically, a process referred
to as data backup. Storage media suitable for routine backup
were discussed in Chapter 4, “Business Hardware.” Many
systems have built-in automatic backup programs. The data
might be duplicated on inexpensive storage devices such as
magnetic tapes. Manufacturers of storage devices also offer
Redundant
Arrays
of
Independent
Disks
(RAID)
for
this
© Cengage Learning 2015
Redundant Arrays of Independent Disks (RAID) automatically back
up transactions onto disks that can be removed and stored in a
secure place
Maxim Tupikov/Photos.com
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
461
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
purpose. As explained in Chapter 4, RAID is a set of disks that is programmed to replicate stored
data, providing a higher degree of reliability. The figure on the previous page shows an example
of RAID disk drives used in a business.
Of course, backing up data is not enough. The disks or tapes containing backed-up data must be
routinely transported off-site, so that if a business site is damaged by a disaster, the remote storage
can be used since it is likely to be spared. In the past, many companies had a truck haul backup disks
and tapes to the storage location at the end of every business day, and some might still do so.
However, due to developments in telecommunications in recent years, most corporations prefer to
back up data at a remote site over a network. In fact, this approach is safer than transporting
physical disks and tapes; on several occasions such media fell off vans or were stolen. Often, the
backup disks or tapes reside thousands of miles away from the organization’s business offices. For
additional protection, backup disks or tapes are locked in safes that can withstand fire and floods.
Companies can also use the services of firms that specialize in providing backup facilities. The
vendor maintains a site with huge amounts of storage space linked to the Internet. The online
data backup service typically provides client organizations with an application that copies
designated files from the client’s systems to remote storage. The client’s data is transmitted
through the Internet and stored at the vendor’s secure site. These vendors also use a variety of
redundancy and multi-location platforms to increase the security of the client backup data in the
event of a disaster at their facilities. These services, offered for a monthly or annual subscription
fee, provide individuals and businesses with a service managed by professionals whose sole
responsibility is the secure backup and access of important data. In addition, customers do not
need to be concerned about increasing their storage capacity as their backup requirements
increase. The vendor continues to provide scalability as the customer’s storage needs change.
These services are referred to as online backup, cloud backup, or e-vaulting. Several companies
provide this service, such as Carbonite (see illustration), Backblaze, Mozy, and Crashplan+.
Businesses and
individuals can subscribe
to online backup services
that automatically create
a remote backup of
data files
Access Controls
Unauthorized access to information systems, usually via public networks such as the Internet,
does not always damage IT resources. However, it is regarded as one of the most serious threats
to security because it is often the prelude to the destruction of websites, databases, and other
resources, or theft of valuable information.
Access controls are measures taken to ensure that only those who are authorized have
access to a computer or network, or to certain applications or data. One way to block access to a
Courtesy of carbonite.com
462
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
computer is by physically locking it in a facility to which only authorized users have a key or by
locking the computer itself with a physical key. However, in the age of networked computers,
this solution is practical only for a limited number of servers and other computers. Therefore,
these organizations must use other access controls, most of which rely on software.
Experts like to classify access controls into three groups: what you know, what you have,
and who you are. “What you know” includes access codes such as user IDs, account numbers,
and passwords. “What you have” is some kind of a device, such as a security card, which you
use directly or which continuously changes coordinated access codes and displays them for you.
“Who you are” includes your unique physical characteristics.
The most common way to control access is through the combination of a user ID and a
password. While user IDs are usually not secret, passwords are. IS managers encourage users to
change their passwords frequently, which most systems easily allow, so that others do not have
time to figure them out and to limit the usefulness of stolen passwords. Some organizations
have systems that force users to change their passwords at preset intervals, such as once a
month or once every three months. Some systems also prevent users from selecting a password
that they have used in the past, to minimize the chance that someone else might guess it, and
many require a minimum length and mix of characters and numerals. Access codes and their
related passwords are maintained either in a special list that becomes part of the operating
system or in a database that the system searches to determine whether a user is authorized to
access the requested resource.
A more secure measure than passwords is security cards, such as RSA’s SecureID.
The device is distributed to employees who need access to confidential databases,
usually remotely. Employees receive a small device that displays a 6-digit number.
Special circuitry changes the number both at the server and the device to the same
new number every minute. To gain access, employees enter at least one access code
and the current number. The device is small enough to be carried on a key chain or
in a wallet. This two-factor access control increases the probability that only
authorized people gain access. This is an example of using both what you know and
what you have.
In recent years, some companies have adopted physical access controls called
biometrics. A biometric characteristic is a unique physical, measurable characteristic
of a human being that is used to identify a person. Characteristics such as
fingerprints, retinal scans, or voiceprints can be used in biometrics. They are in the
class of “who you are.” When a fingerprint is used, the user presses a finger on a
scanner (see figure) or puts it before a digital camera. The fingerprint is compared
against a database of digitized fingerprints of people with authorized access. A growing
number of laptop computers have a built-in fingerprint scanner for the same purpose.
The procedure is similar when the image of a person’s retina is scanned. With voice
recognition, the user is instructed to utter a word or several words. The intonation and
accent are digitized and compared with a list of digitized voice samples.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Scan a Hand
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has been one of the most heavily impacted federal orga-
nizations by the events of September 11, 2001. In the aftermath, the TSA exponentially tightened security.
Proper human identification in airports is just one area that has seen an increase in applied security mea-
sures, and biometrics is the most common and upcoming form of security tool used to control highly
secure areas. Biometrics can measure physical or behavioral traits such as body shape, fingerprints,
facial characteristics, DNA, hand geometry, and iris recognition. For instance, a hand recognition system,
which can be combined with a PIN or proximity card, can allow a system supervisor to immediately deny
access to a user if necessary. Not only does biometrics provide a highly reliable and accurate form of
security, a biometrics-recognition system can save an organization thousands in human security labor
hours.
Source: Dubin, C. H. (2011). Biometrics: Hands down. Security, 48(2), 52–54.
Access controls include what you
know (passwords), what you have
(devices), and what you are
(biometric characteristics)
Thinkstock Images/Photos.com
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
463
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Several manufacturers of computer equipment offer individual keyboard-embedded and
mouse-embedded fingerprint devices. For example, SecuGen Corporation offers EyeD Mouse, a
mouse that includes a fingerprint reader on the thumb side of the device. It verifies a fingerprint
in less than a second. Using biometric access devices is the best way not only to prevent
unauthorized access to computers but also to reduce the workload of Help desk personnel. Up to
50 percent of the calls Help desk personnel receive come from employees who have forgotten
their passwords.
Atomic Transactions
As you know, in an efficient IS, a user enters data only once, and the data is recorded in different
files for different purposes, according to the system’s programmed instructions. For instance, in a
typical order system, a sale is recorded in several files: the shipping file (so that the warehouse
knows what to pack and ship), the invoice file (to produce an invoice and keep a copy in the
system), the accounts receivable file (for accounting purposes), and the commission file (so that
the salesperson can be compensated with the appropriate commission fee at the end of the
month). As indicated in Figure 14.2, a system supports atomic transactions when its code only
allows the recording of data if they successfully reach all their many destinations. An atomic
transaction (from the Greek atomos, indivisible) is a set of indivisible transactions; either all
transactions are executed or none are—never only some. Using atomic transactions ensures that
only full entry occurs in all the appropriate files.
F I G U R E 14.2
Atomic transactions
ensure updating of all
appropriate files
accurately
Is
the transaction
recorded in all
files?
Yes
No
Acknowledge
update.
1. Don’t update any file.
2. Produce error message.
Shipping
Invoice
New sales transaction
Commission
Accounts
Receivable
For instance, suppose the different files just mentioned reside on more than one disk, one of
which is malfunctioning. When the clerk enters the sale transaction, the system tries to
automatically record the appropriate data from the entry into each of the files. The shipping,
accounts receivable, and invoice files are updated, but the malfunctioning commission file
cannot accept the data. Without controls, the sale would be recorded, but unknown to anyone,
© Cengage Learning 2015
464
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
the commission would not be updated, and the salesperson would be deprived of the
commission on this deal. However, an atomic transaction control mechanism detects that not
all four files have been updated with the transaction, and it doesn’t update any of the files. The
system might try to update again later, but if the update does not go through, the application
produces an appropriate error message for the clerk, and remedial action can be taken.
Note that this is a control not only against a malfunction but also against fraud. Suppose the
salesperson collaborates with the clerk to enter the sale only in the commission file, so he or
she can be rewarded for a sale that has never taken place—and then plans to split the fee with
the clerk. The atomic transaction control would not let this happen. Recall our discussion of
relational database management systems. Virtually all current relational DBMSs have atomicity—
the ability to make transactions atomic—as a required feature.
Audit Trail
In spite of the many steps taken to prevent system abuse, it nonetheless occurs. Consequently,
further steps are needed to track transactions so that (1) when abuses are found, they can be
traced, and (2) fear of detection indirectly discourages abuse. One popular tracking tool is the
audit trail: a series of documented facts that help detect who recorded which transactions, at
what time, and under whose approval. Whenever an employee records a transaction, the system
prompts the employee to provide certain information: an invoice number, account number,
salesperson ID number, and the like. Sometimes an audit trail is automatically created using
data, such as the date and time of a transaction or the name or password of the user updating
the file. This data is recorded directly from the computer—often unbeknownst to the user—and
attached to the record of the transaction.
The laws and regulations of many countries require certain policy and audit trail controls,
and since so many operations are performed using ISs, the controls must be programmed into
software. In the United States, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 requires corporations to
implement audit trails and other measures in their systems.
Audit
trail
information
helps
uncover
undesirable
acts,
from
innocent
mistakes
to
premeditated fraud. The information helps determine who authorized and who made the
entries, the date and time of the transactions, and other identifying data that is essential in
correcting mistakes or recovering losses. The audit trail is the most important tool of the infor-
mation systems auditor (formerly known as the electronic data processing auditor), the
professional whose job it is to find erroneous or fraudulent cases and investigate them.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Costly Breaches
According to a Ponemon Institute survey of 850 executives, the average time required to restore an orga-
nization’s reputation after a data breach is one year. Despite the time and effort necessary to rebuild a
brand, severe losses in brand value can be incurred as well. Average losses in brand value ranged from
$184 million to over $330 million for brands that averaged a brand value of $1.5 billion pre-breach. Thus,
the loss in value was 12 percent but sometimes reached as high as 25 percent. No industry or individual
company is immune to data breaches. Of companies surveyed, 43 percent had not implemented a data
breach incident response plan prior to having a breach. To protect data and brand image, Experian Data
Breach Resolution offers the following tips: plan, protect, and partner. Specifically, plan an outline for
what steps a company should take in the event of a data breach. Companies should protect themselves
by being proactive instead of reactive and assume that they will encounter a breach in the future. If a
company does not have adequate resources to protect itself from breaches, partner with a third-party to
get professional protection. It takes years to build a reputable brand image but only one breach to set it
back years and millions of dollars.
Source: Ponemon institute survey: Data breaches can cause lasting and costly damage to the reputation
of affected organizations. (2011). Entertainment Close-Up.
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
465
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Security Measures
As you’ve seen so far in this chapter, the increase in the number of people and organizations using
the Internet has provided fertile ground for unauthorized and destructive activity. This section
describes several ways that organizations can protect themselves against such attacks, including
using firewalls, authentication and encryption, digital signatures, and digital certificates.
Firewalls and Proxy Servers
The best defense against unauthorized access to systems over the Internet is a firewall, which is
hardware and software that blocks access to computing resources. Firewalls are routinely
integrated into the circuitry of routers, as discussed in Chapter 6, “Business Networks and
Telecommunications.” Firewall software screens the activities of a person who logs on to a
website; it allows retrieval and viewing of certain material, but blocks attempts to change the
information or to access other resources that reside on the same computer or computers
connected to it.
It is important to note that while firewalls are used to keep unauthorized users out, they are
also used to restrict unauthorized software or instructions, such as computer viruses and other
rogue software. When an employee uses a company computer to access external websites, the
firewall screens for viruses and active attempts to invade company resources through the open
communications line. It might also be programmed to block employee access to sites that are
suspected of launching rogue programs, or to sites that provide no useful resources. The firewall
then prohibits the user from logging on to those sites.
Figure 14.3 illustrates how a firewall operates to protect network data, and shows the
Windows 8 Firewall screen. As the figure illustrates, a firewall controls communication between
a trusted network and the “untrusted” Internet. The firewall can be installed on a server or a
router. Network professionals use firewall software to check which applications can access the
Internet and which servers might be accessed from the organization’s network. Systems
administrators can configure the Windows firewall parameters to gain access to a trusted
network when accessing an organization’s network from an external network. In some cases,
antivirus software, such as McAfee, maintains the firewall parameters as a function of its
software. Therefore, the antivirus software will also monitor the firewall connections to prevent
the transfer of viruses and malware and maintain a secure connection.
466
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
F I G U R E 14.3
Firewalls attempt to
prevent unauthorized
access through an open
communications line
Server
Firewall
Router Firewall
Internet
Trusted Organizational
Network
To increase security, some companies implement the DMZ (demilitarized zone) approach.
The DMZ is a network of computers that are connected to the company’s trusted network (such
as an intranet) at one end and the untrusted network—the public Internet—at the other end.
The DMZ includes resources to which the organization allows direct access from the Internet. It
might include a website and computers from which people can download files. A DMZ provides
a barrier between the Internet and a company’s organizational network, which is usually an
intranet. The connection between the DMZ and the organization’s trusted network is established
by using a proxy server.
A proxy server “represents” another server for all information requests from resources
inside the trusted network. However, a proxy server can also be placed between the Internet and
the organization’s trusted network when there is no DMZ. For example, this might be the
arrangement when the organization establishes its website as part of its trusted network. The
proxy
server
then
retrieves
webpages
for
computers
requesting
them
remotely
through
the Internet. Thus, external computers requesting webpages never come in direct contact with
the computer hosting the webpages. When a business hires the services of an ISP, the proxy
server is often the one operated by the ISP.
Courtesy of Microsoft
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
467
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Both the organizational network server and proxy server employ firewalls. As shown in
Figure 14.3, the firewalls would be installed on the server of the organizational network and the
router. The router is often called a “boundary router.” The double firewall architecture adds an
extra measure of security for an intranet.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Behind Every Corner
A Consumer Reports survey shows that over 5 million online U.S. households experienced some type of
abuse on Facebook alone in the past year. This includes but is not limited to virus infections, identity
theft, stalking, and for a million children, bullying. In 2010, estimated losses due to malware infection cost
consumers $2.3 billion and were the reason for replacing 1.3 million PCs. The ubiquitous threats that lurk
online make it essential to use some form of security software. Even free anti-malware programs should
provide sufficient protection for most online users.
Source: Anonymous. (2011, June). Online Exposure. Consumer Reports.
Authentication and Encryption
With so much web-based commerce and other communication on the Internet, businesses and
individuals must be able to authenticate messages. That is, they must be able to tell whether
certain information, plain or encrypted, was sent to them by the party that was supposed to
send it. Note that the word “message” is used here for any type of information, not only text. It
might be images, sounds, or any other information in digital form.
Authentication is the process of ensuring that the person who sends a message to or
receives a message from you is indeed that person. Authentication can be accomplished by
senders
and
receivers
exchanging
codes
known
only
to
them.
Once
authentication
is
established, keeping a message secret can be accomplished by transforming it into a form that
cannot be read by anyone who intercepts it. Coding a message into a form unreadable to an
interceptor is called encryption. Authentication also often occurs when an encrypted message
is received, because the recipient needs to ensure that the message was indeed encrypted and
sent by a certain party.
Both
authentication
and
secrecy
are
important
when
communicating
confidential
information such as financial and medical records. They are also essential when transacting
business through a public network. For example, millions of people now buy and sell shares of
stock and other financial products on the web, businesses and individuals make purchases
through the web and use credit-card account numbers for payment, and medical clinics use the
web to transmit patient records to insurance companies and prescriptions to pharmacies. All
must authenticate the recipient and keep the entire communication confidential.
To authenticate the users and maintain secrecy, the parties can use encryption programs.
Encryption programs scramble information transmitted over the network so that an interceptor
only receives unintelligible data. The original message is called plaintext; the coded message is
called ciphertext. Encryption uses a mathematical algorithm, which is a formula, combined
with a key. The key is a unique combination of bits that must be used in the formula to
decipher the ciphertext. As indicated in Figure 14.4, the receiving computer uses the key to
decipher the ciphertext back into plaintext.
468
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
F I G U R E 14.4
Encrypting
communications
increases security
Plaintext
Let’s meet at
11 p.m. at the
regular place.
Let’s meet at
11 p.m. at the
regular place.
Encrypted Message
Decrypted Message
encryption
decryption
@#$%^&*)(hJKgfSed
%$dE?><:”{><?V
encryption
decryption
To illustrate the use of encryption algorithms and keys, here is a simple example. Suppose
you send a secret message that you want the recipient to decipher. Remember that each
character in your digital message is represented by a byte, which is a combination of eight bits.
The byte can be expressed as a numeric value. For instance, the character represented by
00010101 has a decimal value of 21. So, each character in your message has a numeric value
based on a specific algorithm embedded into the software on the sending and receiving
computers. The result of any manipulation of text by this algorithm is a string of characters that
makes no sense to anyone who cannot figure out the algorithm and the key. Note that this is an
extremely simple example. In reality, encryption algorithms are significantly more complex. Also
note that the key used in this example is a combination of eight bits, which is quite easy to
figure out. It would be significantly more difficult to figure out a key consisting of 128, 256, 512,
or 1024 bits, which are commonly used in Internet communication. When keys that long are
used, even with the latest hardware and most sophisticated code-breaking software the average
time to decipher an encrypted message is so long that the probability of success is extremely
small.
Public-Key Encryption
As Figure 14.5 indicates, when both the sender and recipient use the same secret key (which is
the case in the earlier example), the technique is called symmetric encryption. However,
symmetric encryption requires that the recipient have the key before the encrypted text is
received. Therefore, the key is referred to simply as a secret key or private key. While it is fairly
simple to keep the secrecy of a message when the sender and recipient have the same key
beforehand, it is impractical in daily transactions on the Internet. For example, a retail website
would not be able to function if every buyer would require a secret key with each transaction to
ensure confidentiality. Therefore, in such communication, there must be a way for the sender to
communicate the key to the recipient before the message is sent. To this end, the parties use an
asymmetric encryption comprising two keys: one is public, and the other is private. It is
clear why this type of encryption is also called “public-key” encryption.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
469
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
F I G U R E 14.5
Symmetric (secret key)
and asymmetric (public
key) encryption
Algorithm
Dear Janet,
The board of directors
decided to launch the
new product tomorrow...
Dear Janet,
The board of directors
decided to launch the
new product tomorrow...
Dear Janet,
The board of directors
decided to launch the
new product
tomorrow...
Algorithm
Algorithm
Dear Janet,
The board of directors
decided to launch the
new product tomorrow...
Janet’s
public key
Janet’s
private key
*lalk$ ma kdi;
aido ijkad
oija; lao ankj
doi lo;s  isj
oiGi rvfl...
Bob
Janet
Asymmetric Encryption
Secret Key
Secret Key
Bob
Janet
Symmetric Encryption
# ymde?fgk
78: Gdkin x -
M:dbxn/!?Q
bXYRbcmqk
Zw...
Algorithm
Algorithm
A public key is distributed widely and might be known to everyone; a private key is secret
and known only to the recipient of the message. When the sender wants to send a secure
message to the recipient, he uses the recipient’s public key to encrypt the message. The recipient
then uses her own private key to decrypt it. A mathematical relationship exists between the
public and private keys. The public and private keys are related in such a way that only the
public key can be used to encrypt messages, and only the corresponding private key can be used
to decrypt them. It is virtually impossible to deduce the private key from the public key. All
applications that use public keys and private keys use the same principles. What differentiates
them from one another is the different encryption algorithm each uses.
Online businesses often switch site visitors to a secure server when they are asked to provide
secret information such as credit-card account numbers or other personal data. The secure server
provides the visitor’s web browser with the site’s public key. The browser uses it to encrypt the
credit-card number and any other personal information. The secure server uses the private key to
decrypt the information. Once an encrypted exchange is established, the server can send the
visitor’s browser a secret key that both can use. Moreover, the server can change the key often
during the session to make decryption more difficult.
Transport Layer Security
A protocol called Transport Layer Security (TLS) is used for transactions on the web. TLS is
the successor of Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and works following the same principles as SSL, with
some additional improvements that are outside the scope of this discussion. TLS is part of
© Cengage Learning 2015
470
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
virtually all current web browsers. Current versions of browsers use TLS with a 128-bit key. TLS
uses a combination of public key and symmetric key encryption. It works as follows:
1.
When a visitor connects to an online site, the site’s server sends the visitor’s browser its pub-
lic key.
2.
The visitor’s browser creates a temporary symmetric (secret) key of 128 bits. The key is trans-
mitted to the site’s server encrypted by using the site’s public key. Now both the visitor’s
browser and the site’s server know the same secret key and can use it for encryption.
3.
The visitor can now safely transmit confidential information.
How safe is a 128-bit key? It would take 250 PCs working simultaneously around the clock
an estimated average of 9 trillion times the age of the universe just to decrypt a single message.
This is the reason why practically all financial institutions use 128-bit encryption, and if you
want to bank online, you must use a browser that supports this key length. However, how long
it takes an interceptor to decipher depends on current speed of hardware and sophistication of
code-breaking software. As hardware becomes faster and software becomes more sophisticated,
standard keys usually are set longer.
When you log on to secure servers, such as the PayPal website shown in the illustration, you
might notice that the “HTTP://” or “http://” in the URL box at the top of the browser turns into
an HTTPS:// (or https://), and a security icon, usually a little closed padlock, appears in the
browser. In some browsers, as in the illustration, the address bar turns green if it is a secure site.
It is advisable not to transfer any confidential information through the web if you don’t see
both https:// and the padlock icon. HTTPS is the secure version of HTTP, discussed in Chapter
8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise.” HTTPS encrypts communication using SSL or TLS. Fortunately,
all this encryption and decryption is done by the browser. When you access a secure area of a
website, the communication between the site’s server and your web browser is encrypted. The
information you view on your screen was encrypted by the software installed on the site’s server
and then decrypted by your browser.
The https://, padlock icon,
and green color in the
Address bar of this web
browser indicate that you
are communicating with a
secure server
Courtesy of Paypal
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
471
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Digital Signatures
A digital signature is a way to authenticate online messages, analogous to a physical signature
on a piece of paper, but implemented with public-key cryptography. The digital signature
authenticates the identity of the sender of a message and also guarantees that no one has altered
the sent document; it is as if the message were carried in an electronically sealed envelope.
When you send an encrypted message, two phases are involved in creating a digital
signature. First, the encryption software uses a hashing algorithm (a mathematical formula) to
create a message digest from the file you wish to transmit. A message digest is akin to the
unique fingerprint of a file. Then, the software uses your private (secret) key to encrypt the
message digest. The result is a digital signature for that specific file.
How does it work? Follow the flowchart in Figure 14.6. Suppose you want to send the draft
of a detailed price proposal to your business partner. You want to be certain that the document
you intend to send is indeed the one she receives. She wants the assurance that the document
she receives is really from you.
1.
You attach the price proposal file to an email message. The entire communication is essen-
tially one message, indicated as “Plain message” in Figure 14.6.
2.
Using the hashing software, your computer creates a message hash, the message digest,
which is a mathematically manipulated file of the message and is not readily readable by a
human.
3.
You then use a private key that you have previously obtained from the public-key issuer,
such as a certificate authority, to encrypt the message digest. Your computer uses your pri-
vate key to turn the message digest into a digital signature.
4.
The computer also uses your private key to encrypt the message in its plain (unhashed)
form. Your computer sends off both files.
5.
Your business partner receives the encrypted files: the digital signature (which is an
encrypted message digest) and the encrypted message, which usually come as one file.
6.
Your business partner’s computer uses her private key (which is mathematically related to
her public key, which you used) to decrypt both your digital signature and your encrypted
unhashed message.
7.
The decrypted digital signature becomes the message digest. Hashing the decrypted
unhashed message turns this message into a digest, too.
8.
If the two message digests are identical, the message received is, apparently, the one you
sent, unchanged.
472
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
F I G U R E 14.6
How digital signatures
transmit data on the
Internet
Authentication: Compare the digests. If they are
identical, the message has not been tampered with.
Digest
Digest
Decrypt digital signature
using sender’s public key
Create digest (hash)
from message
Plain message
Digital signature
Decrypt encrypted digital signature and encrypted
message using recipient’s private key
Encrypted digital signature
and encrypted message
Recipient
Sender
Transmit through
the Internet
Encrypt digital signature and plain message using
recipient’s public key
Digital signature
Encrypt digest using
sender’s private key
Digest
Create digest (hash)
from message
Plain message
Since the message digest is different for every message, your digital signature is different each
time you send a message. As described here, senders of encrypted messages obtain the public key of
the recipient from an issuer of such keys. In most cases, the issuer is a certificate authority, and the
recipient’s public key is included in the recipient’s digital certificate, which is discussed next.
Digital Certificates
To authenticate a digital signature, both buyers and sellers must use digital certificates (also known
as digital IDs). Digital certificates are computer files that serve as the equivalent of ID cards by
associating one’s identity with one’s public key. An issuer of digital certificates is called a certifi-
cate authority (CA), an organization that serves as a trusted third party. A CA certifies the
identity of anyone who inquires about a party communicating on the Internet. Some CAs are
subsidiaries of banks and credit-card companies, and others are independent. Symantec Trust
Network, GeoTrust, Inc., DigiCert, Inc., and GlobalSign are just a few of the numerous companies
that sell digital certificates. To view a long list of CAs you can go to http://www.sos.ca.gov/digsig/
(Anonymous, 2013a). A CA issues the public (and private) keys associated with a certificate.
© Cengage Learning 2015
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
473
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
A digital certificate contains its holder’s name, a serial number, expiration dates, and a copy
of the certificate holder’s public key (used to encrypt messages and digital signatures). It also
contains the digital signature of the certificate authority so that a recipient can verify that the
certificate is real. To view the digital certificate of a secure online business, click the padlock icon
in the address bar or status bar of your browser. Figure 14.7 shows the same certificate presented
through two different web browsers, Google Chrome (left) and Microsoft Internet Explorer
(right).
F I G U R E 14.7
A digital certificate as
shown in two different
web browsers
Digital certificates are the equivalent of tamper-proof photo identification cards. They are
based on public-key encryption techniques that verify the identities of the buyer and seller in
electronic transactions and prevent documents from being altered after the transaction is
completed.
POINT OF
INTEREST
The Rise of IT Security Workers
In light of the increasing number and sophistication of data theft and other security issues, the demand
for IT security workers has continued to grow. Most organizations are not looking for workers dedicated
to IT security only, but for IT professionals who are security-savvy. Many organizations offer certification
in the area of IT security. Among them are IBM, Cisco, Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft, Oracle, and the Inter-
national Information Systems Security Certification Consortium (ISC2). Companies vie for systems adminis-
trators and database analysts who have a good blend of technical expertise and security knowledge.
Additionally, a career as an IT Security Consultant is an attractive position as it ranked 15th on CNNMo-
ney’s 2012 list of Best Jobs in America. As news of security breaches keeps popping up in the media,
organizations have increased the demand for such talent and have steadily increased such workers’
salaries.
Sources: Barrett, L., “I.T. Security Specialists See Salaries Rise in First Half,” Baseline, July 9, 2007; T.Z.
(2012). Best Jobs in America. Retrieved from http://money.cnn.com/magazines/moneymag/bestjobs/
2010/snapshots/17.html
Courtesy of Google Chrome
Courtesy of Microsoft, Inc.
474
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
The Downside of Security Measures
Security measures—especially passwords, encryption applications, and firewalls—have a price
that relates to more than money: they slow down data communications, and they require user
discipline, which is not always easy to maintain. Employees tend to forget their passwords,
especially if they must replace them every 30 or 90 days.
Employees are especially annoyed when they have to remember a different password for
every system they use; in some companies, there might be four or five different systems, each
with its own access control. A simpler solution is an approach called SSO (single sign-on).
With SSO, users are required to identify themselves only once before accessing several different
systems. However, SSO requires special software that interacts with all the systems in an
organization, and the systems must be linked through a network. Not many organizations have
installed such software.
CIOs often cite SSO as an effective way to decrease the amount of work their subordinates
must do. In February 2013, SurePassID announced its technology solution to create a SSO for
the hybrid cloud. It has developed a single sign-on to integrate with existing IT infrastructures
and is compatible with many popular technology platforms including Apple’s iPhone and iPad
as well as Android and BlackBerry devices (Anonymous, 2013c). Wells Fargo has offered its
commercial customers a new service, CEO Desktop Deposit. This new technology allows
customers to deposit checks through their CEO Portal using a single sign-on (Anonymous,
2012a).
Encryption slows down communication because the software must encrypt and decrypt
every message. Remember that when you use a secure website, much of the information you
view on your screen is encrypted by the software installed on the site’s server, and then
decrypted by your browser. All this activity takes time, and the delay only exacerbates the
Internet’s low download speed during periods of heavy traffic. Firewalls have the same slowing
effect; screening every download takes time, which affects anyone trying to access information,
including employees, business partners, and consumers.
IT specialists must clearly explain to managers the implications of applying security
measures, especially on systems connected to the Internet. The IT specialists and other managers
must first determine which resource should be accessed only with passwords and which also
require other screening methods, such as firewalls. They must tell employees what impact a new
security measure will have on their daily work—and if the measure will adversely affect their
work, the specialists must convince the employees that the inconvenience is the price for
protecting data. The IT specialists should also continue to work on methods that minimize
inconvenience and delays.
Recall the discussion of virtual private networks (VPNs), which enable employees to access
ISs using special security software involving passwords and encryption. This approach allows
employees to access an intranet only from computers equipped with the proper VPN software
and
only
if
they
remember
passwords.
Wawa
Corporation,
a
convenience
store
chain,
implemented a new SAP ERP system. The new system implemented a one-time keyfob similar to
SecurID®. The password changes frequently, and the user does not have to remember it because
it appears automatically on the keyfob. There is no need to use VPN software. If someone steals
a password, the thief cannot use it for more than a few seconds because it then changes. This
enables Wawa employees to access the intranet from any computer in the world.
Recovery Measures
Security measures might reduce undesirable mishaps, but nobody can control all disasters.
According to 2006 statistics of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the cost of
weather and other disasters in the period 1986–2005 in the United States was $278 billion. Only
$21.6 billion of this damage was caused by terrorism. The other causes were tropical storms,
tornadoes, winter storms, earthquakes, and other events. To be prepared for disasters when they
do occur, organizations must have recovery measures in place. Organizations that depend
heavily on ISs for their daily business often use redundancy; that is, they run all systems and
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
475
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
transactions on two computers in parallel to protect against loss of data and business. If one
computer is down, the work can continue on the other computer. Redundancy makes the
system fault tolerant. However, in distributed systems, doubling every computing resource is
extremely expensive, so other measures must be taken.
The Business Recovery Plan
To prepare for mishaps, whether natural or malicious, many organizations have well-planned
programs in place, called business recovery plans (also called disaster recovery plans, business
Terrorism and PATRIOTism
Information technology can help track down criminals and
terrorists, but it also helps criminals and terrorists in their
efforts. The technology can help protect privacy and other civil
rights, but it can also help violate such rights. The growing
danger of terrorism and the continued effort of governments to
reduce drug-related and other crimes led to controversial use,
or abuse, of IT. In the United States, one particular law with a
long name includes controversial provisions that have worried
civil libertarians since October 2001. Uniting and Strengthening
America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept
and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, the PATRIOT Act, as it is
popularly known, gives law enforcement agencies surveillance
and wiretapping rights they did not have before that year. The
law permits the FBI to read private files and personal Internet
records without informing the suspected citizen and without
need for a law enforcement agency to present to the court a
probable cause. “Our constitutional freedoms are in jeopardy.
Now is the time to restore real checks and balances to the
worst sections of the Patriot Act” called a web posting of the
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) in 2005, when the law was
reconsidered by the U.S. Congress. On the contrary, said many
members of Congress, the law should be enhanced to give the
FBI even freer hand.
The Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) explains
the major concerns with the Act, which made changes to 15
existing laws. The Act gives more power than before to law
enforcement agencies in installing pen registers and trap-
and-trace devices. A pen register is any device that records
outgoing phone numbers. A trap-and-trace device—a caller ID
device, for instance—captures and records incoming telephone
numbers. Similarly, the Act extends the government’s authority to
gain access to personal financial information and student
information, even if the subject of the investigation is not
suspected of wrongdoing. Agents only have to certify that the
information likely to be obtained is relevant to an ongoing
criminal investigation. In the past, the government had to show
to a judge probable cause—a reasonable suspicion that the
subject of an investigation is committing or is about to commit
a crime. If a government attorney “certifies” that the information
collected is likely to be relevant, the judge must grant permission
to install the device and collect the information.
The previous federal law referred only to telephones, but the
new Act expanded communication tapping to the Internet, because
it redefined a pen register as “a device or process which records or
decodes dialing, routing, addressing, or signaling information
transmitted by an instrument or facility from which a wire or
electronic communication is transmitted.” This essentially allows
law enforcement agencies to record, without probable cause and
court supervision, email addresses and URLs. Some jurists opine
that this actually allows the agencies to record not only email
sender and recipient addresses and web addresses but also the
content of email messages and webpages.
Even before adoption of the PATRIOT Act, the FBI used
“packet sniffing” devices connected to the servers operated by
Internet service providers (ISPs). Until 2002, the agency used a
custom-built device known as Carnivore, and later started using
commercial devices that reportedly perform the same way. The
devices are supposed to monitor email traffic of suspects.
However, millions of other subscribers use the same servers
and therefore are subject to the same surveillance.
When tapping communications, law enforcement agencies
need the cooperation of a third party, such as a telephone
company or an ISP. In the past, the law limited the definition
of such third parties. Now, there is no limitation. Therefore, if a
university, public library, municipality, or an airport provides
access to the Internet—such as through a hotspot—all users
of these services are subject to surveillance. Furthermore, that
third party is prohibited from notifying anyone, including
unsuspected users, of the surveillance.
Proponents of the Act wanted to leave all its provisions in
place and add two more. They would like to allow the FBI to
demand records without first obtaining an approval from a
prosecutor or a judge. Some would also amend the law to
require the U.S. Postal Service to let FBI agents copy
information from the outside of envelopes in the mail. The law
was not changed, and its term was extended.
Again, we are faced with an old dilemma: How far should
we allow our governments to go in their efforts to protect us
against crime and terrorism? At what point do we start to pay
too much in terms of privacy and civil rights for such
protection? And when terrorists strike or threaten to strike,
should we give up our liberties for more security?
476
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
resumption plans, or business continuity plans). The plans detail what should be done and by
whom if critical systems go down. In principle, the systems do not have to be ISs. However,
most of the attention and resources in recovery plans are devoted to measures that should be
taken when ISs go down or if IS operations become untrustworthy. The U.S. federal government
regards business continuity planning as being in the national interest, and the Department of
Homeland Security has established a website that includes useful information on this topic
(www.ready.gov).
In business recovery planning, the emphasis should not be on the damage to the
organization’s assets but to its business. The estimates and measures taken should be to
minimize damage to the organization’s ability to resume business operations as well as to
minimize the damage to operations from the disaster.
Hurricane Katrina, which hit the U.S. Gulf Coast in 2005, was a wake-up call for many
executives, reminding them in terrible terms of the need for recovery planning. Concern about
disaster recovery has spread beyond banks, insurance companies, and data centers, those
traditionally concerned with disaster recovery. Many customer service and retail firms realize that
they can easily lose customers if they don’t deliver services and products in a timely manner,
which is why the terms “business recovery,” “business resumption,” and “business continuity”
have caught on in some circles. In interactive computing environments, when business systems
are idle, so are the people who bring in revenue. Employees cannot do their work, customers
cannot purchase, and suppliers cannot accept requests for raw materials and services. In addition,
companies’ reputations can be harmed, and competitive advantage and market share lost.
In 2012, hurricane Sandy hit the east coast of the United States. The New York Stock
Exchange trading floor was not operational for two days, the longest weather delay for NYSE in
over 100 years. Capital One Financial’s Remote Deposit Capture (RDC) found that smartphones
complemented the system and helped businesses that were without power deposit checks.
Businesses that could not gain access to their offices used their mobile devices to scan checks
instead of an office scanner. However, a mobile device depletes its battery and requires power.
So backing up mobile devices is also important (Adams, 2012).
Experts propose nine steps to develop a business recovery plan:
1.
Obtain management’s commitment to the plan. Development of a recovery plan requires sub-
stantial resources. Top management must be convinced of the potential damages that paral-
ysis of information systems might cause. Once management is committed, it should appoint
a business recovery coordinator to develop the plan and execute the plan if disaster occurs.
2.
Establish a planning committee. The coordinator establishes a planning committee
comprising representatives from all business units that are dependent on computer-based
ISs. The members serve as liaisons between the coordinator and their unit managers. The
managers are authorized to establish emergency procedures for their own departments.
3.
Perform risk assessment and impact analysis. The committee assesses which operations would
be hurt by disasters, and how long the organization could continue to operate without the
damaged resources. This analysis is carried out through interviews with managers of func-
tional business areas. The committee compiles information regarding maximum allowable
downtime, required backup information, and the financial, operational, and legal conse-
quences of extended downtime.
4.
Prioritize recovery needs. The disaster recovery coordinator ranks each IS application
according to its effect on an organization’s ability to achieve its mission. Mission-critical
applications, those without which the business cannot conduct its operations, are given
the highest priority. The largest or most widely used system might not be the most critical.
Applications might be categorized into several classes, such as:
●
Critical:
Applications
that
cannot
be
replaced
with
manual
systems
under
any
circumstances.
●
Vital: Applications that can be replaced with manual systems for a brief period, such as
several days.
●
Sensitive: Applications that can be replaced with acceptable manual systems for an
extended period of time, though at great cost.
●
Noncritical: Applications that can be interrupted for an extended period of time at little or
no cost to the organization.
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
477
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
5.
Select a recovery plan. Recovery plan alternatives are evaluated by considering advantages and
disadvantages in terms of risk reduction, cost, and the speed at which employees can adjust
to the alternative system.
6.
Select vendors. If it is determined that an external vendor can better respond to a disaster
than in-house staff and can provide a better alternative system, then the most cost-effective
external vendor should be selected. Factors considered should include the vendor’s ability to
provide telecommunications alternatives, experience, and capacity to support current
applications.
7.
Develop and implement the plan. The plan includes organizational and vendor responsibilities
and the sequence of events that will take place. Each business unit is informed of its respon-
sibilities, who the key contacts are in each department, and the training programs available
for personnel.
8.
Test the plan. Testing includes a walk-through with each business unit, simulations as if a real
disaster had occurred, and (if no damage will be caused) a deliberate interruption of the sys-
tem and implementation of the plan. In mock disasters, the coordinator measures the time it
takes to implement the plan and its effectiveness.
9.
Continually test and evaluate. The staff must be aware of the plan at all times. Therefore, the
plan must be tested periodically. It should be evaluated in light of new business practices
and the addition of new applications. If necessary, the plan should be modified to accom-
modate these changes.
The plan should include the key personnel and their responsibilities as well as a procedure to
reinstitute interactions with outside business partners and suppliers. Because an organization’s
priorities and environment change over time, the plan must be examined periodically and
updated if necessary. There will be new business processes or changes in the relative importance
of existing processes or tasks, new or different application software, changes in hardware, and
new or different IS and end users. The plan must be modified to reflect the new environment,
and the changes must be thoroughly tested. A copy of the plan should be kept off-site, because
if a disaster occurs, an on-site copy might not be available. Many companies keep an electronic
copy posted at a server many miles away, so that they can retrieve it from wherever their officer
can have Internet access.
Although the threat of terrorism has increased awareness for the need of recovery plans,
CIOs often find the tasks of earmarking funds for disaster recovery programs difficult because
they cannot show the return on investment (ROI) of such planning. Most companies institute
recovery programs only after a disaster or near-disaster occurs. Usually, the larger companies
have such programs. Even at companies that do have recovery plans, experts estimate that most
plans are never tested. Worse, some experts observed that one out of five recovery plans did not
work well when tested.
Recovery Planning and Hot Site Providers
Companies that choose not to fully develop their own recovery plan can outsource it to
companies that specialize in either disaster recovery planning or provision of alternative sites.
Many companies provide both planning and software for disaster recovery. The software helps
create and update records of key people and procedures. Fewer companies provide alternative
sites—hot sites—chief among them IBM, Hewlett-Packard, and SunGard Availability Services, a
division of SunGard. They provide backup and operation facilities to which a client’s employees
can move and continue operations in case of a disaster.
For example, IBM maintains a business continuity and recovery center in Sterling Forest,
New York, 45 miles from midtown Manhattan. The center is equipped with desks, computer
systems, and Internet links. Customers can use the duplicate databases and applications
maintained for them. The company also provides hotel rooms and air mattresses for people who
need to work long hours. As soon as the power went out one summer, the center’s diesel-
powered generators started up, and it was ready to take in clients’ employees. Some clients had
secured online systems but no light in the offices. These clients operated the systems from links
at the center.
478
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
More than 90 percent of U.S. businesses are within 35 miles of a SunGard center. Worldwide,
the company maintains redundant facilities totaling 279,000 square meters (3 million square feet),
equipped with software and networking facilities to enable a client organization to resume
business within hours.
Hewlett-Packard’s Business Continuity & Availability Services division offers both hot sites
and mobile facilities. When a disaster occurs, HP sends a mobile office within 24-48 hours to a
place designated by the client. Each air-conditioned office includes up to 30 desks equipped with
computers, telephones, a server, and power generators. Company technicians help load
applications and data. The hot site can accommodate up to 1000 client employees. The
company has established more than 50 recovery facilities worldwide to enable the resumption of
business operations in less than four hours with a loss of less than 15 minutes of data.
POINT OF
INTEREST
Seeing Security Differently
A 2011 Forrester Research report indicates businesses are getting the hint on the importance of IT secu-
rity. The survey is based on the responses of 2,058 IT professionals in North American and European busi-
nesses of all sizes. In 2007, security only harnessed 8.2 percent of the total IT budget but that number
grew to 14 percent in 2010. The more businesses rely on information security, the more difficult it is to
keep up with evolving threats. More sophisticated attacks, heftier data breach cleanup costs, and busi-
nesses’ increasing use of outsourced IT resources attributed to the increase in IT security budgets.
Although the survey results show businesses are realizing the necessity for IT security, too many organi-
zations are still applying their IT security resources reactively while they should be trying to predict and
prevent the attacks of tomorrow.
Source: Schwartz, Mathew J. (2011, February 15). Security Spending Grabs Greater Share of IT Budgets.
Retrieved from http://www.informationweek.com/security/management/security-spending-grabs-greater-
share-of/229218689
The Economics of Information Security
Security measures should be dealt with in a manner similar to purchasing insurance. The
spending on measures should be proportional to the potential damage. Organizations also need
to assess the minimum acceptable rate of system downtime and ensure that they can financially
sustain the downtime.
How Much Security Is Enough Security?
From a pure-cost point of view, how much should an organization spend on data security
measures? Two types of costs must be considered to answer this question: the cost of the
potential damage, and the cost of implementing a preventive measure. The cost of the damage is
the aggregate of all the potential damages multiplied by their respective probabilities, as follows:
Cost of potential damage ¼
X
n
i¼1
Cost of disruptioni  Probability of disruptioni
where i is a probable event, and n is the number of events.
Experts are usually employed to estimate the cost and probabilities of damages as well as the
cost of security measures. Obviously, the more extensive the preventive measures, the smaller
the damage potential. So, as the cost of security measures goes up, the cost of potential damage
goes down. Ideally, the enterprise places itself at the optimum point, which is the point at
which the total of the two costs is minimized, as Figure 14.8 illustrates.
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
479
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
F I G U R E 14.8
Optimal spending on IT
security
$
Security
Level
Optimal
Spending
(a) Cost of
Security
Measures
(b) Cost of
Potential
Damage
Cost of
a+b
When budgeting for IT security, managers need to define what they want to protect. They
should focus on the asset they must protect, which in most cases is information, not
applications. Copies of applications are usually kept in a safe place to replace those that get
damaged. They should also estimate the loss of revenue from downtime. Then, they should
budget sums that do not exceed the value of what the measures protect—information and
potential revenues. Even the most ardent IT security advocates agree that there is no point
spending $100,000 to protect information that is worth $10,000.
Calculating Downtime
All other factors being equal, businesses should try to install ISs whose downtime is the lowest
possible, but if obtaining a system with a higher uptime adds to the cost, they should consider
the benefit of greater uptime against the added cost. Mission-critical systems must be connected
to an alternative source of power, duplicated with a redundant system, or both. Often, such
systems must be up 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.
When the service that the business provides depends on uninterrupted power, the systems
are often connected to the grids of two utility companies and an alternative off-grid power
source, such as generators. For example, Equinix, a company in Newark and Secaucus, New
Jersey, that maintains data centers for large companies uses such an arrangement. Both facilities
receive power from two power stations. Even if both utility companies stop supplying electricity,
the company’s systems are automatically powered by batteries, and shortly after that by diesel
generators. Clients can continue to transmit and receive data as if nothing happened.
Recall the discussion of system uptime in Chapter 8, “The Web-Enabled Enterprise.” Experts
can provide good estimates of the probability that systems will fail, both in terms of power
failure in a certain region and for particular applications. Experience in operating certain
systems, such as ERP and SCM systems, can teach the IT staff for how many minutes or seconds
per year the system is likely to fail. For example, if the uptime of a system is 99 percent (“two
nines”), it should be expected to be down 1 percent of the time, and if “time” means 24  7,
downtime expectancy is 87.6 hours per year (365 days  24 hours  0.01). This might be
sufficient for a system supporting some human resources operations, but not an airline
reservation system or an SCM system of a global company. For these systems, the number of
nines must be greater, such as 99.999 percent, in which case there would be only 5.256 minutes
of downtime expected per year (365  24  60  0.00001).
More and more ISs are now interfaced with other systems, which makes them a chain or
cluster of several interdependent systems. For example, if system A is connected to system B, B
depends on A, and the uptime of the systems are 99 percent and 99.5 percent, respectively; the
probability of uptime for B is the multiplication of these probabilities, or 98.505 percent.
Therefore, you could expect the systems to be down 0.01495 of the time, about 131 hours per
© Cengage Learning 2015
480
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
year. This is a greater downtime than if system B operated independently. The greater the
number of interdependent systems, the greater the expected downtime.
Redundancies, on the other hand, reduce expected downtime. For example, if two airline
reservation systems operate in parallel, each can serve all the transactions, and the probabilities
of their failures are 2 percent and 3 percent, the probability that the reservation service will be
down is 0.06 percent (0.03  0.02), just 0.0006 of the time. This downtime is significantly
smaller than the downtime of a service based on either system individually. This is why so many
companies rely on redundant power sources and systems, such as duplicate databases, mirrored
servers, and duplicate applications, especially when much of their operations are executed
online, and even more so when the operations depend on constant online interaction with
customers.
There might be no point in spending much money to increase the “nines” of uptime for
every system. For example, if the only purpose of an IS is to help access a data warehouse to
glean
business
intelligence
(recall
the
discussions
in
Chapter
7,
“Databases
and
Data
Warehouses,” and Chapter 11, “Business Intelligence and Knowledge Management”), spending
thousands of dollars to increase its number of nines from 99 to 99.999 is probably not a wise
choice. For a data warehouse, if an analysis cannot be performed immediately, it can usually be
performed later without serious ramifications.
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
481
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Summary
●
The purpose of controls and security measures is
to maintain the functionality of ISs, the confidenti-
ality of information, the integrity and availability of
data and computing resources, the uninterruptible
availability of data resources and online opera-
tions, and compliance with security and privacy
laws.
●
Risks to ISs include risks to hardware, risks to data
and applications, and risks to networks.
●
Risks to hardware include natural disasters such as
earthquakes, fires, floods, and power failures, as
well as vandalism. Protective measures run the
gamut from surge protectors to the maintenance of
duplicate systems, which make ISs fault tolerant.
●
Risks to data and applications include theft of infor-
mation, identify theft, data alteration, data destruc-
tion, defacement of websites, computer viruses,
worms, and logic bombs, as well as cyber terrorism
and nonmalicious mishaps such as unauthorized
downloading and installation of software.
●
Risks to online operations include denial of service
and computer hijacking.
●
To minimize disruption, organizations use controls.
Controls include program robustness and con-
straints on data entry, periodic backup of software
and data files, access controls, atomic transactions,
and audit trails.
●
Access controls can be categorized into three
groups: what you know, what you have, and who
you are. Access controls also include information
that must be entered before information resources
can
be
used:
passwords,
security
cards,
and
biometrics.
●
Atomic transactions are an important control that
ensures
information
integrity:
either
all
files
involved in a transaction are updated, or no files
are updated.
●
To protect resources that are linked to the Internet,
organizations use firewalls, which are special hard-
ware and software to control access to servers and
their contents.
●
Encryption schemes scramble messages at the
sending end and descramble them at the receiving
end. Encryption is also used to authenticate the
sender or recipient of a message, verifying that the
user is indeed the party he or she claims to be.
●
To encrypt and decrypt messages the communicat-
ing parties must use a key. The larger the number
of bits in the key, the longer it takes to break the
encryption. In symmetric encryption, both users
use a private, secret key. In asymmetric key encryp-
tion, the parties use a public and a private key.
●
The public-private key method does not require
both parties to have a common secret key before
the communication starts. This system is a useful
feature
that
lets
consumers
and
organizations
transact business confidentially on the web.
●
SSL, TLS, and HTTPS are encryption standards
specially designed for the web. They are embedded
in web browsers.
●
Organizations can purchase public and private keys
along with an associated digital certificate from a cer-
tificate authority. Digital certificates contain the certif-
icate holder’s public key and other information, such
as the issue and expiration date of the certificate.
●
Many organizations have business recovery plans
that are developed and periodically tested by a spe-
cial committee. The plans identify mission-critical
applications
and
prescribe
steps
that
various
employees should take in a disaster.
●
A growing number of companies also use the ser-
vices of organizations that specialize in providing
alternative sites, known as hot sites, to continue
operations in case of a debilitating event such as
a terror attack, natural disaster, or power outage.
●
When considering how much to invest in security
measures, organizations should evaluate the dollar
amounts of the potential damage on one hand, and
the cost of security on the other hand. The more that
is spent on security, the smaller the potential loss.
●
A system that depends on other systems for input
has a greater downtime probability than if it is used
independently of other systems. Redundant sys-
tems significantly reduce downtime probability.
●
Governments are obliged to protect citizens against
crime and terrorism and therefore must be able to
tap electronic communication of suspects. Such prac-
tices often collide with individuals’ right to privacy.
482
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
KIMBALL’S REVISITED
After their walkthrough, Michael and Tyler realize that
although the restaurant is heavily reliant on equipment
and technology, they haven’t made specific plans to
safeguard their data and equipment. Michael has read
many recent reports of retailers who had its databases
hacked
and
customers’
credit
card
information
compromised.
From his
days working
in human
resources, he knows the liability issues associated
with safekeeping organizational information.
They know that the fire department as well as the
health
and
building
inspectors
have
specific
requirements for food, employee, and customer safety.
However, there is no inspector for the technology. They
quickly realized several points that they all missed.
What Is Your Advice?
1. In terms of the point-of-sale and other organiza-
tional data, what recommendations would you
give to safeguard their data? Should they consider
other alternatives if one of their server stations
should malfunction?
2. The POS system requires the server to log in to the
workstation. What advice on password safety
would you suggest? What other elements of POS
security should be pointed out?
3. Based on your knowledge of restaurant opera-
tions, what other security, access, and recovery
issues need to be analyzed? What is your advice
on implementing these issues?
New Perspectives
1. Connecting uninterruptible power supplies to ser-
vers is a common practice. However, if the restau-
rant’s power were to be lost, the equipment in the
kitchen would be inoperable. So since the operation
of the restaurant would be inhibited, why does the
point of sale server need to continue operating?
2. Should the restaurant consider any terms of use
or
privacy
policy
for
their
website?
Social
media? Affinity program? If so, what would you
recommend?
Key Terms
access controls, 462
antivirus software, 458
asymmetric (public key)
encryption, 469
atomic transaction, 464
audit trail, 465
authentication, 468
backup, 461
biometric, 463
blackout, 453
bot, 460
brownout, 453
business recovery plan, 476
certificate authority (CA), 473
CIA triad, 452
ciphertext, 468
controls, 461
cyber terrorism, 456
denial of service (DoS), 459
digital certificate, 473
digital signature, 472
DMZ, 467
downtime, 453
encryption, 468
firewall, 466
hijacking, 460
honeypot, 457
honeytoken, 457
hot site, 478
HTTPS, 471
identity theft, 455
information systems auditor, 465
keylogging, 454
logic bomb, 459
message digest, 472
mission-critical application, 477
plaintext, 468
proxy server, 467
RAID, 462
social engineering, 454
SSO (single sign-on), 475
symmetric (secret or private key)
encryption, 469
Transport Layer Security (TLS),
470
Trojan horses, 458
uninterruptible power supply
(UPS), 453
virus, 458
worm, 458
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
483
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Review Questions
1. What are the goals of security measures for ISs?
Explain.
2. All the data of your company is concentrated in
two databases. All employees use PCs or laptop
computers, and all use a corporate network. You
are to prioritize protection of the following ele-
ments of your company: PCs and laptops, the
databases, the corporate network. Which is the
element about which you should be most con-
cerned, and why?
3. Data alteration and destruction are dreaded by
many IS managers more than any other mishap.
Why? Is the threat of website defacement as severe
as data destruction or alteration? Why or why not?
4. Some companies still make a duplicate copy of
disks or tapes and transport them to a remote site
as a precaution against loss of data on the origi-
nal storage media. What is the preferred method
of keeping secured copies of data nowadays?
Give at least two benefits and one possible
drawback of the more recent approach.
5. Comment on the following statement: If your
computer is connected to an external communi-
cation line, anyone with a similar link can poten-
tially access your systems.
6. What is a honeytoken and how is it used by
companies?
7. What is a honeypot and how is it used by
businesses?
8. What is the difference between a virus and a
worm? Which is potentially more dangerous and
why?
9. Why is encryption that uses the public-key
method so important in electronic commerce?
10. Assume that you are charged with developing an
application to record basketball performance
statistics. What limits would you include to ensure
that the information entered is reasonable?
11. What is an audit trail? What audit trail information
would you have for a shipping record?
12. This chapter gives an example of an atomic
transaction. Give another example from any
business area.
13. What is the difference between authentication
and confidentiality?
14. What are biometric access controls? How are they
better than passwords?
15. What is a firewall, and how does it work?
16. What is a DoS? How is it executed, and what is
the purpose of zombies in a DoS? What can
organizations do to prevent a DoS attack?
17. What is the purpose of business recovery plans?
18. A growing number of companies have imple-
mented business recovery plans, but many still
have not developed such plans. What may be the
reasons for that?
Discussion Questions
19. Companies that process credit-card transactions
for merchants have their computers vaulted
behind concrete walls, iron bars, and heavy steel
doors. Employees must enter a code into a key-
pad to enter the vaults. Yet, every so often infor-
mation on millions of credit-card accounts is
stolen without any physical break-in. How so?
20. A military officer in Colorado orders an item
whose part number is 7954. The clerk at the
supply center hundreds of miles away receives
the order through his computer and ships the
item: a ship’s anchor, not realizing that Colorado
is located hundreds of miles from any ocean.
Apparently, the officer wanted to order item
number 7945, a fuel tank for a fighter aircraft,
but he erred when entering the item’s number.
What controls would you implement both at the
entry system and at the systems employed at
the supply center to prevent such mistakes?
21. The average loss in a bank robbery is several
thousand dollars, and the culprit has an 85 per-
cent chance of being caught. The average dam-
age in a “usual” white-collar fraud is several tens
of thousands of dollars. The average amount
stolen in computer fraud against organizations is
several hundreds of thousands of dollars, and it is
extremely hard to find the culprit. Why is the
amount involved in computer fraud so high, and
why is it difficult to find the culprits?
22. To prevent unauthorized people from copying
data from a database, some companies forbid
484
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
their employees to come to work with USB flash
memory devices and they subject the employees
to body searches. Is this an effective measure?
Why or why not?
23. The majority of criminals who commit computer
fraud are insiders, that is, employees. What mea-
sures would you take to minimize insider fraud
through ISs?
24. When accessing an information system, would
you prefer that your identity be verified with a
biometric (such as your palm or fingerprint, or
your retinal scan), or with a password? Why?
25. Explain in an intuitive way why the downtime
probability of a system that depends on another
system is greater than if it were operating
independently.
26. Employees often complain about the hurdles they
have to pass whenever they need to access data
and the slow response of ISs because of firewalls
and encryption measures. As a CIO, how would
you explain the need for such measures to
employees? Would you give them any say in the
decision of how to balance convenience and pro-
tection of data and applications?
27. Organizations often use firewalls to block
employee access to certain websites. Do you
agree with this practice, or do you think it violates
employee privacy?
28. Special software might keep track of webpages
that employees download to their PCs. Do you
think this practice violates employee privacy?
29. When financial institutions discover that their ISs
(especially databases) have been broken into,
they often do not report the event to law
enforcement officers. Even if they know who the
hacker is, they do what they can to avoid public-
ity. Why? Should they be forced to report such
events?
30. When hackers are caught, they often argue that
they actually did a service to the organization
whose system they accessed without permission;
now, they say, the organization knows its system
has a weak point, and it can take the proper steps
to improve security. Do you agree with this claim?
Why or why not?
31. A CIO tells you, “We regularly review all of the
potential vulnerabilities of our information sys-
tems and networks. We implement hardware,
software, and procedures against any potential
event, no matter the cost.” What do you say to
this executive?
32. Is the potential for identity theft growing? Explain.
(Note: The question is not about actual identity
theft for any period of time; it is about the poten-
tial of identity theft.)
33. Encryption helps individuals and organizations to
maintain privacy and confidentiality, thereby
helping protect civil liberties. However, encryp-
tion also helps terrorists and criminals hide their
intentions. Some governments have laws that
forbid nongovernment organizations to use
strong encryption software. The idea is to allow
people to encrypt their communication, but not
strongly enough to prevent the government from
decrypting the communication in surveillance of
suspected criminals and terrorists. Do you favor
such laws, or do you advocate that everybody
have access to the strongest encryption software
available? Explain.
Applying Concepts
34. Search the web for the full text of HIPAA. Assume
you are the CIO of a health insurance company. List
and explain five controls that you must implement
in your organization’s ISs as a result of this law.
35. Research the impact of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
on ISs. Write a two-page report explaining the
major controls corporations must incorporate in
their ISs to satisfy the Act.
36. Log on to a secure website. Figure out which icon
you have to click to receive information on the
security measures used in the session. Send your
professor an email message detailing the site’s
URL and all the information you obtained: the
length of the key that is used for encryption, the
type of digital certificate used, the issuer of the
digital certificate, the date it was issued and its
expiration date, and so forth. Explain each item.
37. Some companies provide free software versions
of their firewalls. Research three such firewall
applications and compare their characteristics:
options to block incoming communication,
options to block outgoing communication, ease
of learning, ease of use, etc. Make a recommen-
dation for individuals based on your comparison.
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
485
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
Hands-On Activities
38. Use Excel or another spreadsheet application to
show your work when solving the following
problem: A company uses three information sys-
tems that are linked sequentially: System A feeds
System B, and System B feeds System C. Con-
sider the following average uptimes: System A,
98 percent; System B, 97 percent; System C, 95
percent. What is the average expected downtime
(as a percentage) of System C?
39. Use Excel or another spreadsheet application to
show your work when solving the following
problem: To reduce chances of failure, a company
has connected all of its vital information systems
to electric power from two different utility firms.
The probability of failure of electric power from
one utility firm is 2 percent. The probability of
failure of electric power from the other utility firm
is 1.5 percent. What is the probability that these
information systems will receive no electric
power at all?
40. A CIO states, “Our online transaction system has
availability of five nines. However, we have a
SaaS (software as a service) contract for
using a human resources information system.
The HR system has availability of only three
nines.”
a. Calculate the minutes of downtime per week
for each of these systems.
b. Explain why the company must have such a
high number of nines for one system but can
settle for a significantly lower number of nines
for the other system.
Team Activities
41. Team up with another student. Research the web
for recovery planning expenditures in your coun-
try or worldwide over the past five years. Prepare
a table showing the expenditure amounts for
each year. Add an analysis that explains the rea-
sons for changes in the expenditures from one
year to another.
42. Your team should evaluate the business recovery
plan of your school. If there is none, write a plan
for the school. If there is one in place, evaluate
its weaknesses and make suggestions for
improvement. Prepare a 10-minute, software-
based presentation of your findings and
suggestions.
486
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
From Ideas to Application: Real Cases
Biometrics Gives Healthcare a Hand
Correct identification (ID) of a patient, as elementary a
task as it sounds, is the leading cause of medical errors
as determined by the
Joint
Commission on the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO).
Misidentifying
patients
can
lead
to
an
array
of
unwanted events including medical identity theft and
insurance fraud, where either patients share insurance
cards or providers submit false claims. Sometimes
misidentification can be due to simple clerical errors,
technological
failures,
or
even
dishonest
patients
misrepresenting their identity. Whatever the cause, a
positive patient identification (PPID) system is now the
standard in healthcare facilities.
Multiple
options
are
available
to
solve
the
healthcare industry’s patient misidentification troubles.
At the point of registration, patients need two key
documents: a valid form of identification such as a
driver’s
license
and
their
insurance
card.
The
information from these documents is crucial to the
patient receiving the proper medical treatments and for
insurance billing information. However, an issue arises
when
clerks
must
manually
copy
down
all
the
information into the patient’s electronic record, a time-
consuming task that can result in human errors. The
best
solution
for
streamlining
the
digitalization
of
patient
data
is
a
dedicated,
high-resolution
card
scanner. The best scanners take pictures of the cards
and
then
upload
them
to
the
patient’s
electronic
medical record (EMR). The technology is being used at
IntraHealth Group where a scanner has turned recording
patient data into a “scan-and-click operation.”
High-resolution
card
scanners
reduce
patient
registration times and allow staff members to focus
more
on
the
individual
health
concerns
of
the
patient. The out-of-the-box systems require virtually
no maintenance, set-up, or training. Additionally, the
scanner
prevents
unsecured
copies
of
important
documents from having to be made. Dedicated, high-
resolution scanners are one way to decrease patient
misidentification and various associated forms of
healthcare fraud.
The most advanced solutions implemented to
combat patient misidentification are systems that
rely on biometrics. At BayCare Health Systems in
Tampa, Florida, palm-vein recognition technology is
used to streamline and secure patient processing.
Palm-vein biometrics work by shining a near-infrared
light on the patient’s hand which penetrates the outer
layer of skin but reflects off deoxygenated blood.
Simply put, the patient’s veins are highlighted to
present a pattern unique to that individual. Palm-vein
technology has been proven to be just as accurate if
not more accurate than iris-scanning technology. In
comparative testing conducted by the International
Biometrics
Group
(IBG),
palm-vein
technology
exhibited significantly low rates of both false positive
and false negative readings. By ensuring a near-zero
enrollment
failure,
palm-vein
technology
is
compatible with essentially all patients.
This
technology
is
integrated
with
EMR
and
registration systems in order to address the patient
identification issues. BayCare updated their electronic
medical records system to make it compatible with the
palm-vein biometric technology. When a palm-vein
reading is taken, it is sent directly to a patient’s EMR.
The combined system is referred to as Patient Secure
Identity (PSI) and offers several business and health-
related benefits. First and foremost is patient safety.
With the PSI system, duplicate medical records are
eliminated and overlays prevented, thus ensuring
doctors that the medical records in their hands are
comprehensive, accurate, and not those of anyone
else. On the front end, biometric readings forgo the
need to transmit sensitive information at registration
such as a Social Security number.
BayCare’s PSI system was launched only 60 days
after the project initiation and was fully implemented
within six months at all BayCare hospitals, outpatient
centers, and outreach lab locations. The PSI system is
linked to all BayCare locations. Once a patient is in the
system, that patient can be correctly identified at any
one of BayCare’s ten healthcare locations whether it is
a hospital, clinic, or imaging center, just by scanning
their hand. BayCare’s PSI system with biometric palm-
vein identification has successfully fulfilled BayCare
Health
System’s
concern
about
ensuring
patient
safety and preventing identity theft and fraud.
PPID is a difficult yet crucial task for healthcare
facilities. In order for healthcare providers to best
execute their responsibilities, they need to address the
patient’s medical issues in a timely fashion, know who
they are treating, and know the patient’s medical
history. Dedicated, high-resolution card scanners and
biometrics linked to patient health records address
these concerns, as well as decrease the ability for fraud
to be committed. PPID systems are now a much-needed
staple to a reputable healthcare facility’s IT portfolio.
Sources: Biometric technology verifies patients’ identity.
(2010).
Health
Management
Technology,
31(3),
20-21;
Cunningham, B. (2012). Positive patient identification begins
at step one. Health Management Technology, 33(8), 10-11.
Thinking About the Case
1. Although biometrics at BayCare Health Systems
helps reduce risk by properly identifying patients
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
487
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART5
at registration, what aspect of their system opens
them up to a different area of risk?
2. Why would a “non-patient” want to enroll in the
BayCare system?
3. Does BayCare’s PSI system hold too much infor-
mation? Does linking patient data to BayCare’s 10
locations infringe on privacy?
4. What risk does BayCare run by collecting such a
large amount of private patient information and
transmitting it between their 10 locations?
A Tale of Two Attacks
Do you leave your office or business door open and
unlocked? Or your home? Unless you live in a rural or
country area, probably not. How many times have you
closed a door and checked to see if it is locked and
securely closed? Probably too many times to count.
Have you left your personal records on the lawn or
your deck? Again, you probably have never done
that. Ultimately, securing your personal property and
information is a constant and continuing process; one
that requires vigilance and gaining knowledge of new
approaches to remain secure.
LinkedIn found its organization embroiled in a
customer privacy protection controversy. The issue
involved password leaks that could have affected their
organization’s accounts. After several hours of blogging
and tweeting postings, the company admitted the next
day that several million LinkedIn passwords had been
posted on a hacker forum. LinkedIn communicated that
they had “enhanced our security measures through an
additional layer of technical protection known as
‘salting’
to better secure
your information.”
This
interesting statement appears to suggest that some
extraordinary tactics were implemented that “sealed”
a gap that was not detected prior to the security
compromise. The weakness had been found and an
appropriate
remedy
was
implemented.
However,
should this have happened? The organization was the
focus of significant attention and scrutiny following the
situation. Ultimately, the question centered on why the
passwords were not subjected to technical processes
(e.g. encryption) to eliminate the security weakness.
Inevitably, a lawsuit was filed in June 2012 seeking $5
million in compensation, stating that LinkedIn did not
adequately
implement
the
appropriate
technical
practices and adhere to its privacy policy.
In the same week that LinkedIn was dealing with its
situation, another well-known company was dealing
with its own technology controversy. eHarmony, an
online
dating
service,
implemented
new
security
methodologies when 1.5 million customer passwords
were compromised. eHarmony posted a blog which
conveyed
that
“After
investigating
reports
of
compromised passwords, we have found that a small
fraction of our user base has been affected. We are
continuing to investigate but would like to provide the
following
actions
we
are
taking
to
protect
our
members.” The blog entry explained that eHarmony
took action to resolve the issue and provided advice on
how to create a strong password.
The issues of data breaches and security gaps
continue
to
make
headlines.
The
Federal
Trade
Commission (FTC) has reported that identity theft cost
Americans $1.52 million in 2011 and appears on the
rise. According to a 2012 report by The Ponemon
Institute, the average annual cost of cybercrime is $8.9
million, ranging from $1.4 million to $46 million. The
impact
of
the
various
cybercrime
approaches,
including denial of service, viruses and malicious code,
continue to cause disruption to business operations and
pirating of organizational and personal data. A recent
report
found
that
43
percent
of
the
companies
surveyed had not implemented a data breach response
plan prior to experiencing a violation. The Internet as
well as the increasing popularity of connected devices
(smartphones,
tablets,
etc.)
continues
to
make
computer crimes more profitable and widespread.
The
issues
of
stolen
data
and
cybercrimes
have increased importance when considering
an
organization’s
mission-critical
applications.
The
importance of these network-enabled devices to gain
access to applications is woven into the daily activities
of
both
businesses
and
individuals.
Various
organizational applications cannot be compromised
by downtime due to the loss of revenue. It is
important
that
these
applications
serve
both
employees
needing
to
gain
information
from
a
corporate system as well as customers completing
daily transactions. For example, it is important for an
organization with significant online sales to maintain
100 percent uptime for its website.
There is no magic technology wand that will
resolve all of these issues and eliminate cybercrimes
and technology attacks. Business, government, and
individuals
need
to
continue
the
battle
against
criminals
and
groups
whose
intention
is
to
compromise the security and well-being of individuals
and businesses. Legislators and government agencies
need to continue to be vigilant by providing laws and
guidance on how to counteract these challenges.
Sources: Anonymous. (2011). Ponemon Institute Survey:
Data Breaches Can Cause Lasting and Costly Damage to
the Reputation of Affected Organizations. Entertainment
Close-Up; Anonymous. (2012). 2012 Cost of Cyber Crime
Study: United States. Traverse City, MI; Liyakasa, K. (2012).
Cracking the Code on Cyber Crimes. Customer Relationship
Management, 16, 36-40; McTigue, J. (2012). Application
Early
Warning
System.
InformationWeek
(1347),
6-11;
Teroka, B. (2012). Update on Compromised Passwords.
Retrieved from http://www.eharmony.com/blog/2012/06/06/
update-on-compromised-passwords/
488
Planning, Acquisition, and Controls
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PART
5
Thinking About the Case
1. With the risk of litigation, loss of confidence and
embarrassment, how do business organizations
balance their public comments and transparency
issues when attacks compromise their customers’
privacy and information as well as their business
operations?
2. Mary Wells Lawrence once said, “In this business,
you can never wash the dinner dishes and say
they are done. You have to keep doing them
constantly.” If you were a business executive or
information technology manager, discuss how
this statement relates to information technology
risks, security, and disaster recovery.
3. Discuss any security situations that you have
personally encountered and how they were han-
dled by the business organization. Do you feel
comfortable with how businesses are safekeeping
your data and transaction activities?
References
Adams, J. (2012). How Superstorm Sandy Brought
Disaster Recovery Home for Capital One, American
Banker.
Anonymous. (2011). ID theft cases fall, but victims’
costs rise. Retrieved April 23, 2013.
Anonymous. (2012a). Business Users of Macs Can Now
Make Remote Deposits to Wells Fargo with Panini
Scanners, Business Wire.
Anonymous. (2012b). Monthly Malware Statistics:
April 2012. Retrieved April 24, 2013.
Anonymous. (2012c). Neustar Releases Survey Results
on DDoS Attacks. (2012). Wireless News.
Anonymous. (2012d). The Revenue Drain of Down-
time. Retrieved April 23, 2013, from http://www.
netstandard.com/the-revenue-drain-of-downtime/
Anonymous. (2013a). Approved List of Digital Signa-
ture Certification Authorities. Retrieved April 22,
2013, from http://www.sos.ca.gov/digsig/
Anonymous. (2013b). New Data Suggests Cyber
Attacks ‘More Dangerous’ Than International
Terrorism. Travel & Leisure Close-Up.
Anonymous. (2013c). SurePassID Launches Secure
Single Sign-On (Secure SSO) for Mobile at RSA
Conference 2013, PR Newswire.
Bensinger, G. (2012). Corporate News: Netflix Blames
Amazon For Overnight Blackout, Wall Street
Journal, p. B.3.
Browdie, B. (2012). Citigroup Weathers Website
Slowdown, American Banker.
Bryan-Low, C. (2011, Sep 02). Europe News: U.K.
Charges Two More In Probe of Web Attacks, Wall
Street Journal, pp. 4-4.
Chia, Terry. (2012, Aug 20). Confidentiality, Integrity,
Availability: The three components of the CIA
Triad. Retrieved August 5, 2013, from http://
security.blogoverflow.com/2012/08/
confidentiality-integrity-availability-the-
three-components-of-the-cia-triad
Christman, A. (2013). Identity theft costs victims time,
money, McClatchy - Tribune Business News.
Collins, J. C. (2012). Technology Q&A. Journal of
Accountancy, 214(2), 76-79.
Darwell, B. (2012). Bot problem? Facebook estimates
8.7% of users are duplicate, miscategorized or
spam accounts. Retrieved April 24, 2013, from
http://www.insidefacebook.com/2012/08/01/bot-
problem-facebook-estimates-8-7-of-users-are-
duplicate-miscategorized-or-spam-accounts/
Dewdney, A. K. (1989). Computer Recreations: Of
Worms, Viruses and Core War. Scientific American.
Finkle, J. (2012). Amazon.com cloudbursts at
Christmas; Service outage pulls Netflix down
across Americas, National Post.
Harris, C. (2011). IT Downtime Costs $26.5 Billion In Lost
Revenue. Retrieved April 24, 2013, from http://www
.informationweek.com/storage/disaster-recovery/it-
downtime-costs-265-billion-in-lost-re/229625441
Linthicum, D. (2013). Calculating the true cost of
cloud outages. Retrieved April 24, 2013, from
http://www.infoworld.com/d/cloud-computing/
calculating-the-true-cost-of-cloud-outages-212253
Nakashima, E., & Douglas, D. (2013). More companies
admit to being hit by cyberattacks, The Washington
Post, p. A.8.
Rapport, M. (2003). Many U.S. firms unprepared for
business/IT outages, think firm finds. Credit Union
Times, 14(13), 22.
Reckard, E. S. (2013). Online, mobile outage at BofA,
Los Angeles Times, p. B.5.
Sarno, D. (2011, Mar 12). Twitter settles with FTC; The site
agrees to tighten its security practices after hackers
accessed users’ data, Los Angeles Times, p. B.3.
Sherr, I. (2011, May 03). Hackers Breach Second Sony
Service, Wall Street Journal, p. B.1.
Simpkins, J. (2011). Cyber Warfare Growing on a
Global Scale – And We Have the Best Way to
Profit. Money Morning. http://moneymorning.com/
tag/cyber-terrorism-statistics/
Turner, K. (2012). Health Insurance Fraud Affects
Everyone, Standard - Speaker.
Zetter, K. (2011). TSA Worker Gets 2 Years for Planting
Logic Bomb in Screening System. Retrieved April
24, 2013, from http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/
2011/01/tsa-worker-malware/
CHAPTER 14
Risks, Security, and Disaster Recovery
489
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

glossary
© Wavebreak Media/Thinkstock
access controls––Hardware and software measures, such as
user IDs and passwords, used to control access to infor-
mation systems.
access point (AP)––An arrangement consisting of a device
connected to the Internet on one end and to a router on
the other end. All wireless devices link to the Internet
through the router.
affiliate program––An arrangement by which a website
promotes sales for another website through a link to the
seller’s site, and for which the affiliate is compensated.
There are various schemes of compensation to affiliates.
agile methods––Software development methods that
emphasize constant communication with clients (end
users) and fast development of code, as well as modifica-
tions as soon as they are needed.
algorithm––A sequence of steps one takes to solve a
problem. Often, these steps are expressed as mathematical
formulas.
alliance––When organizations combine services to make
them more attractive (and usually less expensive) than
purchasing services separately. For example, in the travel
industry, airlines collaborate with hotel chains and
car-rental firms to offer travel and lodging packages.
antivirus software––Software designed to detect and
intercept computer viruses.
applet––A small software application, usually written in
Java or another programming language for the web.
application––A computer program that addresses a general
or specific business or scientific need. General applica-
tions include electronic spreadsheets and word processors.
Specific applications are written especially for a business
unit to accommodate special activities.
application program interface (API)––Code in appli-
cations that helps link them to other applications. Using
operating system APIs enables applications to utilize
operating system features.
application service provider (ASP)––A firm that rents
the use of software applications through an Internet link.
The arrangement is known as Software as a Service (SaaS).
application software––Software developed to meet gen-
eral or specific business needs.
application-specific software––A collective term for all
computer programs that are designed specifically to
address certain business problems, such as a program
written to deal with a company’s market research effort.
application systems support––Provision for software
maintenance and user help on an information system.
arithmetic logic unit (ALU)––The electronic circuitry in
the central processing unit of a computer responsible for
arithmetic and logic operations.
artificial intelligence (AI)––The study and creation of
computer programs that mimic human behavior. This
discipline combines the interests of computer science,
cognitive science, linguistics, and management informa-
tion systems. The main subfields of AI are robotics, artifi-
cial vision, natural language processors, and expert
systems.
assembly language––Second-generation programming
languages that assemble several bytes into groups of
characters that are human-readable to expedite program-
ming tasks.
asymmetric (public key) encryption––Encryption
technology in which a message is encrypted with one key
and decrypted with another.
atomic transaction––A transaction whose entry is not
complete until all entries into the appropriate files have
been successfully completed. It is an important data entry
control. (Atom=Indivisible)
audit trail––Names, dates, and other references in com-
puter files that can help an auditor track down the person
who used an IS for a transaction, legal or illegal.
authentication––The process of ensuring that the person
who sends a message to or receives a message from
another party is indeed that person.
autocategorization––Automatic sorting and indexing of
information that is executed by specialized knowledge
management software.
automatic taxonomy––A method in knowledge
management to organize text and other nonstructured
information in classes or categories.
B2B––Business-to-business, a term that refers to transac-
tions between businesses, often through an Internet link.
B2C––Business-to-consumer, a term that refers to transac-
tions between a business and its customers, often through
an Internet link.
B2G––Business-to-government, a term that refers to
transactions between a business and state or federal
governments, often through an Internet link.
backbone––The network of copper lines, optical fibers, and
radio satellites that supports the Internet.
490
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

backup––Periodic duplication of data in order to guard
against loss.
backward compatibility––Compatibility of a device
with another device that supports only an older standard.
For example, USB 2.0 is backward-compatible with com-
puters that support only USB 1.1 devices.
bandwidth––The capacity of the communications chan-
nel, practically its speed; the number of signal streams the
channel can support, usually measured as the number of
bits per second. A greater bandwidth also supports a
greater bit rate, i.e., transmission speed.
banner––Advertisement that appears spread across the top
or bottom of a webpage.
benchmarking––The measurement of time intervals and
other important characteristics of hardware and software,
usually when testing them before a decision to purchase
or reject.
beta site––An organization that agrees to use a new appli-
cation for a specific period and report errors and unsatis-
factory features to the developer in return for free use and
support.
beta version––A prerelease version of software to be tested
by companies (called beta sites) that agree to use the
application with actual data for several months.
Big Data––High volumes of data compiled from traditional
business activities as well as newer nontraditional sources.
bill of materials (BOM)––A list showing an explosion of
the materials that go into the production of an item. Used
in planning the purchase of raw materials.
biometric––A unique, measurable characteristic or trait of
a human being used for automatically authenticating a
person’s identity. Biometric technologies include digitized
fingerprints, retinal pictures, and voice. Used with special
hardware to uniquely identify a person who tries to access
a facility or an IS, instead of a password.
bit––Binary digit; either a zero or a one. The smallest unit of
information used in computing.
bits per second (bps)––The measurement of the capacity
(or transmission rate) of a communications channel.
blackout/brownout––A period of power loss (blackout)
or a significant fall in power (brownout). Power loss or
irregularity may cause computers to stop working, or even
damage them. Computers can be protected against black-
outs and brownouts by using proper equipment, such as
UPS (uninterruptible power supply) systems.
bleeding edge––The situation in which a business fails
because it tries to be on the technological leading edge.
blog––A contraction of web log. A website where partici-
pants post their opinions on a topic or set of related
topics; these postings are listed in chronological order.
Bluetooth––A personal wireless network protocol. It enables
wireless communication between input devices and com-
puters and among other devices within 10 meters.
bot––A small program installed by a hacker on a computer
without the user’s knowledge, designed to “hijack” the
computer so the hacker can take advantage of the
computer’s resources and/or send spam to large numbers
of people.
brainstorming––The process of a group collaboratively
generating new ideas and creative solutions to problems.
brick-and-mortar––A popular term for companies that
use physical structure for doing business directly with
other businesses and consumers, such as stores. Often
used to contrast with businesses that sell only online
(pure play).
bridge––A device connecting two communications
networks that use similar hardware.
broadband––High-speed digital communication, some-
times defined as at least 200 Kbps. T1, Cable modem, and
DSL provide broadband.
Broadband over Power Lines (BPL)––A broadband
service provided over electric power lines.
brownout––See blackout/brownout.
bus––The set of wires or soldered conductors in the com-
puter through which the different components (such as
the CPU and RAM) communicate. It also refers to a data
communications topology whereby communicating
devices are connected to a single, open-ended medium.
business analytics––Software that analyzes business data
to help make business decisions, often at the strategic
level. An alternative name for business intelligence.
business intelligence (BI)––Information gleaned from
large amounts of data, usually a data warehouse or online
databases; a BI system discovers not-yet-known patterns,
trends, and other useful information that can help
improve the organization’s performance.
business recovery plan––Organizational plan that pre-
pares for disruption in information systems, detailing
what should be done and by whom, if critical information
systems fail or become untrustworthy; also called business
recovery plan and disaster recovery plan. Also known as
business continuity plan.
byte––A standard group of eight bits.
C2C––Consumer-to-consumer business. The term usually
refers to web-based transactions between two consumers
via the servers of an organization, such as auctions and
sales. eBay is an example of a C2C site.
case-based reasoning––A methodology of solving a new
problem based on the solutions of similar problems, used
in expert systems.
cash management system (CMS)––Information system
that helps reduce the interest and fees that organizations
have to pay when borrowing money and increases the
yield that organizations can receive on unused funds.
central processing unit (CPU)––The circuitry of a com-
puter microprocessor that fetches instructions and data
from the primary memory and executes the instructions.
The CPU is the most important electronic unit of the
computer.
certificate authority (CA)––An organization that issues
digital certificates, which authenticate the holder in
electronic business transactions.
Glossary
491
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

change management––A structured, disciplined
approach that facilitates the adoption of new or modified
systems by various groups and individuals within an
organization.
character––The smallest piece of data in the data
hierarchy.
chief information officer (CIO)––The highest-ranking
IS officer in the organization, usually a vice president,
who oversees the planning, development, and imple-
mentation of IS and serves as leader to all IS professionals
in the organization.
chief security officer (CSO)––Also called chief informa-
tion security officer (CISO), the highest-ranking officer in
charge of planning and implementing information secu-
rity measures in the organization, such as access codes
and backup procedures.
chief technology officer (CTO)––A high-level corporate
officer who is in charge of all information technology
needs of the organization. Sometimes the CTO reports to
the chief information officer, but in some companies this
person practically serves as the CIO.
CIA triad––A concept which asserts that three basic
elements are necessary for secure information systems:
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA).
ciphertext––A coded message designed to authenticate
users and maintain secrecy.
clickstream software––Software that is a standard feature
of web server software and is used to collect and analyze
user activities on a website.
clickstream tracking––The use of software to record the
activities of a person at websites. Whenever the person
clicks a link, the activity is added to the record.
clock rate––The rate of repetitive machine cycles that a
computer can perform; also called frequency. Measured in
GHz.
closed system––A system that stands alone, with no
connection to another system.
cloud computing––A model of computing in which local
devices access applications and storage on remote servers,
usually over the Internet.
cloud storage––The availability of network-accessible
storage from an off-site computer or storage device.
clustering––A model of computing in which a “cluster” of
smaller computers are linked via networks to use the
computing power of multiple smaller computers, rather
than one large supercomputer.
coaxial cable––A transmission medium consisting of thick
copper wire insulated and shielded by a special sheath of
meshed wires to prevent electromagnetic interference.
Supports high-speed telecommunication.
co-location––The placement and maintenance of a web
server with servers of other subscribers of the service
provider. The servers are co-located in the same facility.
compact disc (CD)––Collective term for several types of
lower-capacity storage optical discs, used for data storage
and music or audio. Compare to digital video disc (DVD).
competitive advantage––A position in which one
dominates a market; also called strategic advantage.
compiler––A program whose purpose is to translate code
written in a high-level programming language into the
equivalent code in machine language for execution by the
computer.
composite key––In a data file, a combination of two fields
that can serve as a unique key to locate specific records.
computer-aided design (CAD)––Special software used by
engineers and designers that facilitates engineering and
design work.
computer-aided manufacturing (CAM)––Automation
of manufacturing activities by use of computers. Often,
the information for the activity comes directly from
connected computers that were used for engineering the
parts or products to be manufactured.
content management system––Software that allows
users to publish, edit, and update website content.
control unit––The circuitry in the CPU that fetches
instructions and data from the primary memory, decodes
the instructions, passes them to the ALU for execution,
and stores the results in the primary memory.
controls––Constraints applied to a system to ensure proper
use and security standards.
conversion––The process of abandoning an old informa-
tion system and implementing a new one.
cookie––A small file that a website places on a visitor’s hard
disk so that the website can remember something about
the visitor later, such as an ID number or username.
cost/benefit analysis––An evaluation of the costs
incurred by an information system and the benefits
gained by the system.
CPU clock––Circuitry in a computer’s central processing unit
(CPU) that synchronizes all tasks performed by the CPU.
create a new and unique product or service––A stra-
tegic move that can give an organization a competitive
advantage.
create a standard––A strategic move that can give an
organization a competitive advantage.
critical mass––In terms of strategic advantage, a body of
clients that is large enough to attract many other clients.
crowdsourcing––A process for outsourcing a variety of
tasks or problems to a distributed group of people, both
online or offline.
CRT (cathode-ray tube)––A display (for a computer or
television set) that uses an electronic gun to draw and
paint on the screen by bombarding pixels on the internal
side of the screen.
custom-designed (tailored) software––Software
designed to meet the specific needs of a particular orga-
nization or department; also called tailored software.
customer relationship management (CRM) system––
A set of applications designed to gather and analyze
information about customers.
cut-over conversion (flash cut conversion)––A swift
switch from an old information system to the new.
492
Glossary
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cyber terrorism––Terrorist attacks that target information
systems or other online or technology infrastructure.
dashboard––A graphic presentation of organizational per-
formance. Dashboards display in an easy-to-grasp visual
manner metrics, trends, and other helpful information
that is the result of processing of business intelligence
applications.
data––Facts about people, other subjects, and events. May
be manipulated and processed to produce information.
data dictionary––The part of the database that contains
information about the different sets of records and fields,
such as their source and who may change them.
data flow diagram (DFD)––A graphical method to com-
municate the data flow in a business unit. Usually serves
as a blueprint for a new information system in the devel-
opment process. The DFD uses four symbols for entity,
process, data store, and data flow.
data integrity––Accuracy, timeliness, and relevance of
data in a context.
data management module––In a decision support sys-
tem, a database or data warehouse that allows a decision
maker to conduct the intelligence phase of decision making.
data mart––A collection of archival data that is part of a
data warehouse, usually focusing on one aspect of the
organization such as sales of a family of products or daily
revenues in a geographic region.
data mining––Using a special application that scours large
databases for relationships among business events, such as
items typically purchased together on a certain day of the
week, or machinery failures that occur along with a spe-
cific use mode of the machine. Instead of the user query-
ing the databases, the application dynamically looks for
such relationships.
data modeling––The process of charting existing or
planned data stores and flows of an organization or one of
its units. It includes charting of entity relationship
diagrams.
data processing––The operation of manipulating data to
produce information.
data redundancy––The existence of the same data in
more than one place in a computer system. Although
some data redundancy is unavoidable, efforts should be
made to minimize it.
data warehouse––A huge collection of historical data that
can be processed to support management decision making.
data warehousing––Techniques to store very large
amounts of historical data in databases, especially for
business intelligence.
data word––The number of bits that a CPU retrieves from
memory for processing in one machine cycle. When all
other conditions are equal, a machine with a larger data
word is faster.
database––A collection of shared, interrelated records,
usually in more than one file. An approach to data man-
agement that facilitates data entry, update, and
manipulation.
database administrator (DBA)––The individual in
charge of building and maintaining organizational
databases.
database approach––An approach to maintaining data
that contains a mechanism for tagging, retrieving, and
manipulating data.
database management system (DBMS)––A computer
program that allows the user to construct a database,
populate it with data, and manipulate the data.
debugging––The process of finding and correcting errors
in software.
decision support system (DSS)––Information system
that aids managers in making decisions based on built-in
models. DSSs comprise three modules: data management,
model management, and dialog management. DSSs may
be an integral part of a larger application, such as an
ERP system.
dedicated hosting––An arrangement in which a web
hosting organization devotes an entire server to only the
website of a single client organization, as opposed to
having multiple clients’ sites share one server.
denial of service (DoS)––The inability of legitimate visi-
tors to log on to a website when too many malicious
requests are launched by an attacker. Most DoS attacks are
distributed (DDoS).
dialog module––The part of a decision-support system, or
any other system, that allows the user to interact with the
application. Also called interface.
dial-up connection––A connection to the Internet
through a regular telephone and modem. Dial-up con-
nections are slow, as opposed to broadband connections.
differentiation––A strategic initiative that can give an
organization a competitive advantage by persuading
consumers that its product or service is better than its
competitors’.
digital certificate––Computer file that serves as the
equivalent of an ID card.
digital signature––An encrypted digest of the text that is
sent along with a message that authenticates the identity
of the sender and guarantees that no one has altered the
sent document.
digital subscriber line (DSL)––Technology that relieves
individual subscribers of the need for the conversion of
digital signals into analog signals between the telephone
exchange and the subscriber jack. DSL lines are linked to
the Internet on a permanent basis and support bit rates
significantly greater than a normal telephone line between
the subscriber’s jack and the telephone exchange.
digital systems––Systems that communicate and process
information in a form that follows the binary system of
counting and binary methods of representing informa-
tion, including sound and images.
digital video disc (DVD)––A collective term for several
types of high-capacity storage optical discs, used for
data storage and motion pictures. Also called digital
versatile disc.
Glossary
493
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

dimensional database––A database of tables, each of
which contains aggregations and other manipulated
information gleaned from the data to speed up the pre-
sentation by online processing applications. Also called
multidimensional database.
direct access––The manner in which a record is retrieved
from a storage device, without the need to seek it
sequentially. The record’s address is calculated from the
value in its logical key field.
direct-attached storage (DAS)––Any data storage device
that is directly connected to a computer as opposed to
being connected via a communications network. When a
disk is contained in the computer box or externally but
directly linked to it, it is considered DAS.
disaster recovery plan––See business recovery plan.
DMZ––Demilitarized zone, a network of computers and
other devices connected to the Internet where visitors are
not allowed direct access to other resources connected to
the DMZ. DMZs are used to serve visitors while minimiz-
ing risk of unauthorized access.
DNS (Domain Name System)––Hardware and software
making up a server whose purpose is to resolve domain
names (converting them back to IP numbers) and routing
messages on the Internet.
domain name––The name assigned to an Internet server
or to a part of a server that hosts a website.
dot-matrix printer––An older type of printer on which
the printhead consists of a matrix of little pins; thus, each
printed character is made up of tiny dots.
downstream––The movement of data bits from another
computer to your computer via the Internet. Downstream
speed of Internet connection services is usually greater
than the upstream speed.
downtime––The unplanned period of time during which a
system does not function.
drilling down––The process of finding the most relevant
information for executive decision making within a data-
base or data warehouse by moving from more general
information to more specific details, such as from perfor-
mance of a division to performance of a department
within the division.
driver––The software that enables an operating system to
control a device, such as an optical disc drive or joystick.
dynamic IP address––The IP address assigned to a com-
puter that is connected to the Internet intermittently for
the duration of the computer’s connection.
dynamic webpage––A webpage whose contents change
while the visitor watches it.
e-commerce––Business activity that is electronically exe-
cuted between parties, such as between two businesses or
between a business and a consumer.
economic order quantity (EOQ)––The optimal (cost-
minimizing) quantity of a specific raw material that
allows a business to minimize overstocking and save cost
without risking understocking and missing production
deadlines.
effectiveness––The measure of how well a job is
performed.
efficiency––The ratio of output to input; the greater the
ratio, the greater the efficiency.
electronic funds transfer (EFT)––The electronic transfer
of cash from an account in one bank to an account in
another bank.
electronic product code (EPC)––A product code embed-
ded in a radio frequency identification (RFID) tag. Similar
to the older UPC.
EMI (electromagnetic interference)––Unwanted dis-
turbance in a radio receiver or electrical circuits caused by
electromagnetic radiation from an external source.
Fiber-optic cable is not susceptible to EMI.
employee knowledge network––Software that facili-
tates search of relevant knowledge within an organiza-
tion. The software points an employee with need for
certain information or expertise to coworkers who might
have such information or expertise.
encapsulation––In object-oriented terminology, the com-
bined storage of both the data and the procedures to
manipulate the data.
encryption––The conversion of plaintext to an unreadable
stream of characters, especially to prevent a party that inter-
cepts telecommunicated messages from reading them. Special
encryption software is used by the sending party to encrypt
messages, and by the receiving party to decipher them.
enhance existing products or services––A strategic
initiative that can give an organization a competitive
advantage by adding to a product or service to increase its
value to the consumer.
enterprise application––An application that fulfills a
number of functions together, such as inventory plan-
ning, purchasing, payment, and billing.
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system––An
information system that supports different activities for
different departments, assisting executives with planning
and running different interdependent functions.
entity––Any object about which an organization chooses to
collect data.
entity relationship diagram (ERD)––One of several
conventions for graphical rendition of the data elements
involved in business processes and the logical relation-
ships among the elements.
EPC (electronic product code)––The electronic equiva-
lent of a universal product code (UPC), commonly
embedded in an RFID (radio frequency identification) tag.
ergonomics––The science of designing and modifying
machines to better suit people’s health and comfort.
Ethernet––The design, introduced and named by Xerox,
for a popular data communications protocol.
European Article Number (EAN)––A European standard
of product code, similar to UPC but containing more
information.
expert system (ES)––A computer program that mimics
the decision process of a human expert in providing a
494
Glossary
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

solution to a problem. Current expert systems deal with
problems and diagnostics in narrow domains. An ES
consists of a knowledge base, an inference engine, and a
dialog management module.
extranet––A network, part of which is the Internet, whose
purpose is to facilitate communication and trade between
an organization and its business partners.
fault tolerance––The ability of a system to continue to
function despite a catastrophe or other usually disruptive
events. Fault tolerance systems are usually redundant.
feasibility studies––A series of studies conducted to deter-
mine if a proposed information system can be built, and
whether or not it will benefit the business; the series includes
technical, economic, and operational feasibility studies.
Fiber to the Home (FTTH)––The connection of a home
to the Internet through optical fiber technology. Often,
other services, such as television and landline phone, are
also provided through the same medium.
field––A data element in a record, describing one aspect of
an entity or event. Referred to as attribute in relational
databases.
file––In relational database terminology, a collection of
related records.
File Transfer Protocol (FTP)––Software that allows the
transfer of files over communications lines.
firewall––Hardware and software designed to control
access by Internet surfers to an information system, and
access to Internet sites by organizational users.
first mover––A business that is first in its industry to adopt
a technology or method.
fixed wireless––A network of fixed transceivers to facili-
tate connection to the Internet. Requires line of sight
between transceivers.
flash drive––A storage device containing flash memory. Flash
drives are used in numerous electronic devices and often are
designed to connect to a computer through a USB port.
flash memory––A memory chip that can be rewritten and
can hold its content without electric power. Thumb
drives, as well as ROM, are made of flash memory.
flat-panel monitor––A computer display device that has a
slim profile, sharper images, and lower power consump-
tion than older CRT monitors.
foreign key––In a relational database, a field in a table that
is a primary key in another table. Foreign keys allow
association of data between the two files.
fulfillment––Picking, packing, and shipping after a cus-
tomer places an order online.
general-purpose application software––Programs that
serve varied purposes, such as developing decision-
making tools or creating documents; examples include
spreadsheets and word processors.
geographic information system (GIS)––Information
system that exhibits information visually on a computer
monitor with local, regional, national, or international
maps, so that the information can easily be related to
locations or routes on the map. GISs are used, for
example, in the planning of transportation and product
distribution, or the examination of government resources
distributed over an area.
Gigabit Ethernet––A network protocol often used in local
area networks (LANs) supporting up to 1 Gbps.
global information system––Any information system
that crosses national borders.
Global Trade Item Number (GTIN)––A number that
uniquely identifies products and services. The GTIN is a
global standard succeeding the EAN and UPC.
glocalization––The planning and designing of global
websites so that they also cater to local needs and
preferences.
graphical user interface (GUI)––A user interface that
uses windows, icons, scroll bars, and other graphical
images to help the user interact with the program.
group decision support system (GDSS)––Decision sup-
port system for a group of people rather than an individ-
ual. Often, a GDSS serves remote workers through the
Internet, and provides mechanisms for bringing up ideas,
discussing them, voting, and concluding a decision.
groupware––Any of several types of software that enable
users of computers in remote locations to work together
on the same project. The users can create and change
documents and graphic designs on the same monitor.
hard disk––A stack of several rigid aluminum platters
coated with easily magnetized substance to record data.
Usually installed in the same box that holds the CPU and
other computer components, but may be portable.
hardware––All physical components of a computer or
computer system.
hijacking––In the context of networks, computers that are
remotely taken advantage of by people who were not
authorized to do so by the lawful owner. The computer is
“hijacked” after a controlling application was surrepti-
tiously installed on the computer’s hard disk. Hijacked
computers are exploited to participate in spamming or
DDoS attacks.
honeypot––A duplicate database on a server connected to
the Internet to trace an intruder. The server is dedicated
specifically for detection of intrusions and is not produc-
tive. The honeypot is there to be attacked in lieu of a
productive server. The traces can be used to improve
security measures and possibly catch the intruder.
honeytoken––A bogus record in a database on a honeypot
or productive server that is likely to draw an intruder’s
attention. If the intruder changes the record, the security
officers know that the server has been attacked and can
fix vulnerabilities.
host––A computer that contains files and other resources
that can be accessed by “clients;” computers link to it via
a network.
hot site––A location where a client organization hit by a
disaster can continue its vital operations. The structure—
often underground—is equipped with hardware and
software to support the client’s employees.
Glossary
495
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

hotspot––An area in which a wireless device can connect to
the Internet. The hotspot is created by installing an access
point consisting of a device connected to the Internet on
one end and to a router on the other end. All wireless
devices link to the Internet through the router.
HTML5––The newest version of HTML/XML, which
includes support for multimedia and mobile devices.
HTTPS––The secure version of HTTP.
hypermedia––A feature that enables a user to access infor-
mation by clicking on selected text or graphics.
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)––A program-
ming language for webpages and web browsers.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)––Software that
allows browsers to log on to websites.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS)––See
HTTPS.
identity theft––The criminal practice of obtaining enough
personal information to pretend to be the victim, usually
resulting in running up that person’s credit cards or issu-
ing new credit cards under that person’s name.
IEEE 802.11––A family of standards for wireless communi-
cation. Several IEEE 802.11 standards have been approved
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
imaging––The transformation of text and graphical docu-
ments into digitized files. The document can be electron-
ically retrieved and printed to reconstruct a copy of the
original. Imaging has saved much space and expense in
paper-intensive business areas.
impact printer––Printer that creates images on the page
using mechanical impact. A dot-matrix printer is an
impact printer.
implementation––In systems development, a phase that
consists of two steps: conversion and training. Also called
the delivery phase.
impression––In web advertising, the event of an ad dis-
played on a surfer’s monitor.
inference engine––The part of an expert system that links
facts and relationships in the knowledge base to reach a
solution to a problem.
information––The product of processing data so that it
can be used in a context by human beings.
information map––The description of data and informa-
tion flow within an organization.
information system (IS)––A computer-based set of hard-
ware, software, and telecommunications components,
supported by people and procedures, to process data and
turn it into useful information.
information systems auditor––A professional whose job
it is to find erroneous or fraudulent entries in corporate
information systems and investigate them.
information technology (IT)––Refers to all technologies
that collectively facilitate construction and maintenance
of information systems.
inheritance––In object-oriented terminology, the ability
of a new (child) object to “inherit” some or all of the
characteristcs of a previously developed (parent) object.
input––Raw data entered into a computer for processing.
input device––A tool, such as a keyboard or voice recogni-
tion system, used to enter data into an information system.
instant messaging (IM)––The capability for several
online computer users to share messages in real time; also
called chatting online.
intelligent agent––A sophisticated program that can be
instructed to perform services for human beings, espe-
cially on the Internet.
internal memory––The memory circuitry inside the com-
puter, communicating directly with the CPU. Consists of
RAM and ROM.
Internet service provider (ISP)––An individual or orga-
nization that provides Internet connection, and some-
times other related services, to subscribers.
interpreter––A programming language translator that
translates the source code, one statement at a time, and
executes it. If the instruction is erroneous, the interpreter
produces an appropriate error message.
intranet––A network using web browsing software that
serves employees within an organization.
IP address––A unique number assigned to a server or
another device that is connected to the Internet for iden-
tification purposes. Consists of 32 bits. The newer IPv6
protocol contains 128 bits, allowing many more unique
IP addresses.
join table––In relational database manipulation, a table
created by linking—that is, joining—data from multiple
tables.
just-in-time (JIT)––The manufacturing strategy in which
suppliers ship parts directly to assembly lines, saving the
cost of warehousing raw materials, parts, and
subassemblies.
key performance indicator (KPI)––A value used to
measure performance in key areas of a business or orga-
nization; examples include occupancy ratios in hotels in
hospitals, inventory turns in retail, or customer phone
hold time in customer relations. KPIs are often shown in
business analytic dashboard software.
keylogging––Automatically recording the keystrokes of a
computer user. The logging is done by special software,
usually surreptitiously with the intention of later using
secret access codes.
knowledge base––The collection of facts and the rela-
tionships among them that mimic the decision-making
process in an expert’s mind and constitute a major com-
ponent of an expert system.
knowledge management (KM)––The combination of
activities involved in gathering, sharing, analyzing, and
disseminating knowledge to improve an organization’s
performance.
knowledge workers––Employees whose main tasks
involve collecting and organizing knowledge and
information.
late mover––An organization that adopts a technology or
method after competitors have adopted it.
496
Glossary
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

liquid crystal display (LCD)––A flat-panel computer
monitor in which a conductive-film-covered screen is
filled with a liquid crystal whose molecules can align in
different planes when charged with certain electrical
voltage, which either blocks light or allows it to pass
through the liquid. The combination of light and dark
produces images of characters and pictures.
load balancing––The transfer of visitor inquiries from a
busy server to a less busy server.
local area network (LAN)––A computer network con-
fined to a building or a group of adjacent buildings, as
opposed to a wide area network.
location-based services––Services that are enabled based
on the location of a consumer combined with other data
gathered from online and mobile apps, social media, and
other sources. Location-based services offer the ability to
target customers and gather more effective information
about them.
lock in clients or suppliers––A strategic initiative that
can give an organization a competitive advantage by
forcing suppliers or buyers to use their products or
modes of operation. Possessing bargaining power (the
leverage to influence buyers and suppliers) is key to this
approach.
logic bomb––A destructive computer program that is inac-
tive until it is triggered by an event taking place in the
computer, such as the deletion of a certain record from a
file. When the event is at a particular time, the logic bomb
is referred to as a time bomb.
Long-Term Evolution (LTE)––A standard method of
wireless communications, specifically for high-speed data
transmission for mobile phones. Also known as 4G LTE.
machine cycle––The steps that the CPU follows repeat-
edly: fetch an instruction, decode the instruction, execute
the instruction, and store the result.
machine language––Binary programming language that
is specific to a computer. A computer can execute a
program only after the program’s source code is translated
to object code expressed in the computer’s machine
language.
magnetic disk––A disk or set of disks sharing a spindle,
coated with an easily magnetized substance to record data
in the form of tiny magnetic fields.
magnetic tape––Coated polyester tape used to store
computer data; similar to tape recorder or video tape.
magnetic-ink character recognition (MICR)––A tech-
nology that allows a special electronic device to read data
printed with magnetic ink. The data is later processed by
a computer. MICR is widely used in banking. The bank
code, account number, and the amount of a check are
printed in magnetic ink on the bottom of checks.
mainframe computer––A computer larger than a mid-
range computer but smaller than a supercomputer.
management information system (MIS)––A computer-
based information system used for planning, control,
decision making, or problem solving.
manufacturing resource planning (MRP II)––The
combination of MRP with other manufacturing-related
activities to plan the entire manufacturing process, not
just inventory.
many-to-many relationship––In databases, a relation-
ship between two tables whereby every record in a table
can be associated with several records in the other table.
mashup––An application created by integrating two or
more existing applications, such as integrating a
mapping application with a database of local charity
associations.
massively open online course (MOOC)––An education
delivery method that combines traditional course materi-
als with interactive online forums for educators and
students; a form of distance learning.
master production schedule (MPS)––The component
of an MRP II system that specifies production capacity to
meet customer demands and maintain inventories.
material requirements planning (MRP)––Inventory
control that includes a calculation of future need.
m-commerce––See mobile commerce.
message digest––The first phase of the encryption process
is to create a message digest from the file you wish to
transmit, akin to a unique fingerprint of a file. Encryption
software then encrypts the message digest to create a dig-
ital signature for that specific file.
metadata––Information about the data in a database, often
called data dictionary.
metropolitan area network (MAN)––Network that
links multiple LANs within a large city or metropolitan
region and typically spans a distance of up to 50 kilo-
meters/30 miles.
microprocessor––An electronic chip that contains the
circuitry of either a CPU or a processor with a dedicated
and limited purpose, for example, a communications
processor.
microwaves––Short (high frequency) radio waves. Used in
telecommunications to carry digital signals.
MIPS––Millions of instructions per second; an inaccurate
measure of computer speed.
mirror server––An Internet server that holds the same
software and data as another server, which may be located
thousands of miles away.
mission-critical application––Application without
which a business cannot conduct its operations.
mission statement––A paragraph that communicates the
most important overarching goal of an organization for
the next few years.
mobile applications developer––Person who develops
software for smartphones and other mobile devices.
mobile commerce––Commerce conducted with the aid of
mobile devices such as smartphones.
model––A representation of reality.
model management module––A collection of models
that a decision-support system draws on to assist in deci-
sion making.
Glossary
497
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

modem––Short for modulator/demodulator; a communica-
tions device that transforms digital signals to analog tele-
phone signals, and vice versa, for data communications
over voice telephone lines. The term is widely used for all
devices that connect a computer to a wide area network,
such as the Internet, even if the device does not modulate
or demodulate.
motherboard––The primary circuit board in a computer,
also called the system board.
mouse––An input device that controls an on-screen pointer
to facilitate the point-and-click approach to executing
different operations.
multicore processor––A processor that contains more
than one central processing unit. Each core is equivalent
to a CPU.
multidimensional database––See dimensional database.
multimedia software––Software that processes and dis-
plays various forms of information: text, sound, pictures,
and video.
multiprocessing––The mode in which a computer uses
more than one processing unit simultaneously to process
data.
multitasking––The ability of a computer to run more
than one program seemingly at the same time; it enables
the notion of windows in which different programs are
represented.
near-field communiations (NFC)––A standard commu-
nication protocol to create a radio connection between
two devices within close proximity.
network––A combination of a communications device and
a computer or several computers, or two or more compu-
ters, so that the various devices can send and receive text
or audiovisual information to each other.
network administrator––The individual who is respon-
sible for the acquisition, implementation, management,
maintenance, and troubleshooting of computer networks
throughout the organization.
network interface card (NIC)––Circuitry embedded or
installed in a computer to support proper linking of the
computer to a network.
network-attached storage (NAS)––An arrangement of
storage devices linked to computers through a network.
neural network––An artificial intelligence computer pro-
gram that emulates the way in which the human brain
operates, especially its ability to learn.
node––A device connected to at least one other device on a
network.
nonimpact printer––A printer that creates an image on a
page without pressing any mechanism against the paper;
includes laser, ink-jet, electrostatic, and electrothermal
printers.
notebook computer––A computer as small as a book, yet
with computing power similar to that of a desktop
microcomputer.
object code––Program code in machine language, imme-
diately processable by the computer.
object-oriented database model––A database model in
which data is part of an object, that is processed using
object-oriented programs.
object-oriented programming (OOP) programming
language––A programming language that combines
data and the procedures that process the data into a single
unit called an “object,” which can be invoked from dif-
ferent programs.
OC (optical carrier)––A family of several very high-speed
technologies using optical fibers. Usually, the standard is
marked as OC-3, OC-12, OC-48, etc.
offshoring––Outsourcing work to employees in other
countries.
one-to-many relationship––In a database, a relationship
between two tables such that each record in the one table
can be associated with several records in the other table
but each record in the other table can be associated with
only one record in the first table.
online analytical processing (OLAP)––A type of
application that operates on data stored in databases
and data warehouses to produce summary tables with
multiple combinations of dimensions. An OLAP
server is connected to the database or data warehouse
server at one end and to the user’s computer at the
other.
open source software––Software whose source code can
be accessed by the general public.
open system––A system that interfaces and interacts with
other systems.
operating system (OS)––System software that supports
the running of applications developed to utilize its fea-
tures and controls peripheral equipment.
optical disc––A disc on which data is recorded by treating
the disc surface so it reflects light in different ways;
includes CD and DVD.
optical tape––A storage device that uses the same princi-
ples as a compact disc.
organizational culture––An umbrella term referring to
the general tone of a corporate environment.
output––The result of processing data by the computer;
usually, information.
output device––A device, usually a monitor or printer,
that delivers information from a computer to a person.
outsourcing––Buying the services of an information ser-
vice firm that undertakes some or all of the organization’s
IS operations.
packaged software––General-purpose applications that
come ready to install from a magnetic disk, CD, or file
downloaded from a vendor’s website.
parallel conversion––Using an old information system
along with a new system for a predetermined period of
time before relying only on the new one.
parallel processing––The capacity for several CPUs in one
computer to process different data at the same time.
parameters––The categories that are considered when
following a sequence of steps in problem solving.
498
Glossary
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing––Software applications
that enable two Internet users to send and receive to each
other. The technology is highly objectionable to organi-
zations that sell copyrighted materials because the
software promotes violation of copyrights.
peer-to-peer LAN––A local area network (LAN) in which
no central device controls communications.
personal area network (PAN)––A network of devices
typically within a small radius that enables a user to use
two or more devices wirelessly, such as a wireless keyboard
and mouse.
personal computer––The collective name for several
types of computers designed for individual computing:
notebook computers, desktops, netbooks, and handheld
computers.
personal digital assistant (PDA)––A type of handheld
computer that was popular in the 1990s-2000s but has
been superseded by smartphones and tablets. Many PDAs
require the use of a special stylus to click displayed items
and to enter handwritten information that is recognized
by the computer.
phased conversion––Implementing a new information
system one module at a time.
phishing––The criminal practice of luring Internet users to
provide their personal information via email or the web.
Phishing almost always results in fraud or identity theft.
pilot conversion––A trial conversion in which a new
information system is introduced in one business unit
before introducing it in others.
pixel––The smallest picture element addressable on a mon-
itor, short for “picture element.” In an LCD monitor, it is
a triad of three transistors controlling the colors of red,
green, and blue that can be switched on and off and kept
on with varying amounts of electricity to produce various
colors and hues.
plaintext––An original message, before encryption.
plug-and-play (PnP)––The ability of an operating system
to recognize a new attachment and its function without a
user’s intervention.
podcast––To make a digital audio recording, usually of
voice, and post the file on the web so that people can
download and listen to it. People can subscribe to auto-
matically download podcasts to their computers or
devices.
port–– (1) A socket on a computer to which external
devices, such as printers, keyboards, and scanners, can be
connected. (2) Software that enables direct communica-
tion of certain applications with the Internet.
primary key––In a database file, a field that holds values
that are unique to each record. Only a primary key can be
used to uniquely identify and retrieve a record.
process––Any manipulation of data, usually with the goal
of producing information.
productivity––Efficiency, when the input is labor. The
fewer labor hours needed to perform a job, the greater the
productivity.
programmer/analyst––An entry-level position for IT
professionals in computer programming. A programmer/
analyst is partly involved in the analysis of business needs
and ISs, but the greater part of the job involves setting up
business applications.
programming––The process of writing software.
programming language––Set of syntax for abbreviated
forms of instructions that special programs can translate
into machine language so a computer can understand the
instructions.
progressive elaboration––A process in systems develop-
ment in which a vision of an initiative continually devel-
ops and influences the final product over time as more
information is available.
project management––The set of activities that is per-
formed to ensure the timely and successful completion of
a project within the budget. Project management includes
planning activities, hiring and managing personnel, bud-
geting, conducting meetings, and tracking technical and
financial performance. Project management software
applications facilitate these activities.
project portfolio management––A set of processes and
methods used by project managers to determine which
projects will meet the organization’s operational and
financial goals in relation to its strategic objectives as well
as the needs of its customers.
proprietary software––Software owned by an individual
or organizations. The owner can control licensing and
usage terms of the software. Nonproprietary software is
not owned by anyone and is free for use.
protocol––A standard set of rules that governs telecommu-
nication between two communications devices or in a
network.
prototyping––An approach to the development of infor-
mation systems in which several analysis steps are
skipped, to accelerate the development process. A “quick
and dirty” model is developed and continually improved
until the prospective users are satisfied. Prototyping has
evolved into agile development methods.
proxy server––A computer that serves as an intermediary
between two servers on the Internet, often for the purpose
of security or filtering out certain information.
pure-play––A business operating with clients only via the
web, as opposed to operating via stores or other physical
facilities.
query––A request for information, usually addressed to a
database.
radio frequency identification (RFID)––Technology
that enables identification of an object (such as product,
vehicle, or living creature) by receiving a radio signal from
a tag attached to the object.
RAID (Redundant Array of Independent Disks)––A
set of magnetic disk packs maintained for backup pur-
poses. Sometimes RAID is used for storing large databases.
raise barriers to entrants––A strategic initiative that can
give an organization a competitive advantage by making
Glossary
499
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

it difficult or impossible for other organizations to pro-
duce the product or service it provides.
RAM (random access memory)––The major part of a
computer’s internal memory. RAM is volatile; that is,
software is held in it temporarily and disappears when the
machine is unplugged or turned off, or it may disappear
when operations are interrupted or new software is
installed or activated. RAM is made of microchips con-
taining transistors. Many computers have free sockets that
allow the expansion of RAM.
rapid prototyping––Using software and special output
devices to create prototypes to test design in three
dimensions.
reach percentage––The percentage of web users who have
visited a site in the past month, or the ratio of visitors to
the total web population.
record––A set of standard field types. All the fields of a
record contain data about a certain entity or event.
reduce costs––A strategic initiative that can give an orga-
nization a competitive advantage by lowering prices
through having lower costs.
reengineering––The process by which an organization
takes a fresh look at a business process and reorganizes
it to attain efficiency. Almost always, reengineering
includes the integration of a new or improved
information system.
relational model––A general structure of a database in
which records are organized in tables (relations) and the
relationships among tables are maintained through for-
eign keys.
relational operation––An operation that creates a
temporary table that is a subset of the original table or
tables in a relational database.
repeater––A device that strengthens signals and then sends
them on their next leg toward their next destination.
request for information (RFI)––A request to vendors for
general, somewhat informal, information about their
products.
request for proposal (RFP)––A document specifying all
the system requirements and soliciting a proposal from
vendors who might want to bid on a project or service.
resolution––The degree to which the image on a computer
monitor is sharp. Higher resolution means a sharper
image. Resolution depends on the number of pixels on
the screen and the dot pitch.
return on investment (ROI)––A financial calculation of
the difference between the stream of benefits and the
stream of costs over the life of an information system;
often used as a general term to indicate that an invest-
ment in an information system is recouped or smaller
than the cost the system saves or the increase in revenue
it brings about.
reverse auction (name-your-own-price auction)––An
online auction in which participants post the price they
want to pay for a good or service, and retailers compete to
make the sale; also called a name-your-price auction.
RFI (radio frequency interference)––The unwanted
reception of radio signals that occurs when using metal
communication lines. Optical fibers are not susceptible to
RFI.
ROM (read-only memory)––The minor part of a compu-
ter’s internal memory. ROM is loaded by the manufac-
turer with software that cannot be changed. Usually, ROM
holds very basic system software, but sometimes also
applications. Like RAM, ROM consists of microchips
containing transistors.
router––A network device, wired or wireless, that ensures
proper routing of messages within a network such as a
LAN and between each device on that network and
another network, such as the Internet.
RSS––Really Simple Syndication, a type of application using
XML for aggregating updates to blogs and news posted at
websites.
SaaS (Software as a Service)––A software distribution
method in which an application software provider (ASP)
or vendor provides software over a network, often
through the Internet. Payment is determined by the soft-
ware made available, number of users, and the contract
length of time.
scalability––The ability to adapt applications as business
needs grow.
schema––The structure of a database, detailing the names
and types of fields in each set of records, and the rela-
tionships among sets of records.
search advertising––Placing ads at search engine
websites.
search engine optimization (SEO)––Tactics that allow a
business to gain a high-ranking placement of their online
entry in search engine results pages.
self-service––The customer’s ability to determine the tim-
ing and services of their needs through an organization’s
website.
semistructured problem––An unstructured problem
with which the decision maker may have had some
experience. Requires expertise to resolve.
sensitivity analysis––Using a model to determine the
extent to which a change in a factor affects an outcome.
The analysis is done by repeating if-then calculations.
sequential storage––A file organization for sequential
record entry and retrieval. The records are organized as a
list that follows a logical order, such as ascending order of
ID numbers, or descending order of part numbers. To
retrieve a record, the application must start the search at
the first record and retrieve every record, sequentially,
until the desired record is encountered.
server––A computer connected to several less powerful
computers that can utilize its databases and applications.
service-level agreement––A document that lists all the
types of services expected of an outsourcing vendor as
well as the metrics that will be used to measure the degree
to which the vendor has met the level of promised ser-
vices. Usually, the client makes the list.
500
Glossary
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

shared hosting––An arrangement by which the websites
of several clients are maintained by the hosting vendor on
the same server.
smartphone––A cell phone that has a high-resolution
color screen, is web and Internet-enabled, and runs
mobile applications, or apps.
social engineering––Deceptive methods that hackers use
to entice people to release confidential information such
as access codes and passwords. Often, the crooks misrep-
resent themselves as technicians who need one’s pass-
word for fixing a problem in a network.
software––Sets of instructions that control the operations
of a computer.
software as a service (Saas)––A software distribution
method in which an application software provider (ASP)
or vendor provides software over a network, often
through the Internet. Payment is determined by the soft-
ware made available, number of users, and the contract
length of time.
solid state disk (SSD)––Flash memory that serves as an
internal or external storage medium as if it were a hard disk.
solid state storage––Computer storage that can be
rewritten and retains its contents when electrical power is
turned off; also known as flash memory.
source code––An application’s code written in the original
high-level programming language.
source data input device––A device that enables data
entry directly from a document without need for human
keying. Such devices include bar-code readers and optical
character readers.
speech recognition––The process of translating human
speech into computer-readable data and instructions.
spyware––A small application stored surreptitiously by a
website on the hard disk of a visitor’s computer. The
application tracks activities of the user, including visits to
websites, and transmits the information to the operator’s
server.
SSO (single sign-on)––Enabling employees to access sev-
eral information systems by using a single password.
static IP address––An IP address permanently associated
with a device.
storage––(1) The operation of storing data and information
in an information system; (2) Any non-RAM memory,
including internal and external hard disks, flash memory,
and optical discs.
storage area network (SAN)––A device that enables
multiple networked computers to save data on a group of
disks located in a special area.
storage-as-a-service––Outsourcing corporate data storage
to cloud storage vendors.
storage service provider (SSP)––A firm that rents storage
space for software through an Internet link.
strategic advantage––A position in which one dominates
a market; also called competitive advantage.
strategic information system (SIS)––Any information
system that gives its owner a competitive advantage.
structured problem––A problem for whose solution there
is a known set of steps to follow. Also called a program-
mable problem.
Structured Query Language (SQL)––The data definition
and manipulation language of choice for many developers
of relational database management systems.
stylus––A penlike marking device used to enter commands
and data on a computer screen.
subsystem––A component of a larger system.
suite––A group of general software applications that are
often used in the same environment. The strengths of the
different applications can be used to build a single pow-
erful document. Current suites are usually a combination
of a spreadsheet, a word processor, presentation software,
and a database management system.
supercomputer––The most powerful class of computers,
used by large organizations, research institutions, and
universities for complex scientific computations and the
manipulation of very large databases.
supply chain––The activities performed from the purchase
of raw material to the shipping of manufactured goods
and collecting for their sale.
supply chain management (SCM) system––The coor-
dination of purchasing, manufacturing, shipping, and
billing operations, often supported by an enterprise
resource planning system.
switch––A common networking device used as a central
location to connect computers or devices to a local
network.
switching costs––Expenses that are incurred when a cus-
tomer stops buying a product or service from one business
and starts buying it from another.
symmetric (secret or private key) encryption––
Encryption technology in which both the sender and
recipient of a message use the same key for encryption
and decryption.
system––An array of components that work together to
achieve a common goal or multiple goals.
system administrator––A computer professional who
manages and maintains an organization’s operating
systems. Often referred to as “sys admin.”
system requirements––The functions that an informa-
tion system is expected to fulfill and the features through
which it will perform its tasks.
system software––Software that executes routine tasks.
System software includes operating systems, language
translators, and communications software.
systems analysis––The early steps in the systems develop-
ment process; to define the requirements of the proposed
system and determine its feasibility.
systems analyst––An IT professional who analyzes busi-
ness problems and recommends technological solutions.
systems design––The evaluation of alternative solutions to
a business problem and the specification of hardware,
software, and communications technology for the selec-
tion solution.
Glossary
501
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

systems development life cycle (SDLC)––The oldest
method of developing an information system, consisting
of several phases of analysis and design, which must be
followed sequentially.
systems integration––Interfacing several information
systems.
T1 and T3 lines––Point-to-point dedicated digital circuits
provided by telecommunications companies to provide
high-speed communications for a fee.
table––A set of related records in a relational database.
tablet computer––A mobile computing device with a
touch screen that uses a stylus or your fingers to execute
commands; smaller than laptop computers but larger
than smartphones.
targeted marketing––Promoting products and services to
the people who are most likely to purchase them.
TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet
Protocol)–– A set of related protocols that can guaran-
tee packets are delivered in the correct order and can
handle differences in transmission and reception rates.
technology convergence––The combining of several
technologies into a single device, such as mobile phone,
digital camera, and web browser in a smartphone.
telecommunications––Communications over a long dis-
tance, as opposed to communication within a computer,
or between adjacent hardware pieces.
throughput––A general measure of the rate of computer
output or communications speed.
time to market––The time between generating an idea for
a product and completing a prototype that can be mass-
manufactured; also called engineering lead time.
top-level domain––The last part of a URL, a period and
three letters that represent a major category into which
URLs are divided, such as .com, .edu, and .gov.
total cost of ownership (TCO)––A financial estimate
that allows business leaders to objectively evaluate the
direct and indirect costs of a new organizational project.
touch screen––A computer screen that serves both as input
and output device. The user touches the areas of a certain
menu item to select options, and the screen senses the
selection at the point of the touch.
trackback––A feature of some blog software that notifies
bloggers when their posts have been mentioned elsewhere
on the web.
trackball––A device similar to a mouse, used for clicking,
locking, and dragging displayed information; in this case,
the ball moves within the device rather than over a surface.
trackpad––A device used for clicking, logging, and drag-
ging displayed information; the cursor is controlled by
moving one’s finger along a touch-sensitive pad.
traditional file approach––An older approach to main-
taining data which has no mechanism for tagging,
retrieving, and manipulating data, and which has been
largely superseded by the database approach.
transaction––A business event. In an IS context, the
record of a business event.
transaction processing system (TPS)––Any system that
records transactions.
transmission rate––The speed at which data is commu-
nicated over a communications channel.
Transport Layer Security (TLS)––The successor of
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), the software in the web
browser responsible for secure communication.
Trojan horse––A malicious piece of software hidden with a
benign and legitimate software that one downloads or
agrees to otherwise accept and install on one’s computer.
The Trojan horse then causes damage.
twisted pair cable––Traditional telephone wires, twisted
in pairs to reduce electromagnetic interference.
Unicode––An international standard to enable the storage
and display of characters of a large variety of languages—
such as Asian, Arabic, and Hebrew—on computers.
Unified Modeling Language (UML)––An extensive
standard for graphically representing elements of pro-
gramming, specifically accommodating programming in
object-oriented languages and web technologies.
Uniform Code Council (UCC)––An organization that
promotes the use of uniform standards for bar codes.
Uniform Resource Locator (URL)––The address of a
website. Always starts with http:// or https:// but does not
have to contain www.
uninterruptible power supply (UPS)––A device that
provides an alternative power supply as soon as a power
network fails.
Universal Product Code (UPC)––A code usually
expressed as a number and series of variable width bars
that uniquely identifies the product by scanning.
universal serial bus (USB)––A ubiquitous socket that
enables the connection of numerous devices to computers.
unstructured problem––A problem for whose solution
there is no pretested set of steps, and with which the
solver is not familiar—or is only slightly familiar—from
previous experience.
upstream––The movement of data from your computer to
another computer via a network, usually the Internet.
Upstream speed through the services of Internet providers
is typically lower than the downstream speed.
uptime––The percentage of time (so much time per year)
that an information system is in full operation.
USB drive––Any storage device that connects to a com-
puter through a USB socket, but especially flash drives.
user application development––Development of corpo-
rate applications by employees rather than IT
professionals.
utilities––Programs that provide help in routine user
operations.
value-added network (VAN)––A telecommunications
network owned and managed by a vendor that charges
clients periodic fees for network management services.
videoconferencing––A telecommunications system that
allows people who are in different locations to meet via
transmitted images and speech.
502
Glossary
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

virtual memory––Storage space on a disk that is treated
by the operating system as if it were part of the compu-
ter’s RAM.
virtual private network (VPN)––Hardware and software
installed to ensure that a network path that includes the
Internet enables employees of the same organization or
employees of business partners to communicate confi-
dentially. The hardware and software create an impression
that the entire communication path is private.
virtual private server––Part of a server that serves as an
Internet server for a client of a web hosting company,
while other clients share the same physical server.
virus––Destructive software that propagates and is activated
by unwary users; a virus usually damages applications and
data files or disrupts communications.
visual programming language––A programming lan-
guage that provides icons, colors, and other visual
elements from which the programmer can choose to
speed up software development.
VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol)––Technologies
that enable voice communication by utilizing the Internet
instead of the telephone network.
web hosting––The business of organizations that host,
maintain, and often help design websites for clients.
webpage authoring tools––Software tools that make
webpage composition easier and faster than writing code
by providing icons and menus.
webmaster––The person who is in charge of constructing
and maintaining the organization’s website.
what-if analysis––An analysis that is conducted to test
the degree to which one variable affects another; also
called sensitivity analysis.
wide area network (WAN)––A network of computers
and other communications devices that extends over
a large area, possibly comprising national territories.
Example: the Internet.
Wi-Fi––A name given to the IEEE 802.11 standards of
wireless communication. Wi-Fi technologies are used in
hotspots and in home and office networks.
wiki––A web application that enables users to add to and
edit the content of webpages, or software that enables
collaborative software used to create and revise websites.
WiMAX––The IEEE 802.16 standard for wireless networking
with a range of up to 50 km (31 miles). (WiMAX stands
for the organization that promotes that standard,
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access.)
wireless LAN (WLAN)––A local area network that uses
electromagnetic waves (radio or infrared light) as the
medium of communication. In recent years almost all
WLANs have been established using Wi-Fi.
work order––A numbered (or otherwise uniquely coded)
authorization to spend labor and other resources on the
manufacturing of a product or rendering of a service.
Usually, work orders are opened within a project number.
The system of project number and work orders helps
track costs and activities related to an assignment in an
organization, typically one in the manufacturing sector.
workstation––A powerful microcomputer providing high-
speed processing and high-resolution graphics. Used
primarily for scientific and engineering assignments.
worm––A rogue program that spreads in a computer net-
work. Unlike other computer viruses, worms do not need
human intervention to spread.
XHTML––A standard that combines HTML standards and
XML standards.
XML (Extensible Markup Language)––A programming
language that tags data elements in order to indicate what
the data means, especially in webpages.
yield management software––Software that helps
maximize the capacity of airline seats and hotel rooms
by analyzing which variables affect purchasing of such
services and in what way.
Glossary
503
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© Wavebreak Media/Thinkstock
504
subject INDEX
A
Access, 58, 159, 231, 232, 233, 234
access controls, 462
biometrics, 463–464
fingerprints, 463–464
passwords, 463
security cards, 463
user ID, 463
access points (APs), 197
accounting
information systems (ISs), 20,
70–71
software, 5
Acrobat Reader, 48, 458
ActiveNet, 374
active server pages (ASP), 25, 237
activity diagrams, 399
actors, 399
Adaptive Software Development
(ASD), 403
Adobe Flash. See Flash
advertising
banners, 265, 276
business-to-business (B2B),
264–266
impressions, 265
mobile phones, 310
pop-ups, 84, 276
rating companies, 265
spamming, 84
adware, 276
affiliate aggregators, 272
affiliate programs, 46, 266, 271–272
affiliates, 271
after-the-sale-services and supply
chain management (SCM)
systems, 95
Agency Data Systems, 51
aggregators, 260
agile methods, 391, 403
iterative programming, 403
risks, 404
users and customers role in, 404
when not to use, 405–406
when to use, 405
agile software development,
169–170
Airline Economic Analysis Report
(2012), 54
airline industry
alliances, 269
antiquated software and
hardware, 48
cost per available seat-mile
(CASM), 54
electronic ticketing, 52
enhanced service, 53–54
late mover advantage, 54
price discrimination, 337–338
revenue maximization model, 331
tablets, 53
wireless LANs (WLANs), 198
air traffic controllers (ATCs), 342
algorithms, 327
alliances, 45–47
ALU. See arithmetic logic unit (ALU)
Alzheimer’s disease, 343
Amazon Cloud Drive, 370
Amazon Prime, 38, 389
Amazon Redshift, 241
Amazon Relational Database Service
(RDS), 241
Amazon Silk, 370
Amazon Simple Storage, 448
Amazon Web Services, 370
American Community Survey, 205
analog systems, 7
Analytica Cloud Player (ACP), 346
analytics, 371
Android devices, 167, 310, 418, 475
Amazon Coins, 272
Android phones, 32, 122, 123,
124, 156
antivirus software, 458
AOL Instant Messenger (AIM), 261
Apache system, 250
APIs. See application program
interfaces (APIs)
App Cloud Workshop app, 418
Apple Maps, 162
Apple Passbook, 279
applets, 155–156
application program interfaces (APIs),
165, 237
applications, 150
See also application software and
programs
flexibility for global information
systems, 304
mission-critical, 477
risks, 454–459
application service providers (ASPs),
131, 172, 421, 436, 437–438
uptime, 438
application software, 150, 157–164
See also applications and programs
general-purpose, 158
groupware, 163
hypermedia, 160–161
mashups, 161–162
office productivity software,
158–160
3-D geographic software, 163–164
website design tools, 162
application-specific software, 158
application systems support,
402–403
apps and depositing checks, 123
app stores, 418
arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 115,
116–117
arithmetic operations, 117
artificial intelligence (AI), 340
Artisteer, 162, 283
The Art of the Start (Kawasaki), 158
ASAP. See Automated Staff
Acquisition Platform (ASAP)
ASAP for Home Healthcare, 89
AskMe, 374–375
ASP. See active server pages (ASP)
Aspect Unified IP platform, 90
ASP.NET, 237
ASPs. See application service providers
(ASPs)
assembly control subsystem, 11
assembly languages, 151
asymmetric encryption, 469
ATMs. See automatic teller machines
(ATMs)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

atomic transactions, 464–465
AtTask, 407
attributes, 154, 228
auctions, 41–42, 264, 266–268,
272–273
auditing decision support systems
(DSSs), 331
auditing information systems, 402
audit trails, 93, 465
authentication, 468–474
autocategorization, 377
auto industry
building vehicles on websites, 57
information systems (ISs), 73–74
robots, 39
automated decision making, 339
Automated Staff Acquisition Platform
(ASAP), 89
automatic taxonomy, 377
automatic teller machines (ATMs),
16, 121, 243
automation, 39, 52–53, 181–182
automobiles
navigation systems, 123
tweeting mechanical issues, 345
availability, 452
Avanquest WebEasy Professional, 151
AZERTY keyboards, 118
B
backbone, 196
backups, 461–462
companies specializing in, 462
databases, 227–228
data warehouses, 240
magnetic tapes, 127
RAID (redundant array of
independent disks), 461–462
remote storage, 462
backward compatibility, 136
Baidu, 310
balance sheet, 70
bandwidth, 189, 304
banking industry
apps for depositing checks, 123
competitive advantage, 51
data mining, 361
mobile devices transactions, 6
models, 331
phishing and, 274–275
source data input devices, 121
Bankway, 180
banners, 265, 276
barcode scanners, 58, 64, 120,
145, 146
barriers to entrants, 40, 64
Basecamp, 159
BASIC, 152
BeAware, 441
benchmarking and software
licensing, 435
benefits management, 90–91
benefits selection, 338
Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD)
UNIX, 171
beta sites, 402
beta software, 54, 432
Big Brother society, 22
Big Data, 84, 222, 241, 371
data warehouses, 243
retail, 250–251
social media, 243
big iron, 112
bill of materials (BOM), 76
binary counting system, 6
biometrics, 53, 463–464
health care, 487
BI systems. See business intelligence
(BI) systems
bit rate, 189
bits (binary digits), 111
bits per second (bps), 189
BitTorrent, 188
Blackberry devices, 475
Blackberry phones, 156, 276, 382
blackouts, 453
bleeding edge, 58
Blogger, 283
bloggers, 258
blogs, 258–259
freedom of speech, 22
trackback, 259
Blue Gene, 112
Blue Performance, 53
Bluetooth, 146, 191, 199
Bluetooth mouse, 15
Blu-ray players, 418
BOM. See bill of materials (BOM)
bookselling industry decision support
systems (DSSs), 335
bots, 460
Boxee boxes, 418
bps. See bits per second (bps)
brainstorming, 73
brand-name success, 44
brick-and-mortarbusinesses,21,65,270
bridges, 195
“bring your own technology with
you,” 13
broadband, 189
Broadband over Power Lines (BPL),
192, 206
broadband services, 202–203
broadband telephony, 206–208
brownouts, 453
Brussels Convention (1968), 311
brute force software, 457
BSD UNIX. See Berkeley Software
Distribution (BSD) UNIX
buses, 117
business alliances, 268–269
business analysis tools, 325
business analytics, 360
Business Analytics Suite, 331
business applications, 342
business continuity plans, 477
See also business recovery plans
businesses
activities interdependence, 69
analytics strategy, 241
cloud computing, 241
collecting data, 84
globalization, 302–303
information map, 12–13
information systems (ISs), 13
information use, 7
multimedia, 161
personal data, 92
processing orders and payments, 5
researching, 1–2
shortening business cycle, 288
storage media, 132–134
strategic initiatives, 371
unsolicited email, 276
business functions, 71
business intelligence applications,
325, 361, 375
business intelligence (BI), 249, 368,
382
collecting, 369–371
customer loyalty programs, 363
dashboards, 371–372
data mining, 362
mobile devices, 368
top-of-the-line providers, 376
zoos, 363
business intelligence (BI) systems, 18,
360, 395
business plan, 2–3
business process management (BPM)
systems, 356
business process outsourcing, 425
business recovery plans, 476–478
business-to-business (B2B), 56, 57,
264
advertising, 264–266
electronic trade, 21
exchanges and auctions, 266–268
Subject Index
505
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

online business alliances, 268–269
search engine optimization (SEO),
266
trading, 264–269
web as global medium, 300
business-to-consumer (B2C), 57, 264,
269–275, 277–279
auctions and reverse auctions,
272–273
content providers, 273
electronic bill presentment and
payment (EBPP), 274
electronic trade, 21
e-tailing, 270–272
extra-organizational workforce, 277
mobile advertising, 272
mobile commerce, 277–279
web as global medium, 300
business-to-government (B2G), 264
buyers, locking in, 47–48
buzzwords, 88
bytes, 111
C
C#, 155
Cþþ, 151, 155, 157
cable, 202–203
cable modem, 203
cable television, 189
CAD. See computer-aided design
(CAD)
CADUCEUS, 343
call centers, outsourcing, 447
caller ID, 84, 457
CAM. See computer-aided
manufacturing (CAM) systems
cameras, 14
CAN-SPAM act, 276
Carbonite, 258
card scanners, 487
careers
chief information officer (CIO),
25, 26
chief information security officer
(CISO), 25
chief security officer (CSO), 25
chief technology officer (CTO), 26
database administrators (DBAs), 24
mobile applications developers, 25
network administrator, 24–25
system administrators, 25
systems analysts, 23–24
webmasters, 25
women, 24
CargoWiz, 79
Carnivore, 476
carpal tunnel syndrome, 132
car rental companies, 331
case-based expert systems (ESs), 343
case-based reasoning, 343
CASE (computer-aided software
engineering tools), 428
Cash Availability and Forecasting
Environment (CASE), 355–356
cash flow forecasting system,
355–356
cash management systems (CMSs),
72
CASM. See cost per available seat-mile
(CASM)
Category 5 (Cat 5) cable, 190
Category 6 (Cat 6) cable, 190
cathode-ray tube (CRT) monitors,
124
caveat emptor (buyer beware),
437–438
CDMA (Code Division Multiple
Access) protocol, 201
CD-ROM (Compact Disc, Read Only
Memory) CDs, 128
CD-R (recordable) CDs, 128
CD-RW (rewritable) CDs, 128
CDs. See compact discs (CDs)
cell phones, 186–187, 210
global positioning systems (GPS),
278
cellular networks, 146
censorship, 22
central processing units (CPUs), 110
arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 115
control unit, 115
data word, 117
machine cycle, 116–117
microprocessors, 115–116
multicore, 117
CEO. See chief executive officer (CEO)
CEO Desktop Deposit, 475
certificate authorities (CAs), 473
certification, 409–411
CERT program (Carnegie Mellon),
411
CF (Compact Flash) flash memory
card, 129
CGI, 285
change, 417
change management, 389
characters, 223–224
character sets, 304
chess, 341–342
chief executive officer (CEO), 25
chief information officer (CIO),
25, 26
chief information security officer
(CISO), 25
chief security officer (CSO), 25
chief technology officer (CTO), 26
China
censorship restrictions on Google,
310
market, 301
ChoiceView app, 447
Chrome, 55, 474
Chrysler Comprehensive Compensa-
tion (C3), 405
CIA triad (confidentiality, integrity,
and availability), 452
CIO. See chief information officer
(CIO)
CIO Agenda Report (2012, Gartner),
36, 45
ciphertext, 468
CISO. See chief information security
officer (CISO)
Clarizen, 407
class diagrams, 399
classification, 360
click streams, 85
clickstream software, 369–371
clickstream tracking, 263
clients and certification, 410
clock rate, 116–118
closed systems, 11–12
cloud-based technologies versus
outsourcing, 423
cloud computing, 13
businesses, 241
group decision support systems
(GDSS), 346
cloud storage, 110, 131, 133–134
clustering, 360
clustering computers, 112
CMSs. See cash management systems
(CMSs)
coaxial cable, 190
COBOL, 152, 153, 157
Cognos, 383
collaboration software, 163
collaborative logistics, 96
co-location service, 284
commodities, 289
common metals detection, 345
communication and interactive
technology, 261–262
communications software, 169
compact discs (CDs), 128, 132
companies
backups specialization, 462
barriers to entrants, 40
506
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

collaboration with retailers, 96
collection and analysis of consumer
data specialization, 369–371
electronic copies of résumés, 88
failures on the web, 56–57
innovative technologies, 64–65
monopolistic power, 56
selling information, 239
strategic gap with competitors, 53
supply chain management (SCM)
systems, 93
comparative advantage and
manufacturing, 375
compensation, 90–91
competition and e-tailing, 271
competitive advantage, 37
achieving, 38–48
alliances, 45–47
automation, 39
barriers to entrants, 40
constant improvements and, 51
differentiation, 44
enhancing products or services,
44–45
first movers, 73
for-profit companies, 38
industries, 48
information systems (ISs), 51
locking in suppliers or buyers,
47–48
minimizing lead time, 73
as moving target, 51
new and unique product creation,
41–44
online service, 39
organizational change to gain, 50
outsourcing, 430
reducing costs, 39
robots, 39
sales systems innovations, 12
strategic information systems
(SISs), 48
switching costs, 41
competitors
imitating successful companies, 51
strategic gap with, 53
compilers, 156–157, 164, 169
complex simulation, 113
composite key, 230
computer-aided design (CAD), 73, 74,
76, 113
computer-aided manufacturing
(CAM) systems, 73, 76, 113
Computer and Information Sciences
undergraduate degrees
(2010), 24
computers, 15
access controls, 462–464
appropriate personal use of, 441
buses, 117
central processing units (CPUs),
115–117
classifications, 111–115
clock rate, 116–117
clustering, 112
components, 109–110
credit decisions, 339
expansion slots, 135
health and, 132
hijacking, 460–461
mainframe computers, 112–113
memory capacity, 117
notebook computers, 113
personal computers (PCs), 113
personal digital assistants (PDAs),
113–114
power, 117–118
processing and storing data, 111
processing speed, 117–118
servers, 113
smartphones, 114–115
supercomputers, 111–112
tablet computers, 114
technology convergence, 114–115
USB ports, 135
workstations, 113
computer security incident handler
(CSIH) certification, 411
computer telephony integration
(CTI), 84
computer-to-computer calls, 207
computer use policies, 441
computer vision syndrome (CVS),
132
confidentiality, 452
Connect, 187
consumer privacy, 22, 92–93
consumer profiling, 271
consumers
e-commerce transactions law suits,
311
privacy, 452
consumer-to-consumer (C2C), 264,
272
content management systems, 286
content providers, 273
controllers, 71
controls, 461
access, 462–464
application reliability, 461
atomic transactions, 464–465
audit trails, 465
backups, 461–462
data entry, 461
control unit, 115, 116
converging technologies and
networking, 210–211
conversion, 400–402
cookies, 22, 239, 262–263, 270, 271,
288, 369, 447
coopetition, 272
copyrights, 309
Corendal Wiki, 260
cost accounting systems, 16, 71
cost/benefit analysis, 394
cost per available seat-mile
(CASM), 54
costs
cloud storage, 134
hardware, 136
reducing, 39, 64
savings, 390
storage media, 134
countries
civil rights, 309
different standards, 310–311
free speech, 313
privacy, 312–313
regulations and tariffs, 305–306
country-of-destination principle,
311
country-of-origin principle, 311
Covisint website, 56–57, 268–269
C programming language, 152, 157
CPU clock, 116
CPUs. See central processing units
(CPUs)
Creative Suite, 151
credit-card processing, 286
credit cards, 122
consumer privacy, 22
e-commerce, 306
credit evaluation and expert systems
(ESs), 344
credit score, 339
critical mass, 42
CRM systems. See customer
relationship management (CRM)
systems
crowdsourcing, 277
Crystal Clear, 403, 405
CS2/Dreamweaver, 162
CSI, 119
CSO. See chief security officer (CSO)
CTI. See computer telephony
integration (CTI)
cultural differences, 308
custom-designed software, 423–424
Subject Index
507
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Customer Intelligence Group (UPS),
363
customer loyalty programs, 362–363,
383
customer privacy protection
controversy, 488
customer relationship management
(CRM) software, 180–181,
288, 319
e-tailing, 271
on-demand, 435–436
customer relationship management
(CRM) systems, 17–18, 68,
82–87, 330, 345
callback feature, 17
customer service, 86–87
data mining, 369
email and effective, 105
financial services industry, 85
hotel industry, 105
links to web applications, 17
location-based services, 85–86
market research, 83
online analytical processing
(OLAP), 369
salesforce automation, 87
targeted marketing, 84–85
customers
business intelligence (BI),
369–371
capturing total experience of, 288
defining, 84
identifying profitable groups, 363
locking in, 41
managing relationships with,
17–18
predicting behavior of, 361–363
self-service, 288–289
sorting and categorizing, 84
supporting relationships with,
82–87
switching costs, 47
targeting right, 287–288
customer service, 17
customer relationship management
(CRM) systems, 86–87
technology and, 68
Web-based, 86–87
customer service agents, 67–68
cut-over conversion, 401
CVS. See computer vision syndrome
(CVS)
cyber attacks on government
databases, 228
cybercrimes, 488
cyber terrorism, 456
D
DAS. See direct-attached storage (DAS)
DASDs. See direct access storage
devices (DASDs)
dashboards, 16–17, 371–372,
382–383
data, 8
alteration, 456–457
backups, 461–462
bits (binary digits), 111
bytes, 111
characters, 223–224
classification, 377
database approach, 223–228
decision support systems (DSSs),
330
destruction, 456–457
displaying, 14
drilling down, 365, 383
external, 226
global digital increase, 362
hierarchy, 223–224
identity theft, 455
versus information, 8–9
information systems (ISs), 13
input, 14
large Internet retailers, 362
managing, 221–228
manipulation, 8–9
outputting, 14
processing, 12
quality, 5
risks, 454–459
storage, 14–15, 126–134, 221–222
supermarket chains, 249–250
theft, 454–455
traditional file approach, 223
data analysis, 6, 383
database administrators (DBAs),
24, 226
database management systems
(DBMSs), 84, 152, 159, 169, 225
querying data, 226
relational databases, 229
web hosts, 285
database models, 228
object-oriented database model,
231–232
relational database model, 228–231
databases, 12, 24, 221–222, 223–228
amount of data collected in, 222
application independence, 224
attacks on, 24
backups, 227–228
data hierarchy, 223–224
as data management module, 330
data mining, 360–364
data modeling, 235–236
data warehouses, 238, 240–243
decision support systems (DSSs),
330
dimensional, 365, 368
entities, 223
entity relationship diagrams
(ERDs), 235–236
fields, 224, 234
files, 224
gathering, 225–226
Internet, 236–238
linking to the web, 24
multidimensional, 365
object-relational, 232
privacy, 226–227, 239–240
queries, 226
records, 224
recovery, 227–228
reports, 226
security, 226–227
structure, 233–234
targeted marketing, 84
transactional, 238
web, 236–238
data breaches, 465, 488
data centers and reducing costs, 448
data dictionary, 234
data entry controls, 461
data flow diagrams (DFDs), 397–399
data integrity, 223
data management module, 330–331
data marts, 238
Datameer, 251
data members, 154
data mining, 85, 242, 360
banking, 361
business intelligence (BI), 362
classification, 360
clustering, 360
customer loyalty programs, 363
customer relationship management
(CRM), 369
forecasting, 360
identifying profitable customer
groups, 363
inferring demographics, 364
marketing managers, 360
path analysis, 360
predicting customer behavior,
361–363
queries versus traditional queries,
360
sequence, 360
data modeling, 235–236
508
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

data processing, 14
data redundancy, 223, 231
data storage devices, 13
data store, 397
data warehouses, 18, 24, 58, 85, 128,
238, 249, 359
backups, 240
Big Data, 243
customer loyalty programs, 362
as data management module, 330
data marts, 238
data mining, 360–364
extraction, transforming, and
loading (ETL), 242
linkages to identify purchases, 383
mainframes, 240
metadata, 242
moving database data to, 238,
240–242
online analytical processing
(OLAP), 364–369
phases, 242
retail, 250
data words, 117–118
DB2, 231
DBAs. See database administrators
(DBAs)
DBMSs. See database management
systems (DBMSs)
DealerConnection, 56, 57
debit cards, 122, 306
debugging, 152, 402
decimal counting system, 6
decision making, 326
automating, 329, 339
choice phase, 326
collecting data, 6
decision support systems (DSSs), 18
design phase, 326
executive information systems
(EISs), 336
expert systems (ESs), 18
information, 7–8
intelligence phase, 326, 330
models, 326, 331
semi-structured problems, 327–328
structured problems, 327–328
tying data to physical location,
18–19
unstructured problems, 327–328
“What if” questions, 18
decision support
decision support systems (DSSs),
325–326
expert systems (ESs), 325–326,
340–445
geographic information systems
(GIS), 347–349
group decision support system
(GDSS), 346–347
decision support systems (DSSs), 18,
325–326, 329–338
auditing, 331
benefits selection, 338
bookselling industry, 335
data, 330
databases, 330, 340
data management module, 330–331
data warehouses, 330
dialog module, 333
examples, 335–338
financial services, 338
food production, 335
health care, 356
intranets, 333
model management module,
331–333
patients, 356
sensitivity analysis, 335
stand-alone, 329
tax planning, 336
website planning and adjustment,
336–337
yield management, 337–338
de-commoditize, 289
dedicated hosting, 283–284
DELETE SQL command, 233
delivery, 400
Delphi, 153
demodulation, 195
demographics, 364
denial of service (DoS) attacks,
459–460, 488
Designer Pro, 159
desktop publishing, 159
destructive applications, 23
DEX handheld units, 217
DFDs. See data flow diagrams (DFDs)
diagnostic expert systems (ESs), 343
dialog module, 333
dial-up connections, 195, 206
differentiation, 44
digital cameras, 129
digital certificates, 473–474
digital information, 6–7
digital signatures, 472–473
digital subscriber line (DSL), 203
digital systems, 6–7
digital video discs (DVDs), 110, 128,
132, 133
digital wallets, 307
dimensional databases, 365, 368
direct access, 126
direct access storage devices (DASDs),
126
direct-attached storage (DAS), 130, 145
Direct Express Debit MasterCard, 73
disaster recovery planning, 452, 476
See also business recovery plans
Discern Expert, 343–344
The Discipline of Market Leaders, 407
disk mirroring, 145
disk operating system (DOS), 55
displays, 14
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS)
attacks, 459
DMZ (demilitarized zone), 467
DNS (Domain Name System), 197
documentation, 403
documents
embedding links to websites, 160
imaging, 122–123
indexing, 122
domain names, 255
extensions, 275
resolution, 196
top-level domain (TLD), 255
Domain Name System. See DNS
(Domain Name System)
domains, 340
DOS. See disk operating system (DOS)
dossier phenomenon, 92
dot-matrix printers, 126
dots per inch (DPI), 125
Dove brand, 319
downstream, 201
downtime, 453, 480–481, 488
DPI. See dots per inch (DPI)
Dragon Naturally Speaking, 123
Dreamweaver, 151
drilling down, 365, 383
drivers, 167
Drupal, 170
DSL (digital subscriber line), 189, 203
DSL modem, 203
DSSs.Seedecisionsupportsystems(DSSs)
DVDs. See digital video discs (DVDs)
Dvorak keyboards, 118
dynamically modified models, 331
dynamic IP addresses, 197
Dynamic Systems Development
Method (DSDM), 403
dynamic webpages, 285
E
EBPP. See electronic bill presentment
and payment (EBPP)
e-business, 37
Subject Index
509
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

e-commerce, 21, 270, 289, 306–307,
311
economic feasibility study, 393–395
economic opportunities, 22
economic order quantity (EOQ), 77
EDI systems. See Electronic Data
Interchange (EDI) systems
education
information technology (IT), 22
multimedia, 161
podcasts, 260
effectiveness, 68–69
efficiency, 68–69
EFT. See electronic funds transfer
(EFT)
electromagnetic interference (EMI),
192
electronic bill presentment and
payment (EBPP), 274
Electronic Communications Privacy
Act (ECPA, 1986), 239
electronic data interchange (EDI), 264
value-added networks (VANs), 194
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
systems, 280–281
electronic funds transfer (EFT), 72, 73
electronic medical records (EMRs),
218, 487
electronic payments, 64
electronic product code (EPC), 80,
120, 208–209, 278
electronic toll payment devices, 22
electronic wallets, 188
electrostatic printers, 125
electro-thermal printers, 125
e-Logistics, 288
email
effective customer relationship
management (CRM), 105
spam, 276
viruses, 458
Embedded ViaVoice, 123
EMI (electromagnetic interference),
190
employee knowledge networks,
373–374, 375
employee record management, 88
employees, 89–90
computer use policies, 441
privacy, 22
thinking strategically, 40
timecards, 5
employers
certification, 410
monitoring employees, 22
encapsulation, 231
Enchantment (Kawasaki), 158
encryption, 198, 468
algorithms and keys, 469
asymmetric encryption, 469
ciphertext, 468
digital certificates, 473–474
digital signatures, 472–473
plaintext, 468
private key, 469–470
public key, 469–470
public-key encryption, 469–470
secret key, 469
slowing down communications,
475
symmetric encryption, 469
encryption programs, 468
engineering information systems
(ISs), 73–74
enhancing existing products or ser-
vices, 44–45
enterprise applications, 16, 432
customers fearing high switching
costs, 47
dashboard, 16–17
enterprise resource planning (ERP)
systems, 16, 19, 50, 68, 77,
104, 325
challenges and disadvantages,
97–98
Manufacturing Resource Planning
component, 97
supply chain management (SCM)
systems, 93–94, 97
enterprise software applications, 13
enterprise systems, 50
entities, 223
entity relationship diagrams (ERDs),
235–236
EOQ. See economic order quantity
EPC. See electronic product code
(EPC)
e-readers, 114, 335
ergonomic keyboards, 118
ergonomics, 118, 136
ERP systems. See enterprise resource
planning (ERP) systems
ESs. See expert systems (ESs)
e-tailing, 270–272
Ethernet, 197
ETL. See extraction, transforming, and
loading (ETL)
European Article Number (EAN), 310
European Privacy and Human Rights
report, 312
European Union (EU), 310–313
fining Microsoft, 55, 56
evaluation, 90
evaluation software, 90
Excel, 2, 41, 158, 159, 168, 249, 382
exchanges, 266–268
executive information systems (EISs),
336, 371
expansion slots, 135
Experian Data Breach Resolution, 465
expert systems (ESs), 18, 325–326,
329, 340–345
Expression Web, 162
Extensible Hypertext Markup Lan-
guage. See XHTML (Extensible
Hypertext Markup Language)
Extensible Markup Language. See
XML (Extensible Markup
Language)
external data, 226
external entities, 397
external hard disks, 128
external ports, 135
ExtraCare, 363
extraction, transforming, and loading
(ETL), 242
extranets, 195–196, 267
retailers, 280–282
extra-organizational workforce, 277
Extreme Programming (XP), 403,
404–405
EyeD Mouse, 464
F
FacilitatePro, 346
Factiva, 376
Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions
Act (FACT Act), 339
FairPlay DRM (digital rights
management) software, 48
fair trade practices, 55
Falcon Fraud Manager, 342
Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act (FERPA, 1974), 452
FAQs (frequently asked questions),
39, 87
fault tolerance, 130
feasibility studies, 394–396
Feature Driven Development (FDD),
403
fiber-optic cables, 189
fiber optics, 190–191
Fiber to the Home (FTTH), 204
fields, 224, 234
file management tools, 159
files, 224
transferring, 258
510
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

File Transfer Protocol (FTP), 258
finance
cash management systems
(CMSs), 72
information systems (ISs), 20,
71–72
investment analysis and service, 72
financial institutions and denial of
service (DoS) attacks, 460
financial managers, 71
financial services, 85, 338
fingerprints, 463–464
FiOS (Fiber Optic Service), 204
Firefox, 55
firewalls, 466–467
First Aid by American Red Cross, 150
first generation (1G) protocols, 201
first-generation programming
languages, 151
first movers, 42–44, 73
fixed variable models, 331
fixed wireless, 204
Flash, 48
flash cut conversion, 401
flash drives, 126
flash memory, 110, 129
flat-panel display monitors, 124
floppy disks, 127–128
food manufacturers
collaboration with paper manufac-
turers, 96
transit efficiency, 145–146
FoodPro, 335
food production decision support
systems (DSSs), 335
FordDirect.com website, 57
forecasting, 360
foreign keys, 229, 230
for-fee content, 273
for-profit companies competitive
advantage, 38
FORTRAN, 152, 157
Fortune Magazine, 427
4G LTE. See Long-Term Evolution
(LTE)
fourth-generation (4GLs) program-
ming languages, 151–152
fourth generation (4G) protocols, 201
fraud and Internet, 274
freedom of speech, 22
frequently asked questions. See FAQs,
39
fulfillment, 270
functional business areas information
systems (ISs), 19–21
furniture sales, 296
G
Galaxy Note II, 114
Gantt charts, 407
GB. See gigabytes (GB)
GDP. See gross domestic product
(GDP)
General Public License (GPL), 171
general-purpose application software,
158
GeoBase, 78
geographic information systems
(GISs), 18–19, 347–349
geostationary (GEO) satellites,
191–192
GHz. See gigahertz (GHz)
gigabytes (GB), 111
gigahertz (GHz), 116
Gigbit Ethernet, 197
Gimp, 159
GISs. See geographic information
systems (GISs)
global information systems, 300
applicable law, 313
conflicting economic, scientific,
and security issues, 308–309
cultural differences, 308
different standards, 310–311
flexible websites and applications,
304
language differences, 304, 307
legal barriers, 312–313
localizing, 304
multiple versions of websites, 304
open source software, 309
payment mechanisms differences,
306–307
political challenges, 309
privacy laws, 312–313
regulations and tariffs, 305–306
technological challenges, 304–305
time zones, 313–314
globalization, 302–303, 375
global positioning systems (GPSs), 19,
78, 119, 204
cell phones, 278
smartphones, 86
3-D geographic software, 164
Global Trade Item Numbers (GTINs),
311
Google Docs, 41, 160, 163
Google Drive, 160, 163
Google Earth, 19, 349
Google Maps, 19, 162, 164
Google Voice, 207
Google Wallet, 279, 307
GoToMeeting, 187
GoToMyPC, 454
“got-to-have-it” technology, 37
government databases cyber attacks,
228
government-to-business, 264
government-to-consumer, 264
GPS. See global positioning system
(GPS)
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA,
1999), 452
graphical user interfaces (GUIs), 155,
166
object database management
systems (ODBMSs), 232
graphics programs, 159
grocery ordering services, 64–65
gross domestic product (GDP), 93
group decision support system
(GDSS), 346–347
groupware, 163
GSM (Global System for Mobile)
protocol, 201
GUIs. See graphical user interfaces
(GUIs)
H
hackers, 24, 451
hacking, 455
customer privacy protection, 488
software defending against, 457
handheld devices, 14, 113, 124, 146
handheld scanners, 58
hard disks, 127–128
hardware, 109
backward compatibility, 136
blackouts, 453
bridges, 195
brownouts, 453
central processing units (CPUs),
110
compatibility, 136
cost, 136
drivers, 167
ergonomics, 136
expansion slots, 135
external ports, 135
footprint, 136
information systems (ISs), 13
input devices, 110
internal memory, 110
leasing, 138
modems, 195
motherboard, 110
natural disasters, 453
network interface cards (NICs), 195
Subject Index
511
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

noise, 136
output devices, 110, 124–126
power, 135
power consumption, 136
purchasing, 111, 135–137
RAM (random access memory), 110
repeaters, 195
risks, 453–454
ROM (read-only memory), 110
routers, 195
scalability, 138
source data input devices, 120–122
storage, 110, 126–134
switches, 195
technology convergence, 114–115
updating, 138
vandalism, 454
Hawaii Five-O, 119
HBO app family, 418
HBO GO mobile platform, 418
HDTV. See high definition television
(HDTV)
health care
biometrics, 487
decision support systems (DSSs), 356
electronic records, 239–240
networks and, 217–218
positive patient identification
(PPID) systems, 487
health care plans, 338
Health Guide patient monitoring and
management system, 194
health information management
(HIM), 344
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA,
1996), 240, 452
high definition television (HDTV),
125
hijacking, 460–461
hits, 286
home lending operation, 295
honeypots, 457
honeytokens, 457
hospitality industry, 338
hosting service, 283–285
hosts, 196
hotel industry customer relationship
management (CRM), 105
hot sites, 478–479
hotspots, 197–198
How to Drive Your Competition Crazy
(Kawasaki), 158
HR information systems. See human
resources (HR) information
systems
HRM. See human resource manage-
ment (HRM)
HTML5, 257
HTML. See Hypertext Markup
Language (HTML)
HTTP. See Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP)
HTTPS (HTTP Secure), 255, 471
human resource (HR) information
systems, 16
human resource (HR) information
systems (ISs), 21
human resource management (HRM),
88–91
Hurricane by American Red Cross,
150
hypermedia, 160–161
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML),
257–258, 348
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP),
255
I
IBM PCs, 55
iCloud, 131
ICQ, 261
identity theft, 22, 279, 455, 488
IEEE 802.3, 197
IEEE 802.11, 197–199, 218
IEEE 802.15, 199
IEEE 802.16, 199
IF-THEN rules, 340–341
Illustrator, 151, 159
imaging, 122–123
impact analysis, 477
impact printers, 126
implementation, 400–402
impressions, 265
InDesign, 151, 159
indexing documents, 122
industrial revolution, 22
industries and competitive
advantage, 48
inference engine, 340
information, 8
availability, 452
businesses use of, 7
confidentiality, 452
context, 9–10
cost of obtaining, 10
versus data, 8–9
decision making, 7–8
disaster recovery planning, 452
erroneous, 10
generating, 9
identifying needed, 109
integrity, 452
managers and, 12–13
out-of-date, 10
partial, 10
problem solving, 7–8
producing, 12
relevant, 10
risks, 452
theft, 454–455
useful, 10
information map, 12–13
information security
economics, 479–481
goals, 451–452
information systems auditor, 465
information systems (ISs), 12
accounting, 20, 70–71
antiquated, 54
business intelligence (BI) systems,
18
careers, 23–26
competitive advantage, 51
computers, 15
customer relationship management
(CRM) systems, 17–18, 82–87
cyber terrorism, 456
data, 13
data processing, 14
decision support systems (DSSs), 18
downtime, 453
employee involvement in, 423
engineering, 73–74
expert systems (ESs), 18
finance, 20, 71–72
functional business areas, 19–21
geographic information systems
(GISs), 18–19
hardware, 13
human resource (HR), 21
human resource management
(HRM), 88–91
input, 14
inventory control subsystem, 11
manufacturing, 77
marketing, 20
mobile phones, 20
output, 14
people, 13
planning, 387–391
procedures, 13
processing stages, 14–15
purpose of, 7–8
redundancy, 475–476, 480–481
risks, 452–459
securing, 451–452
512
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

software, 13
storage, 14–15
strategic information systems
(SISs), 37
supply chain management (SCM)
systems, 16–17, 75–81, 93–98
telecommunications, 13
transaction processing systems
(TPSs), 16
information technology (IT), 13,
22–23
describing role in mission
statement, 388
dynamic nature of, 8
expediting transfer of knowledge,
375
importance of, 6
job requirements, 8
knowledge creation, 375
knowledge workers and, 8
offshoring, 425
outsourcing, 425
reengineering and, 50
sources for new systems, 389
strategic plan for implementing,
389
systems thinking, 13
targeted marketing, 85
terrorism, 476
turning knowledge into routine,
automated processes, 375
information technology (IT) profes-
sionals certification, 410–411
information technology (IT) security
workers, 474
information technology (IT) services
and outsourcing, 425–428
inheritance, 231
ink-jet printers, 125–126
innovative technologies, 64–65
input, 14
input devices, 14–15, 110
imaging, 122–123
keyboards, 118
mouse, 118–119
source data, 120–122
speech recognition, 123–124
touch screens, 119
trackballs, 119
trackpads, 119
INSERT SQL command, 233
insider securities trading, 345
instant messaging (IM), 261–262
InstantService, 262
insurance claims, 44–45
insurance companies, 48
antiquated software and hardware,
48
identifying profitable customer
groups, 363
neural nets, 342–343
integrity, 452
intellectual property, 40, 309
intelligent agents, 342
intelligent transportation systems
(ITS), 396
interaction diagrams, 399
interactive communication tech-
nology, 261–262
interactive voice recognition (IVR),
123–124
internal memory, 110
international commerce, 300–304
international information systems
(ISs), 304
Internet, 21, 194
auditing information systems, 402
availability, 186
backbone, 196
criminals, 274
databases, 236–238
enhancing existing products or
services, 44–45
fraud, 274
government limits on, 309
growth of, 13
hosts, 196
large retailers, 362
mobile phone access (China), 115
networking services, 201–204, 206
non-work related access, 441
peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing, 188
phone calls, 44
system linking, 77
world-wide population using, 302
Internet Explorer (IE), 47, 55, 58, 474
Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4),
196
Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6), 196
Internet Security Threat report, 23
Internet service providers (ISPs), 194,
199, 476
fixed wireless, 204
Internet connections, 206–207
Internet telephony, 207
interpreters, 156–157, 164, 169
interrupts, 116
intranets, 89, 195–196, 267
benefits database, 91
decision support systems (DSSs),
333
knowledge sharing, 374–375
inventory, 93, 95–96
inventory control, 76–77
inventory control subsystem, 11
investigation, 393–394
investment analysis and service, 72
Invisible Keylogger Stealth, 454
iOS, 167
iPads, 114, 122, 123, 218, 310, 382,
418, 475
iPhones, 32, 42–43, 122, 123, 151,
156, 276, 310, 383, 418, 475
IP (Internet Protocol) addresses, 195,
196–197
iPods, 260, 273, 418
iPod Touches, 64
IP telephony, 207
IrfanView, 159
iSCSI, 145
Isis, 188, 307
Isis Ready merchants, 188
ISPs. See Internet service providers
(ISPs)
ISs. See information systems (ISs)
IT. See information technology (IT)
iterative programming, 403
iTunes, 48, 260, 388
IVR. See interactive voice recognition
(IVR)
J
Jaguar supercomputer, 112
Java, 25, 151, 155, 157, 458
JavaScript, 155
Java servlets, 237, 285
jobs and information technology (IT)
requirements, 8
join relational operation, 232
join tables, 229, 232–233
Joomla!, 286
just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing, 77
just-in-time (JIT) system, 208
K
keyboards, 14, 110, 118
keylogging, 454
key performance indicators (KPIs),
371–372
keystroke logging, 454
Kindle e-readers, 38, 65, 114, 389
Kindle Fire, 131, 370
Kindle Fire HD, 114
Kindle Owners Lending Library, 38
knowledge, 372–373, 375–376
knowledge management (KM)
software, 375
Subject Index
513
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

knowledge management (KM)
systems, 372
autocategorization, 377
automatic taxonomy, 377
capturing and sorting
organizational knowledge, 373
difficulty quantifying benefits, 395
employee knowledge networks,
373–374, 375
knowledge from the web, 375–376
knowledge workers, 8, 373
konbini stores, 306
KPIs. See key performance indicators
(KPIs)
L
languages
character sets, 304
differences, 307
LANs. See local area networks (LANs)
laptops, 87, 113, 194
laser printers, 125–126
lasers, 190
late mover, 54
latency, 129
LCD monitors. See liquid crystal
display (LCD) monitors
Lean Development (LD), 403
legacy systems, 54, 408–409
legal barriers and global information
systems, 312–313
legal jurisdictions on the web, 311
lending institutions, 339
libraries, 335
licensing applications, 431–435.
See also software licensing
life cycle, 392
light-emitting diode (LED), 190
LimeWire, 188
linear regression model, 332–333
Linear Tape-Open (LTO), 127
linking tables, 230
links, 161
Linux, 167–168, 170–171
Linux Mobile, 171
liquid crystal display (LCD) monitors,
124
Liquor Inventory System, 82
load balancing, 282–283
local area networks (LANs), 15, 25,
193, 194
location-based services, 85–86
locking in suppliers or buyers, 41,
47–48
logic bombs, 459
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), 200
Lotus 1-2-3, 41
Lotus Notes, 448
Lotus SmartSuite, 159
low earth orbit (LEO) satellites,
191–192
LTO. See Linear Tape-Open (LTO)
M
machine cycle, 116–117
machine language, 151, 156
Macintosh, 418
Mac OS, 48
Mac OS X, 156, 167, 168
magnetic disks, 110, 126, 127–128,
133
magnetic-ink character recognition
(MICR), 121
magnetic tapes, 110, 126–127, 132,
133, 145
mainframe computers, 112–113
data warehouses, 240
maintenance, 402–403
malicious code, 488
malware, 23
management information system
(MIS), 16
Management Reporting Suite, 156
managers, 12–13
Manifesto for Agile Software Develop-
ment, 404
manufacturing, 75
comparative advantage, 375
departments as subsystems, 10
information systems (ISs), 76–77
just-in-time (JIT), 77
monitoring and controlling, 78
relying on technology, 40
manufacturing resource planning
(MRP II), 77
many-to-many relationship, 230–231
MapPoint, 347
Mapquest, 162, 349
marketing, 20, 84–85
data mining, 360
market research, 83
Mars Climate Orbiter, 310
mashups, 161–162, 349
massive open online courses
(MOOCs), 260–261
master production schedule (MPS),
77
material requirements planning
(MRP), 76–77, 104
MB. See megabytes (MB)
McAfee, 466
m-commerce, 277–279
MediaWiki, 260
medical devices, 46
Medical-grade Wireless Utility, 218
medical management and expert
systems (ESs), 343–344
megabits per second (Mbps), 191
megabytes (MB), 111
megahertz (MHz), 116
Melissa virus, 458
memory
allocation, 166–167
capacity, 117
RAM (random access memory), 110
ROM (read-only memory), 110
message digest, 472
metadata, 234, 242
methods, 154
metropolitan area networks (MANs),
193, 194
WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperabil-
ity for Microwave Access), 199
MHz. See megahertz (MHz)
MICR. See magnetic-ink character
recognition (MICR)
microprocessors, 115–116
Microsoft TechEd conference, 275
Microsoft Windows, 25, 48, 55, 459
Microwaves, 191
military information, 308–309
millions of instructions per second.
See MIPS (millions of instructions
per second)
Mipis Software, 21
MIPS (millions of instructions per
second), 117–118
mirror servers, 283
MIS. See management information
system (MIS)
mission-critical applications, 477,
480
mission statements, 388
Mobile Advertising: Analysis and
Forecasts (2009), 272
mobile applications, 13, 156
mobile applications developers, 25
mobile commerce, 277–279
mobile communications, 201
mobile computing, 6, 13, 36, 109
mobile devices, 44
banking transactions, 6
business intelligence (BI), 368
malware, 23
mobile commerce, 277–279
RFID readers, 278
spam, 276
mobile networks, 201
514
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

mobile payments, 188, 307
mobile phones, 186–187, 243
advertising, 310
automobiles reading text messages
from, 345
consumer privacy, 22
information systems (ISs), 20
payment technology, 37
solid-state storage, 129
switching costs, 41
voice recognition, 124
model management module,
331–333
models, 326, 331–333
modems, 195
modulation, 195
monitors, 14, 110, 124–125, 135
monopolies, 56
MOOCs. See massive open online
courses (MOOCs)
Most Admired Companies for Infor-
mation Technology Services
(Fortune Magazine, 2010), 427
motherboard, 110
mouse, 110, 118–119
Mozilla Firefox, 170
MP3 format, 260
MP3 players, 129
MPS. See master production schedule
(MPS)
MRP. See material requirements
planning (MRP)
MRP II. See manufacturing resource
planning (MRP II)
MSN Messenger, 261
m-tailing, 270
multicore central processing units
(CPUs), 117
multicore processors, 115
multidimensional databases, 365
multimedia, 161
multimedia software, 89–90, 161
multinational organizations, 299–300
multiprocessing, 112
multithreading, 115
municipality-sponsored networks, 199
MYCIN, 343
MyHealthcareAdvisor.com, 338
MySQL, 231
MyStore, 64
N
name-your-own-price auction, 273
narrowband, 189
NAS. See network-attached storage
(NAS)
natural disasters, 453
navigation systems, 123
near-field communication (NFC),
188, 307
.NET, 156
NetApp, 145
netizens, 22
network administrator, 24–25
network-attached storage (NAS),
130, 145
networking services, 201–204, 206
networking technologies
broadband telephony, 206–208
impact of, 206–211
radio frequency identification
(RFID), 208–210
network interface cards (NICs), 195
networks, 192
access controls, 462–464
converging technologies, 210–211
direct-attached storage (DAS), 130
hardware, 195
health care and, 217–218
IP addresses, 197
local area networks (LANs), 193
metropolitan area networks
(MANs), 193
municipality-sponsored, 199
network-attached storage (NAS),130
peer-to-peer LAN, 193
personal area networks (PANs), 194
scalability, 193
storage area networks (SANs), 130
types, 193–196
value-added networks (VANs), 194
virtual private networks (VPNs),
195–196
wide area networks (WANs), 194
wireless LANs (WLANs), 193
neural networks, 340–343
NICs. See network interface cards
(NICs)
nodes, 192
nonimpact printers, 125–126
North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), 300, 427
North American International Auto
Show (2000), 56
Norton 360, 169
notebook computers, 113
O
object code, 156, 157
object database management systems
(ODBMSs), 232
Objectivity/DB, 232
object-oriented database model,
231–232
object-oriented databases (ODBs), 232
object-oriented DBMSs, 232
object-oriented programming (OOP)
languages, 154–156
object-relational databases, 232
objects, 154–155, 231
encapsulation, 231
inheritance, 231
ObjectStore, 232
OCR. See optical character
recognition (OCR)
ODBs. See object-oriented databases
(ODBs)
Office, 41, 159–160
Office 365, 131
Office 2013, 131
office productivity software, 158–160
offshore websites, 311
offshoring, 424–425
oil companies, 94–95
OLAP. See online analytical
processing (OLAP)
“100 Best Companies to Work For”
(Fortune 2011), 205
128-bit keys, 471
OneNote, 159
one-to-many relationship, 230
online advertising, 264–266
online analytical processing (OLAP),
242, 364–369
composing tables on the fly, 365
customer relationship management
(CRM), 369
drilling down, 365
gaining efficiencies, 368–369
relational databases, 365
tracking information about
products, 369
online analytical processing (OLAP)
applications, 365, 368
online annoyances and crimes, 22,
276–277
online chat customer service, 17, 86
online operations
denial of service (DoS) attacks,
459–460
hijacking, 460–461
risks, 459–460
online purchases and sales tax, 266
online shopping, 271
online storage, 110
OnStar, 123
ooVoo, 187
Subject Index
515
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OpenOffice.org, 159, 170
OpenProj, 159
Open Skies, 52, 54
open source software, 169–171, 309
open systems, 11–12
OpenTracker, 369
Open Workbench, 159
operating systems (OSs), 55, 165–168
operational feasibility study, 393, 396
optical carrier (OC), 204, 206
optical character recognition (OCR),
120, 121
optical discs, 110, 126, 128
optical mark recognition, 120
options, 421–422
Oracle, 231, 232
Oracle Retail Merchandising system,
320
Oracle Retail Point-of-Sale Software
System (ORPOS), 320
organizational change, 50
organizational culture, 396
organizational systems, 11, 13
organizations
business partners, 95
customer relationships, 17–18
gathering data, 225–226
information systems (ISs), 13–14
knowledge, 373
mission statements, 388
mobility strategy, 36
personal information, 92
reducing costs and labor resources,
448
targeted by phishers, 456
OSs. See operating systems (OSs)
Outlook, 159, 458
output, 14
output devices, 14, 15, 110, 124–126
outsourcing, 406–407
call centers, 447
cloud-based technologies versus,
423
custom-designed software,
423–424
efficiencies creation, 406
information technology (IT), 425
outlook for traditional, 423
reducing costs, 426
service-level agreements, 430
outsourcing information technology
(IT) services
accessing qualified know-how, 428
advantages, 428–429
change commitment and
engagement, 431
competitive advantage, 430
conflict resolution, 431
contracts, 426–427, 431
core business concentration, 428
experienced employees, 429
financial planning, 428
high costs, 430
information technology (IT)
companies, 426
litigation, 427
loss of control, 429
monitoring, 431
researching, 430–431
risks, 429–430
scope of services, 431
service-level agreements, 430
technology changes and, 427
vendors, 426
P
packaged software, 158, 173–174
packet sniffing devices, 476
PagePlus, 159
pages per minute (ppm), 125
page swapping, 167
Paint Shop Pro, 159
palm-vein technology, 487
PANs. See personal area networks
(PANs)
paper manufacturers collaboration
with food manufacturers, 96
parallel conversion, 401
parallel processing, 112
parameters, 327
partial information, 10
Pascal, 152
passwords, 463
compromising, 488
most common, 455
SSO (single sign-on), 475
strong, 455
patches, 457
patents, 54, 309
path analysis, 360
patient decision support systems
(DSSs), 356
Patient Secure Identity (PSI), 487
PATRIOT Act (2001), 476
payments
foreign mechanisms, 306–307
processing, 5
PAYware Mobile Enterprise software,
64
Pay with Square smartphone app, 37
PBXs (private branch exchanges), 207
PCs. See personal computers (PCs)
PDAs. See personal digital assistants
(PDAs)
PDF (portable data format) standard,
48
Peapod app, 64–65
peer-to-peer LAN, 193
peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing, 188
pen register, 476
PerformanceEdge eLearning, 90
PERL (Practical Extraction and Report
Language), 170, 285
personal area networks (PANs), 194,
199
personal computers (PCs), 113, 418
flat-panel monitors, 124
Microsoft Windows, 55
personal data, 92–93, 312–313
personal digital assistants (PDAs),
113–114
personalizing service, 288
phased conversion, 401
phishing, 22, 274–277, 455
phone-to-phone service, 207
Photoshop, 151, 159
PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor), 155,
237, 285
physical systems, 11
Pidgin, 261
pilot conversion, 402
pixels (picture elements), 124
plaintext, 468
planning information systems (ISs),
387
change management, 389
mission statements, 388
moving to development, 391
standardization benefits, 390–391
strategic plan for implementing
information technology
(IT), 389
platforms. See operating systems (OSs)
Playstation Network, 451
Pleiades supercomputer, 112
PLM. See product lifecycle manage-
ment (PLM)
plug-and-play (PnP) operating system
(OS), 167
podcasts, 260–261
point-of-sale (POS) machines, 14, 16,
70, 243, 319
point-of-sale (POS) system, 32, 64
pop-ups, 22, 84, 276
portfolios, 72
Portrait Miner 6.0, 362
ports, 135
516
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

positive patient identification (PPID)
systems, 487
PowerPoint, 158, 159, 161
P2P file sharing. See peer-to-peer (P2P)
file sharing
ppm. See pages per minute (ppm)
presentation tools, 158
primary key, 230
primary memory, 110
Primavera P6, 407
printers, 14, 41, 110, 125–126
priorities, 421–422
privacy, 22, 92–93
business arguments, 92
consumer profiling, 271
consumers, 452, 488
cookies, 263
databases, 226–227, 239–240
dossier phenomenon, 92
global information systems,
312–313
Kindle Fire, 370
mobile commerce, 279
patients, 452
protecting, 93, 312
students, 452
private key, 469–470
problems, 5–7
identifying, 36
semi-structured, 327–328
structured, 327–328
unstructured, 327–328
problem solving, 7–8, 12
processes, 9
data flow diagrams (DFDs), 397
parallel, 16
sequential, 16
Process Knowledge System, 342
processors, 115, 117
productivity, 68–69
productivity tools, 158
product lifecycle management (PLM),
40
products
alliances, 45–47
brand-name success, 44
differentiation, 44
enhancing existing, 44–45
first movers, 42–43
locking in buyers, 47–48
new and unique, 41–44, 64
new markets for, 37
rapid prototyping, 73
profit-and-loss report, 70
programmer/analysts, 23
programmers, 23
programming, 150, 154
programming languages, 150–151
compilers, 156–157
first-generation, 151
fourth-generation (4GLs),
151–152
Hypertext Markup Language
(HTML), 257–258
interpreters, 156–157
object-oriented programming
(OOP) languages, 154–156
PERL (Practical Extraction and
Report Language), 170
second-generation, 151
third-generation (3GLs), 151–152
visual programming languages,
153
XHTML (Extensible Hypertext
Markup Language), 257
XML (Extensible Markup
Language), 257–258
programs, 150
See also applications
debugging, 152
progressive elaboration, 391
Project, 159, 407
Project Execution, 78
Project Insight, 407
Project Management Professional
(PMP) credentials, 409
project management system (PMS),
355
project portfolio management (PPM)
software, 407
projects
management, 159, 408
planning and management tools,
407
successful, 392
proprietary software, 41, 169
proprietary technologies,
263–264
protocols, 196–201
CDMA (Code Division Multiple
Access), 201
Ethernet, 197
File Transfer Protocol (FTP), 258
first generation (1G), 201
fourth generation (4G), 201
GSM (Global System for Mobile),
201
HTTPS (HTTP Secure), 255
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP), 255
second generation (2G), 201
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), 470, 471
TCP/IP (Transmission Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol),
196–197
third generation (3G), 201
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), 198
wireless, 197–201
WPA2, 198
prototyping, 391, 406
proxy servers, 467–468
public key, 469–470
public-key encryption, 469–470
digital signatures, 472–473
Transport Layer Security (TLS), 471
Publisher, 159
PUFF, 343
purchase order systems, 16
pure play retailers, 270
Python, 285
Q
Quantum 3 TB LTO-5 tapes, 127
Quark, 159
queries, 226
traditional versus data-mining, 360
QUERTY keyboards, 118
Quick Response Codes (QR codes),
120, 121
QuickStore24, 217
R
radio frequency identification (RFID),
80–81, 120, 187–188, 208–211
radio frequency identification (RFID)
devices, 47
radio frequency interference (RFI), 192
radio transmission, 191–192
RAID (redundant array of
independent disks), 130,
461–462
RAM (random access memory), 110,
112
rapid prototyping, 73
Rapt Buy, 330
rating companies, 265
Rational Project Coordinator, 407
Rational Unified Process (RUP), 403
reach percentage, 265
read-only memory. See ROM (read-
only memory)
real estate alliances, 268
records, 224, 232
recovery, 475
business recovery plans, 476–478
databases, 227–228
prioritizing needs, 477
Subject Index
517
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

recovery plans, 478–479
recruitment, 89
Red Hat Fedora, 170
reducing costs, 39, 64
redundancy, 480–481
redundant array of independent
disks. See RAID (redundant array
of independent disks)
reengineering, 50, 98
reference manuals, 302
register, 116
regression analysis, 363
regulations and tariffs, 305–306
relational database management
systems (DBMSs), 233
atomicity, 465
relational database model, 228–231
relational databases, 229–230, 232
online analytical processing
(OLAP), 365
relational operations, 232–234
table creation from existing tables,
232
relational operations, 232–234
relations, 228
relationships among tables, 230–231,
235–236
repeaters, 195
repetitive-stress injuries (RSIs), 132
reports, 226
request for information (RFI), 434
request for proposal (RFP), 434
requirements definition, 393, 396
research & development (R&D), 277
resolution, 125
résumés, 88
retail
Big Data, 250–251
data warehouses, 250
personalizing marketing, 85
stock-outs, 342
supply chain, 75
retailers
companies collaborating with, 96
extranets, 280–282
return on investment (ROI), 169–170,
394, 478
reverse auctions, 40, 273
RFID devices. See radio frequency
identification (RFID) devices
RFID readers, 278
RFID tags, 208–210
RFI (radio frequency interference), 190
RiskAnalyst, 344
risk assessment and business recovery
plans, 477
risks, 452
applications, 454–459
blackouts, 453
brownouts, 453
cyber terrorism, 456
data, 454–459
data alteration, 456–457
data destruction, 456–457
denial of service (DoS) attacks,
459–460
hardware, 453–454
hijacking, 460–461
identity theft, 455
keylogging, 454
logic bombs, 459
natural disasters, 453
non-malicious mishaps, 459
online operations, 459–460
social engineering, 454
theft of information, 454–455
vandalism, 454
viruses, 458–459
website defacement, 456–457
worms, 458–459
RJ-45 plug-in connectors, 190
robots, 39
Roku boxes, 418
ROM (read-only memory), 110
root access, 284
routers, 195
RPG, 152
RSIs. See repetitive-stress injuries
(RSIs)
RSS software, 260
runtime errors, 157
S
SaaS. See storage-as-a-service (SaaS) or
software as a service (SaaS) model
SaaS CRM service, 448
Sabre, 51
Safari, 55
Sales Cloud, 448
salesforce automation, 87, 181, 278
salespeople, 87
sales tax and online purchases, 266
salting, 488
SANs. See storage area networks
(SANs)
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (2002), 20, 395,
452, 465
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Corporate
Governance Act (2005), 428
satellite-based radio broadcasting, 42
satellite networking services, 204
satellite transmission, 191–192
scalability, 130, 138, 193
scanners, 14
schema, 233–234
science and global information
systems, 308–309
scientific applications, 113
SCM systems. See supply chain
management (SCM) systems
Scrum, 403
SDKs. See software development kits
(SDKs)
SD (Secure Digital) flash memory
card, 129
search advertising, 264
search engine optimization (SEO),
266
search engines, 44, 266
second generation (2G) protocols,
201
second-generation programming
languages, 151
secret key, 469
SecureID, 463, 475
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), 470, 471
security
amount needed, 479–480
audit trails, 93
certification, 410–411
custom-designed software, 423
databases, 226–227
downtime, 480–481
economics, 479–481
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
systems, 281
gaps, 488
global information systems,
308–309
goals, 451–452
hackers, 451
holes or vulnerabilities, 454
importance of, 479
mobile payments, 307
128-bit keys, 471
personal data, 93
software patches, 457
user-developed applications, 440
Wi-Fi networks, 198
security cards, 463
security measures
authentication, 468–474
DMZ (demilitarized zone), 467
downside, 475
encryption, 468–474
firewalls, 466–467
proxy servers, 467–468
518
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

self-service, 288–289
semi-structured problems, 327–328
sensitivity analysis, 335
sequential storage, 126
servers, 113, 193, 196
honeypots, 457
load balancing, 282–283
mirror servers, 283
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs),
255
service industries supply chain, 75
service-level agreements, 430
services
automating, 39
combining, 45–47
creating new, 64
differentiation, 44
enhancing, 44–45, 53–54
first movers, 42
improving, 52
new markets for, 37
set-top boxes, 85
shared hosting, 283, 286
SharePoint, 53
SharePoint Designer, 162
SharePoint Server, 372
shipping, 78–79, 122
shopping carts, 286, 296
“A Shop Your Way Rewards”
program, 250
Simple Storage Service (S3)
(Amazon), 15
simulation software, 363
single fixed models, 331
single sign-on. See SSO (single
sign-on)
Siri, 123
SISs. See strategic information systems
(SISs)
SketchUp, 164
SKUs. See stock keeping units (SKUs)
Skype, 187
Smallfoot, 170
Smalltalk, 155
smart computers and air traffic con-
trollers (ATCs), 342
smart outsourcing, 407
smartphone apps and cookies, 447
smartphones, 13, 114–115, 146, 186,
210, 418
depositing checks apps, 123
GPS (global positioning service), 86
location-based services, 86
mobile advertising, 272
mobile commerce, 279
m-tailing, 270
operating systems (OSs), 167
paying on-the-go, 37
personal area networks (PANs), 194
salespeople, 87, 278
spam, 276
touch screens, 119
SMS (text) messages, 23
Snapshot device, 45
social customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM) systems, 85
social engineering, 454, 455
social media, 105, 185, 256,
279–280
accessing at work, 441
analytics, 280
benefits, 7
Big Data, 243
criminals, 274
customers, 6, 22
disseminating information, 280
financial services industry, 85
first movers, 43
freedom of speech, 22
furniture sales, 296
location services, 279
malware, 23
shopping carts, 296
web businesses, 255–256
social networks, 21
software, 13, 109, 149–150, 150
See also applications and programs
affordability, 13
application-specific, 158
automation and, 181–182
beta software, 54, 432
copyrighting, 40
custom modifications versus vendor
updates, 433
defending against hacking, 457
enterprise applications, 47
information systems (ISs), 13
knowledge about, 152
logic bombs, 459
modification difficulties, 433
non-malicious mishaps, 459
open source software, 169–171
packaged, 158, 431–432
patches, 457
patenting, 40
product development costs, 432
proprietary software, 169
standards creation, 47–48
switching costs, 41
vendors, 433
viruses, 458–459
worms, 458–459
software as a service (SaaS), 13, 172,
432, 436–438, 448
software development
agile methods, 404
difficulties measuring competence,
410
software development kits (SDKs),
151
software engineering, 150
software licensing
benchmarking, 435
benefits, 432–433
contracts, 435
General Public License (GPL), 171
permissive model, 171
post-implementation support, 435
request for information (RFI), 434
request for proposal (RFP), 434
risks, 433
software as a service (SaaS), 172
system requirements, 434
vendors, 434, 435
software on demand. See software as a
service (SaaS)
software piracy, 173
Solaris, 168
solid-state disk (SSD), 129
solid-state storage, 129
SolidWorks, 74
Sony batteries, 133
sound system, 10
source code, 156
source data input devices, 120–122,
226
spam, 22, 276
spamming, 84
hijacking and, 460
speakers, 110
spear phishing, 455
specialized output devices, 110
speech recognition, 123–124
Speedpass, 187
spindle speed, 133
spreadsheets, 158
spyware, 22, 263, 276, 369, 459
SQL. See Structured Query Language
(SQL)
SQL Server, 231, 232, 448
Square card reader, 122
SSD. See solid-state disk (SSD)
SSO (single sign-on), 475
SSP. See storage service provider (SSP)
standardization, 390–391
standards creation, 47–48
State of the Data Center Survey
(Information Week, 2012), 448
Subject Index
519
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

states Attorneys General, 55
static IP address, 197
stock keeping units (SKUs), 181
stock transactions, 44
“Stop Online Piracy Act,” 311
storage, 14–15, 110, 126–134, 145
cloud storage, 131
data, 221–222
direct access, 126
direct-attached storage (DAS), 130
magnetic disks, 127–128
magnetic tapes, 127
network-attached storage (NAS),
130
optical discs, 128
RAID (redundant array of indepen-
dent disks), 130
scalability, 130
sequential storage, 126
solid-state storage, 129
storage area networks (SANs),
130
storage area networks (SANs), 130,
145
storage-as-a-service (SaaS), 131
storage devices, 15
storage media, 132–134
storage service provider (SSP), 438
stored data, 132–133
strategic advantage, 37
custom-design software, 424
first movers, 42–44
late mover, 54
strategic information systems (SISs),
37, 40
competitive advantage, 48
creation, 48–50
customers, 49
economic justification, 49
enhanced service, 53–54
maintaining, 50–54
massive automation, 52–53
organizational change, 50
organizational goal, 48
organizational strategy, 49
reengineering, 50
standard business practice, 51
supporting nonstrategic activities,
50
strategic moves, 36–37, 40
strategic planning, 37, 389
strategies, 36–37
competitive advantage, 38–48
as unfair business practices, 55–56
strong passwords, 455
structured problems, 327–328
Structured Query Language (SQL), 25,
152, 233
stylus, 113–114
subsystems, 10–11
suites, 159
supercomputers, 112–113
supermarket chains, 58
data, 249–250
suppliers
locking in, 47–48
reluctance to share information, 95
supply chain management (SCM),
146
information systems (ISs), 75–81
manufacturing resource planning
(MRP II), 77
material requirements planning
(MRP), 76–77
monitoring and control, 78
radio frequency identification
(RFID), 80–81
shipping, 78–79
supply chain management (SCM)
systems, 16–17, 19, 68, 75,
280–282, 330
after-the-sale-services, 95
collaborative logistics, 96
cycle time reductions, 94
enterprise resource planning (ERP)
systems, 93–94, 97–98
implementing, 93
information systems (ISs), 93–98
inventory, 94, 95–96
production costs, 94
relational databases, 229
systems thinking, 16
trust, 94–95
supply chains, 16, 75, 94
knowledge about, 71
web, 280–282
Supply Chain Services, 288
support, 391, 402–403
Surface, 114
swap space, 167
switches, 195
switching costs, 41, 47
S.W.O.T. (Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, and Threats), 299
Symantec Intelligence Report, 277
symmetric encryption, 469
Transport Layer Security (TLS), 471
sys admin. See system administrators
system administrators, 25
system analysis, 393–394
system as a service (SaaS), 421
system requirements, 396
systems, 10–12
systems analysts, 23–24
systems design, 397
construction, 400
data flow diagrams (DFDs), 397–399
system testing, 400
Unified Modeling Language (UML),
399
systems development
agile methods, 391, 403–406
principles, 390
progressive elaboration, 391
systems development life cycle
(SDLC), 391–403
systems development life cycle
(SDLC), 391
economic feasibility study, 393,
394–395
feasibility studies, 394–396
implementation, 400–402
investigation, 393–394
operational feasibility study, 393,
396
requirements definition, 393, 396
support, 402–403
systems design, 397–400
technical feasibility study, 393, 394
systems integration, 408–409
system software, 150, 164–169
systems thinking, 12–13, 16
system testing, 400
T
tables, 228
attributes, 228
composing on the fly, 365
composite key, 230
creation from existing tables, 232
foreign keys, 229, 230
join, 232–233
keys, 229–230
linking, 230
many-to-many relationship,
230–231
one-to-many relationship, 230
primary key, 230
relational database model, 228
relationships, 230–231, 235–236
selecting columns from, 232
temporary, 232
tuples, 228
tablet computers, 114
tablets, 13, 114, 418
airlines industry, 53
mobile advertising, 272
520
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

mobile commerce, 279
m-tailing, 270
operating systems (OSs), 167
personal area networks (PANs), 194
salespeople, 87
as television sets and phones, 210
touch screens, 119
tailored software, 423–424
tampabay.com website, 266
tangible costs, 41
targeted marketing, 84–85, 287–288
TaxCut, 336
tax planning decision support sys-
tems (DSSs), 336
TB. See terabytes (TB)
TCP/IP (Transmission Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol),
196–197
technical feasibility study, 393, 394
technology
bleeding edge, 58
customer service calls, 68
failure and, 58
“got-to-have-it,” 37
innovations, 13
manufacturing businesses, 40
physical or software limitation, 48
strategic moves and, 40
undesirable or unintended
effects, 22
technology convergence, 114–115,
210–211
technology jobs and women, 24
telecommunicating, 52
telecommunications, 15, 185
alternative channels, 186
bandwidth, 189
cellular phones, 186–187
coaxial cable, 190
electrical power lines, 192
fiber optics, 190–191
information systems (ISs), 13
media, 189–192
mobile payments, 188
peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing, 188
radio and satellite transmission,
191–192
twisted pair cable, 190
videoconferencing, 187
warehouses, 187–188
web-empowered commerce,
188–189
wireless payments, 187–188
telecommuting, 205–206
telemarketing, 84
telephones, 476
television, 418
television networks, 85
televisions, 418
television sets, 210
Telework Trendlines, 205
Tellme, 123
temporary tables, 232
10/20/30 rule, 158
terabits per second (Tbps), 191
terabytes (TB), 111
terrorism, 476
theft of information, 454–455
ThinkFree, 160
thinking strategically, 40
third generation (3G) protocols, 201
third-generation programming
languages (3GLs), 151–152
3-D geographic software, 163–164
throughput, 117–118
thumb drives, 129
timecards, 5, 417
time to market, 73
time zones, 313–314
Titan supercomputer, 112
TiVo, 171
T1 lines, 203
T3 lines, 203
top-level domain (TLD), 255
total cost of ownership (TCO),
394–395, 421
Total Rewards, 338
touch screens, 14, 42, 110, 119, 135
TPSs. See transaction processing
systems (TPSs)
trackback, 259
trackballs, 119
trackpads, 119
trade secrets, 309
traditional file approach, 223
traditional programming, 154
traditional queries versus data-mining
queries, 360
TRADOS, 307
training, 89–90
auditing information systems, 402
efficient, 390
multimedia, 161
podcasts, 260
software, 90
transactional databases, 238
transaction processing systems (TPSs),
14, 16, 70, 226
transactions, 14, 16
transactions per minute (TPM), 118
transferring files, 258
transistors, 115
translation software and services, 307
transmission rate, 189
transponder, 208
Transport Layer Security (TLS),
470–471
trap-and-trace device, 476
travel industry, 45
travel itineraries, 278
treasurers, 71
Trillian, 261
Trojan horses, 458–459
trucking business, 331
trust, 94–95
Truth in Caller ID Act (2009), 457
tuples, 228
TurboTax, 336
Turing test, 340
TV manufacturers app stores, 418
tweaking, 97
twisted pair cable, 190
typosquatting, 256
U
Ubuntu, 170
unfair business practices, 55–56
Unicode, 304
Unified Modeling Language (UML),
399
uniform resource locators (URLs),
23, 255
uninterruptible power supply (UPS),
453–454
Uniting and Strengthening America
by Providing Appropriate Tools
Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism Act (PATRIOT
Act, 2001), 476
unit space, 133–134
universal product code (UPC), 80,
120, 310
universal serial bus (USB), 126
UNIX, 25, 48, 168
unstructured problems, 327–328
UPC. See universal product code
(UPC)
UPDATE SQL command, 233
UPS. See uninterruptible power
supply (UPS)
upstream, 201
uptime, 438
URLs. See uniform resource locators
(URLs)
USB. See universal serial bus (USB)
USB drives, 129
USB ports, 135, 167
Subject Index
521
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

use case, 399
user application development,
438–440
user-developed applications, 439–440
user ID, 463
user interface, 166
utilities, 166, 169
V
value-added networks (VANs), 194,
281
vandalism, 454
VANs. See value-added networks
(VANs)
vendor recovery plans, 478
Versant Object Database, 232
video, 273
video apps, 418
video chat, 44, 261
VideoCloud app, 418
videoconferencing, 44, 187
Video Privacy Protection Act (VPPA),
239
virtual memory, 167
virtual private networks (VPNs),
195–196, 475
virtual private server, 283
virtual walls, 64–65
viruses, 24, 458–459, 488
vishing, 457
Visual Basic, 151, 153, 155, 157
Visual C++, 153
visual programming languages, 153
Visual RPG, 153
VoiceBox, 123
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP),
24, 52, 186, 207
voice recognition, 14, 123–124
VoIP. See Voice over Internet Protocol
(VoIP)
voltage regulator, 453
Vuze, 188
W
wall-driven shopping experience,
64–65
WANs. See wide area networks
(WANs)
warehouses, 187–188
warehousing collaboration, 96
waterfall development, 391–392
Weather Channel, 7
web, 21
affiliate programs, 46
annoyances and crimes, 276–277
collaboration, 96
company failures on, 56–57
costs, 302
databases, 236–238
data collection, 239
freedom of speech, 22
international commerce, 300–303
knowledge from, 375–376
legal jurisdictions, 311
linking databases to, 24
monitoring activity, 239
revenue, 302
social media, 279–280
strategic alliances, 46
supply chains, 280–282
Web Affinity Analysis, 370
WebApps, 160
web-based applications and object-
oriented programming (OOP)
languages, 155–156
web-based commerce
cookies, 262
growth and changes, 255–256
rules for successful, 287–289
social media, 255–256
Web-based customer service, 86–87
web beacon, 239
web browsers, 55
first movers, 44
Transport Layer Security (TLS), 471
web bugs, 239
WebEasy Professional, 162
web-empowered commerce, 188–189
web-enabled businesses, 256,
277–279
business-to-business (B2B), 264
business-to-consumer (B2C), 264,
269–275, 277–279
business-to-government (B2G),
264
consumer-to-consumer (C2C), 264
government-to-business, 264
government-to-consumer, 264
WebEx, 187
web hosting, 283–285
web hosts, 285–286
credit-card processing, 286
webmasters, 25
webpage authoring tools, 161
webpages, 243
blogs, 258–259
editing content, 259–260
translating into other languages,
307
web servers and Uniform Resource
Locators (URLs), 255
websites
banners, 265
business alliances, 268–269
capturing customer’s total
experience, 288
clickstream software, 369–371
consumer privacy, 22
content management systems, 286
cookies, 22, 262–263, 270, 271,
447
credit-card processing, 286
de-commoditize, 289
defacement, 456–457
denial of service (DoS) attacks,
459–460
design tools, 162
domain names, 255
downtime, 286
dynamic webpages, 285
embedding links in documents
to, 160
FAQs (frequently asked questions),
39
first movers, 43
for-fee content, 273
global information systems, 304
hits, 286
hosting service, 283–285
impressions, 265
IP addresses, 196
mirror servers, 283
multiple versions of, 304
offshore, 311
optimizing, 266
options for establishing, 282–287
owning and maintaining servers,
282–283
personalizing service, 288
planning and adjustment, 336–337
proactive, 289
reach percentage, 265
reference manuals, 302
rules for successful, 287–289
scalability, 286
self-service, 288–289
shopping carts, 286
targeting customers, 287–288
traffic volume, 264
typosquatting, 256
video, 273
web host, 285–286
WebSphere, 156
web technologies
blogs, 258–259
cookies, 262–263
File Transfer Protocol (FTP), 258
522
Subject Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

geographic information systems
(GIS), 348–349
HTTPS (HTTP Secure), 255
Hypertext Markup Language
(HTML), 257–258
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP), 255
instant messaging (IM), 261–262
interactive communication
technology, 261–262
podcasts, 260–261
proprietary technologies, 263–264
video chat, 261
wikis, 259–260
XHTML (Extensible Hypertext
Markup Language), 257
XML (Extensible Markup
Language), 257–258
what-if analysis, 335
wide area networks (WANs), 194
Wi-Fi networks security, 198
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), 198
Wi-Fi routers and access points (APs),
197
Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity), 24, 191,
197–199, 201, 211, 218
handheld devices, 15
hotspots, 197–198
Wiggio, 163, 258
wikis, 259–260
Wikiversity, 260
WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability
for Microwave Access), 199
Windows 8 Firewall, 466
Windows 8 operating system,
119, 167
Windows operating systems, 156
Internet Explorer, 44
Windows phones, 123, 156
Windows RT, 167
Windows Vista, 138
Wingcast telematics, 56–57
wireless access points, 64
Wireless 802.11b standard, 146
wireless LANs (WLANs), 193,
198, 199
wireless payments, 187–188
wireless protocols
Bluetooth, 199
IEEE.802.11, 197–199
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), 200
Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity), 197–199
WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperabil-
ity for Microwave Access), 199
women and technology jobs, 24
Word, 54, 58, 158, 159, 458
Wordfast, 307
WordPerfect, 158
WordPress, 162, 283
word processors, 158
words, 117–118
workforce computer literacy, 13
work orders, 71
Workplace Forecast (2011), 205
Workrave, 132
workstations, 113
worms, 458–459
WPA2, 198
writing code, 150
X
XHTML (Extensible Hypertext
Markup Language), 257
XML (Extensible Markup Language),
257–258, 281–282, 348
XWiki, 260
Y
Yahoo Maps, 349
Yahoo! Messenger, 261
yield management, 337–338
Z
zombie computers, 459
zoos and business intelligence (BI),
383
Subject Index
523
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© Wavebreak Media/Thinkstock
524
name &
company INDEX
A
ABC, 185
Abercrombie & Fitch, 320
ABI Research, 456
Accenture, 170, 406–407, 426
Acenet, 284
Acquila, 170
Acxiom, 105, 271
Adidas, 257
Adobe, 48, 151, 159, 162, 187,
231, 458
ADP, Inc., 338
Adyen, 307
AES Corp., 305
Aetna, 84
Air Canada, 269
Air New Zealand, 269
Aite Group, 6
Amazon.com, 15, 17, 38, 40, 41, 42,
46, 51, 65, 85, 113, 131, 161, 233,
236, 237, 251, 264, 266, 270,
272, 273, 304, 356, 362, 364,
388–389, 448, 453, 460
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 241,
452–453
Amber Road, 305
Amerada Hess, 171
American Airlines, 51, 269
American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU), 476
American Express Co. (AmEx), 85,
187, 275, 344
American International Group (AIG),
362
American Productivity & Quality
Center (APQC), 210
American Red Cross, 150
American Society of Composers,
Authors and Publishers (ASCAP),
448
American Stock Exchange (AMEX),
345
AMR Corp, 51
AnnualCreditReport.com, 339
AOL, 44
Apache, 159
aplusnet, 283
Apple App Store, 150
Apple Computer, 40, 42–43, 48, 56,
114, 123, 131, 133, 151, 156,
158, 167, 272, 273, 382, 383, 475
ARC Advisory Group, 146
Ariba, 436
ASAP for Home Healthcare, 89
Ascentive LLC, 441
askart.com, 267
ASNA, 153
Aspect, 90
ASTD, 280
Astute Solutions, 319
AT&T, 146, 194, 196, 201, 204, 436
AT&T Bell Labs, 168
Aurora Information Systems, 335
Austrian Airlines, 269
Avanquest, 162
Avenue A, 239, 262
B
Backblaze, 462
Bank of America, 123, 361, 460
Bank of Montreal, 373
Barclays PLC, 274, 275
Barnes & Noble (B&N), 40, 281, 335
Baugh, Rob, 64
BayCare Health Systems, 487
BearingPoint, 169
Beckman Coulter, Inc., 95
Benioff, Mark, 435
Ben & Jerry’s, 369
Best Buy, 121, 310
Bharti Airtel Ltd., 426
BIA/Kelsey, 279
Bing, 264
BMC Software, 47
BN.com, 40
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 40
Booz Allen Hamilton, 277
Bornemann Associates, 53
Boxfl, 207
BP PLC, 94
Brightcove, 418
British Airways, 198, 405
British Tesco, 208
Bureau of Justice Statistics, 279
Burlington Coat Factory, 171
Business Software Alliance (BSA), 173
Business Week, 50
Buy.com, 17, 46, 270
C
Cambria Suites, 267
Capgemini, 406, 426
Capital One Financial Corp.,
67–68, 187
Carbonite, 462
CareTech Solutions, 427
Carle Foundation Hospital, 356
Carl’s Furniture City, 296
CBS, 185
Cemex, 427
Center for Media and
Communications Studies
(CMCS), 312
Chanel, 44
Charles Schwab, 44
CheckPoints, 86
Chesterfield County, Virginia, 417
Chesterfield University, 417
Chevin, 156
Chevrolet, 57
Chevron Corp., 94
ChoiceBuys.com, 267
Choice Hotels International, 267
ChoicePoint, 271
Chronicle of Higher Education, 261
Cincinnati Zoo (CZ), 383
Cinergy, 206
Cisco Systems, 77, 187, 474
Citibank, 123, 172
Citigroup, 460
Citizens National Bank of Texas,
180–181
Citrix, 187
ClamWin, 458
Clarion, 267
ClawfootCollection.com, 284–285
ClickZ, 279
CMS Energy, 432
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CNET, 174
CNN, 460
CNNMoney, 474
Coca-Cola, 96
Cognos, Inc., 325, 365
Comcast, 191, 207
Comfort Inn, 267
Comfort Suites, 267
Commission Junction, 272
Compaq, 55
CompTIA, 411
Computer Sciences Corp. (CSC), 426,
427, 429, 436
Computerworld, 170
Compuware, 57, 269
comScore, 265, 276
Consumer Reports, 468
Continental Airlines, 269
CO-OP Financial Services, 342
Copenhagen Business School of
Frederiksberg, Denmark, 404
Corel, 158, 159
Costco, 240
Crashplan+, 462
Cray, 112
Creative Zen, 273
Current Communications, 206
Customer Service Centers
(AT&T), 196
Cycle Computing, 113
D
DaimlerChrysler, 40, 56
Dana Corp., 187
Dash Group, 52
Dataquest, 456
DataWall, Inc., 173
Dell, 133, 170
Deloitte LLP, 205
Delta Air Lines, 269
Demandware, Inc., 284–285
Department of Homeland Security,
477
Deutsche Telecom, 206
DigiCert, Inc., 473
Direct Marketing Association
(DMA), 276
Disney, 206
Ditmore, J., 407
DoubleClick, 239, 262, 369
DoubleTake Technologies, 119
Dow Chemical Co., 277
Dow Jones, 376
Drugstore.com, 370
Dunkin’ Donuts, 83, 279
E
eBay, Inc., 41–42, 109, 161, 171, 267,
272, 273, 312, 362, 460
Econo Lodge, 267
eConsultancy, 105
Eddie Bauer, Inc., 371
eHarmony, 488
Electrogrid, 346
Electronic Privacy Information
Center (EPIC), 312, 476
Eli Lilly and Company, 277
Embarcadero, 153
Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield, 342
Engage Software, 369
ePowerCenter, 319
Equifax, 339
Equinix, 480
Expedia, 269
Experian, 339
Experian Data Breach Resolution, 465
ExxonMobil, 187
F
Facebook, 6–7, 21, 43, 185, 226,
256, 257, 274, 276, 279, 296,
300, 460, 468
Facilitate.com, 346
Families and Work Institute, 205
FastClick, 239
Federal Aviation Authority (FAA), 53
Federal Consumer Safety Products
Commission (CPSC), 133
Federal Court of Appeals (Canada), 40
Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), 475
Federal Reserve Bank, 121
Federal Trade Commission (FTC),
455, 457, 488
FedEx, 31–32, 39, 122, 288
Ferro Corporation, 406
FICO, 342
Finch Paper, 342
Finish Line, 64
FlickIt, 119
Flickr, 161, 274
FlySousa Airlines, 230
Fonolo, 447
Ford Motor Company, 56–57, 78,
255–256, 280, 300, 345
Forrester Research, 86, 105, 423, 479
Four Seasons Greenhouse and
Nursery, 32–33
Foursquare, 21, 86, 279
Fox, 185
Free Software Foundation, 169, 171
Frito-Lay, 273
Fujitsu, 112
G
Galinsky, Ellen, 205
GAP, 44, 257
Gardiners, 296
Gartner Research, 36, 86, 231,
436, 453
Gates, Bill, 55, 56
Gateway Ticket Systems, 383
GCAN Insurance Company, 372
GE Healthcare, 194
General Electric Corp., 345
General Mills, 96
General Motors Corp, 56, 95, 96,
123, 198
Georgia-Pacific, 96
GeoTrust, Inc., 473
German Metro AG, 208
GlobalSign, 473
Gogo, 198
Goodyear, 95, 96
Google, 43, 44, 51, 124, 128, 160,
161, 167, 231, 257, 264, 272,
283, 307, 309, 310, 362, 376,
377, 448
Google Play store, 150
GroupM, 264
Guess?, Inc., 382
H
Harrah’s Entertainment, 338
HBO, 418
Hershey Foods, 97
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 55, 97, 130,
170, 171, 300, 391, 426, 474,
478, 479
Hitachi, 112, 130, 426
Holden Humphrey Co., 437
Home Depot, Inc., 58, 270
Honda, 57
Honeywell, 342
I
IBISWorld, 296
IBM, 55, 93, 96, 112, 123, 130, 131, 156,
159, 170, 171, 231, 325, 377, 383,
407, 426, 427, 428, 436, 474, 478
IBM Global Services, 436, 437
iCall, 207
IDC, 173, 373, 406
Idea Cellular Ltd., 426
i4i, Inc., 54
iNetSoft, 17
Name & Company Index
525
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Infor, 97
Information Week, 448
Infoseek, 44
InMotionHosting, 284
InnoCentive, Inc., 277
Instagram, 257, 279
Institute for Certification of
Computer Professionals (ICCP),
409, 410
Institute for Corporate Productivity, 280
Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE), 197
Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA), 402
Intel, 39, 170, 194
Intel Atom, 345
Internal Revenue Service, 336
International Biometrics Group
(IBG), 487
International Game Technology
(IGT), 104
International Information Systems
Security Certification Consor-
tium (ISC2), 474
International Paper Co., 96
Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers (ICANN),
256, 275
Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF), 196
Internet World Stats, 264
iPhrase Technologies, Inc., 377
Iron Mountain Digital, 131
i2 Technologies, 433
iWebTrack, 336–337
J
Japan Airlines, 198
Javelin Strategy & Research, 455
J.D. Edwards, 97, 104
JetBlue, 48, 52–54
JIG/MUIR, 207
Jobs, Steve, 56
Johnson, John, 448
Johnson, Samuel, 372
Joint Commission on the Accredita-
tion of Healthcare Organizations
(JCAHO), 487
JPMorgan Chase & Co., 123, 187,
275, 429
K
Kaiser Permanente, 347
Kansas Department of Transportation
(KDOT), 355–356
Kantar Group, 265–266
Kaspersky Labs, 456, 458
Kawasaki, Guy, 158
Kayak, 45
Khan Academy, 162
Kimball’s Restaurant, 1–6
Kinko’s, 454
Kirchman, 180
Kmart, 65, 250, 251
L
LA Fitness, 207
Lampert, Edward, 251
Land’s End, 288, 369
Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, 112
La-Z-Boy’s Hammary division, 296
Leichtman Research Group, 203
Levi Strauss, 44
LexisNexis, 376
LG, 50, 418
Library of Congress, 128
LinkedIn, 488
LinkShare, 272
LiquorInventory.Net, 82
LiveJournal, 258
LivePerson, 86
Loebner, Hugh, 340
Los Angeles County Sheriff’s
Department, 173
Lotus Development Corporation, 41
Lowe’s, 58, 270
Lufthansa, 198, 269
Lumina Decision Systems, 346
Lund Fund Holdings, 249–250
M
MainStay Suites, 267
MapInfo, 348
Mapquest, 19
Marriott Corporation, 47, 363
Mazda North America, 78
MBDA, 427
McAfee, 458
McCormick & Co., Inc., 96
McDonald’s, 89, 303
McKinsey & Company, 128, 362
Medco, 181–182
Medtronic, 46
Megaupload, 311
Merck, 181
Merrill Lynch, 172
MetaScale, 251
Methodist Health System, 93
Metro, 209
Micro Focus, 153
Microsoft Corp., 40, 41, 44, 47, 54,
55–56, 114, 119, 123, 153, 156,
158, 159, 160, 162, 167, 171,
172, 173, 231, 233, 234, 309,
330, 347, 372, 407, 436, 474
Microsoft Safety & Security Center,
455
MICROS Systems, 64
MicroStrategy, 249, 382
Mission Foods, 145–146
Monster.com, 280
Moody’s Analytics, 344
Morgan Stanley, 172
Morris Air, 52
Motorola, 429
Mozy, 462
Multiple Listing Service (MLS), 268
MySpace, 276
N
NASA, 112, 206, 310
Nasser, Jacques, 56
National Association of Realtors
(NAR), 268
National Center for Women &
Information Technology, 24
National Conference of State
Legislatures, 266
National Health Care Anti-Fraud
Association, 455
National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH),
132
National Retail Federation, 64
NBC, 185, 206
NEC, 112, 426
Neeleman, David, 52
Netflix, 239, 452
Netscape Corporation, 44, 55
NetSuite, Inc., 436
Network Appliance, Inc., 145
Neustar, Inc., 460
New York Stock Exchange, 171
NextLinx, 305–306
Nielsen, 105, 265
Nike, 98, 257, 433
Nippon TV, 206
Nistevo Corporation, 96
Nordstrom, 270
Northrop Grumman, 426
Northwest Airlines, 269
NovaSol, 187
Novell, 171
Nuance Communications, Inc., 123
526
Name & Company Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

O
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 112
Obama, Barack, 222, 451
Objectivity, Inc., 232
Office Depot, Inc., 281, 368–369
1&1, 284
OneWorld, 269
OpenOffice.org, 41
OpenPages, 428
Oracle Corp., 47, 97, 104, 172, 180,
320, 330, 365, 407, 436, 437,
458, 474
Oracle Users Group, 240
Orbitz, 45
Oregon State University (OSU), 342
Organization Partners, 200
Overstock.com, 266, 284
Owens & Minor, 50
P
Parks Associates, 272
PayPal, 270, 279, 305, 471
Pay with Square, 37
PC Magazine, 174
PC World, 174
Peapod, 64, 65
PeopleAdmin, Inc., 89
Pepsico, 86
Perot Systems, 426, 427
Petco Animal Supplies, Inc., 145
Phillips, Jack, 206
Pilot Software, 325
Pinterest, 21, 296
Pitney Bowes, 348, 362
Pixar Animation Studios, 171
Pollo Tropical, 348
Ponemon Institute, 465, 488
Priceline.com, 40, 46, 269, 273
Privacy International (PI), 312
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse
Chronology of Data Breaches, 228
Procter & Gamble, 47, 89, 95, 208,
277, 281
Progressive Casualty Insurance
Company, 44–45, 48, 363
Project Management Institute, 409
Proxibid, 267
Q
Qualcomm, Inc., 56
Quality, 267
Quantum, 127
Quark, 159
Quicken Loans, 338
R
Radish, 447
Rapt, Inc., 330
Razorfish, Inc., 369, 370
RBC, 447
Redbox, 12
Red Cross, 20
Redfin.com, 268
Red Hat, 171
RightNow Technologies, Inc., 436
RIM, 382
Rodeway Inn, 267
ROI Institute, 206
Romney, Mitt, 222
Royal Dutch Shell PLC, 94
RSA, 463
Ruby Tuesday, 367
S
Sabre Holding Corporation, 51
Sage, 97
Salesforce.com, 435–436, 448
Samsung, 43, 114, 121, 418
Sanchez, Rick, 451
SAP, 47, 97, 104, 172, 305, 325,
330, 437, 475
SAS, 250
Scandinavian Airlines System,
198, 269
Sears, Roebuck and Co., 46, 65,
250–251, 427
Sears Holding Corp., 65, 250, 427
Second Life, 402
SecuGen Corporation, 464
Securities and Exchange
Commission, 460
Serif, 159
SGI, 112
Shane, 98
Sibuya, 210
Siebel Systems, 97, 180
Simon, Herbert, 326, 329
Simpson Industries, 437
Sirius Canada, 447
Sirius Satellite Radio, 42
Skype, 44, 171, 207
SkyTeam Star Alliance, 269
Sleep Inn, 267
Smashburger, 6
Snapfish, 86
Society for Human Resource
Management (SHRM), 205
Sodexho, 280
Softtruck, 79
Software & Information Industry
Association (SIIA), 173
Sony Corp., 133, 451
Sony Online Entertainment, 451
Sousa, John Philip, 448
South Carolina Department of
Revenue’s website, 228
Southwest Airlines, 52, 391
Spears, Britney, 451
Spirit, 54
SplashData, 455
Sprint, 201, 204
Square, 279
Squarespace, 258
St. Joseph’s Hospital Health Center, 93
St. Vincent’s Hospital, 91
Stallman, Richard, 169
Standish Group, 97
Staples, 181–182, 281
Star Alliance, 269
Starbucks, 37, 89
State of Indiana, 427
Stowe, Jason, 113
Subimo LLC, 338
Suburban Extended Stay Hotel, 267
SunGuard Availability Services, 478
Sun Microsystems Corp., 155, 168, 330
SurePassID, 475
Symantec, 23, 169, 458
Symantec Trust Network, 473
SyncTV, 418
T
Tacit Systems, 374
Target, 236, 270
Target.com, 17
TD Bank, 85
Tech Data Corp., 205–206
Telogis, 78
Teradata, 250
Tesco, 209
Texaco, 94
ThinkFree, 160
3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP), 200
Thompson, Dawn, 311
3M (Minnesota Mining and
Manufacturing), 300
TJX, 300
Tommy Hilfiger, 171
Tompkins Supply Chain Consortium,
93
Torvalds, Linus, 168, 170
Toyota, 57, 123, 345
Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A., 171
TRADOS, Inc., 307
Name & Company Index
527
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Transport Intelligence, 96
TransUnion, 339
Travelocity, Inc., 51, 269, 289
Trimble, 164
Tripit, 278
Turing, Alan, 340
Twitter, 6, 21, 43, 85, 105, 185, 226,
256, 257, 279, 280, 296, 451
Typepad, 258
U
uBid, 267, 272
UBS Global Asset Management, 407
Ultimate Software, 91
Umbach, Frank, 456
Uniform Code Council (UCC), 310–311
Unilever, 319
Unisys, 112
United Airlines, 53, 269
United Illuminating, 86
United Parcel Service (UPS), 46, 122,
288, 363
University of Illinois at Chicago
Medical Center, 343
University of Michigan, 406
University of Missouri-St. Louis, 339
U.S. Army, 427
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 23
U.S. Census Bureau, 132, 205, 264,
347, 441
U.S. Congress, 311, 452
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
(CBP), 308–309
U.S. Department of Commerce, 93
U.S. Department of Defense, 209, 456
U.S. Department of Defense
Advanced Research Projects
Agency, 206
U.S. Department of Energy, 112
U.S. Department of Justice, 42, 55
U.S. Department of Labor, 132
U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation,
311, 460
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, 311
U.S. House of Representatives, 239
U.S. Labor Department, 24
U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), 132
U.S. Robotics (USR), 377
U.S. Supreme Court, 54, 187, 266
U.S. Transportation Security
Administration’s (TSA’s) Color-
ado Springs Operations Center
(CSOC), 459
U.S. Transportation Security
Administration (TSA), 463
US Airways, 269
USinternetworking, 436
V
ValueClick, 262
Valued Opinions, 263
Vanguard, 85, 256
Vanguard Software, 330
VA Software, 171
Venus Swimwear, 261–262
VeriFone, 64
Verizon, 191, 194, 201, 204
Verizon Wireless, 200
Versant Corporation, 232
Versata, 232
Vintage Tub & Bath, 284
Virgin America, 54
Virgin Mobile, 201
Virtual Hold, 447
Vizio, 418
Vonage, 207
W
Wallace, Sanford, 276
Walmart, 46, 47, 95, 208, 209, 236,
240, 270, 273, 281, 300
Walsh College, 427
Wawa Corporation, 475
Weather Channel, 6
Web4Retail, 296
Wegmans Food Markets, 96
Wells Fargo, 123, 295, 475
Whole Foods, 249
WikiMedia Foundation, 260
Wikipedia, 259
Wonderlic, Inc., 89
WordPress, 258
WorldatWork, 205
World Health Organization
(WHO), 396
World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C), 257
WPP PLC, 265
Wyman, Oliver, 54
Wyndham Hotel, 105
X
Xara, 159
Xerox, 155
XL Group, 308
XM Radio, 42
Y
Yahoo!, 56, 161, 264, 283, 309, 312,
376, 377
Yahoo! Auctions, 41
Yale University, 407
Yen, Bruce, 382
YouTube, 14–15, 43, 128, 162, 224,
236, 256, 273, 274
Z
Zillow.com, 19, 268, 348
ziprealty.com, 268
528
Name & Company Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

