management
s e v e n t h  e d i t i o n
a practical introduction
Angelo Kinicki
Brian K. Williams

CONNECT FEATURES
Interactive Applications
Interactive Applications offer a variety of automatically 
graded exercises that require students to apply key 
concepts. Whether the assignment includes a click 
and drag, video case, or decision generator, these 
applications provide instant feedback and progress 
tracking for students and detailed results for the 
instructor.
Self-Assessments
Self-awareness is a fundamental aspect of personal 
or professional development. With 95 researched-
based self-assessments, students will have frequent 
opportunities to make the chapter concepts come to 
life by seeing how they apply to them personally.
Manager’s Hot Seat Videos
The Manager’s Hot Seat is an interactive online video 
program that allows students to watch real managers 
apply their years of experience in confronting issues. 
Students assume the role of the manager as they 
watch the video and answer multiple-choice questions 
that pop up during the segment, forcing them to 
make decisions on the spot. Students learn from 
the manager’s mistakes and successes, and then 
do a report critiquing the manager’s approach by 
defending their reasoning.

Connect generates comprehensive reports and graphs that provide instructors with an instant view of the 
performance of individual students, a speciﬁ c section, or multiple sections. Since all content is mapped to 
learning objectives, Connect reporting is ideal for accreditation or other administrative documentation.
Learning Management System Integration
McGraw-Hill Campus is a one-stop teaching and learning experience available to use 
with any learning management system. McGraw-Hill Campus provides single sign-
on to faculty and students for all McGraw-Hill material and technology from within 
the school website. McGraw-Hill Campus also allows instructors instant access to all 
supplements and teaching materials for all McGraw-Hill products.
Blackboard users also beneﬁ t from McGraw-Hill’s industry-leading integration, 
providing single sign-on to access all Connect assignments and automatic feeding of 
assignment results to the Blackboard grade book.
EASY TO USE
POWERFUL REPORTING
Secure
Simple
Seamless
Connect Insight
The ﬁ rst and only analytics tool of its kind, 
Connect Insight is a series of visual data displays, 
each of which is framed by an intuitive question and 
provides at-a-glance information regarding how an 
instructor’s class is performing. Connect Insight is 
available through Connect titles.

management
S E V E N T H  E D I T I O N
A PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION
Angelo Kinicki
Arizona State University
Brian K. Williams

MANAGEMENT: A PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION, SEVENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2 016 by McGraw-Hill 
Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 201 3, 2011, 2009, 
2008, 2006, and 2003. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any 
means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill Education, 
including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for 
distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 RMN/RMN 1 0 9 8 7 6 5
ISBN 978-0-07-772055-1
MHID 0-07-772055-5
ISBN 978-1-259-59346-8 (Instructor’s Edition)
MHID 1-259-59346-0
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Michael Ryan
Vice President, Content Design & Delivery: Kimberly Meriwether David
Managing Director: Susan Gouijnstook
Director: Michael Ablassmeir
Director, Product Development: Meghan Campbell
Product Developer: Trina Hauger
Marketing Manager: Elizabeth Trepkowski
Director of Development: Ann Torbert
Digital Product Analyst: Kerry Shanahan
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Terri Schiesl
Program Manager: Mary Conzachi
Content Project Managers: Mary E. Powers, Danielle Clement
Buyer: Michael McCormick
Design: Debra Kubiak
Content Licensing Specialists: Lori Hancock
Cover Image: Photography by K S Chew/Getty Images
Compositor: Aptara®, Inc.
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
 
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not 
guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
www.mhhe.com

v
PART 1
Introduction
 1 The Exceptional Manager: What You Do, 
How You Do It 2
 2 Management Theory: Essential Background 
for the Successful Manager 40
PART 2
The Environment of Management
 3 The Manager’s Changing Work 
Environment & Ethical Responsibilities: 
Doing the Right Thing 70
 4 Global Management: Managing 
across Borders 100
PART 3
Planning
 5 Planning: The Foundation of Successful 
Management 134
 6 Strategic Management: How Exceptional 
Managers Realize a Grand Design 158
 7 Individual & Group Decision Making: 
How Managers Make Things Happen 188
PART 4
Organizing
 8 Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design: 
Building Blocks of the Organization 224
 9 Human Resource Management: Getting the Right 
People for Managerial Success 260
10 Organizational Change & Innovation: Lifelong 
Challenges for the Exceptional Manager 304
PART 5
Leading
11 Managing Individual Differences & Behavior: 
Supervising People as People 336
12 Motivating Employees: Achieving Superior 
Performance in the Workplace 374
13 Groups & Teams: Increasing Cooperation, 
Reducing Conflict 410
14 Power, Influence, & Leadership: From Becoming  
a Manager to Becoming a Leader 440
15 Interpersonal & Organizational Communication: 
Mastering the Exchange of Information 476
PART 6
Controlling
16 Control Systems & Quality Management: 
Techniques for Enhancing Organizational 
Effectiveness 510
Appendix: The Project Planner’s Toolkit: Flowcharts, 
  Gantt Charts, & Break-Even Analysis A1
brief contents

vi
Angelo Kinicki is a 
professor of management at the 
W. P. Carey School of Business 
at Arizona State University. 
He also was awarded the 
Weatherup/Overby Chair in 
Leadership in 2005. He has held 
his current position since 1982, 
when he received his doctorate 
in organizational behavior from 
Kent State University.
Angelo is recognized for both his teaching and his research. 
As a teacher, Angelo has been the recipient of six teaching 
awards, including the John W. Teets Outstanding Graduate 
Teacher Award (2009–2010); the Outstanding Teaching Award—
MBA and Master’s Programs (2007–2008); the John W. Teets 
Outstanding Graduate Teacher Award (2009–2010); Graduate 
Teaching Excellence Award (1998–1999); Continuing Education 
Teaching Excellence Award (1991–1992); and Undergraduate 
Teaching Excellence Award (1987–1988). He also was selected 
into Wikipedia, Who’s Who of American Colleges and Universities, 
and Beta Gamma Sigma.
Angelo is an active researcher. He has published more than 
90 articles in a variety of leading academic and professional 
journals and has coauthored eight college textbooks (30, count-
ing revisions). His textbooks have been used by hundreds of 
universities around the world. Angelo’s experience as a re-
searcher also resulted in his selection to serve on the editorial 
review boards for Personnel Psychology, the Academy of 
Management Journal, the Journal of Vocational Behavior, and 
the Journal of Management. He received the “All-Time Best 
Reviewer Award” from the Academy of Management Journal for 
the period 1996–1999.
Angelo also is an active international consultant who works 
with top management teams to create organizational change 
aimed at increasing organizational effectiveness and profitabil-
ity. He has worked with many Fortune 500 firms as well as nu-
merous entrepreneurial organizations in diverse industries. His 
expertise includes facilitating strategic-operational planning 
sessions, diagnosing the causes of organizational and work-unit 
problems, implementing performance management systems, 
designing and implementing performance appraisal systems, 
developing and administering surveys to assess employee atti-
tudes, and leading management/executive education programs. 
He developed a 360° leadership feedback instrument called the 
Performance Management Leadership Survey (PMLS) that is 
used by companies throughout the United States and Europe.
One of Angelo’s strengths is his ability to teach students at all 
levels within a university. He uses an interactive environment to 
enhance undergraduates’ understanding about management 
and organizational behavior. He focuses MBAs on applying man-
agement concepts to solve complex problems; PhD students 
learn the art and science of conducting scholarly research.
Angelo and his wife, Joyce, have enjoyed living in the beauti-
ful Arizona desert for 28 years but are natives of Cleveland, Ohio. 
They enjoy traveling, golfing, and hiking with Gracie, their golden 
retriever.
Brian K. Williams has 
been managing editor for college 
textbook publisher Harper & Row/
Canfield Press in San Francisco; 
editor-in-chief for nonfiction 
trade-book publisher J. P. Tarcher 
in Los Angeles; publications and 
communications manager for the 
University of California, System-
wide Administration, in Berkeley; 
and an independent writer and 
book producer based in the San Francisco and Lake Tahoe areas. He 
has a BA in English and an MA in communication from Stanford 
University. Repeatedly praised for his ability to write directly and in-
terestingly to students, he has co-authored 21 books (64, counting 
revisions). This includes the 2015 Using Information Technology: A 
Practical Introduction with his wife, Stacey C. Sawyer, now in its 
11th edition with McGraw-Hill Education. In addition, he has written 
a number of other information technology books, college success 
books, and health and social science texts. Brian is a native of Palo 
Alto, California, and San Francisco, but since 1989 he and Stacey, a 
native of New York City and Bergen County, New Jersey, have lived 
at or near Lake Tahoe, currently in Genoa (Nevada’s oldest town), 
with views of the Sierra Nevada. In their spare time, they enjoy 
 foreign travel, different cuisine, museum going, music, hiking, con-
tributing to the community (Brian is past chair of his town board), 
and warm visits with friends and family.
Management: A Practical Introduction was twice the recipient of 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin’s Revision of the Year Award, for the third and 
fifth editions.
about the authors

dedication
To Joyce Kinicki, the love of my life, best friend, and the wind beneath 
my wings.
—A.K.
To my wife, Stacey, for her 29 years of steadfast, patient support and 
for her collaboration and shared adventures; and to my beloved 
children and their families—Kirk, Julia, Nicolas, and Lily; and Sylvia, 
Scott, and Atticus.
—B.K.W.


A PROMISE: To make learning management 
easy, efficient, and effective
The seventh edition of Management: A Practical Introduction—a concepts book for the 
introductory course in management—uses a wealth of instructor feedback to identify which features 
from prior editions worked best and which should be improved and expanded. By blending Angelo’s 
scholarship, teaching, and management-consulting experience with Brian’s writing and publishing 
background, we have again tried to create a research-based yet highly readable, practical, and 
motivational text.
Kinicki/Williams is an effective principles of management textbook that does an excellent job of 
conveying the excitement of management and leadership to undergraduates. Engaging and 
practical, it comes with a comprehensive set of support materials that range from the traditional to 
exciting new uses of technology that supercharge the teaching of critical concepts. We looked at 
over ten textbooks before we adopted Kinicki, and we’re most certainly glad that we did. Publisher 
support has been excellent.
—Gary B. Roberts,
Kennesaw State University
Our primary goal is simple to state but hard to 
execute: to make learning principles of management 
as easy, effective, and efficient as possible. 
Accordingly, the book integrates writing, illustration, 
design, and magazine-like layout in a program of 
learning that appeals to the visual sensibilities and 
respects the time constraints and different learning styles 
of today’s students. In an approach initially tested in 
our first edition and fine-tuned in the subsequent 
editions, we break topics down into easily grasped 
portions and incorporate frequent use of various kinds of 
reinforcement techniques. Our hope, of course, is to 
make a difference in the lives of our readers: to 
produce a text that students will enjoy reading and 
that will provide them with practical benefits.
 
The text covers the principles that most 
management instructors have come to expect in 
an introductory text—planning, organizing, 
leading, and controlling—plus the issues 
that today’s students need to be aware of 
to succeed: customer focus, globalism, 
diversity, ethics, information technology, 
entrepreneurship, work teams, the service 
economy, and small business.
Beyond these, our book has four 
features that make it unique:
1. A student-centered approach to 
learning.
2. Imaginative writing for readability and 
reinforcement.
3. Emphasis on practicality.
4. Resources that work.
“
”
ix

Chapter Sections:
Structured into constituent parts for easier learning
Chapters are organized to cover each major question in turn, 
giving students bite-sized chunks of information. Each section 
begins with a recap of the Major Question and includes “The 
Big Picture,” which presents students with an overview of 
how the section they are about to read answers the Major 
Question.
This style textbook succeeds in presenting management information with a fresh face. Each 
chapter is filled with current and useful information for students. The chapters begin by asking 
major questions of the reader. As the student reads, [he or she is] engaged by these questions and 
by the information that follows. A totally readable text with great illustrations and end-of-chapter 
exercises!
—Catherine Ruggieri,
 St. John’s University, New York
FEATURE #1
Instead of opening with the conventional case, as most texts do, we open with The Manager’s 
Toolbox, a motivational device offering practical nuts-and-bolts advice pertaining to the chapter 
content students are about to read—and allowing for class discussion.
FEATURE #1
A Student-Centered Approach to Learning
“
”
x
Chapter Openers: 
Designed to help 
students read with 
purpose
Each chapter begins with 
four to eight provocative, 
motivational Major Questions, 
written to appeal to students’ 
concern about “what’s in it for 
me?” and to help them read 
with purpose.
“Students don’t just say ‘OK I cheated in school, but 
now I’m in the workplace and it ends here,’” says an 
Arizona professor of legal and ethical studies. “They are 
forming bad habits that carry over into the market.”1
The “Holier-Than-Thou” Effect & Motivated 
Blindness
Have you ever cheated—had unauthorized help on 
tests? Or plagiarized—misrepresented others’ work 
as your own? If it’s wrong, why do it?
The psychological mechanisms operating here are:
•  The “holier-than-thou” effect. “People tend to 
be overly optimistic about their own abilities and 
fortunes—to overestimate their standing in class, 
their discipline, their sincerity,” suggests science 
writer Benedict Carey. “But this self-inflating bias 
may be even stronger when it comes to moral 
judgment.”2
•  Motivated blindness. This is the tendency to 
overlook information that works against our best 
interest. “People who have a vested self-interest, 
even the most honest among us, have difficulty 
being objective,” says one report. “Worse yet, 
they fail to recognize their lack of objectivity.”3 
Motivated blindness enables us to behave 
unethically while maintaining a positive 
self-image.4
Because of this psychology, cheating and pla-
giarism have become alarming problems in educa-
tion, from high school to graduate school.5 Most 
students rationalize their behavior by saying “I 
don’t usually do this, but I really have to do it.” 
They would rather cheat, that is, than show their 
families they got an F.6
The Dynamics behind Cheating
Habitual cheating, Carey suggests, “begins with small 
infractions—illegally downloading a few songs, skim-
ming small amounts from the register, lies of omission 
on taxes—and grows by increments.” As success is 
rewarded, these “small infractions” can burgeon into 
an ongoing deliberate strategy of deception or fraud.
How do people rationalize cheating? The justifica-
tions are mainly personal and emotional:
•  Cheating provides useful shortcuts. We 
constantly make choices “between short- and 
long-term gains,” suggests Carey, “between the 
more virtuous choice and the less virtuous one.” 
The brain naturally seeks useful shortcuts and so 
may view low-level cheating as productive.
•  Cheating arises out of resentment. People 
often justify lying and cheating because they 
have resentments about a rule or a boss.7
•  Cheating seeks to redress perceived 
unfairness. The urge to cheat may arise from a 
deep sense of unfairness, such as your sense 
that other people had special advantages.
•  Cheating is to avoid feeling like a chump. Many 
people cheat to avoid feeling like a chump—to 
“not being smart” and “finishing out of the money.”
For Discussion How would you justify cheating and 
plagiarism? Is it simply required behavior in order to 
get through college? (“I’m not going to be a chump.”) 
What do you say to the fact that, as the research 
shows, students who cheat and thus don’t actually 
do the assigned work are more likely to fail anyway?8 
Do you think you can stop the lying and deception 
once you’re out in the work world?
the manager’s toolbox
How Do People Excuse Lying & Cheating?
The triple bottom line of People, Planet, and Profit represents new standards of success 
for businesses. This helps define the new world in which managers must operate and 
their responsibilities, including the community of stakeholders, both internal and exter-
nal, they must deal with. The chapter also considers a manager’s ethical and social re-
sponsibilities, as well as the importance of corporate governance.
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
forecast
PART 2 
THE ENVIRONMENT OF MANAGEMENT
The Manager’s Changing 
Work Environment & Ethical 
Responsibilities
Doing the Right Thing
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
3.1 The Triple Bottom Line: People, Planet, & Profit
Major Question: Is profit the only important goal of a business? 
What are others?
3.2 The Community of Stakeholders Inside the Organization
Major Question: Stockholders are only one group of 
stakeholders. Who are the stakeholders important to me inside 
the organization?
3.3 The Community of Stakeholders Outside the Organization
Major Question: Who are stakeholders important to me outside 
the organization?
3.4  The Ethical Responsibilities Required of You as a Manager
Major Question: What does the successful manager need to 
know about ethics and values?
3.5  The Social Responsibilities Required of You as a Manager
Major Question: Is being socially responsible really necessary?
3.6 Corporate Governance
Major Question: How can I trust a company is doing the right 
thing?
3
72 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
3.1 
The Triple Bottom Line: People, Planet, & Profit
Is profit the only important goal of a business? What are others?
THE BIG PICTURE
Many businesses, small and large, are beginning to subscribe to a new standard of success—the triple 
bottom line, representing People, Planet, and Profit. This outlook has found favor with many young adults 
(millennials) who are more concerned with finding meaning than material success.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
“Profit is a tool,” says Judy Wicks, who founded the White Dog Café in Philadelphia 
30 years ago. “The major purpose of business is to serve.”9
In traditional business accounting, the “bottom line” of a revenue-and-expenses 
statement is the organization’s profit (or loss). But in Wicks’s view, making money 
should be only one goal of business. The others are to foster social and environ-
mental consciousness—the two other elements of what’s known as the “triple bot-
tom line.” The   triple bottom line—representing People, Planet, and Profit (the 
3 Ps)—measures an organization’s social, environmental, and financial performance.
In this view of corporate performance, an organization has a responsibility to its 
employees and to the wider community (People), is committed to sustainable 
(green) environmental practices (Planet), and includes the costs of pollution, worker 
displacement, and other factors in its financial calculations (Profit). Success in 
these areas can be measured through a   social audit, a systematic assessment of a 
company’s performance in implementing socially responsible programs, often based 
on predefined goals.
The White Dog Café, for instance, is known for such social and environmental 
 activities as buying wind-powered electricity, organic produce, and humanely raised 
meat and poultry, as well as sharing ideas with competitors and opening up its prem-
ises for educational forums and speakers. But the triple bottom line isn’t just to be 
practiced by small businesses. As a co-author of Everybody’s Business: The Unlikely 
72 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management

“A One-Minute Guide to Success in This 
Class,” found on page 3, lays down four rules for 
student success in class and suggestions for how to use 
this book most effectively.
“Getting Control of Your Time: Dealing with 
the Information Deluge in College & in Your 
Career,” at the end of Chapter 1, gives students a crash 
course in time-management skills, solid study habits, memory 
aids, and learning from lectures.
Key terms are highlighted and terms and 
definitions are in boldface, to help students 
build their management vocabulary.
It’s hard enough to try to make the class 
exciting, and the only way is to incorporate 
up-to-date, relevant, and interesting examples. 
This text and McGraw-Hill have done just that. 
[It] makes my life easier, but more importantly, 
the students are getting the valuable education 
that they’ve paid for by having better materials 
and instruction.
—Laura L. Alderson,
 University of Memphis
Got one minute to read this section? It could mean the difference between getting an A instead of a B. Or a B in-
stead of a C.
It is our desire to make this book as practical as possible for you. One place we do this is in the Manager’s Toolbox, 
like this one, which appears at the beginning of every chapter and which offers practical advice appropriate to the 
subject matter you are about to explore. Here we show you how to be a success in this course.
Four Rules for Success
The following four rules will help you be successful in this (or any other) course.
• 
Rule 1: Attend every class. No cutting (skipping) allowed.
• 
Rule 2: Don’t postpone studying, then cram the night before a test.
• 
Rule 3: Read or review lectures and readings more than once.
• 
Rule 4: Learn how to use this book.
the manager’s toolbox
A One-Minute Guide to Success in This Class
TAKING SOMETHING PRACTICAL AWAY 
Getting Control of Your Time: 
Dealing with the Information Deluge 
in College & in Your Career
Professionals and managers all have to deal with this central 
problem: how not to surrender their lives to their jobs. The 
place to start, however, is in college. If you can learn to manage 
time while you’re still a student, you’ll find it will pay off not 
only in higher grades and more free time but also in more effi-
cient information-handling skills that will serve you well as a 
manager later on.119
Using Your “Prime Study Time”
Each of us has a different energy cycle.120 The trick is to use it 
effectively. That way, your hours of best performance will coin-
cide with your heaviest academic demands. For example, if 
your energy level is high during the mornings, you should plan 
to do your studying then.
To capitalize on your prime study time, you take the follow-
ing steps: (1) Make a study schedule for the entire term, and 
indicate the times each day during which you plan to study. (2) 
Find some good places to study—places where you can avoid 
distractions. (3) Avoid time wasters, but give yourself frequent 
rewards for studying, such as a TV show, a favorite piece of 
music, or a conversation with a friend.
Improving Your Memory Ability
Memorizing is, of course, one of the principal requirements for 
succeeding in college. And it’s a great help for success in life 
afterward.
Here are some tips on learning to concentrate:121
Choose What to Focus On
“People don’t realize that attention is a finite resource, like 
money,” one expert says. “Do you want to invest your cognitive 
cash on endless Twittering or Net surfing or couch potatoing 
[watching TV]?” She adds, “Where did the idea come from that 
anyone who wants to contact you can do so at any time? You 
need to take charge of what you pay attention to instead of 
responding to the latest stimuli.”122 For example, to block out 
noise, you can wear earplugs while reading, to create your own 
“stimulus shelter.”
Chapter tools help students learn how to learn
In focus groups, symposiums, and reviews, instructors told us that many students do not have the skills 
needed to succeed in college. To support students in acquiring these skills, we offer the following:
Chapter tools help students learn how to learn
The Task Environment
The task environment consists of 11 groups that present you with daily tasks to han-
dle: customers, competitors, suppliers, distributors, strategic allies, employee organi-
zations, local communities, financial institutions, government regulators, special-interest 
groups, and mass media.
1. Customers 
The first law of business (and even nonprofits), we’ve said, is take 
care of the customer. Customers are those who pay to use an organization’s goods or 
services. Many customers value service over price, and are generally frustrated by poor 
customer relations at telecommunications companies, airlines, and social media sites. 
“In defense of these industries,” says one observer, “no one notices them when things 
Lillian and Frank Gilbreth with 
11 of their dozen children. As 
industrial engineers, the Gilbreths 
pioneered time and motion 
studies. If you’re an athlete, you 
can appreciate how small 
changes can make you more 
efficient.
over them. If used correctly, the principles of scientific management can enhance 
productivity, and such innovations as motion studies and differential pay are still 
used today.
Frank & Lillian Gilbreth & Industrial Engineering 
As mentioned, Frank and 
Lillian Gilbreth were a husband-and-wife team of industrial engineers who lectured at 
Purdue University in the early 1900s. Their experiences in raising 12 children—to 
whom they applied some of their ideas about improving efficiency (such as printing 
Other devices to help students 
develop understanding:
• Important scholar names in boldface so 
students remember key contributors to the field of 
management.
• Frequent use of advance organizers, bulleted 
lists, and headings to help students grasp the 
main ideas.
• Illustrations positioned close to relevant text 
discussion so students can refer to them more 
easily and avoid flipping pages.
”
“
xi

Research shows that textbooks written in an imaginative, people-oriented style significantly 
improve students’ ability to retain information. We employ a number of journalistic devices to 
make the material as engaging as possible for students.
We employ a lot of storytelling to 
convey the real “texture of life” in 
being a manager. This means we use 
colorful facts, attention-grabbing 
quotes, biographical sketches, and 
lively tag lines to get students’ 
attention as they read.
Our emphasis on practicality and applications 
extends to the Example boxes, “mini-cases” 
that use snapshots of real-world institutions 
to explain text concepts. “Your Call” invites 
student critical thinking and class 
discussion at the end of each example. 
Suggestions for how to use the Example 
boxes are found in the Instructor’s Manual.
The driving force. One quality 
that stands out about General 
Motors CEO Mary Barra is her 
obvious enthusiasm for cars. 
She is said to be given to talking 
excitedly about whatever car 
she is currently driving and 
what it demonstrates about 
GM’s product line. Do you think 
passion about one’s work is a 
necessary quality for 
managerial success?
g
p
j
g
y
graduated from General Motors Institute (now Kettering University) with a degree in 
electrical engineering, and then became a plant engineer at Pontiac. Spotting her tal-
ent, GM gave her a scholarship to Stanford University, where she earned a graduate 
degree in business. She then began moving up the GM ladder, first as the executive 
assistant to the CEO, then as the company’s head of human resources—formerly often 
as high as female executives ever got, in autos or many other industries. In 2011, her 
big break came when she was promoted to lead GM’s $15 billion vehicle-development 
operations, a high-profile role that became the steppingstone to CEO.
Key to Career Growth: “Doing Things I’ve Never 
Done Before”
Did it help that, as one writer put it, Barra “had motor oil running through her veins for 
most of her life”?4 No doubt it did. But there is another key to career growth—the abil-
ity to take risks. As IBM’s Ginni Rometty, another female CEO, has 
said about herself, she has grown the most in her career because “I 
learned to always take on things I’ve never done before.”5 She has 
found that “you have to be very confident, even though you’re so self-
critical inside about what it is you may or may not know. . . . And that, 
to me, leads to taking risks.”6
Of course both men as well as women have to deal with uncertainty. But 
the ability to take risks—to embrace change and to keep going forward de-
spite fears and internal criticism—is important to any manager’s survival, 
regardless of gender. As Rometty says, “growth and comfort do not coexist.”
p
g
y
EXAMPLE
A Hot Start-Up Cleans Up: Homejoy Transforms an Old Business
As has been often demonstrated in recent years, an old work 
sector can be transformed by the application of new technol-
ogy and new management ideas. An example is house clean-
ing, which until recently was fundamentally unchanged since 
the 1960s.
“Everyone Deserves a Happy Home.” “My brother Aaron and I 
started working together in 2009,” says South Carolina native 
Adora Cheung, who had moved to the San Francisco Bay Area. 
“We were both engineers coding [computer programming], and 
we wanted a place that was clean in order to be more efficient. 
We tried to find someone online to clean.”105
They discovered there were basically two choices—get highly 
qualified cleaning help from an agency, which might cost them 
$40–$60 an hour (but workers earned only minimum wage), or 
get someone from Craigslist, which cost much less, “but you 
don’t know who the heck is going to show up at your door.”
To find out how they might make the business more effi-
cient and learn the needs of the cleaners themselves, Adora 
Entrepreneurs. Former South Carolinians Adora and Aaron Cheung founded 
their house-cleaning company, Homejoy, in the San Francisco Bay Area in 
2012. Most people, even young people, prefer the security of a job with a 
paycheck to the risks of starting a business. Which life would you prefer?
The Kinicki/Williams text is attractive and well organized. The writing is engaging, and 
there is much more than my current text in terms of examples, application, summaries, 
and cases. The graphical quality of the book is much better than the black and white 
version[s] [of texts]. Overall, I think this book represents an excellent approach to the 
subject of management from both an instructor and learner perspective.
—Jeffrey Anderson, 
Ohio University
FEATURE #2
FEATURE #2
Imaginative Writing for Readability
”
“
xii

We want this book to be a “keeper” for students, a resource for future courses and for their 
careers—so we give students a great deal of practical advice in addition to covering the fundamental 
concepts of management. Application points are found not only throughout the text discussion 
but also in the following specialized features.
Each chapter continues our strategy of repetition for learning reinforcement. (New to this edition: 
“Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?” a series of self-test questions.) We include various unique 
pedagogical features to help students take away the most significant portions of the chapter’s content:
FEATURE #3
FEATURE #3
An Emphasis on Practicality
Practical Action boxes, appearing one or 
more times in each chapter, offer students 
practical and interesting advice on issues they 
will face in the workplace. Detailed discussions of 
how to use these Practical Action boxes appear in 
the Instructor’s Manual.
Extra self-assessment exercises enable students to personally 
apply chapter content. These exercises, which are available through the 
Connect website, include objectives for ease in assigning, instructions for 
use, guidelines for interpreting results, and questions for further reflection. 
Fifty-seven self-assessments are integrated into the text and contain 
discussion questions that can be used to stimulate classroom conversation.
Management in Action cases depict 
how companies students are familiar with 
respond to situations or issues featured in the 
text. Discussion questions are included for ease 
of use in class, as reflection assignments, or over 
online discussion boards.
Legal/Ethical Challenges present 
cases—often based on real events—that require 
students to think through how they would handle 
the situation, helping prepare them for decision 
making in their careers.
PRACTICAL ACTION
Global Outsourcing: Which Jobs Are Likely to Fall 
Victim to Offshoring?
Will there be any good jobs left for new college graduates?
Americans are rightly concerned about the changing jobs 
picture, brought about not only by the dismal aftermath of the 
2007–2009 Great Recession but also earlier in part by offshor-
ing of work to low-wage countries such as China, India, and 
the Philippines. Few of the millions of factory jobs that have 
been lost during the last 10 years have been replaced, and to-
day just 9% of American workers are employed in manufacturing. 
This has forced many workers—when they were able to work at 
all—to accept lower-paying alternatives, such as jobs in retail 
and health care, which pay far less than manufacturing jobs.70
out in a contract and signed away.”74 Says Fred Levy, a 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist, “If you can 
describe a job precisely, or write rules for doing it, it’s unlikely 
to survive. Either we’ll program a computer to do it, or we’ll 
teach a foreigner to do it.”75
Which Jobs Will Remain in the United States? It is difficult 
to predict which jobs will remain at home, since even the Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics often can’t get it right. However, jobs 
that endure may share certain traits, listed below, regardless of 
the industry they serve:76
End-of-chapter resources that reinforce applications
New to this edition!
xiii
Assessing Your Attitudes toward Corporate 
Responsibility
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 
3.2. It assesses your attitudes toward corporate social respon-
sibility. Then answer the following questions:
1. 
Where do you stand on corporate social responsibility?
2. 
What life events have influenced your attitudes toward 
corporate social responsibility? Discuss.
3. 
Based on the three lowest-rated items in the survey, how 
might you foster a more positive attitude toward social 
responsibility? Explain.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.2
®

No matter the course you teach—on-campus, online, or hybrid courses—we set out to provide you with 
the most comprehensive set of resources to enhance your Principles of Management course.
Principles of Management Video DVDs Vol-
umes 1, 2, & 3. We present the richest and most diverse 
video program on the market to engage your students in 
the important management concepts covered in this text: 
Sources from Bloomberg Businessweek Online, BBC, CBS, 
FiftyLessons, NBC, PBS, and McGraw-Hill are provided on 
2- to 15-minute clips in three DVD sets. These company 
videos are organized by the four functions of management 
and feature organizations such as PlayStation, Panera Bread, 
Patagonia, Mini Cooper, and the Greater Chicago Food De-
pository. Other subjects are Employer-Subsidized Commut-
ing, Grounded: Are U.S. Airlines Safe?, Using Facebook at 
Work, Adult Bullies, and Encore Careers. Corresponding 
video cases and a guide that ties the videos closely to the 
chapter can be found in the Instructor’s Manual and online.
Instructor’s Manual. The Instructor’s Manual was re-
vised and updated to include thorough coverage of each 
chapter. It also offers time-saving features such as an out-
line on incorporating PowerPoint slides, lecture enhanc-
ers that supplement the textbook, video cases and video 
notes, and answers to all end-of-chapter exercises.
PowerPoint Slides. The PowerPoint slides provide 
comprehensive lecture notes, questions for the class, and 
company examples not found in the textbook.
Test Bank. The Test Bank includes more than 100 ques-
tions per chapter in a variety of formats. The package 
includes a range of comprehension and application 
(scenario-based) questions as well as tagged Bloom’s 
Taxonomy levels and AACSB requirements.
EZ Test, McGraw-Hill’s flexible and easy-to-use elec-
tronic testing program, allows instructors to create tests 
from book-specific items. It accommodates a wide range 
of question types, and instructors may add their own 
questions. Multiple versions of the test can be created, 
and any test can be exported for use with course manage-
ment systems such as WebCT or BlackBoard.
EZ Test Online, available at www.eztestonline.com, al-
lows you to access the test bank virtually anywhere at any 
time, without installation, and to administer EZ Test–
created exams and quizzes online, providing instant 
feedback for students.
Assurance of Learning–Ready
Many educational institutions are often focused on the 
notion of assurance of learning, an important element 
of some accreditation standards. Management: A 
Practical Introduction, 7th ed., is designed specifi-
cally to support your assurance of learning initiatives 
with a simple, yet powerful solution.
 
Each test bank question maps to a specific chap-
ter learning outcome/objective listed in the text. You 
can use our test bank software, EZ Test and EZ Test 
Online, or Connect Management to easily query for 
learning outcomes objectives that directly relate to the 
learning objectives for your course. You can use the 
reporting features of EZ Test to aggregate student re-
sults in a similar fashion, making the collection and 
presentation of assurance of learning data simple 
and easy.
AACSB Statement
The McGraw-Hill Companies is a proud corporate 
member of AACSB International. Understanding the 
importance and value of AACSB accreditation, Man-
agement: A Practical Introduction, 7th ed., recognizes 
the curricula guidelines detailed in the AACSB stan-
dards for business accreditation by connecting 
 selected questions in the text and/or the test bank to 
the general knowledge and skill guidelines in the 
AACSB standards.
 
The statements contained in Management: A 
Practical Introduction, 7th ed., are provided only as a 
guide for the users of this textbook. The AACSB 
leaves content coverage and assessment within the 
purview of individual schools, the mission of the 
school, and the faculty. While Management: A Practi-
cal Introduction, 7th ed., and the teaching package 
make no claim of any specific AACSB qualification 
or evaluation, we have within Management: A Practi-
cal Introduction, 7th ed., labeled selected questions 
according to the general knowledge and skills  areas.
FEATURE #4
FEATURE #4
Resources that Work 
xiv

xv
McGraw-Hill Connect Management
Get Connected. Get Results. McGraw-Hill Education’s Connect is a digital teaching and 
learning environment that aims to improve student learning outcomes as well as provide 
instructors actionable data in their classroom. With Connect Management, instructors 
and students can engage with their coursework anytime, anywhere, enabling faster learn-
ing, more efficient studying, and higher retention of knowledge.
Features
1. SmartBook. SmartBook™ is the first and only adaptive reading experience designed 
to change the way students read and learn. It creates a personalized reading experience 
by highlighting the most impactful concepts a student needs to learn at that moment 
in time. As a student engages with SmartBook, the reading experience continuously 
adapts by highlighting content based on what the student knows and doesn’t know. 
This ensures that the focus is on the content he or she needs to learn, while 
simultaneously promoting long-term retention of material. Use SmartBook’s real-
time reports to quickly identify the concepts that require more attention from 
individual students—or the entire class.
The end result? Students are more engaged with course content, can better prioritize 
their time, and come to class ready to participate.
2. Interactive Applications. These engaging interactive scenarios provide students with 
immersive, experiential learning opportunities so they can apply key concepts and 
deepen their knowledge of key course topics. Students receive immediate feedback at 
intermediate steps throughout each exercise, as well as comprehensive feedback at the 
end of the assignment. All interactives are automatically scored and entered into the 
instructor gradebook.
3. Connect Insight. Insight offers easily interpreted visualizations of student performance, 
assignment performance, and section performance in an actionable way. Designed for 
your tablet or desktop computer, Insight helps you optimize your time by showing you 
the students and assignments that can benefit most from your attention.
4. Student Progress Tracking. Connect Management keeps instructors informed about how 
each student, section, and class is performing, allowing for more productive use of 
lecture and office hours. The progress-tracking function enables you to . . .
•  View scored work immediately and track individual or group performance with 
assignment and grade reports.
•  Access an instant view of student or class performance relative to learning objectives.
•  Collect data and generate reports required by many accreditation organizations, such 
as AACSB.
5. Smart Grading. When it comes to studying, time is precious. Connect Management 
helps students learn more efficiently by providing feedback and practice material when 
they need it, where they need it. When it comes to teaching, your time also is precious. 
The grading function enables you to . . .
•  Have assignments scored automatically, giving students immediate feedback on their 
work and side-by-side comparisons with correct answers.
•  Access and review each response; manually change grades or leave comments for 
students to review.
• Reinforce classroom concepts with practice tests and instant quizzes.
Always at the forefront of learning innovation, McGraw-Hill 
has taken another leap forward....

 xvi
6. Simple Assignment Management. With Connect Management, creating assignments is 
easier than ever, so you can spend more time teaching and less time managing. The 
assignment management function enables you to . . .
•  Create and deliver assignments easily with selectable end-of-chapter questions and 
test bank items.
•  Streamline lesson planning, student progress reporting, and assignment grading to 
make classroom management more efficient than ever.
•  Go paperless with the eBook and online submission and grading of student assignments.
7. Instructor Library. The Connect Management Instructor Library is your repository for 
additional resources to improve student engagement in and out of class. You can select 
and use any asset that enhances your lecture. The Connect Management Instructor 
Library includes . . .
• Instructor’s Manual
• PowerPoint files
• Test Bank
8. Lecture Capture via Tegrity Campus. Increase the attention paid to lecture discussion by 
decreasing the attention paid to note taking. For an additional charge, Lecture Capture 
offers new ways for students to focus on the in-class discussion, knowing they can 
revisit important topics later.
Tegrity Campus: Lectures 24/7
Tegrity Campus is a service that makes class time available 24/7 by automatically captur-
ing every lecture in a searchable format for students to review when they study and com-
plete assignments. With a simple one-click start-and-stop process, you capture all computer 
screens and corresponding audio. Students can replay any part of any class with easy-to-
use browser-based viewing on a PC or Mac.
 
Educators know that the more students can see, hear, and experience class resources, 
the better they learn. In fact, studies prove it. With Tegrity Campus, students quickly re-
call key moments by using Tegrity Campus’s unique search feature. This search helps 
students efficiently find what they need, when they need it, across an entire semester of 
class recordings. Help turn all your students’ study time into learning moments immedi-
ately supported by your lecture. Lecture Capture enables you to . . .
• Record and distribute your lecture with a click of a button.
• Record and index PowerPoint presentations and anything shown on your computer so it 
is easily searchable, frame by frame.
• Offer access to lectures anytime and anywhere by computer, iPod, or mobile device.
• Increase intent listening and class participation by easing students’ concerns about note 
taking. Lecture Capture will make it more likely you will see students’ faces, not the 
tops of their heads.
To learn more about Tegrity, watch a two-minute Flash demo at www.tegrity.com.

xvii
Create
Craft your teaching resources to match the way you teach! With McGraw-Hill Create, 
www.mcgrawhillcreate.com, you can easily rearrange chapters, combine material from 
other content sources, and quickly upload content you have written, like your course syl-
labus or teaching notes. Find the content you need in Create by searching through thou-
sands of leading McGraw-Hill textbooks. Arrange your book to fit your teaching style. 
Create even allows you to personalize your book’s appearance by selecting the cover and 
adding your name, school, and course information. Order a Create book and you’ll receive 
a complimentary print review copy in three to five business days or a complimentary elec-
tronic review copy (eComp) via e-mail in about one hour. Go to www.mcgrawhillcreate.com
today and register. Experience how McGraw-Hill Create empowers you to teach your stu-
dents your way.
Blackboard
McGraw-Hill Education and Blackboard have teamed up. What does this mean 
for you?
• Your life, simplified. Now you and your students can access McGraw-Hill’s Connect 
Management and Create right from within your Blackboard course—all with one single 
sign-on. Say goodbye to the days of logging in to multiple applications.
• Deep integration of content and tools. Not only do you get single sign-on with Connect 
Management and Create, you also get deep integration of McGraw-Hill content and 
content engines right in Blackboard. Whether you’re choosing a book for your course or 
building Connect Management assignments, all the tools you need are right where you 
want them—inside of Blackboard.
• Seamless Gradebooks. Are you tired of keeping multiple gradebooks and manually 
synchronizing grades into Blackboard? We thought so. When a student completes an 
integrated Connect Management assignment, the grade for that assignment automatically 
(and instantly) feeds your Blackboard grade center.
• A solution for everyone. Whether your institution is already using Blackboard or you 
just want to try Blackboard on your own, we have a solution for you. McGraw-Hill 
Education and Blackboard can now offer you easy access to industry-leading technology 
and content, whether your campus hosts it, or we do. Be sure to ask your local McGraw-
Hill Education representative for details.
Customer Contact Information
At McGraw-Hill Education, we understand that getting the most from new technology can 
be challenging. That’s why our services don’t stop after you purchase our products. You 
can e-mail our product specialists 24 hours a day to get product training online. Or you can 
search our knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support website. For 
customer support, call 800-331-5094, or visit www.mhhe.com/support. One of our tech-
nical support analysts will be able to assist you in a timely fashion.

• New throughout: 57 Self-Assessments (available on Connect) integrated within the text. Each contains discussion questions aimed 
at helping students apply what they are leaning. (Example: “How Strong Is My Motivation to Be a Manager?”)
• Also new: “Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?”—10 questions that appear at the end of each chapter to enable students 
to see how well they comprehend the material.
1. The Exceptional Manager
• Sections resequenced, per reviewer request: Former Section 1.3 “What Managers Do: The Four Principal Functions” now 1.2. 
Former Section 1.2 “Seven Challenges to Being an Exceptional Manager” now 1.3. Former Section 1.7 “The Skills Exceptional 
Managers Need” now 1.5. Former Section 1.5 “Roles Managers Must Play Successfully” now 1.6. Former Section 1.6 “The 
Entrepreneurial Spirit” now Section 1.7 and retitled “The Link between Entrepreneurship & Management.”
• New material added: Introductory material features new GM CEO Mary Barra. Concept of mentor added. New material added on 
information technology, including cloud computing, social media, Big Data, privacy, artificial intelligence. Material added to 
Challenge #7, changing “Managing for Your Own Happiness & Life Goals” to “Managing for Happiness & Meaningfulness.” 
Figure 1.2 modified to add “Team leaders” to traditional management pyramid. Subsection added, “Team Leaders: Facilitating 
Home Activities.” Major Section 1.5 “The Skills Exceptional Managers Need” revised with Mary Barra as principal example, with 
emphasis on “soft skills,” per reviewer request.
• Importance of “soft skills” in management success.
• Statistics, facts updated, as of financial rewards for managers, globalization, diversity, ethical standards, white-collar criminals, 
management stars (Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg, Google’s Larry Page, Microsoft’s Satya Nadella, Zappos’s Tony Hsieh, 
WomanCare Global’s Saundra Pelletier), Mintzberg research, entrepreneurs, e-commerce statistics.
• Outdated material deleted: Introductory material on IBM CEO Virginia Rometty deleted. Most of Example box “Efficiency versus 
Effectiveness: ‘Don’t Tell Me You’re Sorry, Just Fix the Problem!’” deleted. Example box deleted, “Losing Competitive Advantage: 
How Did Newspapers Lose Their Way?” Much of Example box deleted, “Is Lying & Cheating Required to Succeed?” Example box 
deleted, “Starting Up a Start-up: The Origins of Yelp.” “Example of an Intrapreneur: Marissa Mayer Develops a Researcher’s Little 
Personal Program into Google News.”
• New or significantly revised Practical Action boxes: “Preparing Yourself to Behave Right When You’re Tempted to Cheat.” 
“Executive Functioning: How Good Are You at Focusing Your Thoughts, Controlling Your Impulses, & Avoiding Distractions?”
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “Efficiency versus Effectiveness: ‘Don’t Tell Me You’re Sorry, Just Fix the Problem!’” 
“The Struggle for Competitive Advantage: App-Based Ride-Share Services Leave the Taxi Industry Reeling.” “A Hot Start-up 
Cleans Up: Homejoy Transforms an Old Business.” “Example of an Intrapreneur: Intel’s Anthropologist Genevieve Bell Explores 
Possible Innovations for Automakers.”
• New Self-Assessments: “How Strong Is My Motivation to Be a Manager?” “To What Extent Do You Possess an Entrepreneurial 
Spirit?”
• New Management in Action case: “Target CEO Works to Regain Consumer Trust after the Company Was Hacked.”
2. Management Theory
• Resequenced material: Subsection “Evidence-Based Management: Facing Hard Facts, Rejecting Nonsense” moved from Section 2.1 
into Section 2.6, “Contingency Viewpoint.”
• New material added: Subsection formerly titled “Five Practical Reasons for Studying This Chapter” now has six reasons. Per 
reviewer request, Figure 2.1 added, “The two overarching perspectives—historical and contemporary,” with new artwork.
• Statistics, facts added, as on material about 1970s flawed cars, learning organizations.
• Outdated material deleted: “Evidence-Based Management: Facing Hard Facts, Rejecting Nonsense,” moved to Chapter 2, Section 2.6. 
Obsolete Example box deleted, “Was Cisco’s Experiment of 48 Decentralized ‘Management Councils’ the Best Way to Organize a 
Company?” “Application of Behavioral Science Approach: Which Is Better—Competition or Cooperation?” “Management 
Science: Do Calorie Postings in Restaurants Change Eating Habits?” “Operations Management: Was Toyota’s ‘Lean Management’ 
Approach the Right Approach?” “Closed versus Open Systems: When Netflix Didn’t Listen.” “The Contingency Viewpoint: What 
Incentives Work in Lean Times?”
• New Manager’s Toolbox: “Mind-sets: How Do You Go about Learning?”
• New or significantly revised Practical Action box: “Evidence-Based Management: An Attitude of Wisdom,” formerly this chapter’s 
Manager’s Toolbox, made a Practical Action box in Section 2.6, with some changes in material.
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “Pages from a Game Company’s Employee Guide: In Flatness Lies Greatness.” 
“Application of Behavioral Science Approach: The Open-Plan Office—Productivity Enhancer or Productivity Killer?” 
“Management Science: ‘Find Me More Music I Like!’” “Operations Management: Using ‘the Toyota Way’ to Benefit Hospital 
Patients.” “Closed versus Open Systems: Penney’s versus Macy’s.” “The Contingency Viewpoint: What Are the Best Kinds of 
Benefits?”
• New Self-Assessments: “What Is Your Orientation toward Theory X/Theory Y?” “To What Extent Is Your Organization Committed 
to Total Quality Management?” “Are You Working for a Learning Organization?”
xviii
Chapter-by-Chapter Changes from the Previous Edition

xix
• New Management in Action case: “GM’s New CEO, Mary Barra, Must Manage a Major Recall.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Is an Apology Enough?”
3. The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities
• Sections resequenced: After addition of new Section 3.1, old Sections 3.1 through 3.5 renumbered as Sections 3.2 through 3.6.
• New material added: Per reviewer request, Section 3.1 added, “The Triple Bottom Line: People, Planet, & Profit,” introducing 
concepts of people, planet, and profit and social audit. New subsection added, “The Millennials’ Search for Meaning.” 
Crowdfunding introduced. Climate change and global warming defined, and benefits of being green explained. New subsection 
added, “The Value of Earth’s Resources: Natural Capital,” with explanation of concept of natural capital. Statistics, facts updated, 
as in hotels, local communities, local stakeholders, boycotts, poverty, productivity, decline in driving, sociocultural issues, lifestyle 
changes, office theft, prohibition of gifts to doctors, insider trading, Ponzi schemers, whistle-blowing, philanthropy.
• Outdated material deleted: Example box “Corporate Social Responsibility: Office Furniture Maker Herman Miller Competes on 
Sustainability.”
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “Taking Care of Customers: Amazon’s Jeff Bezos Obsesses about ‘the Customer 
Experience.’” “Local Communities as Stakeholders: Are Financial Incentives to Business Really Necessary?” “Managing the 
Media: What’s the Best Practice for Handling Product Recalls?” “Corporate Social Responsibility: Salesforce.com Wants to 
Change the Way the World Works.”
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Your Ethical Ideology.” “Assessing Your Attitudes toward Corporate Responsibility.”
• New Management in Action case: “UPS Actively Pursues Sustainability.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Is It Fair to Have Different Standards for Paying Bills versus Collecting Bills?”
4. Global Management
• New material added: New subsection added at reviewer request, “Competition & Globalization: Who Will Be No. 1 Tomorrow,” on 
U.S. ranking for competitiveness, per-capita income, degree of freedom. Material added to Example box, “Americans Working 
Overseas.” Coverage of exchange rates, per reviewer request. Per reviewer request, corruption and labor abuses added to subsection 
“Law, Instability, Corruption, & Labor Abuses.” Statistics, facts updated, as on multinational corporations, business travel, mergers, 
use of travel downtime, former U.S. firms now under foreign ownership, foreign trade, NAFTA, EU, cultural differences, language, 
religion, returning expatriates.
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “An American in London Dealing with Currency Exchange—How Much Are Those 
Jeans, Really?” “Dinner at 10? Spain’s Cultural Differences in Time.”
• New or significantly revised Practical Action box, “Being an Effective Road Warrior.”
• Outdated material deleted: Example box deleted, “E-Commerce: Resolers to the World.” Obsolete material deleted in Example box, 
“Americans Working Overseas.” Outdated in-text examples deleted throughout.
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Your Global Manager Potential.” “Assessing Your Consumer Ethnocentrism.” “Assessing Your 
Stand on the GLOBE Dimensions.”
• New Management in Action case: “Norwegian Air Shuttle Aspires to Become the Cheapest Global Airline.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Should Families of Passengers on Malaysia Flight 370 Be Allowed to Sue for Damages in 
the U.S.?”
5. Planning
• Resequenced material, to better explain strategic-management process: New Section 5.1, “Planning & Strategy,” moved from 
Chapter 6, old Section 6.1, “The Dynamics of Strategic Planning.” New Section 5.3, “Goals & Plans,” using material from old 
Section 6.2. Renumbered Section 5.4 from 5.3, “Promoting Goal Setting: SMART Goals & Management by Objectives.” 
Renumbered Section 5.5 from 5.4, “The Planning/Control Cycle.”
• New material added: In Section 5.1, discussion of strategy and strategic management added. Discussion of business plan and 
business model added. New coverage added: “Why Planning & Strategic Management Are Important.” “Developing a Sustainable 
Competitive Advantage.” Statistics, facts updated, as on vision statement, Southwest Airlines.
• Outdated material deleted: Old Manager’s toolbox deleted, “Planning Different Career Paths: ‘It’s a Career, Not a Job.’” Subsection 
deleted, “How Organizations Respond to Uncertainty.” Subsection deleted, “How Planning Helps You: Four Benefits.” Obsolete 
Example box deleted: “Thinking Ahead: Ford Plans a Radical Design of the Fusion.” Obsolete subsection “How Organizations 
Respond to Uncertainty,” deleted. Material deleted from “Management by Objectives” for space reasons.
• New Manager’s Toolbox: “Setting Big Goals: Is This the Road to Success?”
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “Is Planning Necessary? Launching a Vending Machine Business on $425.” 
“Developing Competitive Advantage: What’s the Best Strategy in an E-Commerce Age?” “Strategic, Tactical, & Operational Goals: 
Southwest Airlines.” “Setting Goals: Walmart Lays Out an Agenda for Environmental Change.”
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Your Career Vision & Plan.” “What Is the Quality of Goal Setting within a Current or Past 
Employer?”

• New Management in Action case: “GE’s Poor Planning Results in Delays & Increased Costs.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “How Do You Think Companies Should Respond to Accusations Made by a Whistle-Blower?”
6. Strategic Management
• Resequenced material, to better explain strategic-management process: Old Section 6.1, “The Dynamics of Strategic Planning,” 
moved to Section 5.1, Chapter 5. New Section 6.1, “What Is Effective Strategy?” created from part of old section. New Section 6.3, 
“Establishing the Mission & the Vision,” created from part of old Section 6.2. New Section 6.4, “Assessing the Current Reality,” 
created in part from old Section 6.3, “Establishing the Grand Strategy.” New Section 6.5, “Formulating the Grand Strategy,” created 
in part from old Section 6.4, “Formulating Strategy.” New Section 6.6, “Implementing & Controlling Strategy: Execution,” created 
from same material in old Section 6.5.
• New material added: “Step 2: Assess the Current Reality,” including term current reality assessment. Addition of “Benchmarking: 
Comparing with the Best” material moved here from Chapter 16. New material in Section 6.6, “Implementing & Controlling 
Strategy: Execution.” Transitional material added throughout chapter to explain new approach to strategic-management process. 
Statistics, facts updated, as on Manager’s Toolbox, Michael Porter, Amazon.com, auto recalls, Toyota SWOT analysis, Indian 
motorcycles.
• Material deleted: Material in old Section 6.1 on strategic management moved to Chapter 5. Obsolete Example boxes deleted, 
“Developing Competitive Advantage: Is Apple’s App Store a Model for Ford?” and “Crisis Leading to the Strategic Management 
Process: JetBlue Weathers an Ice Storm.” Also deleted, Example box “Contingency Planning: Southwest Airlines Uses Hedging to 
Hold Down Price of Aviation Fuel.” Practical Action box, “Mentoring: The New Rules,” deleted for space reasons.
• New or significantly revised Practical Action box: “Building a Foundation of Execution,” converted from text in old Section 6.5.
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “Crisis Leading to the Strategic-Management Process: Starbucks Reclaims Its Soul.” 
“SWOT Analysis: How Would You Analyze Toyota?” “Contingency Planning for Climate Change: Drought, Rain, & Fire.”
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Strategic Thinking.” “Core Skills for Strategic Planning.” “Assessing the Obstacles to Strategic 
Execution.”
• New Management in Action case: “Putting AutoZone into Drive.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Should Companies Be Pressured to Recruit Females for Boards of Directors?”
7. Individual & Group Decision Making
• Sections resequenced: Former Section 7.4, “Making Ethical Decisions,” now Section 7.2, per reviewer request. Former Section 7.2, 
“Evidence-Based Decision Making & Analytics,” now Section 7.3. Former Section 7.3, “Four Decision-Making Styles,” now 
Section 7.4. Discussion of Participative Management moved from Section 7.4 to Chapter 14 as a Practical Action box.
• New material: “Two Systems of Decision Making,” on psychologist Daniel Kahneman, per reviewer suggestion. More discussion 
in “The Uses of ‘Big Data,’” including Big Data analytics. Material added on minority dissent. In subsection “Computer-Aided 
Decision Making,” material added on decision-support systems. Statistics, facts updated, as on intuition, implementing evidence-
based decision making, ineffective reactions to change, brainstorming, group size.
• Outdated material deleted: Obsolete Example box, “Making a Decision: Which Is Better, Fast or Slow Delivery? Maersk Shipping 
Line Managers Decide among Alternatives.” Deletion of subsection “The Incremental Model.” Obsolete Practical Action box, 
“The Steps in Critical Thinking,” deleted, per reviewer suggestion. Deletion, for space reasons, of risk propensity from discussion 
of decision-making styles. Example box deleted, “How Should Netflix Reinvent Itself?” Under “Computer-Aided Decision 
Making,” chauffeur-driven systems and group-driven systems deleted.
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “How Can Being the Best Affect Your Decision Making?” “Making a Correct 
Diagnosis: Who’s Better at Financial Decisions, Men or Women?” “Evaluation: The Boeing 787 Dreamliner, a Bet-the-Company 
Decision.” “Analytics in Athletics: The Personal ‘Moneyball’ Coach.” “Deciding to Decide: How Should a Paper Maker Reinvent 
Itself?”
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Your Problem Solving Potential.” “Assessing Your Level of Intuition.” “What Is Your Decision 
Making Style?” “Assessing Participation in Group Decision Making.”
• New Management in Action case: “Companies Use Tracking Devices to Help Make Decisions.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Would You Agree to Wear a Sensor So Your Employer Can Track Your Movements & 
Conversations?”
8. Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design
• Material resequenced: New Manager’s Toolbox: “How to Stand Out in a New Job: Fitting into an Organization’s Culture in the First 
60 Days,” moved here from Manager’s Toolbox in Chapter 9. New Practical Action box: “When Should You Delegate & When Not: 
How Managers Get More Done,” formerly Chapter 8 Manager’s Toolbox.
• New section added: “8.1 Aligning Strategy, Culture, & Structure.” Introduction of person-organization fit, how an organization’s 
culture and structure are used to implement strategy. Subsection on “The Importance of Culture” significantly revised. Overarching 
new Figure 8.1, “Drivers and flow of organizational culture,” outlines how managers align the organization’s vision and strategies 
with its organizational culture to realize overall performance. New Figure 8.3, “What organizational benefits are associated with 
xx

what organizational cultures.” Table 8.2 added, “A Dozen Ways to Change Organizational Culture.” Section 8.3, “The Process of 
Culture Change,” revised out of old “8.2 Developing High-Performance Cultures.” “Flat organization” defined. Old closing 
subsection, “The Link between Strategy & Culture,” is now “The Link between Strategy, Culture, & Structure.” Statistics, facts 
updated, as on adhocracy culture, market culture, hierarchy culture, observable artifacts, process of culture change, Whole Foods 
stock price, mechanistic organizations, organic organizations.
• Outdated material deleted: Old Figure 8.3 “Four Functions of Organizational Culture.” Subsection deleted, “Cultures for Enhancing 
Economic Performance: Three Perspectives.” Subsection deleted, “Life Cycle: Four Stages in the Life of an Organization.”
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “How Strategy Affects Culture & Culture Affects Structure: EndoStim, a Medical 
Device Start-up, Operates Virtually,” modified from existing Example. “The Corporate Culture of Pfizer Pharmaceuticals: The 
Different ‘Personalities’ Within an Organization,” modified from previous Example.
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Your Preferred Type of Organizational Culture.” “Assessing Your Organizational Structure 
Preference.”
• New Management in Action case: “IDEO’s Culture Reinforces Helping Behavior.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Is Apple’s Culture Going Too Far?”
9. Human Resource Management
• Sections resequenced, at reviewer request: Section 9.3, “Recruitment & Selection: Putting the Right People into the Right Jobs,” 
now Section 9.2. Section 9.6, “Managing an Effective Workforce: Compensation & Benefits,” now Section 9.3. Section 9.7, 
“Managing Promotions, Transfers, Disciplining, & Dismissals,” now Section 9.6. Section 9.2, “The Legal Requirements of Human 
Resource Management,” now Section 9.7.
• New Manager’s Toolbox: “Soft Skills & Social Graces: Boosting Your Advantage in the Hiring World.”
• New material added: New subsection, “Performance Management in Human Resources,” with new Figure 9.2. Subsection added, 
“Bullying” with Table 9.5, “Beating Back the Bully.” Details, statistics updated, as for interviewing, background checking, 
employee engagement, performance appraisal, forced ranking, workplace discrimination, U.S. union movement.
• Outdated material deleted: Old Manager’s Toolbox removed, “How to Stand Out in a New Job: Fitting into an Organization in the 
First 60 Days,” which is now Chapter 8 Manager’s Toolbox. Old Practical Action box deleted, “How to Make Incentive Pay Plans 
Meet Company Goals: Communicate Them to Employees.” Example deleted, “The 360-Degree Assessment: How Can It Be 
Compromised?”
• New Practical Action box: “Why Rewards May Fail to Motivate.”
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “Performance Management: How Domino’s Pizza Built a Billion-Dollar Business.” 
“Silicon Valley, Sexual Harassment, & the ‘Brogrammer’ Culture.”
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing the Quality of HR Practices.” “Assessing Your Person-Job Fit.” “Is a Career in HR Right for 
You?” “Assessing Your Attitudes toward Unions.”
• New Management in Action case: “More Companies Rely on Proactive Human Resource Practices to Reduce Employee Turnover.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “How Would You Accommodate a Pregnant Employee?”
10. Organizational Change & Innovation
• Material resequenced: Table 10.1, “Six Methods for Managing Employee Resistance to Change,” moved to Section 10.4. New 
Section “10.2 Types & Models of Change” added, using existing text material and new material. “Collins’s Five Stages of Decline” 
moved to Example box in Section 10.5. Subsections “The Causes of Resistance to Change” and “Ten Reasons Employees Resist 
Change” moved from Section 10.2 to 10.5. “Benchmarking” moved to Chapter 6.
• New material added: “Disruptive innovation” redefined. Figure 10.1, “Forces for change outside and inside the organization,” 
reconfigured with new categories. New Figure 10.2, “Lewin’s model of change,” added. “Invention” and “creativity” defined more 
precisely and distinguished from “innovation.” Table 10.2 compressed, “Factors that Reduce an Organization’s Ability to Learn 
from Failure.” “Core versus Transformational Innovations” replaces “Incremental versus Transformational Innovations.” 
“Transformational innovations” given revised definition. New Table 10.3, “Top Companies in 2014 Whose Cultures Strongly 
Encourage Innovation.” New statistics, facts throughout, as on supertrends, technological advancements, global economy, offshore 
suppliers, greatest innovators, innovation responding to recognizing a problem.
• Outdated material deleted: Example box deleted, “Proactive Change: Redbox’s Parent, Coinstar, Gets Out Front on New Vending 
Machines.” Section deleted, “Areas in Which Change Is Often Needed: People, Technology, Structure, & Strategy,” along with 
Example box “Changing Technology: Web 2.1 Is Radically Altering How Business Is Done.” Outdated example box deleted, 
“Organizational Development: Patagonia Tries to Become Greener.”
• New or significantly revised Example boxes: “Radical Change: The Fall of the BlackBerry.” “Reactive Change: The BP Gulf of 
Mexico Blowout.” “Proactive Change: Disney World Gets Out Front with Its MagicBand.” “Technology Creates the Sharing 
Economy: Airbnb, Uber, & . . . DogVacay?” “Organizational Development: Using OD to Make Money in the Restaurant Business,” 
per reviewer request for more material on small business. “Recognizing the Need for Change: Collins’s Five Stages of Decline,” 
moved from text in Section 10.1.
xxi

xxii
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Your Attitudes toward Change at Work.” “How Innovative Is the Organizational Climate?”
• New Management in Action case: “Hewlett-Packard Is Counting on Organizational Change to Boost Revenue Growth.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Should CEOs Fire Employees Based on the Opinions of U.S. Senators?”
11. Managing Individual Differences & Behavior
• Some subsections resequenced: Under “Core Self-Evaluations,” locus of control now follows rather than precedes self-efficacy and 
self-esteem.
• New material added: Subsection “Core Self-Evaluations” replaces “Five Traits Important in Organizations.” Subsection “Emotional 
Stability” replaces “Self-Monitoring.” “LGBT People” replaces “Gays & Lesbians,” with new material and statistics added. 
Statistics, facts updated throughout, as on millennials, job satisfaction, diversity, gender, stress.
• Outdated material deleted: Subsection “Self-Monitoring,” along with Example box.
• New or significantly revised Example box: “Emotional Intelligence: Self-Understanding Should Include ‘the Good, the Bad, & the 
Ugly.’”
• New Self-Assessments: “Where Do You Stand on the Big Five Dimensions of Personality?” “What Is Your Level of Emotional 
Intelligence.” “To What Extent Are You Engaged in Your Studies?” “How Satisfied Are You with Your Present Job?” “What Are 
Your Attitudes about Working with Older Employees?”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Should Airlines Accommodate Overweight People?”
12. Motivating Employees
• New material added: Figure 12.3, “Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,” developed more fully. “Deci & Ryan’s Self-Determination 
Theory: Competence, Autonomy, & Relatedness.” “The Four Motivational Mechanisms of Goal-Setting Theory.” Statistics and 
facts updated on job satisfaction, money as motivator, work-life balance, flexible work arrangements, telecommuting.
• Outdated material deleted: “Aldefer’s ERG Theory: Existence, Relatedness, & Growth.” Example boxes deleted: “Acquired Needs 
Theory: What Motivates Facebook’s COO Sheryl Sandberg?” “Use of Expectancy Theory: A Drug Company Ties CEO Pay to 
Performance.”
• New or significantly revised Example box: “Reducing the F’s: Applying Expectancy Theory to Failing Students.”
• New Self-Assessments: “Are You More Interested in Extrinsic or Intrinsic Rewards?” “Assessing Your Acquired Needs.” “Assessing 
Your Needs for Self-Determination.” “Measuring Perceived Fair Interpersonal Treatment.” “Assessing the Motivating Potential of 
Your Job.”
• New Management in Action Case: “Caterpillar Puts Employee Pay at Risk, but Is It Done Fairly?”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Should College Athletes Be Paid to Perform?”
13. Groups & Teams
• New material: Redefinition of formal and informal groups. New figure: Figure 13.2, “The Relationship between intensity and 
outcomes.” New text material: “Five Basic Behaviors to Help You Better Handle Conflict.” Updated statistics on abusive bosses, 
approaches to five conflict-handling styles.
• Obsolete in-text examples deleted, as for intergroup and multicultural conflicts.
• New Self-Assessments: “Attitudes toward Teamwork.” “Assessing Your Team’s Productive Energy.” “Assessing Groupthink.” 
“Assessing Team Effectiveness.” “What Is Your Conflict-Management Style?”
• New Management in Action case: “Wooga Effectively Utilizes Teams When Creating Game Apps.”
14. Power, Influence, & Leadership
• New material added: “Positive Task-Oriented Traits & Positive/Negative Interpersonal Attributes,” including narcissism, 
Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. “Task-Oriented Leader Behaviors: Initiating-Structure Leadership & Transaction Leadership.” 
“Relationship-Oriented Leader Behavior: Consideration, Empowerment, & Servant Leadership,” with servant leadership provided 
from existing material. “Passive Leadership: The Lack of Leadership Skills,” including laissez-faire leadership, written out of 
existing material. Section 14.4, “Situational Approaches,” replaces the term contingency with situational. Section 14.5 now titled 
“The Uses of Transformational Leadership,” instead of “The Full-Range Model,” with previous material on transactional leadership 
moved earlier in the chapter. Facts and statistics updated on women executives, lack of female CEOs, other matters.
• Outdated material deleted: Kouzes & Posner’s Five Traits. Leadership lessons from the GLOBE project. University of Michigan 
model. Ohio State model. Obsolete Example box deleted: “Set a Goal, Maintain Intensity: The Man Who Built Zynga, a Tightly 
Wired Machine.”
• New or significantly revised Practical Action box: “Participative Management: Empowering Employees to Handle Decision 
Making” (moved here from text material in Chapter 7, Section 7.4).
• New or significantly revised Example box: “Servant Leadership: Leaders Who Work for the Led.”

xxiii
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Your Readiness to Assume the Leadership Role.” “Assessing Your Task & Relationship-
Oriented Leader Behavior.” “Assessing Your Boss’s Servant Leadership.” “Assessing Your Leader–Member Exchange.”
• New Management in Action case: “Leadership Lessons from Sir Alex Ferguson.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Is It Ethical for Organizations to Incentivize Their Employees to Poach People from Competing 
Companies?”
15. Interpersonal & Organizational Communication
• Sections resequenced, per reviewer request: Section 15.2 (old 15.3) is now “How Managers Fit into the Communication Process”
and Section 15.3 (old 15.2) is now “Barriers to Communication.”
• New material added: Material on paraphrasing as a listener response. Per reviewer request, “feedback” given more emphasis. 
Discussion added on defensive communication and nondefensive communication. Statistics updated on e-mail. Table 15.8 
compressed, “Five Rules for Using Smartphones.” Subsection added: “Enhanced Business Productivity with Social Media.” Table 
15.10 now “Tips for Effective Listening,” with new material.
• Outdated material deleted: “Learn to Streamline Reading.”
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing Your Communication Competence.” “Does Your Organization Have a Supportive or Defensive 
Communication Climate?” “To What Extent Are You Effectively Using Online Social Networking at Work?” “Assessing Your 
Listening Style.”
• New Management in Action case: “Hootsuite Uses Social Media to Manage Aspects of the Human Resources Function.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Should Professors’ Tweets Be Part of Their Academic Freedom to Comment on Controversial 
Topics?”
16. Control Systems & Quality Management
• Sections resequenced, in response to suggestion about emphasis on productivity: Old Section 16.1, “Managing for Productivity,” is
now Section 16.7 and moved to end of chapter.
• New material added: Figure 16.1 now labeled “Controlling for effective performance” and slightly modified. Per reviewer request, 
Figure 16.3, “Steps in the process,” labeled to emphasize feedback. At reviewer request, material added on supply chain and Figure 16.4 
added, “The links in a supply chain.” Under “The Balanced Scorecard,” material added on developing and taking care of employees. 
Figure 16.8, “Managing productivity and results,” changed slightly. In-text examples updated, as on Starbucks, strategic meetings, 
Ritz-Carlton, statistical process control
• New or significantly revised Example box: “Supply Chain Journey: The Tale of a Couch.”
• New Self-Assessments: “Assessing the Innovation & Learning Perspective of the Balanced Scorecard.” “Assessing Your Financial 
Literacy.” “Assessing Your Satisfaction with Your College or University Experience.”
• New Management in Action case: “UPS Relies on Sophisticated Control Systems to Manage Package Deliveries.”
• New Legal/Ethical Challenge: “Should Companies Be Allowed to Administer Untested Drugs on People with Ebola?”
• Material deleted: “Benchmarking” moved to Chapter 6. Outdated material deleted: “Learn to Streamline Reading.” Obsolete 
Example box deleted: “Do Social Media Ads Work? The Need for Benchmarking.” Old end-of-chapter Self-Assessment deleted.

xxiv
acknowledgments
We could not have completed this product without the help of a great many people. The 
first edition was signed by Karen Mellon and developed by Glenn and Meg Turner of Burrston 
House, to all of whom we are very grateful. Sincere thanks and gratitude also go to our 
former executive editor John Weimeister and to our present executive brand manager 
Michael Ablassmeir. Among our first-rate team at McGraw-Hill, we want to acknowledge key 
contributors: Jane Beck, product developer; Elizabeth Trepkowski, senior marketing manager; 
Mary E. Powers, content project manager; copy editor Peter de Lissovoy; proofreader Martha 
Ghent; designer Pam Verros; senior photo research coordinator Lori Hancock; and photo re-
searcher Robin Sand. We would also like to thank Ross Mecham for his work on the Instruc-
tor’s Manual; Brad Cox for the PowerPoint slides; Bob Abadie and Connie Sitterly for the test 
bank; and Patrick Soleymani for creating great Connect applications for the self-assessments.
Warmest thanks and appreciation go to the individuals who provided valuable input 
during the developmental stages of this edition, as follows:
Darlene Andert, 
Florida Gulf Coast University
Pamela Ball, 
Clark State Community College
Jessie Bellflowers, 
Fayetteville Technical Institute
Stephen Betts, 
William Paterson University
Carol Bormann Young, 
Metropolitan State University
Jon Bryan, 
Bridgewater State College
Becky Bryant, 
Texas Women’s University
Thomas Deckelman, 
Owens Community College
Valerie Evans, 
Kansas State University
Dane Galden, 
Columbus State Community College
Evgeniy Gentchev, 
Northwood University
Ryan Greenbaum, 
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater
Marie Halvorsen-Ganepola, 
University of Notre Dame
Karen Hawkins, 
Miami Dade College
Duane Helleloid, 
University of North Dakota
Tammy Hunt, 
University of North Carolina, 
Wilmington
Aviad Israeli, 
Kent State University
Kathleen Jones, 
University of North Dakota
Chris Levan, 
University of Tennessee, Chattanooga
Lori Merlak, 
Kirkwood Community College
Troy Mumford, 
Colorado State University
Margie Nicholson, 
Columbia College, Chicago
John Orife, 
Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Eren Ozgen, 
Troy State University, Dothan
Fernando Pargas, 
James Madison University
Paula Potter, 
Western Kentucky University
Storm Russo, 
Valencia Community College
Martin St. John, 
Westmoreland County Community 
College
Shane Spiller, 
Western Kentucky University
Isaiah Ugboro, 
North Carolina A & T State University
Kerry Webb, 
Texas Women’s University
Eric Williams, 
University of Alabama, Birmingham
Mark Zorn, 
Butler County Community College
We would also like to thank the following colleagues who served as manuscript reviewers during the development of 
previous editions:
G. Stoney Alder, 
Western Illinois University
Phyllis C. Alderdice, 
Jefferson Community College
Laura L. Alderson, 
University of Memphis
William Scott Anchors, 
University of Maine at Orono
Jeffrey L. Anderson, 
Ohio University
John Anstey, 
University of Nebraska at Omaha
Maria Aria, 
Camden County College
James D. Bell, 
Texas State University-San Marcos
Victor Berardi, 
Kent State University
Patricia Bernson, 
College County of Morris
David Bess, 
University of Hawaii
Stephen Betts, 
William Paterson University

xxv
Danielle Beu, 
Louisiana Tech University
Randy Blass, 
Florida State University
Larry Bohleber, 
University of Southern Indiana
Melanie Bookout, 
Greenville Technical College
Robert S. Boothe, 
University of Southern Mississippi
Susan M. Bosco, 
Roger Williams University
Roger Brown, 
Western Illinois University
Marit Brunsell, 
Madison Area Technical College
Jon Bryan, 
Bridgewater State College
Neil Burton, 
Clemson University
Barbara A. Carlin, 
University of Houston
Pamela Carstens, 
Coe College
Julie J. Carwile, 
John Tyler Community College
Daniel A. Cernas Ortiz, 
University of North Texas
Glen Chapuis, 
St. Charles Community College
Rod Christian, 
Mesa Community College
Mike Cicero, 
Highline Community College
Jack Cichy, 
Davenport University
Anthony Cioffi, 
Lorain County Community College
J. Dana Clark, 
Appalachian State University
Deborah Clark, 
Santa Fe Community College
Dean Cleavenger, 
University of Central Florida
Sharon Clinebell, 
University of Northern Colorado
Loretta Fergus Cochran, 
Arkansas Tech University
Glenda Coleman, 
University of South Carolina
Ron Cooley, 
South Suburban College
Gary Corona, 
Florida Community College
Keith Credo, 
McNeese State University
Dan Curtin, 
Lakeland Community College
Ajay Das, 
Baruch College
Tom Deckelman, 
Owens Community College
Kate Demarest, 
Caroll Community College
E. Gordon DeMeritt, 
Shepherd University
Kathleen DeNisco, 
Erie Community College
John DeSpagna, 
Nassau Community College
Pamela A. Dobies, 
University of Missouri-Kansas City
David Dore, 
City College of San Francisco
Lon Doty, 
San Jose State University
Ron Dougherty, 
Ivy Tech Community College/
Columbus Campus
Scott Droege, 
Western Kentucky University
Ken Dunegan, 
University of Cincinnati
Steven Dunphy, 
University of Akron
Linda Durkin, 
Delaware County Community 
College
Subhash Durlabhji, 
Northwestern State University
Jack Dustman, 
Northern Arizona University
Ray Eldridge, 
Freed-Hardeman University
Bob Eliason, 
James Madison University
Paul Fadil, 
University of North Florida
Jud Faurer, 
Metro State College of Denver
Judy Fitch, 
Augusta State University
David Foote, 
Middle Tennessee State University
Lucy R. Ford, 
Saint Joseph’s University
Gail E. Fraser, 
Kean University
Tony Frontera, 
Broome Community College
Michael Garcia, 
Liberty University
Evgeniy Gentchev, 
Northwood University
James Glasgow, 
Villanova University
Connie Golden, 
Lakeland Community College
Kris Gossett, 
Ivy Tech State College
Marie Gould, 
Peirce University
Kevin S. Groves, 
California State University, Los 
Angeles
Joyce Guillory, 
Austin Community College
Reggie Hall, 
Tarleton State University
Stephen F. Hallam, 
The University of Akron
Charles T. Harrington, 
Pasadena City College
Santhi Harvey, 
Central State University
Samuel Hazen, 
Tarleton State University
Jack Heinsius, 
Modesto Junior College
Evelyn Hendrix, 
Lindenwood University
Kim Hester, 
Arkansas State University
Anne Kelly Hoel, 
University of Wisconsin-Stout
Mary Hogue, 
Kent State University
Edward Johnson, 
University of North Florida
Nancy M. Johnson, 
Madison Area Technical College
Rusty Juban, 
Southeastern Louisiana University
Dmitriy Kalyagin, 
Chabot College
Acknowledgments

xxvi
Heesam Kang, 
Bacone College
Marvin Karlins, 
University of South Florida
Marcella Kelly, 
Santa Monica College
Richard Kimbrough, 
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Renee N. King, 
Eastern Illinois University
Bobbie Knoblauch, 
Wichita State University
Todd Korol, 
Monroe Community College
Sal Kukalis, 
California State University-Long 
Beach
Rebecca Legleiter, 
Tulsa Community College
David Leonard, 
Chabot College
David Levy, 
United States Air Force Academy
Chi Lo Lim, 
Northwest Missouri State University
Natasha Lindsey, 
University of North Alabama
Beverly Little, 
Western Carolina University
Guy Lochiatto, 
MassBay Community College
Mary Lou Lockerby, 
College of DuPage
Michael Dane Loflin, 
Limestone College
Paul Londrigan, 
Charles Stewart Mott Community 
College
Tom Loughman, 
Columbus State University
Ivan Lowe, 
York Technical College
Margaret Lucero, 
Texas A & M-Corpus Christi
James Manicki, 
Northwestern College
Christine I. Mark, 
University of Southern Mississippi
Marcia A. Marriott, 
Monroe Community College
Brenda McAleer, 
University of Maine at Augusta
Daniel W. McAllister, 
University of Nevada-Las Vegas
David McArthur, 
University of Nevada-Las Vegas
Tom McFarland, 
Mount San Antonio College
Joe McKenna, 
Howard Community College
Zack McNeil, 
Longview Community College
Jeanne McNett, 
Assumption College
Spencer Mehl, 
Coastal Carolina Community College
Mary Meredith, 
University of Louisiana
Douglas Micklich, 
Illinois State University
Christine Miller, 
Tennessee Tech University
Val Miskin, 
Washington State University
Gregory Moore, 
Middle Tennessee State University
Rob Moorman, 
Creighton University
Robert Myers, 
University of Louisville
Christopher P. Neck, 
Arizona State University
Francine Newth, 
Providence College
Thomas J. Norman, 
California State University-
Dominguez Hills
Fernando Pargas, 
James Madison University
Jack Partlow, 
Northern Virginia Community College
Don A. Paxton, 
Pasadena City College
John Paxton, 
Wayne State College
Sheila Petcavage, 
Cuyahoga Community College-
Western Campus
Barbara Petzall, 
Maryville University
Anthony Plunkett, 
Harrison College
Cynthia Preston, 
University of Northwestern Ohio
George Redmond, 
Franklin University
Rosemarie Reynolds, 
Embry Riddle Aeronautical University
H. Lynn Richards, 
Johnson County Community College
Leah Ritchie, 
Salem State College
Gary B. Roberts, 
Kennesaw State University
Barbara Rosenthal, 
Miami Dade Community College/
Wolfson Campus
Gary Ross, 
Barat College of DePaul University
Catherine Ruggieri, 
St. John’s University-New York
Cindy Ruszkowski, 
Illinois State University
William Salyer, 
Morris College
Diane R. Scott, 
Wichita State University
Marianne Sebok, 
Community College of Southern 
Nevada
Thomas J. Shaughnessy, 
Illinois Central College
Randi Sims, 
Nova Southeastern University
Frederick J. Slack, 
Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Erika E. Small, 
Coastal Carolina University
Jim Smas, 
Kent State University
Gerald F. Smith, 
University of Northern Iowa
Mark Smith, 
University of Southwest Louisiana
Jeff Stauffer, 
Ventura College
Raymond Stoudt, 
DeSales University
Barb Stuart, 
Daniels College of Business
Robert Scott Taylor, 
Moberly Area Community College
Virginia Anne Taylor, 
William Patterson University
Wynn Teasley, 
University of West Florida

xxvii
Marguerite Teubner, 
Nassau Community College
Jerry Thomas, 
Arapahoe Community College
Joseph Tomkiewicz, 
East Carolina University
Robert Trumble, 
Virginia Commonwealth University
Joy Turnheim Smith, 
Elizabeth City State University
Isaiah Ugboro, 
North Carolina Agricultural & 
Technical State University
Anthony Uremovic, 
Joliet Junior College
Barry Van Hook, 
Arizona State University
Susan Verhulst, 
Des Moines Area Community College
Annie Viets, 
University of Vermont
Tom Voigt, Jr., 
Aurora University
Carolyn Waits, 
Cincinnati State Technical & 
Community College
Bruce C. Walker, 
University of Louisiana at Monroe
Tekle O. Wanorie, 
Northwest Missouri State University
Charles Warren, 
Salem State College
Velvet Weems-Landingham, 
Kent State University-Geauga
Allen Weimer, 
University of Tampa
David A. Wernick, 
Florida International University
James Whelan, 
Manhattan College
John Whitelock, 
Community College of Baltimore/
Catonsville Campus
Wendy V. Wysocki, 
Monroe County Community College
The following professors also participated in an early focus group that helped drive the 
development of this text. We appreciate their suggestions and participation immensely:
We would also like to thank the following students for participating in a very important 
focus group to gather feedback from the student reader’s point of view:
Rusty Brooks, 
Houston Baptist University
Kerry Carson, 
University of Southwestern Louisiana
Sam Dumbar, 
Delgado Community College
Subhash Durlabhji, 
Northwestern State University
Robert Mullins, 
Delgado Community College
Carl Phillips, 
Southeastern Louisiana University
Allayne Pizzolatto, 
Nicholls State University
Ellen White, 
University of New Orleans
Marcy Baasch, 
Triton College
Diana Broeckel, 
Triton College
Lurene Cornejo, 
Moraine Valley Community College
Dave Fell, 
Elgin Community College
Lydia Hendrix, 
Moraine Valley Community College
Kristine Kurpiewski, 
Oakton Community College
Michelle Monaco, 
Moraine Valley Community College
Shannon Ramey, 
Elgin Community College
Arpita Sikand, 
Oakton Community College
Finally, we would like to thank our wives, Joyce and Stacey, for being understanding, 
patient, and encouraging throughout the process of writing this edition. Your love and 
support helped us endure the trials of completing this text.
We hope you enjoy reading and applying the book. Best wishes for success in your 
career.
Angelo Kinicki
Brian K. Williams
Acknowledgments

Management: A Practical Introduction 7e
The following Self-Assessment Table of Contents was created 
to help you navigate through the library of 95 available 
assessments. As noted earlier, 57 of these assessments have 
been integrated directly into the textbook. The first part of 
the table of contents shows you a chapter-by-chapter outline of 
the titles for each of these assessments. This can help you to 
decide which of the in-text assessments you might like to use. 
The second part of this table of contents provides a listing of the 
additional 37 self-assessments in the Kinicki Self-Assessment 
Library. These additional self-assessments are categorized 
according to topic—individual, group/team, and organization. It 
is important to note that all 95 self-assessments are contained 
within Connect, making them assignable and gradable.
Chapter 1 – The Exceptional Manager: What You Do, How You Do It
1. How Strong Is My Motivation to Be a Manager?
2. To What Extent Do You Possess an Entrepreneurial Spirit?
Chapter 2 – Management Theory: Essential Background for the 
Successful Manager
1. What Is Your Orientation toward Theory X/Theory Y?
2. To What Extent Is Your Organization Committed to Total 
Quality Management?
3. Are You Working for a Learning Organization?*
Chapter 3 – The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & 
Ethical Responsibilities: Doing the Right Thing
1. Assessing Your Ethical Ideology
2. Assessing Your Attitudes toward Corporate Social 
Responsibility
Chapter 4 – Global Management: Managing across Borders
1. Assessing Your Consumer Ethnocentrism
2. Assessing Your Stand on the GLOBE Dimensions
3. Assessing Your Global Manager Potential
Chapter 5 – Planning: The Foundation of Successful Management
1. Assessing Your Career Vision and Plan
2. What Is the Quality of Goal Setting within a Current or Past 
Employer?
Chapter 6 – Strategic Management: How Exceptional Managers 
Realize a Grand Design
1. Assessing Strategic Thinking
2. Core Skills Required for Strategic Planning
3. Assessing the Obstacles to Strategic Execution
Chapter 7 – Individual & Group Decision Making: How Managers 
Make Things Happen
1. Assessing Your Problem-Solving Potential*
2. Assessing Your Level of Intuition*
3. What Is Your Decision-Making Style?*
4. Assessing Participation in Group Decision Making*
Chapter 8 – Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design: Building 
Blocks of the Organization
1. Assessing Your Preferred Type of Organizational Culture*
2. Assessing Your Organizational Structure Preference
Chapter 9 – Human Resource Management: Getting the Right 
People for Managerial Success
1. Assessing the Quality of HR Practices
2. Assessing Your Person-Job Fit
3. Is a Career in HR Right for You?
4. Assessing Your Attitudes toward Unions
Chapter 10 – Organizational Change & Innovation: Lifelong 
Challenges for the Exceptional Manager
1. Assessing Your Attitudes toward Change at Work*
2. How Innovative Is the Organizational Climate?*
3. How Adaptable Are You?
4. Assessing Your Resistance to Change
Chapter 11 – Managing Individual Differences & Behavior: 
Supervising People as People
1. Where Do You Stand on the the Big Five Dimensions of 
Personality?
2. What Is Your Level of Emotional Intelligence?
3. To What Extent Are You Engaged in Your Studies?*
4. How Satisfied You Are with Your Present Job?*
5. What Are Your Attitudes about Working with Older 
Employees?*
Chapter 12 – Motivating Employees: Achieving Superior 
Performance in the Workplace
1. Are You More Interested in Extrinsic or Intrinsic Rewards?
2. Assessing Your Acquired Needs*
3. Assessing Your Needs for Self-Determination
4. Measuring Perceived Fair Interpersonal Treatment*
5. Assessing the Motivational Potential of Your Job
Chapter 13 – Groups & Teams: Increasing Cooperation, 
Reducing Conflict
1. Attitudes toward Teamwork
2. Assessing Your Team’s Productive Energy
3. Assessing Groupthink
4. Assessing Team Effectiveness
5. What Is Your Conflict Management Style?
Chapter 14 – Power, Influence, & Leadership: From Becoming a 
Manager to Becoming a Leader
1. Assessing Your Readiness to Assume the Leadership Role*
2. Assessing Your Task & Relationship-Oriented Leader 
Behavior*
3. Assessing Your Boss’s Servant Leadership*
4. Assessing Your Leader–Member Exchange*
xxviii
Self-Assessment Library

xxix
Chapter 15 – Interpersonal & Organizational Communication: 
Mastering the Exchange of Information
1. Assessing Your Communication Competence*
2. Does Your Organization Have a Supportive or Defensive 
Communication Climate?
3. To What Extent Are You Effectively Using Online Social 
Networking at Work?
4. Assessing Your Listening Style
Chapter 16 – Control Systems & Quality Management: Techniques 
for Enhancing Organizational Effectiveness
1. Assessing the Innovation & Learning Perspective of the 
Balanced Scorecard
2. Assessing Your Financial Literacy
3. Assessing Your Satisfaction with Your College or University 
Experience
*Indicates assessments used in both Kinicki/Williams Management and 
Kinicki/Fugate Organizational Behavior.
What About Me?
A. Learning About Your Personality:
• Assessing my Perspective on Ethics
• What Is My Big Five Personality Profile?
• How Proactive Am I?
• Assess Your Core Self-Evaluations
B. Your Values and Work Attitudes:
• What Are Your Core Values?
C. Social Perception and Managing Diversity:
• Assessing an Organization’s Diversity Climate
• How Does Your Diversity Profile Affect Your Relationships 
With Other People?
D. Your Motivation:
• To What Extent Have I Used Job Crafting?
• Creating and I-Deal
E. Using Goals, Feedback, Rewards, and Positive Reinforcement:
• Measuring Your Desire for Performance Feedback
• What Rewards Do I Value Most?
F. Flourishing:
• What Is My Positivity Ratio?
• What Is Your Level of Mindfulness?
• What Is My Level of Psychological Capital?
• What Are My Signature Strengths?
Working in Groups
A. Groups and Teams:
• Is This a Mature Work Group or a Team?
• Team Role Preference Scale
• Evaluate Your Team Member Preference
• How Trusting Am I?
B. Communication Skills:
• Assessing My Listening Style
• Social Media Readiness
C. Conflict and Negotiations:
• Interpersonal Conflict Tendencies
• Psychological Safety Climate
• School-Work-Life Conflict
• Bullying–Experienced, Witnessed, and Committed
D. Making Decisions:
• What Is Your Problem-Solving Potential?
E. Power, Influence, and Politics:
• How Much Power Do I Have?
• Which Influence Tactics Do I Use?
• How Political Am I?
• Your Impression Management – Who and How
Organization Life
A. Culture, Socialization, and Mentoring
• What Is the Organizational Culture at My Current 
Employer?
• What Type of Organizational Culture Do I Prefer?
• Have You Been Adequately Socialized?
• Assessing My Level of Mentoring
B. Organizational Design, Effectiveness, and Innovation
• Assessing Climate for Creativity
C. Managing Change and Stress
• What Is Your Change Readiness?
• How Resistant Are You to Change?
Additional Assessments found in Kinicki/Fugate – Organizational 
Behavior: A Practical Problem-Solving Approach 1e

xxx
contents
PART 1
Introduction
CHAPTER ONE
The Exceptional Manager: 
What You Do, How You Do It 2
1.1 Management: What It Is, What Its 
Benefits Are 4
The Rise of the “Die Maker’s Daughter” 4
Key to Career Growth: “Doing Things I’ve Never 
Done Before” 4
The Art of Management Defined 5
Why Organizations Value Managers: The Multiplier 
Effect 6
The Financial Rewards of Being an Exceptional 
Manager 6
What Are the Rewards of Studying & Practicing 
Management? 7
1.2 What Managers Do: The Four Principal 
Functions 9
Planning: Discussed in Part 3 of This Book 9
Organizing: Discussed in Part 4 of This Book 10
Leading: Discussed in Part 5 of This Book 10
Controlling: Discussed in Part 6 of This Book 10
1.3 Seven Challenges to Being an Exceptional 
Manager 11
CHALLENGE #1: Managing for Competitive 
Advantage—Staying Ahead of Rivals 11
CHALLENGE #2: Managing for Diversity—The 
Future Won’t Resemble the Past 13
CHALLENGE #3: Managing for Globalization—The 
Expanding Management Universe 13
CHALLENGE #4: Managing for Information 
Technology—Dealing with the “New Normal” 14
CHALLENGE #5: Managing for Ethical 
Standards 15
CHALLENGE #6: Managing for Sustainability—The 
Business of Green 16
CHALLENGE #7: Managing for Happiness & 
Meaningfulness 17
How Strong Is Your Motivation to Be a Manager? 
The First Self-Assessment  17
1.4 Pyramid Power: Levels & Areas of 
Management 18
The Traditional Management Pyramid: Levels & 
Areas 18
Four Levels of Management 18
Areas of Management: Functional Managers versus 
General Managers 20
Managers for Three Types of Organizations: For-
Profit, Nonprofit, Mutual-Benefit 21
Do Managers Manage Differently for Different Types 
of Organizations? 21
1.5 The Skills Exceptional Managers Need 22
1. Technical Skills—The Ability to Perform a 
Specific Job 22
2. Conceptual Skills—The Ability to Think 
Analytically 22
3. Human Skills—The “Soft Skills” Ability to Interact 
Well with People 23
The Most Valued Traits in Managers 23
1.6 Roles Managers Must Play Successfully 24
The Manager’s Roles: Mintzberg’s Useful 
Findings 24
Three Types of Managerial Roles: Interpersonal, 
Informational, & Decisional 26
1.7 The Link between Entrepreneurship & 
Management 28
Starting Up a Start-up: From Hats to Hamburgers 28
Entrepreneurship Defined: Taking Risks in Pursuit of 
Opportunity 29
Taking Something Practical Away from This 
Chapter 32
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 35
Key Points 35
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 36
Management in Action 37
Legal/Ethical Challenge 38
CHAPTER TWO
Management Theory: Essential Background 
for the Successful Manager 40
2.1 Evolving Viewpoints: How We Got to Today’s 
Management Outlook 42
Creating Modern Management: The Handbook of 
Peter Drucker 42
Six Practical Reasons for Studying This 
Chapter 43
Two Overarching Perspectives about Management: 
Historical & Contemporary 44
2.2 Classical Viewpoint: Scientific & 
Administrative Management 45
Scientific Management: Pioneered by Taylor & the 
Gilbreths 45
Administrative Management: Pioneered by Fayol & 
Weber 47
The Problem with the Classical Viewpoint: Too 
Mechanistic 48

xxxi
2.3 Behavioral Viewpoint: Behaviorism, Human 
Relations, & Behavioral Science 49
Early Behaviorism: Pioneered by Munsterberg, 
Follett, & Mayo 49
The Human Relations Movement: Pioneered by 
Maslow & McGregor 50
The Behavioral Science Approach 51
2.4 Quantitative Viewpoints: Management 
Science & Operations Management 53
Management Science: Using Mathematics to Solve 
Management Problems 53
Operations Management: Being More Effective 54
2.5 Systems Viewpoint 55
The Systems Viewpoint 55
The Four Parts of a System 56
2.6 Contingency Viewpoint 58
Gary Hamel: Management Ideas Are Not Fixed, 
They’re a Process 59
Evidence-Based Management: Facing Hard Facts, 
Rejecting Nonsense 59
2.7 Quality-Management Viewpoint 61
Quality Control & Quality Assurance 61
Total Quality Management: Creating an Organization 
Dedicated to Continuous Improvement 61
2.8 The Learning Organization in an Era 
of Accelerated Change 63
The Learning Organization: Handling Knowledge & 
Modifying Behavior 63
How to Build a Learning Organization: Three Roles 
Managers Play 64
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 65
Key Points 65
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 66
Management in Action 67
Legal/Ethical Challenge 68
PART 2
The Environment of 
Management
CHAPTER THREE
The Manager’s Changing Work 
Environment & Ethical Responsibilities: 
Doing the Right Thing 70
3.1 The Triple Bottom Line: People, Planet, & 
Profit 72
The Millennials’ Search for Meaning 72
3.2 The Community of Stakeholders Inside the 
Organization 73
To Whom Should a Company Be Responsible? 73
Internal & External Stakeholders 74
Internal Stakeholders 75
3.3 The Community of Stakeholders Outside the 
Organization 76
The Task Environment 76
The General Environment 80
3.4 The Ethical Responsibilities Required of You 
as a Manager 83
Defining Ethics & Values 83
Four Approaches to Deciding Ethical Dilemmas 84
White-Collar Crime, SarbOx, & Ethical Training 85
How Organizations Can Promote Ethics 86
3.5 The Social Responsibilities Required of You 
as a Manager 88
Is Social Responsibility Worthwhile? Opposing & 
Supporting Viewpoints 88
Corporate Social Responsibility: The Top of the 
Pyramid 89
One Type of Social Responsibility: Climate Change, 
Sustainability, & Natural Capital 89
Another Type of Social Responsibility: Philanthropy, 
“Not Dying Rich” 91
How Does Being Good Pay Off? 91
3.6 Corporate Governance 93
The Need for Independent Directors 93
The Need for Trust 94
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 95
Key Points 95
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 97
Management in Action 97
Legal/Ethical Challenge  99
CHAPTER FOUR
Global Management: Managing 
across Borders 100
4.1 Globalization: The Collapse of Time & 
Distance 102
Competition & Globalization: Who Will Be No. 1 
Tomorrow? 102
The Rise of the “Global Village” & Electronic 
Commerce 102
One Big World Market: The Global Economy 103
Cross-Border Business: The Rise of Both 
Megamergers & Minifirms Worldwide 105
4.2 You & International Management 106
Why Learn about International Management? 107
The Successful International Manager: Geocentric, 
Not Ethnocentric or Polycentric 109
4.3 Why & How Companies Expand 
Internationally 110
Why Companies Expand Internationally 110
How Companies Expand Internationally 111
Contents

4.4 The World of Free Trade: Regional Economic 
Cooperation 115
Barriers to International Trade 115
Organizations Promoting International Trade 116
Major Trading Blocs: NAFTA, EU, APEC, ASEAN, 
Mercosur, & CAFTA 117
Most Favored Nation Trading Status 119
Exchange Rates 119
4.5 The Importance of Understanding Cultural 
Differences 121
The Importance of National Culture 122
Cultural Dimensions: The GLOBE Project 122
Other Cultural Variations: Language, Interpersonal 
Space, Communication, Time Orientation, Religion, 
& Law & Political Stability 124
U.S. Managers on Foreign Assignments: 
Why Do They Fail? 128
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 129
Key Points 129
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 131
Management in Action 131
Legal/Ethical Challenge 133
PART 3
Planning
CHAPTER FIVE
Planning: The Foundation of Successful 
Management 134
5.1 Planning & Strategy 136
Planning, Strategy, & Strategic Management 136
Why Planning & Strategic Management Are 
Important 137
5.2 Fundamentals of Planning 140
Mission & Vision Statements 140
Three Types of Planning for Three Levels of 
Management: Strategic, Tactical, & Operational 142
5.3  Goals & Plans 144
Three Types of Goals: Strategic, Tactical, 
& Operational 144
The Action Plan & the Operating Plan 144
Types of Plans: Standing Plans & Single-Use Plans 146
5.4 Promoting Goal Setting: SMART Goals 
& Management by Objectives 147
SMART Goals 147
Management by Objectives: The Four-Step Process 
for Motivating Employees 148
Cascading Objectives: MBO from the Top Down 150
The Importance of Deadlines 150
5.5 The Planning/Control Cycle 152
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 154
Key Points 154
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 155
Management in Action 155
Legal/Ethical Challenge 156
CHAPTER SIX
Strategic Management: How Exceptional 
Managers Realize a Grand Design 158
6.1 What Is Effective Strategy? 160
Strategic Positioning & Its Principles 160
Does Strategic Management Work for Small as Well 
as Large Firms? 161
6.2 The Strategic-Management Process 162
The Five Steps of the Strategic-Management 
Process 163
6.3  Establishing the Mission & the Vision 165
Characteristics of a Good Mission Statement 165
Characteristics of a Good Vision Statement 166
6.4 Assessing the Current Reality 167
Competitive Intelligence 167
SWOT Analysis 168
Forecasting: Predicting the Future 171
Benchmarking: Comparing with the Best 173
Porter’s Five Competitive Forces 173
6.5 Formulating the Grand Strategy 175
Three Common Grand Strategies 175
Porter’s Four Competitive Strategies 176
Single-Product Strategy versus Diversification 
Strategy 177
The BCG Matrix 179
6.6 Implementing & Controlling Strategy: 
Execution 180
Implementing the Strategy 180
Maintaining Strategic Control 180
Execution: Getting Things Done 180
The Three Core Processes of Business: People, 
Strategy, & Operations 181
How Execution Helps Implement & Control 
Strategy 181
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 183
Key Points 183
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 185
Management in Action 185
Legal/Ethical Challenge 186
CHAPTER SEVEN
Individual & Group Decision Making: How 
Managers Make Things Happen 188
7.1 Two Kinds of Decision Making: Rational & 
Nonrational 190
Decision Making in the Real World 190
xxxii
Contents

Rational Decision Making: Managers Should Make 
Logical & Optimal Decisions 191
Stage 1: Identify the Problem or Opportunity—
Determining the Actual versus the Desirable 191
Stage 2: Think Up Alternative Solutions—Both the 
Obvious & the Creative 192
Stage 3: Evaluate Alternatives & Select a Solution—
Ethics, Feasibility, & Effectiveness 192
Stage 4: Implement & Evaluate the Solution Chosen 193
What’s Wrong with the Rational Model? 195
Nonrational Decision Making: Managers Find It 
Difficult to Make Optimal Decisions 196
7.2 Making Ethical Decisions 199
The Dismal Record of Business Ethics 199
Road Map to Ethical Decision Making: A Decision 
Tree 199
7.3 
Evidence-Based Decision Making & Analytics 201
Evidence-Based Decision Making 201
In Praise of Analytics 203
The Uses of “Big Data”  205
7.4 Four General Decision-Making Styles 206
Value Orientation & Tolerance for Ambiguity 206
1. The Directive Style: Action-Oriented Decision 
Makers Who Focus on Facts 207
2. The Analytical Style: Careful Decision 
Makers Who Like Lots of Information & 
Alternative Choices 207
3. The Conceptual Style: Decision Makers Who Rely 
on Intuition & Have a Long-Term Perspective 207
4. The Behavioral Style: The Most People-Oriented 
Decision Makers 207
Which Style Do You Have? 207
7.5 How to Overcome Barriers to Decision 
Making 209
Decision Making & Expectations about 
Happiness 209
How Do Individuals Respond to a Decision 
Situation? Ineffective & Effective Responses 209
Nine Common Decision-Making Biases: Rules of 
Thumb, or “Heuristics” 211
7.6 Group Decision Making: How to Work with 
Others 214
Advantages & Disadvantages of Group Decision 
Making 214
What Managers Need to Know about Groups & 
Decision Making 215
Group Problem-Solving Techniques: Reaching for 
Consensus 216
More Group Problem-Solving Techniques 216
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 219
Key Points 219
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 221
Management in Action 221
Legal/Ethical Challenge 223
PART 4
Organizing
CHAPTER EIGHT
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design: 
Building Blocks of the Organization 224
8.1 Aligning Strategy, Culture, & Structure 226
What Does It Mean to “Fit”? Anticipating a Job 
Interview 226
How an Organization’s Culture & Structure Are Used 
to Implement Strategy 226
8.2 What Kind of Organizational Culture Will You 
Be Operating In? 229
Four Types of Organizational Culture: Clan, 
Adhocracy, Market, & Hierarchy 229
The Three Levels of Organizational Culture 232
How Employees Learn Culture: Symbols, Stories, 
Heroes, & Rites & Rituals 232
The Importance of Culture 233
8.3 The Process of Culture Change 235
1. Formal Statements 235
2. Slogans & Sayings 235
3. Rites & Rituals 235
4. Stories, Legends, & Myths 235
5. Leader Reactions to Crises 236
6. Role Modeling, Training, & Coaching 236
7. Physical Design 236
8. Rewards, Titles, Promotions, & Bonuses 236
9. Organizational Goals & Performance Criteria 237
10. Measurable & Controllable Activities 237
11. Organizational Structure 237
12. Organizational Systems & Procedures 237
8.4 Organizational Structure 238
The Organization: Three Types 238
The Organization Chart 239
8.5 The Major Elements of an Organization 241
Common Elements of Organizations: Four Proposed 
by Edgar Schein 241
Common Elements of Organizations: Three More that 
Most Authorities Agree On 242
8.6 Basic Types of Organizational Structures 245
1. Traditional Designs: Simple, Functional, 
Divisional, & Matrix Structures 245
2. The Horizontal Design: Eliminating Functional 
Barriers to Solve Problems 247
3. Designs That Open Boundaries between 
Organizations: Hollow, Modular, & Virtual Structures 250
8.7 Contingency Design: Factors in Creating the 
Best Structure 252
Three Factors to Be Considered in Designing an 
Organization’s Structure 252
xxxiii
Contents

1. The Environment: Mechanistic versus Organic 
Organizations—the Burns & Stalker Model 252
2. The Environment: Differentiation versus 
Integration—the Lawrence & Lorsch Model 254
3. Linking Strategy, Culture, & Structure 254
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 255
Key Points 255
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 257
Management in Action 257
Legal/Ethical Challenge 259
CHAPTER NINE
Human Resource Management: Getting 
the Right People for Managerial 
Success 260
9.1 Strategic Human Resource Management 262
Human Resource Management: Managing an 
Organization’s Most Important Resource 262
Planning the Human Resources Needed 264
9.2 Recruitment & Selection: Putting the Right 
People into the Right Jobs 266
Recruitment: How to Attract Qualified Applicants 266
Selection: How to Choose the Best Person 
for the Job 268
9.3 Managing an Effective Workforce: 
Compensation & Benefits 274
Wages or Salaries 274
Incentives 274
Benefits 275
9.4 Orientation, Training, & Development 276
Orientation: Helping Newcomers Learn the 
Ropes 277
Training & Development: Helping People Perform 
Better 277
9.5 Performance Appraisal 280
Performance Management in Human 
Resources 280
Two Kinds of Performance Appraisal: Objective & 
Subjective 281
Who Should Make Performance Appraisals? 282
Effective Performance Feedback 284
9.6 Managing Promotions, Transfers, 
Disciplining, & Dismissals 285
Promotion: Moving Upward 285
Transfer: Moving Sideways 285
Disciplining & Demotion: The Threat of Moving 
Downward 286
Dismissal: Moving Out of the Organization 286
9.7 The Legal Requirements of Human Resource 
Management 288
1. Labor Relations 288
2. Compensation & Benefits 288
3. Health & Safety 288
4. Equal Employment Opportunity 288
Workplace Discrimination, Affirmative Action, 
Sexual Harassment, & Bullying 290
9.8 Labor-Management Issues 294
How Workers Organize 294
How Unions & Management Negotiate a Contract 294
The Issues Unions & Management Negotiate 
About 295
Settling Labor-Management Disputes 297
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 298
Key Points 298
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 301
Management in Action 301
Legal/Ethical Challenge 302
CHAPTER TEN
Organizational Change & Innovation: 
Lifelong Challenges for the Exceptional 
Manager 304
10.1 The Nature of Change in Organizations 306
Fundamental Change: What Will You Be Called On 
to Deal With? 306
Two Types of Change: Reactive versus Proactive 308
The Forces for Change: Outside & Inside the 
Organization 310
10.2 Types & Models of Change 313
Three Kinds of Change: From Least Threatening to 
Most Threatening 313
Lewin’s Change Model: Unfreezing, Changing, 
& Refreezing 314
Kotter’s Eight Steps for Leading Organizational 
Change 315
10.3 Organizational Development: What It Is, 
What It Can Do 317
What Can OD Be Used For? 317
How OD Works 317
The Effectiveness of OD 319
10.4 Promoting Innovation within the 
Organization 320
How Does Failure Impede Innovation? 320
Two Myths about Innovation 320
The Seeds of Innovation: Starting Point for 
Experimentation & Inventiveness 321
Types of Innovation: Product or Process, Core or 
Transformational 321
Celebrating Failure: Cultural & Other Factors 
Encouraging Innovation 323
How You Can Foster Innovation: Four Steps 324
10.5 The Threat of Change: Managing Employee 
Fear & Resistance 327
The Causes of Resistance to Change 327
Ten Reasons Employees Resist Change 329
xxxiv
Contents

Key Terms Used in This Chapter 331
Key Points 331
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 332
Management in Action 333
Legal/Ethical Challenge 334
PART 5
Leading
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Managing Individual Differences & 
Behavior: Supervising People as 
People 336
11.1 Personality & Individual Behavior 338
The Big Five Personality Dimensions 338
Core Self-Evaluations 340
Emotional Intelligence: Understanding Your 
Emotions & the Emotions of Others 342
11.2 Values, Attitudes, & Behavior 344
Organizational Behavior: Trying to Explain & Predict 
Workplace Behavior 344
Values: What Are Your Consistent Beliefs & Feelings 
about All Things? 344
Attitudes: What Are Your Consistent Beliefs & 
Feelings about Specific Things? 345
Behavior: How Values & Attitudes Affect People’s 
Actions & Judgments 347
11.3 Perception & Individual Behavior 348
The Four Steps in the Perceptual Process 348
Four Distortions in Perception 348
The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy, or Pygmalion Effect 352
11.4 Work-Related Attitudes & Behaviors 
Managers Need to Deal With 353
Important Workplace Behaviors 354
11.5 The New Diversified Workforce 357
How to Think about Diversity: Which Differences 
Are Important? 357
Trends in Workforce Diversity 359
Barriers to Diversity 361
11.6 Understanding Stress & Individual 
Behavior 363
The Toll of Workplace Stress 363
How Does Stress Work? 363
The Sources of Job-Related Stress 364
The Consequences of Stress 365
Reducing Stressors in the Organization 366
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 368
Key Points 368
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 370
Management in Action 370
Legal/Ethical Challenge 372
CHAPTER TWELVE
Motivating Employees: Achieving 
Superior Performance in the 
Workplace 374
12.1 Motivating for Performance 376
Motivation: What It Is, Why It’s Important 376
The Four Major Perspectives on Motivation: 
Overview 378
12.2 Content Perspectives on Employee 
Motivation 379
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory: Five Levels 379
McClelland’s Acquired Needs Theory: Achievement, 
Affiliation, & Power 380
Deci & Ryan’s Self-Determination Theory: 
Competence, Autonomy, & Relatedness 382
Herzberg’s Two-Factor Theory: From Dissatisfying 
Factors to Satisfying Factors 383
12.3 Process Perspectives on Employee 
Motivation 386
Equity Theory: How Fairly Do You Think You’re 
Being Treated in Relation to Others? 386
Expectancy Theory: How Much Do You Want & How 
Likely Are You to Get It? 388
Goal-Setting Theory: Objectives Should Be Specific 
& Challenging but Achievable 391
12.4 Job Design Perspectives on Motivation 392
Fitting Jobs to People 392
The Job Characteristics Model: Five Job Attributes 
for Better Work Outcomes 393
12.5 Reinforcement Perspectives 
on Motivation 396
The Four Types of Reinforcement: Positive, 
Negative, Extinction, & Punishment 396
Using Reinforcement to Motivate Employees 397
12.6 Using Compensation & Other Rewards 
to Motivate 399
Is Money the Best Motivator? 399
Motivation & Compensation 399
Nonmonetary Ways of Motivating Employees 401
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 404
Key Points 404
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 406
Management in Action 406
Legal/Ethical Challenge 408
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Groups & Teams: Increasing Cooperation, 
Reducing Conflict 410
13.1 Groups versus Teams 412
Groups & Teams: How Do They Differ? 413
Formal versus Informal Groups 413
xxxv
Contents

Work Teams for Four Purposes: Advice, Production, 
Project, & Action 414
Self-Managed Teams: Workers with Own 
Administrative Oversight 416
13.2 Stages of Group & Team Development 417
Stage 1: Forming—“Why Are We Here?” 417
Stage 2: Storming—“Why Are We Fighting over 
Who’s in Charge & Who Does What?” 417
Stage 3: Norming—“Can We Agree on Roles & 
Work as a Team?” 417
Stage 4: Performing—“Can We Do the Job 
Properly?” 418
Stage 5: Adjourning—“Can We Help Members 
Transition Out?” 418
13.3 Building Effective Teams 419
1. Cooperation: “We Need to Systematically 
Integrate Our Efforts” 419
2. Trust: “We Need to Have Reciprocal Faith 
in Each Other” 419
3. Cohesiveness: The Importance of Togetherness 419
4. Performance Goals & Feedback 420
5. Motivation through Mutual Accountability 420
6. Size: Small Teams or Large Teams? 421
7. Roles: How Team Members Are Expected to 
Behave 422
8. Norms: Unwritten Rules for Team Members 423
9. Groupthink: When Peer Pressure Discourages 
“Thinking Outside the Box” 424
13.4 Managing Conflict 428
The Nature of Conflict: Disagreement Is Normal 428
Can Too Little or Too Much Conflict Affect 
Performance? 429
Three Kinds of Conflict: Personality, Intergroup, & 
Cross-Cultural 430
How to Stimulate Constructive Conflict 432
Five Basic Behaviors to Help You Better Handle 
Conflict 433
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 435
Key Points 435
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 436
Management in Action 436
Legal/Ethical Challenge  438
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Power, Influence, & Leadership: 
From Becoming a Manager to 
Becoming a Leader 440
14.1 The Nature of Leadership: Wielding 
Influence 442
Managers & Leaders: Not Always the Same 442
Managerial Leadership: Can You Be Both a 
Manager & a Leader? 442
Coping with Complexity versus Coping with 
Change: The Thoughts of John Kotter 443
Five Sources of Power 445
Leadership & Influence: Using Persuasion to Get 
Your Way at Work 446
Five Approaches to Leadership 447
14.2 Trait Approaches: Do Leaders Have 
Distinctive Personality Characteristics? 448
Positive Task-Oriented Traits & Positive/Negative 
Interpersonal Attributes 448
Gender Studies: Do Women Have Traits that Make 
Them Better Leaders? 449
14.3 Behavioral Approaches: Do Leaders Show 
Distinctive Patterns of Behavior? 451
Task-Oriented Leader Behaviors: Initiating-Structure 
Leadership & Transactional Leadership 451
Relationship-Oriented Leader Behavior: 
Consideration, Empowerment, & Servant 
Leadership 452
Passive Leadership: The Lack of Leadership Skills 456
Some Practical Implications of the Behavioral 
Approaches 456
14.4 Situational Approaches: Should Leadership 
Vary with the Situation? 457
1. The Contingency Leadership Model: Fiedler’s 
Approach 457
2. The Path–Goal Leadership Model: House’s 
Approach 459
14.5 The Uses of Transformational Leadership 462
Transformational Leaders 462
The Best Leaders Are Both Transactional & 
Transformational 462
Four Key Behaviors of Transformational Leaders 463
Implications of Transformational Leadership for 
Managers 465
14.6 Three Additional Perspectives 466
Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Leadership: 
Having Different Relationships with Different 
Subordinates 466
E-Leadership: Managing for Global Networks 467
Followers: What Do They Want, How Can They 
Help? 467
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 469
Key Points 469
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 471
Management in Action 471
Legal/Ethical Challenge 474
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Interpersonal & Organizational 
Communication: Mastering the 
Exchange of Information 476
15.1 The Communication Process: What It Is, 
How It Works 478
Communication Defined: The Transfer of 
Information & Understanding 478
xxxvi
Contents

How the Communication Process Works 479
Selecting the Right Medium for Effective 
Communication 480
15.2 How Managers Fit into the Communication 
Process 482
Formal Communication Channels: Up, Down, 
Sideways, & Outward 482
Informal Communication Channels 484
15.3 Barriers to Communication 486
1. Physical Barriers: Sound, Time, Space, 
& So On 487
2. Semantic Barriers: When Words Matter 487
3. Personal Barriers: Individual Attributes that 
Hinder Communication 488
Nonverbal Communication: How Unwritten & 
Unspoken Messages May Mislead 490
Communication Differences between Men & 
Women 492
15.4 Communication in the Information Age 494
Digital Communication Technology & Workplace 
Behavior 494
The “Always On” Generation 494
Digital Communication & the New Workplace: 
Videoconferencing, Telecommuting, & 
Teleworking 496
The Downside of the Digital Age 497
Smartphones: Use & Abuse 498
Social Media: Pros & Cons 499
15.5 Improving Communication 
Effectiveness 501
Being an Effective Listener 501
Being an Effective Reader 503
Being an Effective Writer 503
Being an Effective Speaker 504
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 506
Key Points 506
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 508
Management in Action 508
Legal/Ethical Challenge 509
PART 6
Controlling
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Control Systems & Quality Management: 
Techniques for Enhancing Organizational 
Effectiveness 510
16.1 Control: When Managers Monitor 
Performance 512
Why Is Control Needed? 512
Steps in the Control Process 514
16.2 Levels & Areas of Control 517
Levels of Control: Strategic, Tactical, & Operational 517
Six Areas of Control 517
16.3 The Balanced Scorecard, Strategy Maps, & 
Measurement Management 520
The Balanced Scorecard: A Dashboard-like View of 
the Organization 520
Strategy Map: Visual Representation of a Balanced 
Scorecard 522
Measurement Management: “Forget Magic” 523
16.4 Some Financial Tools for Control 525
Budgets: Formal Financial Projections 525
Financial Statements: Summarizing the 
Organization’s Financial Status 526
Ratio Analysis: Indicators of an Organization’s 
Financial Health 527
Audits: External versus Internal 527
16.5 Total Quality Management 529
Deming Management: The Contributions of 
W. Edwards Deming to Improved Quality 529
Core TQM Principles: Deliver Customer Value & 
Strive for Continuous Improvement 530
Applying TQM to Services 533
Some TQM Tools & Techniques 534
16.6 Managing Control Effectively 537
The Keys to Successful Control Systems 537
Barriers to Control Success 538
16.7 Managing for Productivity 540
What Is Productivity? 540
Why Increasing Productivity Is Important 541
Epilogue: The Keys to Your Managerial Success 542
Key Terms Used in This Chapter 544
Key Points 544
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know? 546
Management in Action 546
Legal/Ethical Challenge 548
APPENDIX
The Project Planner’s Toolkit: Flowcharts, 
Gantt Charts, & Break-Even Analysis A1
Tool #1: Flowcharts—for Showing Event Sequences 
& Alternate Decision Scenarios A1
Tool #2: Gantt Charts—Visual Time Schedules for 
Work Tasks A3
Tool #3: Break-Even Analysis—How Many Items 
Must You Sell to Turn a Profit? A4
CHAPTER NOTES CN1
CREDITS CR1
NAME INDEX IND1
COMPANY INDEX IND4
GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX IND8
xxxvii
Contents

THE MANAGER’S TOOLBOX
A One-Minute Guide to Success in This Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Mind-sets: How Do You Go about Learning? . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
How Do People Excuse Lying & Cheating?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Learning to Be a Success Abroad: How Do You Become a World 
Citizen?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Setting Big Goals: Is This the Road to Success?  . . . . . . . . . 135
Being a Successful Manager: Look beyond the Fads, Be Willing 
to Make Painful Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
How Exceptional Managers Check to See If Their Decisions 
Might Be Biased . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
How to Stand Out in a New Job: Fitting into an Organization’s 
Culture in the First 60 Days . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
Soft Skills & Social Graces: Boosting Your Advantage in the Hiring 
World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
Managing for Innovation & Change Takes a Careful Hand . . 305
Managing the Millennials: What’s Different about Today’s 
Generation of Younger Workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
Managing for Motivation: Keeping Employees Invested in 
Their Jobs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 375
Reaching across Time & Space: The Challenge of Managing 
Virtual Teams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411
Advancing Your Career: Staying Ahead in the Workplace of 
Tomorrow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 441
Acing the Interview: Communicating Counts in Landing 
a Job . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 477
Improving Productivity: Going beyond Control Techniques to Get 
the Best Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 511
PRACTICAL ACTION BOXES
Preparing Yourself to Behave Right When You’re Tempted 
to Cheat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Executive Functioning: How Good Are You at Focusing 
Your Thoughts, Controlling Your Impulses, & Avoiding 
Distractions?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Evidence-Based Management: An Attitude of Wisdom  . . . . 60
Being an Effective Road Warrior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Global Outsourcing: Which Jobs Are Likely to Fall Victim to 
Offshoring? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
How to Achieve Your Important Goals: Don’t Keep Every Option 
Open. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Building a Foundation of Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
How Exceptional Managers Make Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
Transition Problems on Your Way Up: How to Avoid 
the Pitfalls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
When Should You Delegate & When Not? How Managers 
Get More Done . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
Would You Lie Like This on Your Resume? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 268
Applying for a Job? Here Are Some Mistakes to Avoid . . . . . 269
The Right Way to Conduct an Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
Why Rewards May Fail to Motivate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
The Right Way to Handle a Dismissal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
What Makes a Successful Start-up? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322
How Can Managers Harness the Pygmalion Effect to Lead 
Employees? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
The Flexible Workplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 401
Dealing with Disagreements: Five Conflict-Handling 
Styles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 434
Participative Management: Empowering Employees to 
Handle Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 454
How to Be a Great Follower: Benefiting Your 
Boss—& Yourself . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 468
How to Streamline Meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 485
What Makes a Service Company Successful? 
Four Core Elements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 534
EXAMPLE BOXES
to Illustrate Important Management Concepts
Bringing current issues & companies into the classroom
Efficiency versus Effectiveness: “Don’t Tell Me You’re Sorry, 
Just Fix the Problem!” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
The Struggle for Competitive Advantage: App-Based Ride-Share 
Services Leave the Taxi Industry Reeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
A Hot Start-up Cleans Up: Homejoy Transforms an Old 
Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Example of an Intrapreneur: Intel’s Anthropologist Genevieve Bell 
Explores Possible Innovations for Automakers . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Pages from a Game Company’s Employee Guide: In Flatness Lies 
Greatness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Application of Behavioral Science Approach: The Open-Plan 
Office—Productivity Enhancer or Productivity Killer?  . . . . . . 52
Management Science: “Find Me More Music I Like!” . . . . . . . 54
Operations Management: Using “the Toyota Way” to Benefit 
Hospital Patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Closed versus Open Systems: Penney’s versus Macy’s . . . . . 57
The Contingency Viewpoint: What Are the Best Kinds 
of Benefits?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
xxxviii
Contents

Taking Care of Customers: Amazon’s Jeff Bezos 
Obsesses about “the Customer Experience” . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Local Communities as Stakeholders: Are Financial Incentives to 
Business Really Necessary? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Managing the Media: What’s the Best Practice for Handling 
Product Recalls? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Corporate Social Responsibility: Salesforce.com Wants to Change 
the Way the World Works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
Corporate Governance: Chesapeake Energy’s CEO Gets Some 
Unusual Breaks from His Board of Directors . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Americans Working Overseas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
An American in London Dealing with Currency Exchange—How 
Much Are Those Jeans, Really?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Dinner at 10? Spain’s Cultural Differences in Time . . . . . . . 126
Is Planning Necessary? Launching a Vending-Machine Business 
on $425 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
Developing Competitive Advantage: What’s the Best Strategy in 
an E-Commerce Age? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Mission Statements for Three Different Companies: Hilton, 
Amazon, & Patagonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Vision Statements for Three Different Companies: Hilton, 
Amazon, & Patagonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Strategic Planning by Top Management: Amazon Manages for 
the Future, to the Frustration of Short-Term Investors . . . . . 142
Strategic, Tactical, & Operational Goals: 
Southwest Airlines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
Setting Goals: Walmart Lays Out an Agenda for Environmental 
Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
The Planning/Control Cycle: Apple Keeps Its Products Secret to 
Generate Buzz  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Comparing Strategies: Big-Company “Make the Consumer a 
Captive” versus Small-Firm “Offer Personal Connections” . . 161
Crisis Leading to the Strategic-Management Process: Starbucks 
Reclaims Its Soul  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
SWOT Analysis: How Would You Analyze Toyota? . . . . . . . . . 169
Contingency Planning for Climate Change: Drought, Rain, & Fire . . 172
How Can Being the Best Affect Your Decision Making? . . . . 190
Making a Correct Diagnosis: Who’s Better at Financial Decisions, 
Men or Women? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
Faulty Implementation: Customer Service Is Often 
“Just Talk” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
Evaluation: The Boeing 787 Dreamliner, a Bet-the-Company 
Decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194
Evidence-Based Decision Making: “If People Are Your Most 
Important Assets, Why Would You Get Rid of Them?” . . . . . . 203
Analytics in Athletics: The Personal “Moneyball” Coach . . . . 204
Deciding to Decide: How Should a Paper Maker Reinvent 
Itself? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
How Strategy Affects Culture & Culture Affects Structure: 
EndoStim, a Medical Device Start-up, Operates Virtually . . . 228
The Corporate Cultures of Pfizer Pharmaceuticals: The Different 
“Personalities” within an Organization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Use of a Horizontal Design: Whole Foods Market . . . . . . . . . 248
Personality Tests: How a Sporting-Goods Chain Screens Job 
Applicants Online . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
Off-the-Job Training: Getting Ahead through E-Learning . . . 279
Performance Management: How Domino’s Pizza Built a Billion-
Dollar Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 281
Silicon Valley, Sexual Harassment, & the “Brogrammer” 
Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 291
Radical Change: The Fall of the Blackberry . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307
Reactive Change: The BP Gulf of Mexico Blowout . . . . . . . . 309
Proactive Change: Disney World Gets Out Front with Its 
MagicBand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
Technology Creates the Sharing Economy: Airbnb, Uber, 
& . . . DogVacay? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
Kotter’s Steps in Organizational Change: Implementing an 
Electronic Health Record System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316
Organizational Development: Using OD to Make Money in the 
Restaurant Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
Achieving Success by Celebrating Failure: 3M’s On-Again Off-
Again On-Again Culture of Innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
Recognizing the Need for Change: Collins’s Five Stages of 
Decline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327
Emotional Intelligence: Self-Understanding Should Include “the 
Good, the Bad, & the Ugly” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
How Values & Attitudes Affect Behavior: Thinking beyond Profit to 
Create Value for Society . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
The Halo Effect: Do Good Looks Make People Richer 
& Happier? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
The Recency Effect: Can You Use It to Get a Better Performance 
Review? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
Extreme Counterproductive Work Behaviors: Violence in the 
Workplace  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 356
Looking for Peak Performance: A Hotel CEO Applies Maslow’s 
Hierarchy to Employees, Customers, & Investors . . . . . . . . . 380
Reducing the F’s: Applying Expectancy Theory to Failing 
Students . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 390
Informal Groups & Informal Learning: Sharing Knowledge in the 
Lunchroom & on Social Media  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414
Team Size: And the Magic Number Is  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 422
How to Develop Team Norms: Creating a “Fear-Free Zone” 
of Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423
Groupthink: An Enthusiasm for Brainstorming, a 
Technique that Often Doesn’t Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426
xxxix
Contents

Dysfunctional & Functional Conflict: Do Nasty Bosses Get 
Better Performance? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 428
“What We Have Here Is a Failure to Communicate”: 
The Plight of the Tongue-Tied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 431
Servant Leadership: Leaders Who Work for the Led . . . . . . . 455
The Superior Performance of Both a Transactional & 
Transformational Leader: PepsiCo’s CEO Indra Nooyi . . . . . . 263
Do Female Executives Have an Edge in Business? Women & 
Communication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 493
Crowdsourcing: Using Facebook & Twitter to Develop 
New Ideas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500
Steps in the Control Process: What’s Expected of UPS 
Drivers? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 516
Supply-Chain Journey: The Tale of a Couch . . . . . . . . . . . . . 518
Is Chrysler’s New Quality Strategy Working? . . . . . . . . . . . . 532
Break-Even Analysis: Why Do Airfares Vary So Much? . . . . . . A6
MANAGEMENT IN ACTION
Case Studies
Target CEO Works to Regain Consumer Trust after the Company 
Was Hacked . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
GM’s New CEO, Mary Barra, Must Manage a Major Recall . . . 67
UPS Actively Pursues Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Norwegian Air Shuttle Aspires to Become the Cheapest Global 
Airline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
GE’s Poor Planning Results in Delays & Increased Costs . . . 155
Putting AutoZone into Drive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
Companies Use Tracking Devices to Help Make Decisions . . 221
IDEO’s Culture Reinforces Helping Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
More Companies Rely on Proactive Human Resource Practices to 
Reduce Employee Turnover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
Hewlett-Packard Is Counting on Organizational Change to Boost 
Revenue Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
Steve Jobs’s Personality & Attitudes Drove His Success  . . . 370
Caterpillar Puts Employee Pay at Risk, but Is It Done Fairly? . . . 406
Wooga Effectively Utilizes Teams When Creating 
Game Apps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 436
Leadership Lessons from Sir Alex Ferguson  . . . . . . . . . . . . 471
Hootsuite Uses Social Media to Manage Aspects of the Human 
Resources Function  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508
UPS Relies on Sophisticated Control Systems to Manage 
Package Deliveries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 546
LEGAL/ETHICAL CHALLENGES
To Delay or Not to Delay? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Is an Apology Enough? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Is It Fair to Have Different Standards for Paying Bills versus 
Collecting Bills? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Should Families of Passengers on Malaysia Flight 370 Be 
Allowed to Sue for Damages in the U.S.? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
How Do You Think Companies Should Respond to Accusations 
Made by a Whistle-Blower?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Should Companies Be Pressured to Recruit Females for Boards 
of Directors? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
Would You Agree to Wear a Sensor So Your Employer Can Track 
You Movements & Conversations?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
Is Apple’s Culture Going Too Far?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
How Would You Accommodate a Pregnant Employee? . . . . . 302
Should CEOs Fire Employees Based on the Opinions of U.S. 
Senators? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
Should Airlines Accommodate Overweight People? . . . . . . . 372
Should College Athletes Be Paid to Perform? . . . . . . . . . . . . 408
When Employees Smoke Marijuana Socially: A Manager’s 
Quandary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 438
Is It Ethical for Organizations to Incentivize Their Employees to 
Poach People from Competing Companies?  . . . . . . . . . . . . 474
Should Professors’ Tweets Be Part of Their Academic Freedom to 
Comment on Controversial Topics? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509
Should Companies Be Allowed to Administer Untested Drugs on 
People with Ebola? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 548
xl
Contents

management
S E V E N T H  E D I T I O N
A PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION

PART 1 
INTRODUCTION
1
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
1.1 Management: What It Is, What Its Benefits Are
Major Question: What are the rewards of being an exceptional 
manager?
1.2 What Managers Do: The Four Principal Functions 
Major Question: What would I actually do—that is, what would 
be my four principal functions—as a manager?
1.3 Seven Challenges to Being an Exceptional Manager
Major Question: Challenges can make one feel alive. What are 
seven challenges I could look forward to as a manager?
1.4 Pyramid Power: Levels & Areas of Management
Major Question: What are the levels and areas of management 
I need to know to move up, down, and sideways?
1.5 The Skills Exceptional Managers Need
Major Question: To be a terrific manager, what skills should 
I cultivate?
1.6 Roles Managers Must Play Successfully
Major Question: To be an exceptional manager, what roles must 
I play successfully?
1.7 The Link between Entrepreneurship & Management
Major Question: Do I have what it takes to be an entrepreneur?
The Exceptional Manager
What You Do, How You Do It

forecast
We describe the rewards, benefits, and privileges managers might expect. We also de-
scribe the four principal functions of management—planning, organizing, leading, and 
controlling. We discuss the seven challenges to managers in today’s world. We consider 
levels and areas of management. We describe the three roles managers must play. We 
describe the three skills required of a manager and the three roles managers play. Finally, 
we consider the contributions of entrepreneurship.
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
Got one minute to read this section? It could mean the difference between getting an A instead of a B. Or a B in-
stead of a C.
It is our desire to make this book as practical as possible for you. One place we do this is in the Manager’s Toolbox, 
like this one, which appears at the beginning of every chapter and which offers practical advice appropriate to the 
subject matter you are about to explore. Here we show you how to be a success in this course.
Four Rules for Success
The following four rules will help you be successful in this (or any other) course.
• 
Rule 1: Attend every class. No cutting (skipping) allowed.
• 
Rule 2: Don’t postpone studying, then cram the night before a test.
• 
Rule 3: Read or review lectures and readings more than once.
• 
Rule 4: Learn how to use this book.
How to Use This Book Most Effectively
When reading this book, follow the steps below:
• 
Get an overview of the chapter by reading over the first page, which contains the section headings 
and Major Questions.
• 
Read “Forecast: What’s Ahead in This Chapter.”
• 
Look at the Major Question at the beginning of each section before you read it.
• 
Read the “The Big Picture,” which summarizes the section.
• 
Read the section itself (which is usually only 2–6 pages), trying silently to answer the Major Question. 
This is important!
• 
After reading all sections, use the Key Terms, Key Points, and Understanding the Chapter questions at the 
end of the chapter to see how well you know the concepts. Reread any material you’re unsure about.
If you follow these steps consistently, you’ll probably absorb the material well enough that you won’t have to 
cram before an exam; you’ll need only to lightly review it before the test.
For Discussion Do you sometimes (often?) postpone keeping up with coursework, then pull an “all-nighter” of 
studying to catch up before an exam? What do you think happens to people in business who do this?
the manager’s toolbox
A One-Minute Guide to Success in This Class

The driving force. One quality 
that stands out about General 
Motors CEO Mary Barra is her 
obvious enthusiasm for cars. 
She is said to be given to talking 
excitedly about whatever car 
she is currently driving and 
what it demonstrates about 
GM’s product line. Do you think 
passion about one’s work is a 
necessary quality for 
managerial success?
4 
PART 1 
Introduction
1.1 
Management: What It Is, What Its Benefits Are
What are the rewards of being an exceptional manager?
THE BIG PICTURE
Management is defined as the pursuit of organizational goals efficiently and effectively. Organizations, or 
people who work together to achieve a specific purpose, value managers because of the multiplier effect: 
Good managers have an influence on the organization far beyond the results that can be achieved by one 
person acting alone. Managers are well paid, with the chief executive officers (CEOs) and presidents of even 
small and midsize businesses earning good salaries and many benefits.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
When Mary Barra was named chief executive officer of Detroit-based General Motors 
in December 2013, she became the first female CEO of an American or any other 
global automaker. She also became only the 22nd woman at the helm of a Fortune 500 
company, one of those 500 largest U.S. companies that appear on the prestigious an-
nual list compiled by Fortune magazine. (Other big-time female CEOs: IBM’s Virginia 
“Ginni” Rometty, Yahoo!’s Marissa Mayer, Hewlett-Packard’s Meg Whitman, Xerox’s 
Ursula Burns, PepsiCo’s Indra Nooyi.)
What kind of a person is Barra (pronounced Bahr-ra), a 30-year GM veteran? “She 
has a soft-spoken manner that belies her intensity on the job,” says one report.1
“She’s the real deal, very down to earth,” says another.2 “Her open, relaxed manner has 
marked a clear contrast with the far more uptight style of many of the middle-aged 
men around her in General Motors’ management,” says a third.3 Are these qualities—
which a lot of people have—enough to propel one to the top of a great organization?
The Rise of the Die Maker’s Daughter
The daughter of a die maker with a 39-year career in GM’s Pontiac division, Barra 
grew up in suburban Detroit, joined GM at age 18 on the factory floor as an intern, 
graduated from General Motors Institute (now Kettering University) with a degree in 
electrical engineering, and then became a plant engineer at Pontiac. Spotting her tal-
ent, GM gave her a scholarship to Stanford University, where she earned a graduate 
degree in business. She then began moving up the GM ladder, first as the executive 
assistant to the CEO, then as the company’s head of human resources—formerly often 
as high as female executives ever got, in autos or many other industries. In 2011, her 
big break came when she was promoted to lead GM’s $15 billion vehicle-development 
operations, a high-profile role that became the steppingstone to CEO.
Key to Career Growth: “Doing Things I’ve Never 
Done Before”
Did it help that, as one writer put it, Barra “had motor oil running through her veins for 
most of her life”?4 No doubt it did. But there is another key to career growth—the abil-
ity to take risks. As IBM’s Ginni Rometty, another female CEO, has 
said about herself, she has grown the most in her career because “I 
learned to always take on things I’ve never done before.”5 She has 
found that “you have to be very confident, even though you’re so self-
critical inside about what it is you may or may not know. . . . And that, 
to me, leads to taking risks.”6
Of course both men as well as women have to deal with uncertainty. But 
the ability to take risks—to embrace change and to keep going forward de-
spite fears and internal criticism—is important to any manager’s survival, 
regardless of gender. As Rometty says, “growth and comfort do not coexist.”

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
5
The Art of Management Defined
Is being an exceptional manager a gift, like a musician having perfect pitch? Not ex-
actly. But in good part it may be an art.7 Fortunately, it is one that is teachable.
Management, said one pioneer of management ideas, is “the art of getting things 
done through people.”8
Getting things done. Through people. Thus, managers are task oriented, achieve-
ment oriented, and people oriented. And they operate within an organization—a group 
of people who work together to achieve some specific purpose.
More formally, management is defined as (1) the pursuit of organizational goals 
efficiently and effectively by (2) integrating the work of people through (3) planning, 
organizing, leading, and controlling the organization’s resources.
Note the words efficiently and effectively, which basically mean “doing things 
right.”
■ 
Efficiency—the means. Efficiency is the means of attaining the organiza-
tion’s goals. To be efficient means to use resources—people, money, raw 
materials, and the like—wisely and cost-effectively.
■ 
Effectiveness—the ends. Effectiveness regards the organization’s ends, the 
goals. To be effective means to achieve results, to make the right decisions 
and to successfully carry them out so that they achieve the organization’s 
goals.
Good managers are concerned with trying to achieve both qualities. Often, how-
ever, organizations will erroneously strive for efficiency without being effective.
Efficiency versus Effectiveness: “Don’t Tell Me You’re Sorry, 
Just Fix the Problem!”
What do airline passengers complain about most? Cancella-
tions, delays, and failed flight connections. Reservations, tick-
eting problems, and long telephone wait times. Boarding, 
baggage, and refund hassles.
How do the airlines handle such complaints? They say 
they’re sorry.
Having representatives routinely say “I’m sorry” for service 
difficulties may be efficient for the airlines—even when the 
apologies are accompanied by gift cards, credits, and loyalty 
points—since it’s a lot cheaper than, say, adding more reser-
vation agents, flight crews, baggage handlers, and, of course, 
airplanes.9 But it’s not effective if it leaves us, the customers, 
fuming and less inclined to continue doing business.
Bad customer service hurts. One survey found that 51% of 
U.S. consumers in 2013 were so fed up with poor service that 
they ditched consumer goods retailers, cable and satellite pro-
viders, banks, and phone companies.10 Numerous airline cus-
tomers no doubt also said “I’ll never use you again!”
Efficiency: Saving Company Dollars. Still, a lot of airlines fa-
vor efficiency over effectiveness in their customer service—in 
large part because there are some big events they can’t con-
trol, such as bad weather. In the winter of 2014, relentless 
snow and ice storms led to the highest number of flight cancel-
lations in 25 years—5.5% of the 1.37 million flights between 
December 1 and mid-January. In addition, new government 
rules went into effect prohibiting airlines from keeping passen-
gers on the tarmac for three hours or more, so airlines can-
celled blocks of flights rather than risk fines of up to $27,500 
per passenger ($4.1 million for a planeload of 150 flyers). The 
EXAMPLE
Effective? Is this irate customer dealing with a company customer-
support system that is more efficient than effective?

6 
PART 1 
Introduction
government also implemented a new rule increasing the 
amount of rest pilots need, making it harder for the companies 
to operate an irregular schedule, as might follow stormy 
weather. Finally, “airlines have been cutting unprofitable flights 
and packing more passengers into planes,” reports the Associ-
ated Press. “That’s been great for their bottom line but has cre-
ated a nightmare for passengers.”11
Effectiveness: Retaining Customers & Their Dollars. Apolo-
gizing doesn’t work when it’s a canned response or half-hearted 
or insincere. “Customers know talk is cheap,” says an apology 
critic.12 Much better is the method employed by Southwest Air-
lines, which answered one flyer’s complaint about an unpleas-
ant flight by quickly and personally saying it was “truly sorry,” 
addressing each issue he’d brought up, and giving him a credit 
equal to the value of his one-way fare. “Southwest admitted 
that there were mistakes, didn’t make excuses, and offered sin-
cere and profound apologies,” the mollified passenger said.13
YOUR CALL
The average telephone wait time to reach a human agent at 
Southwest Airlines, according to Get2Human.com (http://
get2human.com/get2human_list.asp), was only two minutes, 
and agent communications—often difficult when agents, such 
as those in overseas call centers, have severe accents—rated 
a smiley face (meaning “good”).14 Spirit Air, on the other hand, 
took 48 minutes and racked up five red flags (“very bad”) for 
agent communications. Get2Human.com (or GetHuman.com) is 
a website that aims to convince enterprises, whether airlines or 
other kinds, that “providing high quality customer service and 
having satisfied customers costs much less than providing low 
quality customer service and having unsatisfied customers”—
in other words, being more effective, not just efficient. Get2Hu-
man also publishes the unpublicized codes for reaching a 
company’s human operators and cut-through-automation tips. 
What recent unpleasant customer experience would you want 
to post on this website?
Why Organizations Value Managers: 
The Multiplier Effect
Some great achievements of history, such as scientific discoveries or works of art, 
were accomplished by individuals working quietly by themselves. But so much 
more has been achieved by people who were able to leverage their talents and abili-
ties by being managers. For instance, of the top 10 great architectural wonders of the 
world named by the American Institute of Architects, none was built by just one 
person. All were triumphs of management, although some reflected the vision of an 
individual. (The wonders are the Great Wall of China, the Great Pyramid, Machu 
Picchu, the Acropolis, the Coliseum, the Taj Mahal, the Eiffel Tower, the Brooklyn 
Bridge, the Empire State Building, and Frank Lloyd Wright’s Falling Water house in 
Pennsylvania.)
Good managers create value. The reason is that in being a manager you have a mul-
tiplier effect: Your influence on the organization is multiplied far beyond the results 
that can be achieved by just one person acting alone. Thus, while a solo operator such 
as a salesperson might accomplish many things and incidentally make a very good liv-
ing, his or her boss could accomplish a great deal more—and could well earn two to 
seven times the income. And the manager will undoubtedly have a lot more influence.
Exceptional managers are in high demand. “The scarcest, most valuable resource in 
business is no longer financial capital,” says a Fortune article. “It’s talent. If you doubt 
that, just watch how hard companies are battling for the best people. . . . Talent of every 
type is in short supply, but the greatest shortage of all is skilled, effective managers.”15
Even in dismal economic times—maybe especially in such times—companies reach 
out for top talent.
The Financial Rewards of Being 
an Exceptional Manager
How well compensated are managers? According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, the median weekly wage in 2013 for American workers of all sorts was 
$786, or $40,872 a year.16 Education pays: the median 2013 yearly income for 

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
7
Best paid. The CEO of Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, 
earned $2.2 billion in 2012—more than $6 million a 
day—making him the highest-paid manager in the 
United States that year. His base salary was $503,205, 
but most of his pay package came from exercising 
millions of stock options when his company went 
public that year. What do you think your chances are 
of making even $100 million in your entire lifetime?
full-time workers with at least a bachelor’s degree was $63,388, compared to $33,696 
for high-school graduates.17
The business press frequently reports on the astronomical earnings of top chief 
executive officers (which jumped a median 8.47% in 2012). The top earner in 2012 
was Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg, whose total compensation topped $2.27 
billion.18 However, this kind of huge payday isn’t common. Median compensation 
for top-ranked CEOs in North America in 2012, based on a survey of 2,259 CEOs, 
was $9.8 million.19 The more usual median wage for CEOs that year was $168,140 
and for general and operations managers $95,440, according to the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics.20
Managers farther down in the organization usually don’t make this much, of course; 
nevertheless, they do fairly well compared with most workers. At the lower rungs, 
managers may make between $35,000 and $60,000 a year; in the middle levels, be-
tween $45,000 and $120,000. (For examples of managerial salaries, go to www.bls.
gov/ooh/management/home.htm.)21 There are also all kinds of fringe benefits and sta-
tus rewards that go with being a manager, ranging from health insurance to stock op-
tions to large offices. And the higher you ascend in the management hierarchy, the 
more privileges may come your way: personal parking space, better furniture, lunch in 
the executive dining room, on up to—for those on the top rung of big companies—
company car and driver, corporate jet, and even executive sabbaticals (months of paid 
time off to pursue alternative projects).
What Are the Rewards of Studying 
& Practicing Management?
Are you studying management but have no plans to be a manager? Or are you trying to 
learn techniques and concepts that will help you be an exceptional management prac-
titioner? Either way there are considerable rewards.
The Rewards of Studying Management 
Students sign up for an introductory 
management course for all kinds of reasons. Many, of course, are planning business 
careers, but others are taking it to fulfill a requirement or an elective. Some students 
are in technical or nonprofit fields—computer science, education, health, and the 
like—and never expect to have to supervise people.

8 
PART 1 
Introduction
Mentoring. Matthew Wardenaar (right), whose 
California company produces Tagged, an app 
that helps users meet new people, gives 
Mohammed Abdulla assistance (with Google 
Glass) during a session of the Hidden Genius 
Project, a mentoring organization that gives 
underrepresented minorities guidance in moving 
into technology and science careers.24 Is helping 
others one of your life goals?
Here are just a few of the payoffs of studying management as a discipline:
■ 
You will understand how to deal with organizations from the outside. 
Since we all are in constant interaction with all kinds of organizations, it helps 
to understand how they work and how the people in them make decisions. 
Such knowledge may give you some defensive skills that you can use in deal-
ing with organizations from the outside, as a customer or investor, for example.
■ 
You will understand how to relate to your supervisors. Since most of us 
work in organizations and most of us have bosses, studying management will 
enable you to understand the pressures managers deal with and how they will 
best respond to you.
■ 
You will understand how to interact with coworkers. The kinds of man-
agement policies in place can affect how your coworkers behave. Studying 
management can give you the understanding of teams and teamwork, cultural 
differences, conflict and stress, and negotiation and communication skills that 
will help you get along with fellow employees.
■ 
You will understand how to manage yourself in the workplace. Manage-
ment courses in general, and this book in particular, give you the opportunity 
to realize insights about yourself—your personality, emotions, values, percep-
tions, needs, and goals. We help you build your skills in areas such as self-
management, listening, handling change, managing stress, avoiding 
groupthink, and coping with organizational politics.
The Rewards of Practicing Management 
 Many young people not only want 
to make money but make a difference.22 Becoming a management practitioner offers 
many rewards apart from money and status, as follows:
■ 
You and your employees can experience a sense of accomplishment. Every 
successful goal accomplished provides you not only with personal satis-
faction but also with the satisfaction of all those employees you directed who 
helped you accomplish it.
■ 
You can stretch your abilities and magnify your range. Every promotion 
up the hierarchy of an organization stretches your abilities, challenges your 
talents and skills, and magnifies the range of your accomplishments.
■ 
You can build a catalog of successful products or services. Every product 
or service you provide—the personal Eiffel Tower or Empire State Building 
you build, as it were—becomes a monument to your accomplishments. In-
deed, studying management may well help you in running your own business.
■ 
You can become a mentor and help others. According to one survey, 84% 
of workers who had a mentor—an experienced person who provided guid-
ance to someone new to the work world—said the mentor helped them ad-
vance their careers.23 By the very fact of being a manager, you are in a unique 
position to be a mentor to others. ●

1.2 
What Managers Do: The Four 
Principal Functions 
What would I actually do—that is, what would be my four principal 
functions—as a manager?
THE BIG PICTURE
Management has four functions: planning, organizing, leading, and controlling.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
9
What do you as a manager do to “get things done”—that is, achieve the stated goals of 
the organization you work for? You perform what is known as the management pro-
cess, also called the four management functions: planning, organizing, leading, 
and controlling. (The abbreviation “POLC” may help you to remember them.)
As the diagram below illustrates, all these functions affect one another, are ongoing, 
and are performed simultaneously. (See Figure 1.1.)
Planning
You set goals and
decide how to
achieve them.
Organizing
You arrange tasks,
people, and other
resources to
accomplish the work.
Controlling
You monitor
performance, compare
it with goals,
and take corrective
action as needed.
Leading
You motivate, direct,
and otherwise
influence people to
work hard to achieve
the organization’s goals.
FIGURE 1.1
The Management Process
What you as a manager do to 
“get things done”—to achieve 
the stated goals of your 
organization.
Although the process of management can be quite complex, these four functions 
represent its essential principles. Indeed, as a glance at our text’s table of contents 
shows, they form four of the part divisions of the book. Let’s consider what the four 
functions are, using the management (or “administration,” as it is called in nonprofit 
organizations) of your college to illustrate them.
Planning: Discussed in Part 3 of This Book
Planning is defined as setting goals and deciding how to achieve them. Your college 
was established for the purpose of educating students, and its present managers, or 
administrators, now must decide the best way to accomplish this. Which of several 
possible degree programs should be offered? Should the college be a residential or a 
commuter campus? What sort of students should be recruited and admitted? What kind 
of faculty should be hired? What kind of buildings and equipment are needed?

10 
PART 1 
Introduction
Leading. Called “one of the 
most powerful people in human 
history” by one writer, Larry 
Page, 40, is the co-founder 
(with Sergey Brin) and CEO of 
Google Inc., the Mountain View, 
California, global technology 
company, which generated 
nearly $18 billion in profits in 
2013. “He has an expansive 
belief in the possible,” says the 
writer, and “has demonstrated 
a willingness to spend . . . cash 
on wildly ambitious and 
expensive projects,” such as 
self-driving cars and a new 
gadget category under Google 
Glass.25 Can you see yourself in 
this kind of leadership role? 
Organizing: Discussed in Part 4 of This Book
Organizing is defined as arranging tasks, people, and other resources to accom-
plish the work. College administrators must determine the tasks to be done, by 
whom, and what the reporting hierarchy is to be. Should the institution be orga-
nized into schools with departments, with department chairpersons reporting to 
deans who in return report to vice presidents? Should the college hire more full-
time instructors than part-time instructors? Should English professors teach just 
English literature or also composition, developmental English, and “first-year ex-
perience” courses?
Leading: Discussed in Part 5 of This Book
Leading is defined as motivating, directing, and otherwise influencing people 
to work hard to achieve the organization’s goals. At your college, leadership 
begins, of course, with the president (who would be the chief executive officer, or 
CEO, in a for-profit organization). He or she is the one who must inspire faculty, 
staff, students, alumni, wealthy donors, and residents of the surrounding commu-
nity to help realize the college’s goals. As you might imagine, these groups often 
have different needs and wants, so an essential part of leadership is resolving 
conflicts.
Controlling: Discussed in Part 6 of This Book
Controlling is defined as monitoring performance, comparing it with goals, and taking 
corrective action as needed. Is the college discovering that fewer students are majoring 
in nursing than they did five years previously? Is the fault with a change in the job 
market? with the quality of instruction? with the kinds of courses offered? Are the 
Nursing Department’s student recruitment efforts not going well? Should the depart-
ment’s budget be reduced? Under the management function of controlling, college 
administrators must deal with these kinds of matters. ●

Would you agree that the ideal state that many people seek is an emotional zone some-
where between boredom and anxiety? That’s the view of psychologist Mihaly 
Csikszentmihalyi (pronounced Me-high Chick-sent-me-high-ee) of Claremont Gradu-
ate University.26 Boredom, he says, may arise because skills and challenges are mis-
matched: you are exercising your high level of skill in a job with a low level of challenge, 
such as licking envelopes. Anxiety arises when one has low levels of skill but a high 
level of challenge, such as (for many people) suddenly being called upon to give a 
rousing speech to strangers.
As a manager, could you achieve a balance between these two states—boredom and 
anxiety, or action and serenity? Certainly managers have enough challenges to keep 
their lives more than mildly interesting. Let’s see what they are.
Challenge #1: Managing for Competitive 
Advantage—Staying Ahead of Rivals
Competitive advantage is the ability of an organization to produce goods or services 
more effectively than competitors do, thereby outperforming them. This means an 
organization must stay ahead in four areas: (1) being responsive to customers, 
(2) innovation, (3) quality, and (4) efficiency.
1.3 
Seven Challenges to Being an 
Exceptional Manager 
Challenges can make one feel alive. What are seven challenges I could look 
forward to as a manager?
THE BIG PICTURE
Seven challenges face any manager: You need to manage for competitive advantage—to stay ahead of 
 rivals. You need to manage for diversity in race, ethnicity, gender, and so on, because the future won’t resem-
ble the past. You need to manage for the effects of globalization and of information technology. You always 
need to manage to maintain ethical standards. You need to manage for sustainability—to practice sound 
environmental policies. Finally, you need to manage for the achievement of your own happiness and life goals.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
11
The Struggle for Competitive Advantage: App-Based Ride-Share Services 
Leave the Taxi Industry Reeling
Ever had trouble getting a cab (if you’ve had occasion to need 
one)? It could get even harder if ride-sharing services continue 
to be successful.
Just as technology has allowed the lodging-sharing ser-
vice Airbnb to take business from hotels, so smartphones 
and apps have enabled on-demand “transportation network 
companies” (TNCs) such as Uber, Lyft, and Sidecar to chal-
lenge the traditional taxi cab industry. In cities from London 
to New York to San Francisco to Shanghai, Uber, for instance, 
lets riders hail drivers in their personal cars by using the 
UberX app on their mobile device and rent a car and driver 
on demand and by the minute.
EXAMPLE
How Ridesharing Works. Once you’ve signed up with the ser-
vice and given your credit card information (no cash changes 
hands), you can then call for a car anytime you want by activating 
the app, which will show the name and picture of the responding 
driver, make of car, and approximate arrival time, monitoring its 
progress through your mobile’s display. The charge to you is 
based on Uber’s surge pricing model (algorithm): when demand is 
great, the price goes up—sometimes as much as eight times the 
normal rate.27
Recruiting Drivers. Drivers for ride-share companies must pro-
vide their own personal vehicle and carry personal insurance, and 

12 
PART 1 
Introduction
they are expected to turn over 5% to 15% of their fares to the 
company. (Some companies offer car-purchasing or car-leasing 
options for drivers who don’t own vehicles.) Because transporta-
tion network companies don’t require a long-term commitment, 
there is high turnover—some drivers take the wheel for only a 
few weeks before stopping. This has led to a recruiting war in 
which ride services have posted online and billboard ads enticing 
drivers with promises of setting their own schedules and making 
up to $40 an hour.28 As might be expected, the rush to hire has 
had a devastating effect on the ranks of regular cab drivers.
Trouble for Taxis. “Every cab company I know of is having a 
huge problem filling shifts,” said the owner of San Francisco–
based DeSoto Cab Co., who estimated up to a third of the city’s 
taxi-driving shifts were going unfilled. The cab companies’ com-
petitive disadvantage was further aggravated by government 
 requirements that taxis had to be wheelchair accessible and their 
drivers background-checked, requirements so far not applying to 
the ride-sharing firms.29 The lack of accommodation in ride ser-
vices for disabled passengers has been especially worrisome for 
those dependent on such services.30
YOUR CALL
Which sector, taxis or ride services, do you think will have the 
ultimate competitive advantage? To make this judgment, you 
need to be aware that, in California at least, the state has re-
quired the app-ride companies to submit plans on how they 
will meet the needs of disabled riders—especially the wheel-
chair-accessibility or ramp requirement. In addition, some ride-
share drivers have become nervous about insurance 
regulations, since a personal insurance policy won’t cover you 
while you’re using your car for passengers and the $1 million 
excess liability policies that the ride services have don’t cover 
damage to the driver’s car. Finally, in a case in which a young 
girl was killed by an Uber driver in San Francisco, her parents 
are suing the ride service for wrongful death on the grounds 
that the app violates distracted-driving laws because drivers 
have to constantly watch their phones to look for possible pas-
sengers.31 So, which sector do you think will prevail? 
Competitive advantage? Lyft ride-share drivers display distinctive pink 
mustaches on their cars. Customers wanting rides contact them through 
an app on their smartphones. Do you think traditional taxi-cab companies 
will still exist 10 years from now?
1. Being Responsive to Customers 
The first law of business is: Take care of 
the customer. Without customers—buyers, clients, consumers, shoppers, users, pa-
trons, guests, investors, or whatever they’re called—sooner or later there will be no 
organization. Nonprofit organizations are well advised to be responsive to their 
“customers,” too, whether they’re called citizens, members, students, patients, voters, 
rate-payers, or whatever, since they are the justification for the organizations’ existence.
2. Innovation 
Finding ways to deliver new or better goods or services is called
innovation. No organization, for-profit or nonprofit, can allow itself to become 
complacent—especially when rivals are coming up with creative ideas. “Innovate or 
die” is an important adage for any manager.
We discuss innovation in Chapter 10.
3. Quality 
If your organization is the only one of its kind, customers may put up 
with products or services that are less than stellar (as they have with some airlines that 
have a near monopoly on flights out of certain cities), but only because they have no 
choice. But if another organization comes along and offers a better-quality travel expe-
rience, TV program, cut of meat, computer software, or whatever, you may find your 
company falling behind. Making improvements in quality has become an important 
management idea in recent times, as we shall discuss.
4. Efficiency 
A generation ago, organizations rewarded employees for their length of 
service. Today, however, the emphasis is on efficiency: Companies strive to produce goods 

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
13
Cross-border burger business. 
American businesspeople 
operating overseas often face 
unique problems. The manager 
of this Johnny Rockets 
hamburger store, which opened 
in Lagos, Nigeria, in 2012, found 
that to achieve an authentic, 
U.S. style taste he needed to 
fly in the toppings—onions, 
mushrooms, and iceberg 
lettuce—which meant that he 
had to start prices at $14 for 
a single-patty burger. 
or services as quickly as possible using as few employees (and raw materials) as possible. 
Although a strategy that downgrades the value of employees might ultimately backfire—
resulting in the loss of essential experience and skills and even customers—an organization 
that is overstaffed may not be able to compete with leaner, meaner rivals. This is the reason 
why, for instance, today many companies rely so much on temp (temporary) workers.32
Challenge #2: Managing for Diversity—
The Future Won’t Resemble the Past
Today nearly one in six American workers is foreign-born, the highest proportion since the 
1920s.33 But greater changes are yet to come. By mid-century, the mix of American racial 
or ethnic groups will change considerably, with the United States becoming half (54%) 
racial or ethnic minority. Non-Hispanic whites are projected to decrease from 63% of the 
population in 2011 to 47% in 2050. African Americans will increase from 12%–13%, 
Asians from 5%–9%, and Hispanics (who may be of any race) from 17%–29%.34 In addi-
tion, in the coming years there will be a different mix of women, immigrants, and older 
people in the general population, as well as in the workforce. For instance, in 2030, nearly 
one in five U.S. residents is expected to be 65 and older. This age group is projected to in-
crease to 88.5 million in 2050, more than doubling the number in 2013 (41.4 million).35
Some scholars think that diversity and variety in staffing produce organizational 
strength, as we consider elsewhere.36 Clearly, however, the challenge to the manager of 
the near future is to maximize the contributions of employees diverse in gender, age, race, 
ethnicity, and sexual orientation. We discuss this matter in more detail in Chapter 11.
Challenge #3: Managing for Globalization—
The Expanding Management Universe
When you ask some Russians “How are you?” the response may not be a simple 
“Fine” but rather the complete truth as to how they really feel—“a blunt pronounce-
ment of dissatisfaction punctuated by, say, the details of any recent digestive troubles,” 
as one American world traveler explained it.37 And when you meet Cambodians or 
Burmese and are asked “Have you eaten yet?” you should not mistake this as an invita-
tion to lunch—all it means is just “Hello.”38

14 
PART 1 
Introduction
The point is this: verbal expressions and gestures don’t have the same meaning to 
everyone throughout the world. Not understanding such differences can affect how 
well organizations manage globally.
American firms have been going out into the world in a major way, even as the 
world has been coming to us—leading to what New York Times columnist Thomas 
Friedman has called, in The World Is Flat, a phenomenon in which globalization has 
leveled (made “flat”) the competitive playing fields between industrial and emerging-
market countries.39 Managing for globalization will be a complex, ongoing challenge, 
as we discuss at length in Chapter 4.40
Challenge #4: Managing for Information 
Technology—Dealing with the “New Normal”
The challenge of managing for information technology, not to mention other technolo-
gies affecting your business, will require your unflagging attention. Most important is 
the Internet, the global network of independently operating but interconnected 
computers, linking hundreds of thousands of smaller networks around the world.
By 2017, consumers worldwide are projected to spend $2.3 trillion online, a rise of 
14.8% over the year before.41 This kind of e-commerce, or electronic commerce—the 
buying and selling of goods or services over computer networks—has reshaped entire 
industries and revamped the very notion of what a company is. More important than 
e-commerce, information technology has led to the growth of e-business, using the 
Internet to facilitate every aspect of running a business. Because the Internet so dra-
matically lowers the cost of communication, it can radically alter any activity that de-
pends heavily on the flow of information. The result is that disruption has become the 
“new normal.”42 Some of the implications of information technology that we will dis-
cuss throughout the book are as follows:
■ 
Far-ranging electronic management: e-communication all the time. Us-
ing mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets, 21st-century managers 
will need to become masters of electronic communication, able to create pow-
erful messages to create, motivate, and lead teams of specialists all over the 
world. Their means for doing so will range from e-mail, electronic-mail mes-
sages and documents transmitted over a computer network; to texting, quick 
text messages exchanged among smartphones; and social media, Internet-
based and mobile technologies such as Facebook and Twitter for generating 
interactive dialogue with others on a network. Getting the right balance is 
important, because many messages may be useful, but many are not. 
Employees can lose valuable time and productivity when dealing with 
excessive and unimportant e-mail and text messages, leading to increased 
conflict and stress.43
■ 
More and more data: challenges to decision making. Every day, a typical 
American office worker puts out about 5,000 megabytes of data, whether 
from e-mail, word processing, downloaded movies, or other items generated 
by computers.44 The Internet, then, not only speeds everything up, it also, 
through cloud computing—the storing of software and data on gigantic collec-
tions of computers located away from a company’s principal site (out there some-
where, “in the cloud”)—and huge, interconnected databases—computerized 
collections of interrelated files—can assemble astonishing quantities of infor-
mation and make them available to us instantaneously. This has led to the 
phenomenon known as Big Data, stores of data so vast that conventional da-
tabase management systems cannot handle them, and so very sophisticated 
analysis software and supercomputers are required. The challenge: How do we 
deal with this massive amount of data to make useful decisions without violat-
ing people’s right to privacy?

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
15
Dread Pirate. Ross Ulbricht, a 
former Eagle Scout and holder 
of a master’s degree in materials 
science, was alleged by federal 
prosecutors to be a drug kingpin 
and attempted murderer named 
Dread Pirate Roberts. He was 
scheduled to go on trial in late 
2014 as the founder of Silk 
Road, an online site for selling 
narcotics. He pled not guilty to 
drug trafficking, computer 
hacking, money laundering, and 
running a continuing criminal 
conspiracy.
■ 
The rise of artificial intelligence: more automation in the workforce. “Soft-
ware and automation—think self-driving cars, robotic factories, and artificially 
intelligent reservationists,” writes Thomas Friedman, “are not only replacing 
blue-collar jobs at a faster rate, but now also white-collar skills.”45 Artificial intel-
ligence (AI) is the discipline concerned with creating computer systems that sim-
ulate human reasoning and sensation, as represented by robots, natural 
language processing, pattern recognition, and similar technologies. The job 
losses caused by automation among autoworkers, film processors, travel agents, 
and the like will probably extend to other fields as robot surgeons, driverless 
cars, drones (pilotless aircraft), and molecule-sized nanobots (used in medicine) 
come into use.46 What will be the implications of these events for you as a manager 
for staffing and training employees and for your own professional development?47
■ 
Organizational changes: shifts in structure, jobs, goals, and knowledge 
management. With computers and telecommunications technology, organiza-
tions and teams become “virtual”; they are no longer as bound by time zones 
and locations. Employees, for instance, may telecommute, or work from home 
or remote locations using a variety of information technologies. Meetings may 
be conducted via videoconferencing, using video and audio links along with 
computers to let people in different locations see, hear, and talk with one an-
other. In addition, collaborative computing, using state-of-the-art computer 
software and hardware, will help people work better together. Goal setting and 
feedback will be conducted via web-based software programs such as eWork-
bench, which enables managers to create and track employee goals. Such man-
agers will also rely on project management software, programs for 
planning and scheduling the people, costs, and resources to complete a proj-
ect on time. All such forms of interaction will require managers and employees 
to be more flexible, and there will be an increased emphasis on knowledge 
management—the implementing of systems and practices to increase the shar-
ing of knowledge and information throughout an organization.
Challenge #5: Managing for Ethical Standards
With the pressure to meet sales, production, and other targets, managers can find them-
selves confronting ethical dilemmas. What do you do when, as a manager for a cruise 
line, say, you learn that an important safety measure will have to be skipped 
if a 4,200-passenger cruise ship is to sail on time?48 As a sales manager, how 
much should you allow your sales reps to criticize the competition? How 
much leeway do you have in giving gifts to prospective clients in a foreign 
country to try to land a contract? In an era of climate change, with changing 
temperatures and rising sea levels, what is your responsibility to “act 
green”—avoid company policies that are damaging to the environment?
Ethical behavior is not just a nicety; it is a very important part of doing 
business. This was certainly made clear in December 2008, when financier 
Bernard Madoff confessed that his investments were all “one big lie”—not 
investments at all, but rather a $50 billion scheme (Ponzi scheme), using 
cash from newer investors to pay off older ones. A few months later, this 
perpetrator of the world’s biggest fraud, then age 71, was sentenced to 150 
years in prison. Madoff joined a long list of famous business scoundrels of 
the early 21st century: Tyco International CEO Dennis Kozlowski (now on 
parole after serving prison time for grand larceny, securities fraud, and tax 
evasion), WorldCom head Bernard Ebbers (doing 25 years for fraud), 
Adelphia CEO John Rigas (15 years for conspiracy and bank fraud), for-
mer Enron chief Jeffrey Skilling (24 years for similar white-collar crimes), 
Galleon Group hedge fund head Raj Rajaratnam and Goldman Sachs di-
rector Rajat Gupta (11 years each for insider trading).

16 
PART 1 
Introduction
PRACTICAL ACTION
Preparing Yourself to Behave Right When You’re Tempted to Cheat
There are all kinds of things that influence people to cheat. 
They may cheat more in the afternoon than in the morning. 
(Perhaps because mental fatigue sets in as the day wears 
on.)50 They may cheat more when technology makes it easy. 
(Access to copy/paste tools was associated with a higher rate 
of cheating.)51 They may even cheat because it makes them 
feel good. (Really! Cheaters in one study reported more positive 
feelings than subjects who acted honestly.)52
Of course, just because somehow you feel okay about 
cheating doesn’t mean it’s right, or, from a hard-headed busi-
ness point of view, even effective—either for you or for the 
organization you work for.53 Did you know, for instance, that 
you can be fired for lying on a job application or resume?
Learning to Be Ethical. Concerned about transgressions in 
the managerial world, some of the top U.S. researchers in busi-
ness ethics in January 2014 introduced a new website, Ethical-
Systems.org (www.ethicalsystems.org). One of its purposes is 
to examine the problem that, as The New York Times describes 
it, “how we think we’re going to act when faced with a moral 
decision and how we really do act are often vastly different.”54 
Originally business ethics grew out of philosophy and was 
concerned with the right thing to do. Now research is directed 
toward the underlying reasons people act the way they do, to 
develop a more psychologically realistic approach and learn 
what tools will nudge people toward right behavior.
Doing Right versus Being Liked. When people predict how 
they’re going to act in a given situation, “the ‘should’ self 
dominates—we should be fair, we should be generous, we 
should assert our values,” says business ethics professor Ann 
E. Tenbrunsel. “But when the time for action comes, the ‘want’ 
self dominates—I don’t want to look like a fool, I don’t want to 
be punished.”55 Thus, you may see some wrong occur (such 
as an act of cheating) and actually mean to do something 
about it, but can’t quite figure how—and then the moment 
passes and you let it go and tell yourself that what you 
did was okay.
YOUR CALL
How can you learn to be ethical? First, you need to be aware 
of when you are apt not to speak up about a matter of wrong-
doing—as when it might alienate your friends (“No one will 
speak to me after this”), when it might cause others to disre-
spect you (“I’m going to look like an idiot”), or when an 
authority figure is present (“This will get me fired”). Once you 
become aware of such thoughts, you need to try to override 
them, letting the discomfort you’re experiencing signal you 
that you need to be courageous and take action, not just lapse 
into inaction. Can you tell yourself how you should—and 
must—behave the next time you’re tempted to cheat or see 
someone cheating?
Challenge #6: Managing for Sustainability—
The Business of Green
An apparently changing climate, bringing increased damage from hurricanes, floods, 
and fires throughout the United States and the world, has brought the issue of “being 
green” to increased prominence. Former U.S. Vice President Al Gore’s documentary 
film An Inconvenient Truth, along with his book by the same name, further popularized 
the concepts of global climate change and the idea of sustainability as a business model.56
Our economic system has brought prosperity, but it has also led to unsustainable 
business practices because it has assumed that natural resources are limitless, which 
they are not. Sustainability is defined as economic development that meets the 
needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs.57 In the United States, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which is 
supposed to represent the views of business, has been resistant to climate change 
legislation.58 However, several companies—Levi Strauss, Apple, Tiffany, Exelon, 
Pacific Gas & Electric, PNM Resources, and Mohawk Fine Papers—have resigned 
Of course, business crime is not perpetrated just by respectable-looking people 
wearing suits. Hippie entrepreneur Ross Ulbricht, 29, was arrested in late 2013 for al-
legedly being the founder of Silk Road, described as an “online illegal-goods bazaar 
that had been dubbed the eBay of vice,” from which he purportedly made nearly half a 
billion dollars in under three years by selling drugs.49
We consider ethics in Chapter 3 and elsewhere in the book.

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
17
from the Chamber in protest. Perhaps, then, business can begin to take the lead. After 
years of being slow to address climate change, major corporations—including indus-
trial giants that make products ranging from electricity to chemicals to bulldozers—
have begun to call for limits on global warming emissions.
Challenge #7: Managing for Happiness 
& Meaningfulness
Which would you rather have, a happy life or a meaningful life?
One study found that “Happiness was linked to being a taker rather than a giver, 
whereas meaningfulness went with being a giver rather than a taker,” as a study author 
put it.59 Happiness is getting what you want, of having your desires fulfilled. Meaning-
fulness—which may not always make you happy—is achieving a valued sense of 
one’s self and one’s purpose within the larger context of life and community. Research 
clearly shows that a sense of meaningfulness in your life is associated with better 
health, work and life satisfaction, and performance.60
Many people find being a manager doesn’t make them happy.61 They may complain that 
they have to go to too many meetings, that they can’t do enough for their employees, that they 
are caught in the middle between bosses and subordinates. They may feel, at a time when 
Dilbert cartoons have created such an unflattering portrayal of managers, that they lack re-
spect. They may decide that, despite the greater income, money doesn’t buy happiness.
On the other hand, being a manager can be one of the greatest avenues to a mean-
ingful life, particularly if you are working within a supportive or interesting organiza-
tional culture. (We discuss company culture, or style, in Chapter 8.) As Oakland, 
California, productivity-improvement expert Odette Pollar has stated, being a manager 
is “an opportunity to counsel, motivate, advise, guide, empower, and influence large 
groups of people. These important skills can be used in business as well as in personal 
and volunteer activities.” And, we might add, in nonprofit organizations as well. “If 
you truly like people,” she goes on, “and enjoy mentoring and helping others to grow 
and thrive, management is a great job.”62
How Strong Is Your Motivation to Be a Manager? 
The First Self-Assessment
As we stated at the beginning of this chapter, it is our desire to make this book as prac-
tical as possible for you. As an important means of advancing this goal, from time to 
time we present self-assessments—two or more to a chapter—which allow you to 
gauge how you feel about the material you are reading and how you can make use of 
it. The way this works is you go to the self-assessment website at connect.mheducation.
com complete the assessment, then answer the self-assessment questions in the book. 
Here is the first one. ●
How Strong Is My Motivation to Be a Manager?
How motivated are you to manage others? Go to connect
.mheducation.com and take the self-assessment. When you’re 
done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Does this instrument accurately assess your potential as 
a manager? Explain.
2. 
Which of the seven dimensions do you think is likely the 
best predictor of managerial success? Which is the least? 
Explain.
3. 
The instrument emphasizes competition with others in a 
win–lose mentality. Describe the pros and cons of this 
approach to management.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 1.1
®

The workplace of the future may resemble a symphony orchestra, famed management 
theorist Peter Drucker said.63 Employees, especially so-called knowledge workers—
those who have a great deal of technical skills—can be compared to concert musi-
cians. Their managers can be seen as conductors.
In Drucker’s analogy, musicians are used for some pieces of music—that is, work 
projects—and not others, and they are divided into different sections (teams) based on 
their instruments. The conductor’s role is not to play each instrument better than the musi-
cians but to lead them all through the most effective performance of a particular work.
This model differs from the traditional pyramid-like organizational model, where one 
leader sits at the top, with layers of managers beneath, each of whom must report to and 
justify his or her work to the manager above (what’s called accountability, as we discuss 
in Chapter 8). We therefore need to take a look at the traditional arrangement first.
The Traditional Management Pyramid: 
Levels & Areas
A new Silicon Valley technology start-up company staffed by young people in san-
dals and shorts may be so small and so loosely organized that only one or two mem-
bers may be said to be a manager. General Motors or the U.S. Army, in contrast, has 
thousands of managers doing thousands of different things. Is there a picture we can 
draw that applies to all the different kinds of organizations and describes them in 
ways that make sense? Yes: by levels and by areas, as the pyramid on the next page
shows. (See Figure 1.2.) 
Four Levels of Management
Not everyone who works in an organization is a manager, of course, but those who 
are may be classified into four levels—top, middle, and first-line managers and team 
leaders.
Top Managers: Determining Overall Direction 
Their offices may be equipped 
with expensive leather chairs and have lofty views. Or, as with one Internet company, 
they may have plastic lawn chairs in the CEO’s office and beat-up furniture in the 
lobby. Whatever their decor, an organization’s top managers tend to have titles such as 
“chief executive officer (CEO),” “chief operating officer (COO),” “president,” and 
“senior vice president.”
Some may be the stars in their fields, the men and women whose pictures appear on 
the covers of business magazines, people such as Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg 
or Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer, who appeared on Fortune. As we’ve seen, the median 
salary is $168,140 a year for CEOs and presidents of small and midsize companies and 
can range up to the millions for top executives in large companies.
1.4 
Pyramid Power: Levels & Areas of Management
What are the levels and areas of management I need to know to move up, down, 
and sideways?
THE BIG PICTURE
Within an organization, there are four levels of managers: top, middle, and first-line managers and also team 
leaders. Managers may also be general managers, or they may be functional managers, responsible for just 
one organizational activity, such as Research & Development, Marketing, Finance, Production, or Human 
Resources. Managers may work for for-profit, nonprofit, or mutual-benefit organizations.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
18 
PART 1 
Introduction

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
19
One kind of top manager. 
India-born Satya Nadella, 
who joined Microsoft in 
1992, became CEO of the 
technology company in early 
2014. He will likely receive 
$18 million in compensation 
in 2015. Nadella will have his 
hands full, as shareholders 
have grumbled for years about 
Microsoft’s strategy and 
direction. Do you see yourself 
joining a company and staying 
with it for life, as Nadella has 
(after an earlier job at Sun 
Microsystems), or is that 
even possible anymore?
Top managers make long-term decisions about the overall direction of the organiza-
tion and establish the objectives, policies, and strategies for it. They need to pay a lot of 
attention to the environment outside the organization, being alert for long-run opportunities 
and problems and devising strategies for dealing with them. Thus, executives at this 
level must be future oriented, dealing with uncertain, highly competitive conditions.
These people stand at the summit of the management pyramid. But the nature of a 
pyramid is that the farther you climb, the less space remains at the top. Thus, most 
pyramid climbers never get to the apex. However, that doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t 
try. Indeed, you might end up atop a much smaller pyramid of some other organization 
than the one you started out in—and happier with the result.
Middle Managers: Implementing Policies & Plans 
Middle managers implement 
the policies and plans of the top managers above them and supervise and coordinate 
the activities of the first-line managers below them. Titles might include “plant man-
ager,” “district manager,” and “regional manager” among others. In the nonprofit world, 
middle managers may have titles such as “clinic director,” “dean of student services,” 
and the like. Their salaries may range from under $45,000 up to $120,000 a year.
Middle managers are critical for organizational success because they implement the 
strategic plans created by CEOs and top managers. (Strategic planning is discussed 
in Chapter 6.) In other words, these managers have the type of “high touch” jobs—
dealing with people rather than computer screens or voice-response systems—that can 
directly affect employees, customers, and suppliers.64
First-Line Managers: Directing Daily Tasks 
The job titles at the bottom of the 
managerial pyramid tend to be on the order of “department head,” “foreman” or “fore-
woman,” or “supervisor”—clerical supervisor, production supervisor, research super-
visor, and so on. Indeed, supervisor is the name often given to first-line managers as a 
whole. Their salaries may run from $35,000 to $65,000 a year.
Following the plans of middle and top managers, first-line managers make short-
term operating decisions, directing the daily tasks of nonmanagerial personnel, who 
FIGURE 1.2
The levels and areas 
of management
Top managers make long-term 
decisions, middle managers 
implement those decisions, and 
first-line managers make short-
term decisions. Team leaders 
facilitate team activities toward 
achieving a goal.
Levels of
Management
Top managers
Middle managers
First-line managers
R&D
Marketing
Finance
Production
Human
resources
Team leaders
Functional
Areas

20 
PART 1 
Introduction
Top manager of another sort. 
In 1999, at age 24, Tony Hsieh 
(pronounced Shay), sold 
advertising network 
LinkExchange, the company he 
co-founded, to Microsoft for 
$265 million and then joined 
Zappos.com, the Nevada online 
shoe and clothing retailer, as an 
investor and advisor. Later he 
became CEO and helped grow 
Zappos to $1 billion in sales. 
He is also author of the book 
Delivering Happiness. Do you 
think a top manager is always 
an adventurous type?
are, of course, all those people who work directly at their jobs but don’t 
oversee the work of others.
No doubt the job of first-line manager will be the place where you 
would start your managerial career. This can be a valuable experience be-
cause it will be the training and testing ground for your management ideas.
Team Leaders: Facilitating Team Activities 
Not all companies 
have teams—small groups of people with complementary skills who are 
committed to a common purpose—but teams and teamwork are largely the 
standard way of operating in today’s organizations. (Teams are thoroughly 
discussed in  Chapter 13.)
Members of a team generally report to a first-line manager, who has the 
authority to hire and fire, controls resources, and is responsible for the 
team’s performance. But one of the members of the team may be charged 
with being the team leader, a manager who is responsible for facilitating 
team activities toward achieving key results. Team leaders may not have 
authority over other team members, but they are expected to provide guid-
ance, instruction, and direction to the others; to coordinate team efforts; to 
resolve conflicts; to represent the team to the first-level manager; and to 
make decisions in the absence of consensus.
Areas of Management: Functional Managers versus 
General Managers
We can represent the levels of management by slicing the organizational pyramid hor-
izontally. We can also slice the pyramid vertically to represent the organization’s de-
partments or functional areas, as we did in Figure 1.2.
In a for-profit technology company, these might be Research & Development, Mar-
keting, Finance, Production, and Human Resources. In a nonprofit college, these might 
be Faculty, Student Support Staff, Finance, Maintenance, and Administration. What-
ever the names of the departments, the organization is run by two types of managers—
functional and general. (These are line managers, with authority to direct employees. 
Staff managers mainly assist line managers.)
Functional Managers: Responsible for One Activity 
If your title is Vice Presi-
dent of Production, Director of Finance, or Administrator for Human Resources, you are 
a functional manager. A functional manager is responsible for just one organizational 
activity. Google is particularly noteworthy for its unusual functional management job ti-
tles, such as Fitness Program Manager, Green Team Lead, and Vice President of Search 
Products & User Experience, which was Marissa Mayer’s former title before she left to 
head Yahoo!. (Yahoo! has its own unusual functional titles, such as VP of Talent Acquisi-
tion, VP Consumer Platforms, and VP of Research for Europe & LatAm.)
General Managers: Responsible for Several Activities 
If you are working 
in a small organization of, say, 100 people and your title is Executive Vice Presi-
dent, you are probably a general manager over several departments, such as Pro-
duction and Finance and Human Resources. A general manager is responsible for 
several organizational activities. At the top of the pyramid, general managers are 
those who seem to be the subject of news stories in magazines such as Bloomberg 
Businessweek, Fortune, Forbes, and Inc. Examples are big-company CEOs Denise 
Morrison of Campbell Soup and Jeff Bezos of Amazon.com, and also small-company 
CEOs such as Gayle Martz, who heads New York–based Sherpa’s Pet Trading 
Co., which sells travel carriers for dogs and cats. But not all general managers are 
in for-profit organizations.

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
21
Nonprofit general manager. 
A general manager is 
responsible for several 
organizational activities. As 
CEO of WomanCare Global, 
Saundra Pelletier developed 
the organization’s initial 
business plan and secured 
funding, as well as made 
several product acquisitions. 
She leads a team with private 
sector, global public health, 
and pharmaceutical 
experience to serve women in 
need worldwide. Do you think 
managerial skills are different 
for nonprofit and for-profit 
organizations?
Saundra Pelletier is chief executive of WomanCare Global, a 
San Diego, California, nonprofit provider of health care products 
for women and girls. (Simultaneously, she is also CEO of Evofem 
Inc., a for-profit biotechnology company.) As the founding CEO, 
Pelletier secured start-up funding from major foundations and in-
vestors and worked to reach women globally in over 100 countries, 
particularly focusing on underserved parts of Africa and Asia. 
Previously she worked for pharmaceutical giant G.D. Searle and 
other companies as a top manager.65
Managers for Three Types of 
Organizations: For-Profit, Nonprofit, 
Mutual-Benefit
There are three types of organizations classified according to the 
three purposes for which they are formed—for-profit, nonprofit, 
and mutual-benefit.66
1. For-Profit Organizations: For Making Money 
For-
profit, or business, organizations are formed to make money, or 
profits, by offering products or services. When most people think 
of “management,” they think of business organizations, ranging 
from Allstate to Zynga, from Amway to Zagat.
2. Nonprofit Organizations: For Offering Services 
Managers in nonprofit 
organizations are often known as “administrators.” Nonprofit organizations may be 
either in the public sector, such as the University of California, or in the private sector, 
such as Stanford University. Either way, their purpose is to offer services to some cli-
ents, not to make a profit. Examples of such organizations are hospitals, colleges, and 
social-welfare agencies (the Salvation Army, the Red Cross).
One particular type of nonprofit organization is called the commonweal organiza-
tion. Unlike nonprofit service organizations, which offer services to some clients, 
commonweal organizations offer services to all clients within their jurisdictions. 
Examples are the military services, the U.S. Postal Service, and your local fire and 
police departments.
3. Mutual-Benefit Organizations: For Aiding Members 
Mutual-benefit or-
ganizations are voluntary collections of members—political parties, farm coopera-
tives, labor unions, trade associations, and clubs—whose purpose is to advance 
members’ interests.
Different Organizations, Different Management?
If you become a manager, would you be doing the same types of things regardless of 
the type of organization? Generally you would be; that is, you would be performing 
the four management functions—planning, organizing, leading, and controlling—that 
we described in Section 1.2.
The single biggest difference, however, is that in a for-profit organization, the mea-
sure of its success is how much profit (or loss) it generates. In the other two types of 
organizations, although income and expenditures are very important concerns, the 
measure of success is usually the effectiveness of the services delivered—how many 
students were graduated, if you’re a college administrator, or how many crimes were 
prevented or solved, if you’re a police chief. ●

Lower- and middle-level managers are a varied lot, but what do top managers have in 
common? A supportive spouse or partner, suggests one study.67 Regardless of gender, 
reaching the top demands a person’s all-out commitment to work and career, and 
someone needs to be there to help with children and laundry. Thus, in 2011, 27 of 29 
current or former Fortune 500 female CEOs were married (but only 18 had children), 
and their husbands were apparently willing to defer their ambitions to their wives’—
just as so many spouses of men have. 
General Motors CEO Mary Barra, who is married and is the mother of two teenage 
children, has been assisted in her rise by her husband, Tony Barra, a technology con-
sultant. Although female managers with supportive partners are becoming more com-
mon, society is still struggling with what it means for men and women to be peers and 
whether one’s career should come first or both should be developed simultaneously.
Whether or not they have support at home, aspiring managers also need to have 
other kinds of the “right stuff.” In the mid-1970s, researcher Robert Katz found that 
through education and experience managers acquire three principal skills—technical, 
conceptual, and human.68
1. Technical Skills—The Ability to Perform 
a Specific Job
Mary Barra has a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering and a master’s in business 
administration and a well-rounded resume that includes important experience as ex-
ecutive assistant to the CEO, being head of midsize car engineering, managing GM’s 
Detroit-Hamtramck plant, and leading the company’s human resources division. Then 
in 2011 she was made head of GM’s huge worldwide product development, where she 
“brought order to chaos,” according to one account, “mostly by flattening its bureau-
cracy . . . , reducing the number of expensive, global vehicle platforms, and bringing 
new models to market faster and at lower cost.”69 Said by her predecessor to be “one of 
the most gifted executives” he had met in his career, she displays an engineer’s enthu-
siasm for cars, a quality not found among other car-company CEOs promoted from 
finance operations.70 Indeed, says one account, “Ms. Barra can often be found on the 
company’s test track putting vehicles through their paces at high speeds.”71
Technical skills consist of the job-specific knowledge needed to perform well in a 
specialized field. Having the requisite technical skills seems to be most important at 
the lower levels of management—that is, among employees in their first professional 
job and first-line managers.
2. Conceptual Skills—The Ability to Think Analytically
Conceptual skills are more important as you move up the management ladder. Said a 
GM executive about Barra, “When you put her in a position that’s completely new to 
her, she does an amazing job of getting grounded, understanding what’s important and 
1.5  
The Skills Exceptional Managers Need
To be a terrific manager, what skills should I cultivate?
THE BIG PICTURE
Good managers need to work on developing three principal skills. The first is technical, the ability to perform 
a specific job. The second is conceptual, the ability to think analytically. The third is human, the ability to 
interact well with people.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
22 
PART 1 
Introduction

General Motors headquarters. 
The Renaissance Center in 
Detroit is headquarters for most 
of GM’s enterprises, including 
CEO Mary Barra’s office. Barra 
seems to have the three skills—
technical, conceptual, and 
human—necessary to be a 
terrific manager for such a 
complex organization. Which 
skill do you think you need to 
work on the most? (Human skills 
are the most difficult to master.)
 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
23
what’s not, and executing very well.”72 Or, as Barra 
said about her management approach, “Problems don’t 
go away when you ignore them—they get bigger. In 
my experience, it is much better to get the right people 
together, to make a plan, and to address every chal-
lenge head on.”73 At every stop along the way in rising 
through GM, Barra analyzed the situation and simpli-
fied things. For example, in her product-development 
job, she streamlined designs by using the same parts in 
many different models. She also assigned engineers to 
work in car dealerships to learn more about what cus-
tomers want in their vehicles.74
Conceptual skills consist of the ability to think 
analytically, to visualize an organization as a whole and 
understand how the parts work together. Conceptual 
skills are particularly important for top managers, who 
must deal with problems that are ambiguous but that 
could have far-reaching consequences.
3. Human Skills—“Soft Skills,” the 
Ability to Interact Well with People
This may well be the most difficult set of skills to mas-
ter. Human skills consist of the ability to work well in 
cooperation with other people to get things done—
especially with people in teams, an important part of 
today’s organizations (as we discuss in Chapter 13). 
Often these are thought of as “soft skills.” Soft skills—
the ability to motivate, to inspire trust, to communicate 
with others—are necessary for managers of all levels. 
But because of the range of people, tasks, and problems in an organization, developing 
your human-interacting skills may turn out to be an ongoing, lifelong effort.75
During her more than three decades at GM, Barra has demonstrated exceptionally 
strong soft skills. She has “an ability with people,” says her previous boss, that is criti-
cal to GM’s team-first approach.76 “She is known inside GM as a consensus builder 
who calls her staff together on a moment’s notice to brainstorm on pressing issues,” 
says another report.77 “She’s fiercely intelligent yet humble and approachable,” says a 
third account. “She’s collaborative but is often the person who takes charge. And she’s 
not afraid to make changes.”78
The Most Valued Traits in Managers
Clearly, Barra embodies the qualities sought in star managers, especially top manag-
ers. “The style for running a company is different from what it used to be,” says a top 
executive recruiter of CEOs. “Companies don’t want dictators, kings, or emperors.”79 
Instead of someone who gives orders, they want executives who ask probing questions 
and force the people beneath them to think and find the right answers.
Among the chief skills companies seek in top managers are the following:
■ 
The ability to motivate and engage others.
■ 
The ability to communicate.
■ 
Work experience outside the United States.
■ 
High energy levels to meet the demands of global travel and a 24/7 world.80
Let’s see how you can begin to acquire these and other qualities for success. ●

Multitasking. Multiple activities 
are characteristic of a 
manager—which is why 
so many managers use their 
smartphones to keep track 
of their schedules. Do you use 
a mobile electronic device for 
this purpose?
Clearly, being a successful manager requires playing several different roles and exer-
cising several different skills. What are they?
The Manager’s Roles: Mintzberg’s Useful Findings
Maybe, you think, it might be interesting to follow some managers around to see what 
it is, in fact, they actually do. That’s exactly what management scholar Henry Mintzberg
did when, in the late 1960s, he shadowed five chief executives for a week and recorded 
their working lives.81 And what he found is valuable to know, since it applies not only 
to top managers but also to managers on all levels.
Consider this portrait of a manager’s workweek: “There was no break in the pace 
of activity during office hours,” reported Mintzberg about his subjects. “The mail 
(average of 36 pieces per day), telephone calls (average of five per day), and meet-
ings (average of eight) accounted for almost every minute from the moment these 
executives entered their offices in the morning until they departed in the evening.”82
Only five phone calls per day? And, of course, this was back in an era before e-mail, 
texting, and Twitter, which nowadays can shower some executives with 100, even 300, 
messages a day. Indeed, says Ed Reilly, who heads the American Management Associa-
tion, all the e-mail, cellphone calls, text messaging, and so on can lead people to end 
up “concentrating on the urgent rather than the important.”83
Obviously, the top manager’s life is extraordinarily busy. Here are 
three of Mintzberg’s findings, important for any prospective manager:
1. A Manager Relies More on Verbal than on Written 
Communication 
Writing letters, memos, and reports takes time. 
Most managers in Mintzberg’s research tended to get and transmit infor-
mation through telephone conversations and meetings. No doubt this is 
still true, although the technologies of e-mail, texting, and Twitter now 
make it possible to communicate almost as rapidly in writing as with the 
spoken word.
2. A Manager Works Long Hours at an Intense Pace 
“A true 
break seldom occurred,” wrote Mintzberg about his subjects. “Coffee was 
taken during meetings, and lunchtime was almost always devoted to for-
mal or informal meetings.”
Long hours at work are standard, he found, with 50 hours being typi-
cal and up to 90 hours not unheard of. A 1999 survey by John P. Kotter 
of the Harvard Business School found that the general managers he stud-
ied worked just under 60 hours per week.84 Four decades following the 
Mintzberg research, another study found that many professionals worked 
a whopping 72 hours a week, including weekend work.85 Prior to the 
1.6 
Roles Managers Must Play Successfully
To be an exceptional manager, what roles must I play successfully?
THE BIG PICTURE
Managers tend to work long hours at an intense pace; their work is characterized by fragmentation, brevity, 
and variety; and they rely more on verbal than on written communication. According to management scholar 
Henry Mintzberg, managers play three roles—interpersonal, informational, and decisional. Interpersonal 
roles include figurehead, leader, and liaison activities. Informational roles are monitor, disseminator, and 
spokesperson. Decisional roles are entrepreneur, disturbance handler, resource allocator, and negotiator.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
24 
PART 1 
Introduction

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
25
A Mintzberg manager. John T. 
Chambers, CEO of network gear 
maker Cisco Systems, relies more 
on verbal than on written 
communication, works long hours, 
and experiences an “interrupt-
driven day.” Interestingly, Chambers 
is successful despite having had 
lifelong dyslexia, the common 
language-related learning disability. 
He compensates by leaving 40 or 
50 voice mails a day, studies 
summaries in briefing binders, and 
tapes videos for employees. What 
kind of personal adversity have you 
had to overcome?
2007–2009 Great Recession, researchers at Purdue and McGill universities found that 
more companies were allowing managers to reduce their working hours and spend 
more time with their families yet still advance their high-powered careers.86 However, 
during economic hard times, top managers may be more apt to see subordinates’ 
work–life flexibility as a luxury they can no longer afford.
3. A Manager’s Work Is Characterized by Fragmentation, Brevity, & Variety 
Only about a tenth of the managerial activities observed by Mintzberg took more than 
an hour; about half were completed in under 9 minutes. Phone calls averaged 6 min-
utes, informal meetings 10 minutes, and desk-work sessions 15 minutes. “When free 
time appeared,” wrote Mintzberg, “ever-present subordinates quickly usurped it.”
No wonder the executive’s work time has been characterized as “the interrupt-
driven day” and that many managers—such as GM’s Mary Barra—are often in their 
offices by 6 a.m., so that they will have a quiet period in which to work undisturbed. 
No wonder that finding balance between work and family lives—“work–life balance,” 
as we consider in Chapter 12—is an ongoing concern.87 No wonder, in fact, that the 
division between work and nonwork hours is considered almost obsolete in newer 
industries such as information technology, where people seem to use their smartphones 
24/7 to stay linked to their jobs.88
It is clear from Mintzberg’s work that time and task management are major chal-
lenges for every manager. The Practical Action box below, “Executive Functioning: 
How Good Are You at Focusing Your Thoughts, Controlling Your Impulses, & Avoid-
ing Distractions?” examines this challenge further. The box “Getting Control of Your 
Time: Dealing with the Information Deluge in College & in Your Career” at the end of 
this chapter also offers some important suggestions.
PRACTICAL ACTION
Executive Functioning: How Good Are You at Focusing Your 
Thoughts, Controlling Your Impulses, & Avoiding Distractions?
Managers are executives, of course, and good managers 
have what psychologists call good “executive functioning.” 
This is a psychological term, rather than a workplace one, 
and it involves the ability to manage oneself and one’s re-
sources in order to achieve a goal. Specifically, this means 
the ability to focus your thoughts, control your impulses, and 
avoid distractions.89
Gen Z. The 20 million people born from 1990 to the present, 
known as Generation Z, or the Net Generation, were “practically 

26 
PART 1 
Introduction
Three Types of Managerial Roles: Interpersonal, 
Informational, & Decisional
From his observations and other research, Mintzberg concluded that managers play 
three broad types of roles or “organized sets of behavior”: interpersonal, informa-
tional, and decisional.
1. Interpersonal Roles—Figurehead, Leader, and Liaison 
In their 
interpersonal roles, managers interact with people inside and outside their work units. 
The three interpersonal roles include figurehead, leader, and liaison activities.
2. Informational Roles—Monitor, Disseminator, and Spokesperson 
The 
most important part of a manager’s job, Mintzberg believed, is information handling, 
because accurate information is vital for making intelligent decisions. In their three 
informational roles—as monitor, disseminator, and spokesperson—managers 
receive and communicate information with other people inside and outside the organiza-
tion. Mary Barra, for example, wrote an e-mail in early 2014 to all GM employees to 
discuss how the company was responding to a recall of 1.6 million vehicles. She al-
ready had been actively communicating with government officials and a host of 
senior executives regarding the matter. She noted in her e-mail that “recalls of this size 
and scope usually take time to play out. Various other parties will naturally be 
involved, and GM will cooperate fully. You can expect additional developments in 
the near term.”98
3. Decisional Roles—Entrepreneur, Disturbance Handler, Resource 
Allocator, and Negotiator 
In their decisional roles, managers use information to 
make decisions to solve problems or take advantage of opportunities. The four deci-
sion-making roles are entrepreneur, disturbance handler, resource allocator, and 
negotiator.
These roles are summarized on the next page. (See Table 1.1.)
born with a smartphone in their hand,” in one description.90 Indeed, 
one study found that 92% of college undergraduates are cellphone 
or tablet users.91 How good is their executive functioning? The typi-
cal college student plays with his or her digital device an average of 
11 times a day while in class, and more than 80% admit that their 
use of smartphones, tablets, and laptops can interfere with their 
learning. More than a fourth say their grades suffer.92 In addition, 
students do a lot of multitasking—as in checking out Facebook and 
listening to music while reading this textbook. You may think you’re 
simultaneously doing three separate tasks, but you’re really not. 
“It’s like playing tennis with three balls,” says one expert.93
The Finite Brain. “Life,” says Winifred Gallagher, author of Rapt, 
“is the sum of what you focus on.”94 Another writer says, “You 
can drive yourself crazy trying to multitask and answer every 
e-mail message instantly. Or you can recognize your brain’s finite 
capacity for processing information.”95 To be successful not only 
in school but in the workplace—especially as a manager—you 
need to learn to direct your attention. This is known as focus or 
mindfulness, as we explore further later in the book.96
YOUR CALL
Do you procrastinate about getting your work done? Most peo-
ple do—and in fact the problem has worsened over the years: 
Today about 26% of Americans think of themselves as chronic 
procrastinators, up from 5% in 1978, and 80%–95% of college 
students procrastinate on a regular basis The major reason: too 
many tempting diversions, especially electronic ones.97 Is this 
a problem for you? What can you do to improve your “executive 
functioning”?

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
27
TABLE 1.1 
Three Types of Managerial Roles: Interpersonal, Informational, and Decisional
BROAD MANAGERIAL 
ROLES
TYPES OF 
ROLES
DESCRIPTION
Interpersonal
Figurehead role
In your figurehead role, you show visitors around your company, 
attend employee birthday parties, and present ethical guidelines to 
your subordinates. In other words, you perform symbolic tasks that 
represent your organization.
Leadership role
In your role of leader, you are responsible for the actions of your 
subordinates, as their successes and failures reflect on you. Your 
leadership is expressed in your decisions about training, motivating, 
and disciplining people.
Liaison role
In your liaison role, you must act like a politician, working with other 
people outside your work unit and organization to develop alliances 
that will help you achieve your organization’s goals.
Informational
Monitor role
As a monitor, you should be constantly alert for useful information, 
whether gathered from newspaper stories about the competition or 
gathered from snippets of conversation with subordinates you meet 
in the hallway.
Disseminator 
role
Workers complain they never know what’s going on? That probably 
means their supervisor failed in the role of disseminator. Managers 
need to constantly disseminate important information to employees, 
as via e-mail and meetings.
Spokesperson 
role
You are expected, of course, to be a diplomat, to put the best face on 
the activities of your work unit or organization to people outside it. 
This is the informational role of spokesperson.
Decisional
Entrepreneur 
role
A good manager is expected to be an entrepreneur, to initiate and 
encourage change and innovation.
Disturbance 
handler role
Unforeseen problems—from product defects to international currency 
crises—require you be a disturbance handler, fixing problems.
Resource 
allocator role
Because you’ll never have enough time, money, and so on, you’ll 
need to be a resource allocator, setting priorities about use of 
resources.
Negotiator role
To be a manager is to be a continual negotiator, working with others 
inside and outside the organization to accomplish your goals.
Did anyone say a manager’s job is easy? Certainly it’s not for people who want to 
sit on the sidelines of life. Above all else, managers are doers. ●

1.7 
The Link between Entrepreneurship & Management
Do I have what it takes to be an entrepreneur?
THE BIG PICTURE
Entrepreneurship, a necessary attribute of business, means taking risks to create a new enterprise. 
It is expressed through two kinds of innovators, the entrepreneur and the intrapreneur. 
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Most of the popular get-rich stories you hear these days are about technology start-
ups, such as Facebook, Yelp, Foursquare, or Uber, a start-up being defined as a newly 
created company designed to grow fast.99 But there are all kinds of new endeavors 
constantly being launched, not all of which are about technology and not all of which 
are intended to quickly become big.
Starting Up a Start-up: From Hats to Hamburgers
Big Truck Brands, founded in Truckee, California, in 2010, makes custom-designed 
trucker hats for Olympic skier Julia Mancuso and actor Zach Efron, as well as average 
consumers.100 Brooklyn-based MOD Restoration, launched by a rabbi’s daughter, 
Hanny Lerner, handles furniture reupholstering for clients like Barclays Center and 
Long Island Hospital; it currently has about 10 employees.101 Walker & Company, 
headed by Tristan Walker, aims to revolutionize the skin-care and beauty-products in-
dustry for African Americans.102
While so far these businesses have remained small, others have experienced rapid 
growth. Numi, founded in 1999 by brother and sister Ahmed and Reem Rahim in their 
750-square-foot Oakland, California, apartment, is now a fair-trade tea empire with annual 
sales of over $20 million in nearly 40 countries.103 Denver chain Smashburger, founded in 
2007, which features a $6 truffle, mushroom, and swiss burger, among other specialties, is 
up to 235 stores in 30 states and aiming for 765 more in the next five years.104
28 
PART 1 
Introduction
EXAMPLE
A Hot Start-Up Cleans Up: Homejoy Transforms an Old Business
As has been often demonstrated in recent years, an old work 
sector can be transformed by the application of new technol-
ogy and new management ideas. An example is house clean-
ing, which until recently was fundamentally unchanged since 
the 1960s.
“Everyone Deserves a Happy Home.” “My brother Aaron and I 
started working together in 2009,” says South Carolina native 
Adora Cheung, who had moved to the San Francisco Bay Area. 
“We were both engineers coding [computer programming], and 
we wanted a place that was clean in order to be more efficient. 
We tried to find someone online to clean.”105
They discovered there were basically two choices—get highly 
qualified cleaning help from an agency, which might cost them 
$40–$60 an hour (but workers earned only minimum wage), or 
get someone from Craigslist, which cost much less, “but you 
don’t know who the heck is going to show up at your door.”
To find out how they might make the business more effi-
cient and learn the needs of the cleaners themselves, Adora 
Entrepreneurs. Former South Carolinians Adora and Aaron Cheung founded 
their house-cleaning company, Homejoy, in the San Francisco Bay Area in 
2012. Most people, even young people, prefer the security of a job with a 
paycheck to the risks of starting a business. Which life would you prefer?

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
29
took a job at a cleaning company. Later, in July 2012, the two 
launched their own company, Homejoy, under the slogan 
“Everyone deserves a happy home.”
The Homejoy Differences. Several things make Homejoy, which 
is headquartered in San Francisco with operations in 30 North 
American markets, different from traditional cleaning services.
First, having determined what their true costs are, the Cheungs 
are able to charge customers only $20 an hour—whether it’s for 
once a year, once a month, or twice a week—with the worker 
keeping $12–$15 an hour, the rest going to Homejoy.
Second, to ensure a professional cleaning experience and 
keep customers happy, Homejoy “certifies” all their cleaners by 
running numerous background and reference checks, and all 
house cleanings are bonded and insured and frequently 
checked for quality. The company offers a complimentary re-
clean if customers aren’t satisfied.
Third, to keep cleaners happy, Homejoy allows them to 
select their own hours and the geographical areas where they 
want to work. The cleaners, who are independent contractors 
rather than employees, are found through contacts with city 
agencies, such as the Chicago mayor’s office, and nonprofits, 
such as the Urban League—a novel form of recruitment.
Finally, the Cheungs used their expertise in information 
technology to set up a website that allows customers to book, 
cancel, and reschedule cleanings through their computers or 
smartphones.106
Not Just for the Money. Homejoy has its competitors, of course, 
among them Jack Rabbit, Handybook, Merrymaids.com, and 
Care.com. But having raised $40 million in funding by investors, 
the Cheungs clearly think they’re on the way to making a tidy 
return. However, they have also established their own nonprofit 
foundation, the Homejoy Foundation, to provide support to build, 
create, or maintain a happy home environment. The foundation 
currently focuses on improving the living environments of veter-
ans and military families by donating cleaning services and a 
slice of its profits.
“I think there’s a point where start-ups get to a certain size 
and level of recognition which gives them a platform to do 
something for a greater good,” says Adora Cheung. “We believe 
it’s our social responsibility to give back.”107
YOUR CALL
It would be nice as a start-up business owner to get to the point 
where you would be worth several times what your salaried 
counterparts are worth and able to be a magnanimous donor to 
good causes. But do you think you have the stomach for the 
risks involved in establishing and growing a start-up? What are 
some risks associated with owning your own business?108
Entrepreneurship Defined: Taking Risks 
in Pursuit of Opportunity
Homejoy in its early days represents one of the many small outfits in the United States that 
are one of the primary drivers of the nation’s economy. Indeed, according to the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, small companies, defined as having between 1 and 250 employees, 
created 46.7% of all new jobs in 2013.109 (Note, however: Because many small firms fail, 
“new businesses are important to job creation primarily because they get founded,” says 
entrepreneurial studies professor Scott Shane, “not because most of them tend to grow.”)110
Most small businesses originate with people like the Cheungs. They are the entre-
preneurs, the people with the idea, the risk takers. The most successful entrepreneurs 
become wealthy and make the covers of business magazines: Oprah Winfrey (Harpo 
Productions), Fred Smith (Federal Express), Larry Page and Sergey Brin (Google). 
Failed entrepreneurs may benefit from the experience to live to fight another day—as 
did Henry Ford, twice bankrupt before achieving success with Ford Motor Co.
What Entrepreneurship Is 
Entrepreneurship is the process of taking risks to try 
to create a new enterprise. There are two types of entrepreneurship:
■ 
An entrepreneur is someone who sees a new opportunity for a product or 
service and launches a business to try to realize it. Most entrepreneurs run 
small businesses with fewer than 100 employees.
■ 
An intrapreneur is someone who works inside an existing organization who 
sees an opportunity for a product or service and mobilizes the organization’s 
resources to try to realize it. This person might be a researcher or a scientist 
but could also be a manager who sees an opportunity to create a new venture 
that could be profitable.

30 
PART 1 
Introduction
Multiple entrepreneur. South 
African–born Elon Musk, 
declared No. 1 on Fortune’s 
2013 list of Top People in 
Business, was a co-founder of 
PayPal, which provides payment 
processing for online vendors. 
He went on to shake up the auto 
business with Tesla Motors, 
which builds electric cars; 
developed SpaceX, a space 
launch vehicle company; and 
began retooling the energy 
sector with SolarCity, a 
residential solar energy provider. 
He is said to be worth $7.7 
billion. What is your passion that 
you might turn into a business?
How Do Entrepreneurs & Managers Differ? 
While the entrepreneur is not 
necessarily an inventor, he or she “always searches for change, responds to it, and 
exploits it as an opportunity,” Peter Drucker pointed out.114 Most people are not 
suited to be entrepreneurs. Let’s consider the differences between entrepreneurs 
and managers.
Being an entrepreneur is what it takes to start a business; being a manager is what it 
takes to grow or maintain a business. As an entrepreneur/intrapreneur, you initiate new 
goods or services; as a manager you coordinate the resources to produce the goods or 
services—including, as we mentioned, the efforts of the intrapreneurs. Do you think it 
takes different skills to excel at being a good entrepreneur or manager?
Some of the examples of success we have previously mentioned—Fred Smith 
(FedEx) and Larry Page (Google)—are actually both entrepreneurs and effective manag-
ers. Other people, however, find they like the start-up part but hate the management 
part. For example, Stephen Wozniak, entrepreneurial co-founder with Steve Jobs of 
Apple Computer, abandoned the computer industry completely and 
went back to college. Jobs, by contrast, went on to launch another 
business, Pixar, which among other things became the animation fac-
tory that made the movies Toy Story and Finding Nemo.
Entrepreneurial companies have been called “gazelles” for the 
two attributes that make the African antelope successful: speed 
and agility. “Gazelles have mastered the art of the quick,” says 
Alan Webber, founding editor of Fast Company magazine. “They 
have internal approaches and fast decision-making approaches that 
let them move with maximum agility in a fast-changing business 
environment.”115
EXAMPLE
Example of an Intrapreneur: Intel’s Anthropologist Genevieve Bell Explores 
Possible Innovations for Automakers
If being an intrapreneur sounds more attractive than being a 
manager, consider this: Managers are vital to supporting the in-
trapreneur’s efforts. Microsoft in-house researchers, for instance, 
have brought forth many truly cutting-edge ideas, often beating 
out Apple and Google. The problem, says one analysis, is that 
such intrapreneurs were “not getting the buy-in from manage-
ment to turn their discoveries into products,” a difficulty that its 
new CEO, Satya Nadella, has been urged to address.111
Backing In-House Risk Taking. Richard Branson, CEO of the 
Virgin Group, who says his 200 companies (including music and 
airline businesses) were built on the efforts of “a steady stream of 
intrapreneurs who looked for and developed opportunities,” un-
derstands the importance of management support. In his view, 
CEO should stand for “chief enabling officer,” to nurture in-house 
experimentation.112
Intel’s Dr. Bell. Intel Corporation, most famously known for its 
computer chips but now anxious to go in other directions, cer-
tainly appreciates the infusion of new ideas. Indeed, it has hired 
anthropologist Genevieve Bell as its “director of user experience 
research” at Intel Labs, where she heads some 100 social scien-
tists and designers who explore how people use technology in 
their homes and in public. “The team’s findings help inform the 
company’s product development process,” says one report, “and 
are also often shared with the laptop makers, automakers, and 
other companies that embed Intel processors in their goods.”113
For example, to find out how people shift back and forth 
between the built-in technologies in their cars and the personal 
mobile devices they carry, Bell and a fellow anthropologist 
have traveled around the world examining, photographing, and 
describing the contents of people’s cars. They learned that, de-
spite the fact that automakers have installed voice-command 
systems and other technology in their vehicles for the purpose 
of reducing distracted driving, drivers in traffic—especially 
when bored—often picked up their handheld personal de-
vices anyway. This has led Intel to join with Jaguar Land Rover 
to find ways for consumers to better synchronize their personal 
devices with their cars.
YOUR CALL
Do you think most companies truly support intrapreneurship? 
Why would they not?

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
31
Is this the kind of smart, innovative world you’d like to be a part of? Most people 
prefer the security of a job and a paycheck. Entrepreneurs do seem to have psycho-
logical characteristics that are different from managers, as follows:116
■ 
Characteristic of both—high need for achievement. Both entrepreneurs 
and managers have a high need for achievement. However, entrepreneurs cer-
tainly seem to be motivated to pursue moderately difficult goals through their 
own efforts in order to realize their ideas and, they hope, financial rewards. 
Managers, by contrast, are more motivated by promotions and organizational 
rewards of power and perks.
■ 
Also characteristic of both—belief in personal control of destiny. If you 
believe “I am the captain of my fate, the master of my soul,” you have what is 
known as internal locus of control, the belief that you control your own 
destiny, that external forces will have little influence. (External locus of con-
trol means the reverse—you believe you don’t control your destiny, that exter-
nal forces do.) Both entrepreneurs and managers like to think they have 
personal control over their lives.
■ 
Characteristic of both, but especially of entrepreneurs—high energy level 
and action orientation. Rising to the top in an organization probably requires 
that a manager put in long hours. For entrepreneurs, however, creating a new 
enterprise may require an extraordinary investment of time and energy. In ad-
dition, while some managers may feel a sense of urgency, entrepreneurs are 
especially apt to be impatient and to want to get things done as quickly as 
possible, making them particularly action oriented.
■ 
Characteristic of both, but especially of entrepreneurs—high tolerance 
for ambiguity. Every manager needs to be able to make decisions based on 
ambiguous—that is, unclear or incomplete—information. However, entrepre-
neurs must have more tolerance for ambiguity because they are trying to do 
things they haven’t done before.
■ 
More characteristic of entrepreneurs than managers—self-confidence 
and tolerance for risk. Managers must believe in themselves and be willing 
to make decisions; however, this statement applies even more to entrepre-
neurs. Precisely because they are willing to take risks in the pursuit of new 
opportunities—indeed, even risk personal financial failure—entrepreneurs 
need the confidence to act decisively.
IBM CEO Virginia “Ginni” 
Rometty. The Chicago-area 
native began her career during 
the early 1980s, when women 
began entering corporate 
America in droves. As the leader 
of “Big Blue,” as IBM is called, 
Rometty placed No. 1 on 
Fortune’s 2013 list of The 50 
Most Powerful Women in the 
United States. Currently she is 
pushing IBM resources into 
commercializing Watson, the 
supercomputer famed for 
winning on Jeopardy, whose 
ability to learn, Rometty 
believes, represents new sales 
opportunities. Are entrepreneurs 
and managers really two 
different breeds?

32 
PART 1 
Introduction
Of course, not all entrepreneurs have this kind of faith in themselves. So-called ne-
cessity entrepreneurs are people such as laid-off corporate workers, discharged mili-
tary people, immigrants, and divorced homemakers who suddenly must earn a living 
and are simply trying to replace lost income and are hoping a job comes along. In the 
United States, these make up about a quarter of entrepreneurs. However, three-quarters 
are so-called opportunity entrepreneurs—those who start their own business out of a 
burning desire rather than because they lost a job.117
So where do you stand? Do you think you would like to be an entrepreneur? The 
following self-assessment was created to provide you with feedback about your entre-
preneurial orientation. ●
To What Extent Do You Possess an 
Entrepreneurial Spirit?
How motivated are you to be an entrepreneur, to start your own 
company? Do you have the aptitudes and attitudes possessed 
by entrepreneurs? This self-assessment allows you to compare 
your motivations, aptitudes, and attitudes with those found in a 
sample of entrepreneurs from a variety of industries.118 Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take the self-assessment. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
To what extent are your motives, aptitudes, and attitudes 
similar to entrepreneurs? Explain.
2. 
Based on your results, where do you have the biggest 
gaps with entrepreneurs in terms of the individual 
motives, aptitudes, and attitudes?
3. 
What do these gaps suggest about your entrepreneurial 
spirit? Discuss.
4. 
Do these results encourage or discourage you from 
thinking about starting your own business? Explain.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 1.2
®
TAKING SOMETHING PRACTICAL AWAY 
Getting Control of Your Time: 
Dealing with the Information Deluge 
in College & in Your Career
Professionals and managers all have to deal with this central 
problem: how not to surrender their lives to their jobs. The 
place to start, however, is in college. If you can learn to manage 
time while you’re still a student, you’ll find it will pay off not 
only in higher grades and more free time but also in more effi-
cient information-handling skills that will serve you well as a 
manager later on.119
Using Your “Prime Study Time”
Each of us has a different energy cycle.120 The trick is to use it 
effectively. That way, your hours of best performance will coin-
cide with your heaviest academic demands. For example, if 
your energy level is high during the mornings, you should plan 
to do your studying then.
To capitalize on your prime study time, you take the follow-
ing steps: (1) Make a study schedule for the entire term, and 
indicate the times each day during which you plan to study. (2) 
Find some good places to study—places where you can avoid 
distractions. (3) Avoid time wasters, but give yourself frequent 
rewards for studying, such as a TV show, a favorite piece of 
music, or a conversation with a friend.
Improving Your Memory Ability
Memorizing is, of course, one of the principal requirements for 
succeeding in college. And it’s a great help for success in life 
afterward.
Here are some tips on learning to concentrate:121
Choose What to Focus On
“People don’t realize that attention is a finite resource, like 
money,” one expert says. “Do you want to invest your cognitive 
cash on endless Twittering or Net surfing or couch potatoing 
[watching TV]?” She adds, “Where did the idea come from that 
anyone who wants to contact you can do so at any time? You 
need to take charge of what you pay attention to instead of 
responding to the latest stimuli.”122 For example, to block out 
noise, you can wear earplugs while reading, to create your own 
“stimulus shelter.”

 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
33
Devote the First 1½ Hours of Your Day to Your Most 
Important Task
Studying a hard subject? Make it your first task of the day, and 
concentrate on it for 90 minutes. After that, your brain will 
probably need a rest, and you can answer text messages, 
e-mail, and so on. But until that first break, don’t do anything 
else, because it can take the brain 20 minutes to refocus.
Space Your Studying, Rather Than Cramming
Cramming—making a frantic, last-minute attempt to memo-
rize massive amounts of material—is probably the least effec-
tive means of absorbing information. Research shows that it’s 
best to space out your studying of a subject over successive 
days. A series of study sessions over several days is preferable 
to trying to do it all during the same number of hours on one 
day. It is repetition that helps move information into your long-
term memory bank.
Review Information Repeatedly—Even “Overlearn It”
By repeatedly reviewing information—what is known as 
“rehearsing”—you can improve both your retention and your 
understanding of it. Overlearning is continuing to review mate-
rial even after you appear to have absorbed it.
Use Memorizing Tricks
There are several ways to organize information so that you can 
retain it better. For example, you can make drawings or dia-
grams (as of the parts of a computer system). Some methods 
of establishing associations between items you want to 
 remember are given in the exhibit. (See Exhibit 1.1.)
How to Improve Your Reading Ability: 
The SQ3R Method
SQ3R stands for “survey, question, read, recite, and review.”123 
The strategy behind it is to break down a reading assignment 
into small segments and master each before moving on. The 
five steps of the SQ3R method are as follows:
 1. Survey the chapter before you read it: Get an over-
view of the chapter or other reading assignment be-
fore you begin reading it. If you have a sense of what 
the material is about before you begin reading it, you 
can predict where it is going. In this text, we offer on 
the first page of every chapter a list of the main 
heads and accompanying key questions. At the end 
of each chapter we offer a Key Points, which explains 
what the chapter’s terms and concepts mean and 
why they are important.
 2. Question the segment in the chapter before you read it: 
This step is easy to do, and the point, again, is to get 
you involved in the material. After surveying the entire 
chapter, go to the first segment—section, subsection, 
or even paragraph, depending on the level of difficulty 
and density of information. Look at the topic heading of 
that segment. In your mind, restate that heading as a 
question. In this book, we have done this by following 
each main section head with a Major Question. As an 
example, for the first section of this chapter (Manage-
ment: What It Is, What Its Benefits Are), our restatement 
question is, “What are the rewards of being an excep-
tional manager?” 
 
   After you have formulated the question, go to 
steps 3 and 4 (read and recite). Then proceed to the 
next segment and again restate the heading there as 
a question.
 3. Read the segment about which you asked the question: 
Now read the segment you asked the question about. 
Read with purpose, to answer the question you formu-
lated. Underline or color-mark sentences that you think 
are important, if they help you answer the question. 
EXHIBIT 1.1 
Some Memorizing Tricks
• Mental and physical imagery: Use your visual and 
other senses to construct a personal image of what 
you want to remember. Indeed, it helps to make the 
image humorous, action-filled, sexual, bizarre, or out-
rageous in order to establish a personal connection. 
Example: To remember the name of the 21st president 
of the United States, Chester Arthur, you might visual-
ize an author writing the number “21” on a wooden 
chest. This mental image helps you associate chest 
(Chester), author (Arthur), and 21 (21st president).
• Acronyms and acrostics: An acronym is a word 
created from the first letters of items in a list. For 
instance, Roy G. Biv helps you remember the colors of 
the rainbow in order: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, 
indigo, violet. An acrostic is a phrase or sentence cre-
ated from the first letters of items in a list. For exam-
ple, Every Good Boy Does Fine helps you remember 
that the order of musical notes on the staff is 
E-G-B-D-F.
• Location: Location memory occurs when you associ-
ate a concept with a place or imaginary place. For ex-
ample, you could learn the parts of a computer system 
by imagining a walk across campus. Each building you 
pass could be associated with a part of the computer 
system.
• Word games: Jingles and rhymes are devices fre-
quently used by advertisers to get people to remember 
their products. You may recall the spelling rule “I be-
fore E except after C or when sounded like A as in 
neighbor or weigh.” You can also use narrative meth-
ods, such as making up a story.

34 
PART 1 
Introduction
Read this portion of the text more than once, if neces-
sary, until you can answer the question. In addition, 
determine whether the segment covers any other sig-
nificant questions, and formulate answers to these, too. 
After you have read the segment, proceed to step 4. 
(Perhaps you can see where this is all leading. If you 
read in terms of questions and answers, you will be 
better prepared when you see exam questions about 
the material later.)
 4. Recite the main points of the segment: Recite means 
“say aloud.” Thus, you should speak out loud (or softly) 
the answer to the principal question or questions about 
the segment and any other main points.
 5. Review the entire chapter by repeating questions: After 
you have read the chapter, go back through it and review 
the main points. Then, without looking at the book, test 
your memory by repeating the questions.
Clearly the SQ3R method takes longer than simply reading 
with a rapidly moving color marker or underlining pencil. How-
ever, the technique is far more effective because it requires 
your involvement and understanding. This is the key to all ef-
fective learning.
Learning from Lectures 
Does attending lectures really make a difference? Research 
shows that students with grades of B or above were more apt 
to have better class attendance than students with grades of C 
or below.124 Some tips for getting the most out of lectures are 
the following.
Take Effective Notes by Listening Actively
Research shows that good test performance is related to good 
note taking.125 And good note taking requires that you listen 
actively—that is, participate in the lecture process. Here are 
some ways to take good lecture notes:
• Read ahead and anticipate the lecturer: Try to anticipate 
what the instructor is going to say, based on your previous 
reading. Having background knowledge makes learning 
more efficient.
• Listen for signal words: Instructors use key phrases such 
as “The most important point is . . . ,” “There are four rea-
sons for . . . ,” “The chief reason . . . ,” “Of special impor-
tance . . . ,” “Consequently . . .” When you hear such signal 
phrases, mark your notes with a ! or *.
• Take notes in your own words: Instead of just being a ste-
nographer, try to restate the lecturer’s thoughts in your 
own words, which will make you pay attention more.
• Ask questions: By asking questions during the lecture, 
you necessarily participate in it and increase your 
understanding.
Review Your Notes Regularly
Make it a point to review your notes regularly—perhaps on the 
afternoon after the lecture, or once or twice a week. We cannot 
emphasize enough the importance of this kind of reviewing.

Key Terms Used In This Chapter
artificial intelligence (AI) 15
Big Data 14
cloud computing 14
collaborative computing 15
competitive advantage 11
conceptual skills 23
controlling 10
databases 14
decisional roles 26
e-business 14
e-commerce 14
e-mail 14
effective 5
efficient 5
entrepreneur 29
entrepreneurship 29
first-line managers 19
four management functions 9
functional managers 20
general managers 20
“high-touch” jobs 19
human skills 23
informational roles 26
innovation 12
internal locus of control 31
Internet 14
interpersonal roles 26
intrapreneur 29
knowledge management 15
leading 10
management 5
management process 9
mentor 8
middle managers 19
organization 5
organizing 10
planning 9
project management software 15
social media 14
soft skills 23
start-up 28
sustainability 16
team leaders 20
technical skills 22
telecommute 15
texting 14
top managers 19
videoconferencing 15
Key Terms Used In This Chapter
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
Key Points
1.1 Management: What It Is, What Its 
Benefits Are
• Management is defined as the pursuit of 
organizational goals efficiently, meaning to 
use resources wisely and cost-effectively, and 
effectively by integrating the work of people 
through planning, organizing, leading, and 
controlling the organization’s resources.
1.2 What Managers Do: The Four 
Principal Functions
• The management process, or four 
management functions, are represented by 
the abbreviation POLC.
• Planning is setting goals and deciding how to 
achieve them.
• Organizing is arranging tasks, people, and 
other resources to accomplish the work.
• Leading is motivating, directing, and 
otherwise influencing people to work hard to 
achieve the organization’s goals.
• Controlling is monitoring performance, 
comparing it with goals, and taking corrective 
action as needed.
1.3 Seven Challenges to Being an 
Exceptional Manager
• Managing for competitive advantage, which 
means an organization must stay ahead in 
four areas—being responsive to customers, 
innovating new products or services offering 
better quality, being more efficient.
• Managing for diversity among different 
genders, ages, races, and ethnicities.
• Managing for globalization, the expanding 
universe.
• Managing for computers and 
telecommunications—information technology.
• Managing for right and wrong, or ethical 
standards.
• Managing for sustainability.
• Managing for your own happiness and 
meaningful life goals.
1.4 Pyramid Power: Levels & Areas of 
Management
• Within an organization, there are managers at 
four levels.
• Top managers make long-term decisions 
about the overall direction of the organization 
and establish the objectives, policies, and 
strategies for it.
• Middle managers implement the policies and 
plans of their superiors and supervise and 
coordinate the activities of the managers 
below them.
• First-line managers make short-term 
operating decisions, directing the daily tasks 
of nonmanagerial personnel.
 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
35

• Team leaders are managers who are 
responsible for facilitating team activities 
toward achieving key results.
• There are three types of organizations—
for-profit, nonprofit, and mutual benefit.
• For-profit organizations are formed to make 
money by offering products or services.
• Nonprofit organizations offer services to 
some, but not to make a profit.
• Mutual-benefit organizations are voluntary 
collections of members created to advance 
members’ interests.
1.5 The Skills Exceptional 
Managers Need
• The three skills that exceptional managers 
cultivate are technical, conceptual, and human.
• Technical skills consist of job-specific 
knowledge needed to perform well in a 
specialized field.
• Conceptual skills consist of the ability to think 
analytically, to visualize an organization as a 
whole, and to understand how the parts work 
together.
• Human skills consist of the ability to work well 
in cooperation with other people in order to 
get things done.
1.6 Roles Managers Must Play 
Successfully
• The Mintzberg study shows that, first, a 
manager relies more on verbal than on written 
communication; second, managers 
work long hours at an intense pace; and, 
third, a manager’s work is characterized 
by fragmentation, brevity, and variety.
• Mintzberg concluded that managers 
play three broad roles: (1) interpersonal—
figurehead, leader, and liaison; (2) 
informational—monitor, disseminator, 
and spokesperson; and (3) decisional—
entrepreneur, disturbance handler, resource 
allocator, and negotiator.
1.7 The Link between Entrepreneurship 
& Management 
• Entrepreneurship, a necessary attribute of 
business, is the process of taking risks to 
create a new enterprise.
• Two types are the entrepreneur and the 
intrapreneur.
• The entrepreneur sees a new opportunity for 
a product or service and launches a business 
to realize it.
• The intrapreneur works inside an existing 
organization and sees an opportunity 
for a product or service and mobilizes 
the organization’s resources to realize it.
• Entrepreneurs start businesses; managers 
grow or maintain them. Both (but especially 
entrepreneurs) have a high need for 
achievement, high energy level and action 
orientation, and tolerance for ambiguity. 
Entrepreneurs are more self-confident and 
have higher tolerance for risk.
36 
PART 1 
Introduction
 1. What is the difference between being efficient and 
being effective?
 2. What is the formal, three-part definition of 
management?
 3. How would I define the four functions of management?
 4. What are the seven challenges of being a manager, 
and which is the one I will probably most have to 
worry about during my lifetime?
 5. What are the differences among the four levels of 
managers in the organizational pyramid?
 6. How would I distinguish among the three types of 
organizations?
 7. What are the three skills that exceptional managers 
need to cultivate, and which one do I probably have 
to work on most?
 8. Mintzberg’s study in the 1960s came up with three 
important findings about a manager’s routine. What 
are they, and are they probably still the same today?
 9. Mintzberg also found that managers play three 
important roles. What are they, and what examples 
can I think of them?
 10. Which would I rather be—a manager or an 
entrepreneur/intrapreneur, and why?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?

Target CEO Works to Regain Consumer Trust 
after the Company Was Hacked
Minneapolis—Executives settled around a square 
table inside a Target Corp. conference room here 
earlier this month and munched on store-brand snacks 
as they chewed over something far less appetizing.
Opinion surveys commissioned by the company 
found that the massive cybertheft that waylaid Target 
late [in 2013] had knocked confidence and trust in the 
51-year-old retailer to an all-time low. . . .
Target was having trouble shaking the fallout from a 
key decision by Chief Executive Gregg Steinhafel that 
made the crisis appear even worse than it already was.
The initial evidence had indicated that credit and 
debit card numbers of about 40 million Target custom-
ers had been stolen. But the retailer had learned later 
that the hackers gained access to partial names and 
physical or e-mail addresses for as many as 70 million 
people—a breach that some top executives counseled 
against disclosing because it was unclear what kind of 
fraud danger it posed.
Nevertheless, Mr. Steinhafel insisted on making the 
bigger number public, sparking news reports that as 
many as 110 million Target customers had been affected.
At the meeting, Chief Marketing Officer Jeffrey 
Jones groused about the huge number. The public 
“keeps hearing that equals one-third of all Americans,” 
he said. “That’s hammering us.”
Mr. Steinhafel says he has no regrets about the ag-
gressive disclosure and other costly decisions in the 
wake of the crisis. “Target won’t be defined by the 
breach, but how we handle the breach,” he says. . . .
The executives acknowledge the crisis has damaged 
the retailer’s bull’s-eye brand, while analysts estimate 
it may cost Target billions of dollars. During the holi-
day-shopping season, Target’s sales and store traffic 
plummeted. Call-center volume overwhelmed employ-
ees. Executives testified before congressional panels, 
and the company is facing federal and state investiga-
tions into how the cybercrime occurred from its store 
registers and computer network. . . .
Over the two months since the crisis erupted, Mr. 
Steinhafel, 59 years old, has lurched from one difficult 
decision to another.
At one point, he proposed in a meeting that Target 
would provide free credit monitoring and identity-theft 
insurance for one year to all its customers. Scott 
Kennedy, a senior executive, asked: “You’re saying we 
will give this to any customer who’s ever been in a 
store, but we aren’t checking?”
Mr. Steinhafel nodded.
“Then we’re offering this to all Americans,” Mr. 
Kennedy replied.
Target went ahead with that plan.
The breach could wind up costing Target, which 
notched $73 billion in sales in 2012, a few billion dol-
lars, people familiar with the matter say. . . .
New chip technology to replace magnetic strips 
on credit cards could cost about $100 million, one 
executive told Congress. Card-monitoring services 
for customers could cost tens of millions, according 
to one executive. Hundreds of millions of market-
ing dollars could be diverted to repairing the brand.
In addition, costs are mounting for reissuing cards, 
staffing call centers, forensic and data-security 
units, and lawyers for public inquiries and private 
lawsuits. . . .
The CEO, who likes to say “retail is detail,” is 
known internally for paying surprise visits to Target 
stores—there are about 1,800 in the U.S. that drew 
about 32 million customers a week before the crisis.
Store managers say they warn each other to be alert for 
a man snooping around the aisles, frequently snacking 
from a box of animal crackers. . . .
Recently, Mr. Steinhafel says, he stopped a manager 
who was reading e-mail on her cellphone as she passed 
through Target’s downtown Minneapolis headquarters.
“Please be in the present,” he recalls telling her. . . .
From November 27, the day before Thanksgiv-
ing, through December 18, Target executives say, 
shoppers’ payment-card data was captured through 
“malware” installed in Target’s computer network.
The hackers had entered the network through a 
vendor. . . .
The breach got wide publicity. Shoppers clogged 
Target phone lines and stores. Some sent tweets and 
e-mails that they would never again shop at Target. On 
the last weekend before Christmas, the big crowds at 
Target stores had dwindled.
On December 20, Mr. Jones, the chief marketing 
officer, urged Mr. Steinhafel to appear in a video on 
Target’s website. The CEO was reluctant. He didn’t 
have a script and was exhausted.
With a camera rolling, Target’s public-relations 
chief, Dustee Jenkins, asked him questions. Mr. 
Steinhafel, clad in Target’s trademark red shirt and 
khakis store attire, thanked customers for their trust, 
provided tips to monitor their accounts, and prom-
ised zero liability to shoppers for any fraudulent 
charges.
Mr. Steinhafel began holding twice-daily “status 
meetings” in a 32nd floor conference room. . . .
Early this month, prompted by the Target data 
breach, Congress held hearings on cyberattacks. As 
Mr. Mulligan, the CFO, made his appearances, Mr. 
Steinhafel and his executive team watched from the 
company’s “situation room.”
Management in Action
 
The Exceptional Manager 
CHAPTER 1 
37

38 
PART 1 
Introduction
A Secret Service official testified that the data breach 
was “highly technical and sophisticated,” prompting Mr. 
Steinhafel to remark: “That shows it’s not just our opera-
tion. It would be hard for any retailer to withstand this.”
At a daily status meeting early this month, Mr. 
Steinhafel pushed to accelerate to early next year 
the timeline for Target to replace magnetic strips on 
its payment cards with a new chip technology 
widely used in Europe and Canada that is less 
vulnerable to fraud.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. From a management perspective, do you think Target 
made any major mistakes? Explain.
 2. Which of the four principal managerial functions 
were exhibited by CEO Greg Steinhafel?
 3. Which of the seven managerial challenges discussed 
in this chapter is Target facing? How are they han-
dling these challenges?
 4. What is your evaluation of Steinhafel’s ability to ef-
fectively execute the three key managerial roles—
interpersonal, informational, and decisional? Explain.
 5. If you were a consultant to Target, what advice 
would you give to senior management about han-
dling a crisis like this? Discuss.
Source: Excerpted from Monica Langley, “Inside Target, CEO 
Struggles to Regain Shoppers’ Trust,” The Wall Street Journal, 
February 19, 2014, pp A1, A10. 
To Delay or Not to Delay?
You have been hired by a vice president of a national 
company to create an employee attitude survey, to 
administer it to all employees, and to interpret the 
results. You have known this vice president for more 
than 10 years and have worked for her on several oc-
casions. She trusts and likes you, and you trust and 
like her. You have completed your work and now are 
ready to present the findings and your interpretations 
to the vice president’s management team. The vice 
president has told you that she wants your honest in-
terpretation of the results, because she is planning to 
make changes based on the results. Based on this dis-
cussion, your report clearly identifies several strengths 
and weaknesses that need to be addressed. For exam-
ple, employees feel that they are working too hard and 
that management does not care about providing good 
customer service. At the meeting you will be present-
ing the results and your interpretations to a group of 
15 managers. You also have known most of these 
managers for at least 5 years.
You arrive for the presentation armed with slides, 
handouts, and specific recommendations. Your slides 
are loaded on the computer, and most of the partici-
pants have arrived. They are drinking coffee and tell-
ing you how enthused they are about hearing your 
presentation. You also are excited to share your 
insights. Ten minutes before the presentation is set to 
begin, however, the vice president takes you out of the 
meeting room and says she wants to talk with you 
about your presentation. The two of you go to another 
office, and she closes the door. She then tells you that 
her boss’s boss decided to come to the presentation un-
announced. She thinks that he is coming to the presen-
tation to look solely for negative information in your 
report. He does not like the vice president and wants to 
replace her with one of his friends. If you present your 
results as planned, it will provide this individual with 
the information he needs to create serious problems 
for the vice president. Knowing this, the vice president 
asks you to find some way to postpone your presenta-
tion. You have 10 minutes to decide what to do.
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
What would you do?
 1. Deliver the presentation as planned.
 2. Give the presentation but skip over the negative results.
 3. Go back to the meeting room and announce that your 
spouse has had an accident at home and you must 
leave immediately. You tell the group that you just 
received this message and that you will contact the 
vice president to schedule a new meeting.
 4. Invent other options. Discuss.
Legal/Ethical Challenge


2
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
2.1 Evolving Viewpoints: How We Got to Today’s 
Management Outlook
Major Question: What’s the payoff in studying different 
management perspectives, both yesterday’s and today’s?
2.2 Classical Viewpoint: Scientific & Administrative 
Management
Major Question: If the name of the game is to manage work 
more efficiently, what can the classical viewpoint teach me?
2.3 Behavioral Viewpoint: Behaviorism, Human Relations, & 
Behavioral Science
Major Question: To understand how people are motivated to 
achieve, what can I learn from the behavioral viewpoint?
2.4 Quantitative Viewpoints: Management Science & 
Operations Management
Major Question: If the manager’s job is to solve problems, how 
might the two quantitative approaches help?
2.5 Systems Viewpoint
Major Question: How can the exceptional manager be helped by 
the systems viewpoint?
2.6 Contingency Viewpoint
Major Question: In the end, is there one best way to manage in 
all situations?
2.7 Quality-Management Viewpoint
Major Question: Can the quality-management viewpoint offer 
guidelines for true managerial success?
2.8 The Learning Organization in an Era of Accelerated 
Change
Major Question: Organizations must learn or perish. How do I 
build a learning organization?
Management Theory
Essential Background for the Successful 
Manager

the manager’s toolbox
Mind-sets: How Do You Go about Learning?
Learn or die. Isn’t that the challenge to us as individu-
als? Throughout your career, your success will de-
pend on your constantly being a learner, making 
choices about how to solve various problems—which 
tools to apply, including the theories we will describe 
in this chapter. However, one barrier to learning that 
all of us need to be aware of is our mind-set.
The Enemy of Learning
By the time we are grown, the minds of many of us 
have become set in patterns of thinking, the result of 
our personal experiences and various environments, 
that affect how we respond to new ideas. These 
mind-sets determine what ideas we think are impor-
tant and what ideas we ignore.
Because we can’t pay attention to all the events 
that occur around us, say the authors of a book on 
critical analysis, “our minds filter out some observa-
tions and facts and let others through to our con-
scious awareness.”1 Herein lies the danger: “As a 
result, we see and hear what we subconsciously want 
to and pay little attention to facts or observations that 
have already been rejected as unimportant.”
Having mind-sets makes life comfortable. However, 
as the foregoing writers point out, “Familiar relation-
ships and events become so commonplace that we 
expect them to continue forever. Then we find our-
selves completely unprepared to accept changes that 
are necessary even when they stare us in the face.”2
What’s Your Mind-set? Two Views
What will be your approach to studying management 
theory (or anything else in this book)? If you can’t “get 
it” right away, will you take that as a reflection on your 
basic intelligence—that you’re somehow deficient, that 
people will think you’re dumb and you’ll feel like a loser? 
Based on 20 years of research, Stanford psychol-
ogy professor Carol Dweck suggests that the view 
you adopt about yourself profoundly affects the way 
you lead your life—including how you learn. In our 
views of ourselves, she says, most of us have either a 
fixed mind-set or a growth mind-set.3
• 
The fixed mind-set—believing your basic 
qualities are carved in stone. People with a fixed 
mind-set are concerned about how they will be 
judged, as on intelligence or personal qualities. 
They believe “My intelligence is something very 
basic that can’t be changed very much.” Or, “I’m a 
certain kind of person, and there’s not much that 
can be done to change that.” They care less about 
learning than looking bad when failure occurs.
• 
The growth mind-set—believing your basic 
qualities can be changed through your effort. 
People with a growth mind-set are concerned 
with improving. They think, “You can always 
change your intelligence quite a bit.” Or, “You can 
always change basic things about the kind of 
person you are.” Failure for these kinds of people 
may well feel bad, but instead of hiding their 
deficiencies from others they try to overcome 
them. Fortunately, by applying themselves, people 
of a fixed mind-set can develop a growth mind-set. 
For Discussion Your approach to learning won’t 
stop once you leave school. As we discuss at the end 
of this chapter, most organizations now are “learning 
organizations,” in which employees are continually 
required to expand their ability to achieve results by 
obtaining the right knowledge and changing their be-
havior. Thus, your mind-set matters. Which type are 
you? What can a person begin to do to move from a 
fixed mind-set to a growth mind-set?
This chapter gives you a short overview of the three principal historical perspectives 
or viewpoints on management—classical, behavioral, and quantitative. It then 
describes the three principal contemporary viewpoints—systems, contingency, and 
quality-management. Finally, we consider the concept of learning organizations.
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
forecast

True learner. In his 70-year career, Peter 
Drucker published over 35 books and 
numerous other publications, received 
the Presidential Medal of Freedom, and 
achieved near rock-star status for his 
management ideas, which influenced 
organizations from General Electric to 
the Girl Scouts. A true learner who 
constantly expanded his knowledge, he 
understood that new experiences are key 
to nurturing new ideas and new ventures. 
Do you have this kind of curiosity?
42 
PART 1 
Introduction
2.1 
Evolving Viewpoints: How We Got to Today’s 
Management Outlook
What’s the payoff in studying different management perspectives, both yesterday’s 
and today’s?
THE BIG PICTURE
After studying theory, managers may learn the value of bringing rationality to the decision-making process. 
This chapter describes two principal theoretical perspectives—the historical and the contemporary. 
Studying management theory provides understanding of the present, a guide to action, a source of new 
ideas, clues to the meaning of your managers’ decisions, and clues to the meaning of outside events.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
“The best way to predict the future is to create it,” Peter Drucker said.
The purpose of this book is, to the extent possible, to give you the tools to create 
your own future in your career and as a manager.
Creating Modern Management: The Handbook 
of Peter Drucker
Who is Peter Drucker? “He was the creator and inventor of modern management,” 
says management guru Tom Peters (author of In Search of Excellence). “In the early 
1950s, nobody had a tool kit to manage these incredibly complex organizations that had 
gone out of control. Drucker was the first person to give us a handbook for that.”4
An Austrian trained in economics and international law, Drucker came to the United 
States in 1937, where he worked as a correspondent for British newspapers and later 
became a college professor. In 1954, he published his famous text The Practice of Man-
agement, in which he proposed that management was one of the major social innovations 
of the 20th century and that it should be treated as a profession, like medicine or law. In 
this and other books, he introduced several ideas that now underlie the organization and 
practice of management—that workers should be treated as assets, that the corporation 
could be considered a human community, that there is “no business without a customer,” 
that institutionalized management practices were preferable to charismatic cult leaders.
Many ideas that you will encounter in this book—decentralization, management by 
objectives, knowledge workers—are directly traceable to Drucker’s pen. “Without his 
analysis,” says one writer, “it’s almost impossible to imagine the rise of dispersed, 
globe-spanning corporations.”5 In our time, Drucker’s rational approach has culmi-
nated in evidence-based management, as we describe in Section 2.6 in this chapter.

 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
43
Six Practical Reasons for Studying This Chapter
“Theory,” say business professors Clayton Christensen and Michael Raynor, “often 
gets a bum rap among managers because it’s associated with the word ‘theoretical,’ 
which connotes ‘impractical.’ But it shouldn’t.”6 After all, what could be more practi-
cal than studying different approaches to see which work best?
Indeed, there are six good reasons for studying theoretical perspectives:
 1. Understanding of the present. “Sound theories help us interpret the present, 
to understand what is happening and why,” say Christensen and Raynor.7 Un-
derstanding history will help you understand why some practices are still fa-
vored, whether for right or wrong reasons.
 2. Guide to action. Good theories help us make predictions and enable you to 
develop a set of principles that will guide your actions.
 3. Source of new ideas. It can also provide new ideas that may be useful to you 
when you come up against new situations.
 4. Clues to meaning of your managers’ decisions. It can help you understand 
your firm’s focus, where the top managers are “coming from.”
 5. Clues to meaning of outside events. It may allow you to understand events 
outside the organization that could affect it or you.
 6. Producing positive results. It can help you understand why certain manage-
ment practices—such as setting goals that stretch you to the limit (stretch 
goals), basing compensation and promotion on performance, and monitoring 
results—have been so successful for many firms.8
Pages from a Game Company’s Employee Guide 
In Flatness Lies Greatness: 
If Management 1.0 is what we’re used to now, with its tradi-
tional pyramid hierarchy, what would Management 2.0 look 
like? What if, as management thinker Gary Hamel suggests, 
Management 2.0 looked a lot like Web 2.0 as represented in 
Wikipedia, YouTube, and other online communities?9 Could the 
traditional hierarchy of boxes with lines actually become a cor-
porate straitjacket?
Is Hierarchy Overrated? Bellevue, Washington–based Valve 
Corp. is an online entertainment and technology company that 
has created several award-winning games (Half Life, Portal) as 
well as Steam, an online gaming platform. Its staff consists of (1) 
all the employees and (2) a founder/president—who is not a 
manager. In fact, “we don’t have any management,” says Valve’s 
employee handbook, “and nobody ‘reports to’ anybody else.”10
In other words, Valve is a flat organization, defined as one 
with few or no levels of management (as we discuss further in 
Chapter 8). Indeed, Valve is the flattest of flat organizations be-
cause for an employee, says the handbook, it “removes every 
organizational barrier between your work and the customer 
enjoying that work.”
Desks with Wheels. Not only do Valve employees have no 
managers, but they get to select which projects they want to 
work on, have the power to green-light (approve) new projects, 
and even ship finished products. Every employee’s desk has 
wheels, serving two purposes. “The first is a symbolic reminder 
that one should always consider where they could move to be 
more valuable,” says one account. “The other is literal—team 
members often move their desks close together when working 
on a project.”11 Instead of managers, Valve relies on rotating 
team leaders (called “group contributors”), who change accord-
ing to each project.
YOUR CALL
The basic reason Valve has no formal managers is that it 
wants to attract the best talent and produce outstanding 
products year after year. Clearly, the flat structure works very 
well for Valve—as it does for other organizations, profit and 
not-for-profit alike, that operate in a rapidly changing envi-
ronment, depend on innovation to stay on top, and have a 
shared purpose.12 Flattened hierarchies even work for some 
large organizations, such as W.L. Gore, maker of Gore-Tex 
fabric, which employs 10,000 people. Why do you think, then, 
that many organizations resist using flat structures? Do you 
think studying management theory could help you answer 
this question?
EXAMPLE

44 
PART 1 
Introduction
The Systems Viewpoint
Regards the organization as
systems of interrelated parts
that operate together to 
achieve a common purpose
The Quality-Management
Viewpoint
Three approaches 
The Contingency Viewpoint
Emphasizes that a manager’s
approach should vary accord-
ing to—i.e., be contingent
on—the individual and environ-
mental situation
Classical Viewpoint
1911–1947
Emphasis on ways to
manage work more
efﬁciently
The Historical Perspective (1911–1950s)
The Contemporary Perspective (1960s–Present)
e Historical Perspective (1911 1950s)
he
ontemporary Perspective (1960s–Pres
on
Behavioral Viewpoint
1913–1950s
Emphasis on importance of
understanding human behavior
and motivating and encouraging
employees toward achievement
sent)
sen
Quantitative Viewpoint
1940s–1950s
Applies quantitative techniques
to management
FIGURE 2.1 
The Two Overarching Perspectives—Historical and Contemporary
Theory underlies all the 
achievements of business. 
Some of the greatest companies 
in the world are headquartered 
in these New York City 
skyscrapers: American Express, 
Colgate-Palmolive, J.P. Morgan 
Chase, JetBlue Airways, Macy’s, 
NBC Universal, Ralph Lauren, 
and Time Warner. A number 
of start-ups are also based in 
New York: Etsy, Fab, Foursquare, 
Gilt, Meetup, Shutterstock, and 
Tumblr. The launch, growth, 
and profitability of businesses 
all depend on execution of solid 
management theory.
Two Overarching Perspectives about Management: 
Historical & Contemporary
In this chapter, we describe two overarching perspectives about management. (See 
Figure 2.1.) They are:
■ 
The historical perspective (1911–1950s) includes three viewpoints—classical, 
behavioral, and quantitative.
■ 
The contemporary perspective (1960s–present) also includes three 
viewpoints—systems, contingency, and quality-management. ●

2.2 
Classical Viewpoint: Scientific & Administrative 
Management
If the name of the game is to manage work more efficiently, what can the classical 
viewpoint teach me?
THE BIG PICTURE
The three historical management viewpoints we will describe include (1) the classical, described in this 
section; (2) the behavioral; and (3) the quantitative. The classical viewpoint, which emphasized ways to 
manage work more efficiently, had two approaches: (a) scientific management and (b) administrative manage-
ment. Scientific management, pioneered by Frederick W. Taylor and Frank and Lillian Gilbreth, emphasized 
the scientific study of work methods to improve the productivity of individual workers. Administrative man-
agement, pioneered by Henri Fayol and Max Weber, was concerned with managing the total organization.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
45
Bet you’ve never heard of a “therblig,” although it may describe some physical mo-
tions you perform from time to time—as when you have to wash dishes, say. A made-
up word you won’t find in most dictionaries, therblig was coined by Frank Gilbreth 
and is, in fact, “Gilbreth” spelled backward, with the “t” and the “h” reversed. It refers 
to 1 of 17 basic motions. By identifying the therbligs in a job, as in the tasks of a brick-
layer (which he had once been), Frank and his wife, Lillian, were able to eliminate 
motions while simultaneously reducing fatigue.
The Gilbreths were a husband-and-wife team of industrial engineers who were pio-
neers in one of the classical approaches to management, part of the historical perspec-
tive (1911–1950s). As we mentioned, there are three historical management viewpoints 
or approaches.13 (See Figure 2.2, next page.) They are
■ 
Classical viewpoint—1911–1947
■ 
Behavioral viewpoint—1913–1950s
■ 
Quantitative viewpoint—1940s–1950s
In this section, we describe the classical perspective of management, which 
 originated during the early 1900s. The classical viewpoint, which emphasized 
finding ways to manage work more efficiently, had two branches—scientific and
administrative—each of which is identified with particular pioneering theorists. In 
general, classical management assumes that people are rational. Let’s compare the 
two approaches.
Scientific Management: Pioneered 
by Taylor & the Gilbreths
The problem for which scientific management emerged as a solution was this: In the 
expansive days of the early 20th century, labor was in such short supply that managers 
were hard-pressed to raise the productivity of workers. Scientific management em-
phasized the scientific study of work methods to improve the productivity of individual 
workers. Two of its chief proponents were Frederick W. Taylor and the team of Frank 
and Lillian Gilbreth.
Frederick Taylor & the Four Principles of Scientific Management 
No 
doubt there are some days when you haven’t studied, or worked, as efficiently as 
you could. This could be called “underachieving,” or “loafing,” or what Taylor 
called it—soldiering, deliberately working at less than full capacity. Known as “the 
father of scientific management,” Taylor was an American engineer from Philadelphia 

46 
PART 1 
Introduction
Frederick W. Taylor. Called the 
father of scientific management, 
Taylor published The Principles of 
Scientific Management in 1911.
who believed that managers could eliminate soldiering by applying four principles 
of science:
 1. Evaluate a task by scientifically studying each part of the task (not use old 
rule-of-thumb methods).
 2. Carefully select workers with the right abilities for the task.
 3. Give workers the training and incentives to do the task with the proper work 
methods.
 4. Use scientific principles to plan the work methods and ease the way for work-
ers to do their jobs.
Taylor based his system on motion studies, in which he broke down each worker’s 
job—moving pig iron at a steel company, say—into basic physical motions and then 
trained workers to use the methods of their best-performing coworkers. In addition, he 
suggested employers institute a differential rate system, in which more efficient work-
ers earned higher wages.
Why Taylor Is Important: Although “Taylorism” met considerable resistance from 
employees fearing that working harder would lead to lost jobs except for the highly 
productive few, Taylor believed that by raising production both labor and manage-
ment could increase profits to the point where they no longer would have to quarrel 
Classical Viewpoint
1911–1947
Emphasis on ways to
manage work more
efﬁciently
Proponents:
Henri Fayol
Max Weber
Administrative management
Concerned with managing the
total organization
Scientific management
Emphasized scientiﬁc study of
work methods to improve pro-
ductivity of individual workers
Proponents:
Frederick W. Taylor
Frank and Lillian Gilbreth
Behavioral science approach
Relies on scientiﬁc research for
developing theory to provide
practical management tools
Behavioral Viewpoint
1913–1950s
Emphasis on importance of
understanding human behavior
and motivating and encouraging
employees toward achievement
Early behaviorists
Proponents:
Hugo Munsterberg
Mary Parker Follett
Elton Mayo
Human relations movement
Proposed better human
relations could increase worker
productivity
Proponents:
Abraham Maslow
Douglas McGregor
Management science
Focuses on using mathematics
to aid in problem solving and
decision making
Operations management
Focuses on managing the
production and delivery of an
organization’s products or
services more effectively
Quantitative Viewpoint
1940s–1950s
Applies quantitative techniques
to management
The Historical Perspective (1911–1950s)
FIGURE 2.2 
The Historical Perspective: Three Viewpoints—Classical, Behavioral, and Quantitative

 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
47
Lillian and Frank Gilbreth with 
11 of their dozen children. As 
industrial engineers, the Gilbreths 
pioneered time and motion 
studies. If you’re an athlete, you 
can appreciate how small 
changes can make you more 
efficient.
over them. If used correctly, the principles of scientific management can enhance 
productivity, and such innovations as motion studies and differential pay are still 
used today.
Frank & Lillian Gilbreth & Industrial Engineering 
As mentioned, Frank and 
Lillian Gilbreth were a husband-and-wife team of industrial engineers who lectured at 
Purdue University in the early 1900s. Their experiences in raising 12 children—to 
whom they applied some of their ideas about improving efficiency (such as printing 
the Morse Code on the back of the bathroom door so that family members could learn 
it while doing other things)—later were popularized in a book, two movies, and a 
TV sitcom, Cheaper by the Dozen. The Gilbreths expanded on Taylor’s motion 
studies—for instance, by using movie cameras to film workers at work in order to 
isolate the parts of a job.
Lillian Gilbreth, who received a PhD in psychology, was the first woman to be a 
major contributor to management science.
Administrative Management: Pioneered 
by Fayol & Weber
Scientific management is concerned with the jobs of individuals. Administrative 
management is concerned with managing the total organization. Among the pioneer-
ing theorists were Henri Fayol and Max Weber.
Henri Fayol & the Functions of Management 
Fayol was not the first to inves-
tigate management behavior, but he was the first to systematize it. A French engineer 
and industrialist, he became known to American business when his most important 
work, General and Industrial Management, was translated into English in 1930.
Why Fayol Is Important: Fayol was the first to identify the major functions of man-
agement (see page 9)—planning, organizing, leading, and controlling, as well as 
coordinating—the first four of which you’ll recognize as the functions providing the 
framework for this and most other management books.14
Max Weber & the Rationality of Bureaucracy 
In our time, the word bu-
reaucracy has come to have negative associations: impersonality, inflexibility, red 
tape, a molasseslike response to problems. But to German sociologist Max Weber, 
a bureaucracy was a rational, efficient, ideal organization based on principles of 
logic. After all, in Weber’s Germany in the late 19th century, many people were in 

48 
PART 1 
Introduction
Scientific management. 
Carmakers have broken down 
automobile manufacturing into 
its constituent tasks, as shown 
here for an assembly plant. This 
reflects the contributions of the 
school of scientific management. 
Is there anything wrong with this 
approach? How could it be 
improved?
positions of authority (particularly in the government) not because of their abilities 
but because of their social status. The result, Weber wrote, was that they didn’t per-
form effectively.
A better-performing organization, he felt, should have five positive bureaucratic 
features:
 1. A well-defined hierarchy of authority.
 2. Formal rules and procedures.
 3. A clear division of labor, with parts of a complex job being handled by spe-
cialists.
 4. Impersonality, without reference or connection to a particular person.
 5. Careers based on merit.
Why Weber Is Important: Weber’s work was not translated into English until 1947, 
but it came to have an important influence on the structure of large corporations, such 
as the Coca-Cola Company.
The Problem with the Classical Viewpoint: 
Too Mechanistic
A flaw in the classical viewpoint is that it is mechanistic: It tends to view humans as 
cogs within a machine, not taking into account the importance of human needs. Be-
havioral theory addressed this problem, as we explain next.
Why the Classical Viewpoint Is Important: The essence of the classical viewpoint 
was that work activity was amenable to a rational approach, that through the applica-
tion of scientific methods, time and motion studies, and job specialization it was pos-
sible to boost productivity. Indeed, these concepts are still in use today, the results 
visible to you every time you visit McDonald’s or Pizza Hut. The classical viewpoint 
also led to such innovations as management by objectives and goal setting, as we ex-
plain elsewhere. ●

The behavioral viewpoint emphasized the importance of understanding human 
behavior and of motivating employees toward achievement. The behavioral 
viewpoint developed over three phases: (1) early behaviorism, (2) the human relations 
movement, and (3) behavioral science.
Early Behaviorism: Pioneered by Munsterberg, 
Follett, & Mayo
The three people who pioneered behavioral theory were Hugo Munsterberg, 
Mary Parker Follett, and Elton Mayo.
Hugo Munsterberg & the First Application of Psychology to Industry 
Called “the father of industrial psychology,” German-born Hugo Munsterberg had a 
PhD in psychology and a medical degree and joined the faculty at Harvard University 
in 1892. Munsterberg suggested that psychologists could contribute to industry in 
three ways. They could:
 1. Study jobs and determine which people are best suited to specific jobs.
 2. Identify the psychological conditions under which employees do their best 
work.
 3. Devise management strategies to influence employees to follow management’s 
interests.
Why Munsterberg Is Important: His ideas led to the field of industrial psychology,
the study of human behavior in workplaces, which is still taught in colleges today.
Mary Parker Follett & Power Sharing among Employees & Managers 
A 
Massachusetts social worker and social philosopher, Mary Parker Follett was lauded 
on her death in 1933 as “one of the most important women America has yet produced 
in the fields of civics and sociology.” Instead of following the usual hierarchical ar-
rangement of managers as order givers and employees as order takers, Follett thought 
organizations should become more democratic, with managers and employees work-
ing cooperatively.
2.3 
Behavioral Viewpoint: Behaviorism, Human 
Relations, & Behavioral Science
To understand how people are motivated to achieve, what can I learn from the 
behavioral viewpoint?
THE BIG PICTURE
The second of the three historical management perspectives was the behavioral viewpoint, which empha-
sized the importance of understanding human behavior and of motivating employees toward achievement. 
The behavioral viewpoint developed over three phases: (1) Early behaviorism was pioneered by Hugo 
Munsterberg, Mary Parker Follett, and Elton Mayo. (2) The human relations movement was pioneered by 
Abraham Maslow (who proposed a hierarchy of needs) and Douglas McGregor (who proposed a Theory X and 
Theory Y view to explain managers’ attitudes toward workers). (3) The behavioral science approach relied on 
scientific research for developing theories about behavior useful to managers.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
49

50 
PART 1 
Introduction
Elton Mayo. In the 1920s, Elton 
Mayo (shown with long 
cigarette holder) and his team 
conducted studies of Western 
Electric’s Hawthorne plant. Do 
you think you’d perform better 
in a robotlike job if you thought 
your supervisor cared about you 
and paid more attention to you?
The following ideas were among her most important:
 1. Organizations should be operated as “communities,” with managers and 
subordinates working together in harmony.
 2. Conflicts should be resolved by having managers and workers talk over dif-
ferences and find solutions that would satisfy both parties—a process she 
called integration.
 3. The work process should be under the control of workers with the relevant 
knowledge, rather than of managers, who should act as facilitators.
Why Follett Is Important: With these and other ideas, Follett anticipated some of to-
day’s concepts of “self-managed teams,” “worker empowerment,” and “interdepartmen-
tal teams”—that is, members of different departments working together on joint projects.
Elton Mayo & the Supposed “Hawthorne Effect” 
Do you think workers 
would be more productive if they thought they were receiving special attention? This 
was the conclusion drawn by a Harvard research group in the late 1920s.
Conducted by Elton Mayo and his associates at West-
ern Electric’s Hawthorne (Chicago) plant, what came to 
be called the Hawthorne studies began with an investi-
gation into whether workplace lighting level affected 
worker productivity. (This was the type of study that 
Taylor or the Gilbreths might have done.) In later 
experiments, other variables were altered, such as wage 
levels, rest periods, and length of workday. Worker per-
formance varied but tended to increase over time, lead-
ing Mayo and his colleagues to hypothesize what came 
to be known as the Hawthorne effect—namely, that em-
ployees worked harder if they received added attention, 
if they thought that managers cared about their welfare 
and that supervisors paid special attention to them. 
However, later investigators found flaws in the studies, 
such as variations in ventilation and lighting or inade-
quate follow-through, that were overlooked by the origi-
nal researchers. Critics also point out that it’s doubtful 
that workers improved their productivity merely on the basis of receiving more attention 
rather than because of a particular instructional method or social innovation.15
Why the Hawthorne Studies Are Important: Ultimately, the Hawthorne studies were 
faulted for being poorly designed and not having enough empirical data to support the 
conclusions. Nevertheless, they succeeded in drawing attention to the importance of 
“social man” (social beings) and how managers using good human relations could 
improve worker productivity. This in turn led to the so-called human relations move-
ment in the 1950s and 1960s.
The Human Relations Movement: Pioneered by 
Maslow & McGregor
The two theorists who contributed most to the human relations movement—which 
proposed that better human relations could increase worker productivity—were 
Abraham Maslow and Douglas McGregor.
Abraham Maslow & the Hierarchy of Needs 
What motivates you to perform: 
Food? Security? Love? Recognition? Self-fulfillment? Probably all of these, Abraham 
Maslow would say, although some needs must be satisfied before others. The 

 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
51
chairman of the psychology department at Brandeis University and one of the earliest 
researchers to study motivation, in 1943 Maslow proposed his famous hierarchy of 
human needs: physiological, safety, love, esteem, and self-actualization.16 We discuss 
this hierarchy in detail in Chapter 12, where we explain why Maslow is important.
Douglas McGregor & Theory X versus Theory Y 
Having been for a time a 
college president (at Antioch College in Ohio), Douglas McGregor came to realize that 
it was not enough for managers to try to be liked; they also needed to be aware of their 
attitudes toward employees.17 Basically, McGregor suggested in a 1960 book, these 
attitudes could be either “X” or “Y.”
Theory X represents a pessimistic, negative view of workers. In this view, workers 
are considered to be irresponsible, to be resistant to change, to lack ambition, to hate 
work, and to want to be led rather than to lead.
Theory Y represents the outlook of human relations proponents—an optimistic, 
positive view of workers. In this view, workers are considered to be capable of ac-
cepting responsibility, self-direction, and self-control and of being imaginative 
and creative.
Why Theory X/Theory Y Is Important: The principal contribution offered by the 
Theory X/Theory Y perspective is that it helps managers understand how their beliefs 
affect their behavior. For example, Theory X managers are more likely to microman-
age, which leads to employee dissatisfaction, because they believe employees are in-
herently lazy. Managers can be more effective by considering how their behavior is 
shaped by their expectations about human nature.
Underlying both Maslow’s and McGregor’s theories is the notion that more job 
satisfaction leads to greater worker performance—an idea that is somewhat controver-
sial, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 11.
What is your basic view of human nature? Your attitude could be key to your career 
success. To see the general direction of your outlook, try the following self-assessment.
What Is Your Orientation toward 
Theory X/Theory Y?
This self-assessment is designed to reveal your orientation as 
a manager—whether it tends toward Theory X or Theory Y. Go 
to connect.mheducation.com and take the self-assessment. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
To what extent do you think your results are an accurate 
reflection of your beliefs about others? Are you surprised 
by the results?
2. 
As a leader of a student or work-related project team, 
how might your results affect your approach toward 
leading others? Explain.
3. 
If an employee doesn’t seem to show ambition, can that 
be changed? Discuss.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.1
®
The Behavioral Science Approach
The human relations movement was a necessary correction to the sterile approach used 
within scientific management, but its optimism came to be considered too simplistic 
for practical use. More recently, the human relations view has been superseded by the 
behavioral science approach to management. Behavioral science relies on scientific 
research for developing theories about human behavior that can be used to provide 
practical tools for managers. The disciplines of behavioral science include psychology, 
sociology, anthropology, and economics. ●

52 
PART 1 
Introduction
Open-plan seating. What kind 
of office would you prefer to 
have for yourself—a private 
office, a shared private office, a 
partitioned cubicle, or a desk in 
an open office scattered with 
other desks with no partitions? 
Which would be most 
comfortable for you personally? 
Why, theoretically, would the 
open office best promote 
superior performance?
EXAMPLE
Application of Behavioral Science Approach: The Open-Plan 
Office—Productivity Enhancer or Productivity Killer?
Today some office layouts mix managers and workers in completely 
open offices using communal tables. The theory is that this fosters 
more interaction and increased productivity. But does it work?
The Distraction Next to You. On any given day, probably 
40%–60% of all your workplace interactions (including face-to-
face chats and e-mails) will be with your immediate fellow 
employees, says a behavioral scientist who studies such things. 
There is only a 5%–10% chance of your interacting with someone 
two rows away.18 And, research shows, face-to-face interruptions 
constitute one-third more intrusions than do e-mail or phone 
calls.19 So how are conscientious workers in open-plan offices to 
get anything done—to avoid “pesky, productivity-sapping inter-
ruptions,” in one writer’s phrase?20
“This Means I’m Busy!” Various workers have come up with 
their own ways of alerting others that they are not to be inter-
rupted. Some wear special bright-colored sashes or vests or hats. 
Some block off their work spaces with neon-yellow plastic DO 
NOT DISTURB barricade tape (from CubeGuard). Some retreat to 
designated closed offices as “no interruption” zones to get neces-
sary work done.
The Right Seating Mix. Another way to reduce disruption is for 
companies to assign who sits next to whom, rather than using 
unassigned seating. In open-plan offices, “people literally catch 
emotions from one another like a virus,” says Wharton School 
management professor Sigal Barsade, who suggests that the 
people who work best together are those with similar emotional 
temperaments.21 For instance, mixing extroverts and introverts 
can lower the productivity of both, as introverts, who are quiet 
and like to keep their distance, may resent the intrusions of ex-
troverts, those outgoing coworkers who need interaction and 
love to talk and talk.22 Paul English, co-founder of the travel web-
site Kayak.com, uses new hires as an excuse to alter existing 
open-office seating arrangements, taking into careful consider-
ation everything from “employees’ personalities to their political 
views to their propensity for arriving at work early—or, more 
important, their propensity for judging colleagues who arrive 
late,” says one report.23 “If I put someone next to you that’s an-
noying or there’s a total style clash, I’m going to make your job 
depressing,” English says.
YOUR CALL
The open office is designed to encourage spontaneous interac-
tion, cooperation, and teamwork, with the goal of fostering 
achievement and productivity among employees. Is there a 
case to be made for intermingling employees with different 
personalities and different skills to foster the potential for stim-
ulating breakthrough ideas? What kind of fellow workers in an 
open office would you like to be seated with and why?

FedEx. What management tools 
do you use to schedule 
employees and aircraft to deal 
with wide variations in package 
volume—such as December 
23 versus December 26?
2.4 
Quantitative Viewpoints: Management 
Science & Operations Management
If the manager’s job is to solve problems, how might the two quantitative 
approaches help?
THE BIG PICTURE
The third and last category under historical perspectives consists of quantitative viewpoints, which em-
phasize the application to management of quantitative techniques, such as statistics and computer 
simulations. Two approaches of quantitative management are management science and operations 
management.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
53
During the air war known as the Battle of Britain in World War II, a relative few of 
England’s Royal Air Force fighter pilots and planes were able to successfully resist the 
overwhelming might of the German military machine. How did they do it? Military 
planners drew on mathematics and statistics to determine how to most effectively 
allocate use of their limited aircraft.
When the Americans entered the war in 1941, they used the British model to form 
operations research (OR) teams to determine how to deploy troops, submarines, and 
other military personnel and equipment most effectively. For example, OR techniques 
were used to establish the optimum pattern that search planes should fly to try to locate 
enemy ships.
After the war, businesses also began using these techniques. One group of former 
officers, who came to be called the Whiz Kids, used statistical techniques at Ford Mo-
tor Co. to make better management decisions. Later Whiz Kid Robert McNamara, who 
had become Ford’s president, was appointed Secretary of Defense and introduced 
similar statistical techniques and cost-benefit analyses throughout the Department of 
Defense. Since then, OR techniques have evolved into quantitative management, the 
application to management of quantitative techniques, such as statistics and computer 
simulations. Two branches of quantitative management are management science and 
operations management.
Management Science: Using Mathematics 
to Solve Management Problems
How would you go about deciding how to assign utility repair crews during a black-
out? Or how many package sorters you needed and at which times for an overnight 
delivery service such as FedEx or UPS? You would prob-
ably use the tools of management science.
Management science is not the same as Taylor’s 
scientific management. Management science focuses 
on using mathematics to aid in problem solving and deci-
sion making. Sometimes management science is called 
operations research.
Why Management Science Is Important: Management 
science stresses the use of rational, science-based tech-
niques and mathematical models to improve decision 
making and strategic planning Management science is a 
forerunner to analytics and Big Data, as we will discuss 
in Chapter 7.

54 
PART 1 
Introduction
EXAMPLE
EXAMPLE
Management Science: “Find Me More Music I Like!”
Operations Management: Using “the Toyota Way” to Benefit Hospital Patients
“Once, all you needed to succeed in the music business were a 
pair of gold ears and some hustle,” says writer Ben Sisario. 
“Now, it also takes mountains of data.”24
Tim Westergren studied music composition and computer 
science in college, played in unsuccessful rock bands, and 
worked as a film-score composer. Then he thought to try to map 
song musical qualities in what he called the Music Genome Proj-
ect, which he described as “an enormous collection of songs that 
have been analyzed, one song at a time, using 400 unique 
qualities.”25 In 2005 the genome became the basis for Oakland, 
California–based Pandora Internet Radio, which essentially 
applies management science (metrics) to music selection. Pandora 
is an online music streaming and automated music recommen-
dation service that allows users to type in a favorite song or 
Over the years, Toyota Motor Corp. has developed a variety of 
production techniques that drew in part on operations manage-
ment.28 Together these methods constitute “the Toyota Way,” 
the company’s systematic approach to producing vehicles 
efficiently, with the ultimate aim of pleasing the customer.
First, the process emphasizes the smoothest possible flow of 
work, by identifying the many steps in a production process and 
eliminating unnecessary ones (called value-stream mapping). It 
also uses teamwork to examine problems and fix them as soon 
as they appear (mistake proofing). In addition, the carmaker uses 
the just-in-time approach to obtain supplies from vendors only 
as they are needed in the factory. These efficient techniques, 
which all come under the term “lean management,” has enabled 
Toyota to sell its cars on the basis of their superior quality.29
Adapting Toyota’s Philosophy & Practices to Hospitals. A 
growing number of U.S. hospitals have been forced to compete 
harder under the federal Affordable Care Act as formerly uninsured 
patients have begun to understand they do not necessarily have to 
go to their closest public safety-net hospital but could be a little 
more choosey. That realization put public hospitals “in the unusual 
artist, and then Pandora’s software plays other music with the 
same musical characteristics. In 2014 the company “that plays 
only music you like” reported it had 75 million active listeners.26
YOUR CALL
Today there are many companies that have computer “rec-
ommendation engines” to suggest new products keyed to a 
consumer’s individual tastes, such as Spotify, Warner Music, 
and iTunes for music; Amazon for books; and Netflix for films. 
Do you think there’s any room left for experienced human de-
cision makers who don’t rely on numbers? (See, for example, 
Beats Music, which Apple acquired in 2014.)27 Do you think 
reliance on the automated recommendation process cheats 
consumers out of “pleasant surprises” and new discoveries?
position of having to attract and retain ‘paying customers’ to sur-
vive,” writes reporter Victoria Colliver.30 Accordingly, around 2000, 
hospital administrators began to apply Toyota’s techniques to im-
proving hospital quality, safety, and patient satisfaction.
“A Million Small Changes.” The Toyota method is “really fo-
cused on the small things,” a hospital CEO told Colliver. A team of 
employees meets for a week-long hands-on session to come up 
with a plan that makes specific, small changes that can have 
a major impact. One team, for instance, focused on whittling 
10 minutes off the typical 40 minutes of time it took from wheeling 
a patient into the operating room until the first surgical incision. 
“Ten minutes may not sound like a lot,” observes Colliver, “but 
those minutes can add up in wasted time and cost when a staff of 
nurses and doctors has to wait for a piece of equipment or a pa-
tient to be ready for them.” Another team was able to reduce 
outpatient wait time from 4–6 hours to 2.5 hours.
YOUR CALL
In Chapter 1, we described the problem of “efficiency versus 
effectiveness.” Which is the focus of lean management?
Operations Management: Being More Effective
Operations management focuses on managing the production and delivery of an orga-
nization’s products or services more effectively. Operations management is concerned 
with work scheduling, production planning, facilities location and design, and opti-
mum inventory levels.
Why Operations Management Is Important: Through the rational management of 
resources and distribution of goods and services, operations management helps ensure 
that business operations are efficient and effective. ●

Being of a presumably practical turn of mind, could you run an organization or a de-
partment according to the theories you’ve just learned? Probably not. The reason: peo-
ple are complicated. To be an exceptional manager, you need to learn to deal with 
individual differences in a variety of settings.
Thus, to the historical perspective on management (classical, behavioral, and quan-
titative viewpoints), let us now add the contemporary perspective, which consists of 
three viewpoints. (See Figure 2.3 below.) These consist of:
■ 
Systems
■ 
Contingency
■ 
Quality-management
2.5 
Systems Viewpoint
How can the exceptional manager be helped by the systems viewpoint?
THE BIG PICTURE
Three contemporary management perspectives are (1) the systems, (2) the contingency, and (3) the quality-
management viewpoints. The systems viewpoint sees organizations as a system, either open or closed, with 
inputs, outputs, transformation processes, and feedback. The systems viewpoint has led to the development 
of complexity theory, the study of how order and pattern arise from very complicated, apparently chaotic sys-
tems. The contingency viewpoint emphasizes that a manager’s approach should vary according to the individ-
ual and environmental situation. It is a forerunner to evidence-based management. The quality-management 
viewpoint has two traditional approaches: quality control, the strategy for minimizing errors by managing each 
stage of production, and quality assurance, which focuses on the performance of workers, urging employees 
to strive for zero defects. A third quality approach is the movement of total quality management (TQM), a com-
prehensive approach dedicated to continuous quality improvement, training, and customer satisfaction.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
55
Quality control
Strategy for minimizing errors
by managing each state of
production
Proponent:
Walter Shewart
The Systems Viewpoint
Regards the organization as
systems of interrelated parts
that operate together to 
achieve a common purpose
The Quality-Management
Viewpoint
Three approaches
Total quality management
Comprehensive approach
dedicated to continuous quality
improvement, training, and
customer satisfaction
The Contingency Viewpoint
Emphasizes that a manager’s
approach should vary accord-
ing to—i.e., be contingent
on—the individual and environ-
mental situation
Quality assurance
Focuses on the performance of
workers, urging employees to
strive for “zero defects”
Proponents:
W. Edwards Deming
Joseph M. Juran
The Contemporary Perspective (1960s–Present)
FIGURE 2.3 
The Contemporary Perspective: Three Viewpoints—Systems, Contingency, and Quality-Management
In this section, we discuss the systems viewpoint.
The Systems Viewpoint
The 27 bones in the hand. The monarchy of Great Britain. A weather storm front. Each of 
these is a system. A system is a set of interrelated parts that operate together to achieve a 

56 
PART 1 
Introduction
Transformational processes
The organization’s capabilities
in management and technology
that are applied to converting
inputs into outputs 
Example: Designer’s
management skills (planning,
organizing, leading, controlling),
gold and silver smithing tools and
expertise, website for marketing
Feedback
Information about the reaction of the environment to
the outputs, which affects the inputs
Example: Web customers like African-style designs,
dislike imitation Old English designs
Outputs
The products, services, profits,
losses, employee satisfaction or
discontent, etc., produced by the
organization
Example: Gold and silver rings,
earrings, bracelets, etc.
2
3
4
1
Example: For a jewelry 
designer—design, money,
artistic talent, gold and silver,
tools, marketing expertise 
Inputs
The people, money,
information, equipment,
and materials required
to produce an organization’s
goods or services
FIGURE 2.4 
The Four Parts of a System
common purpose. Even though a system may not work very well—as in the inefficient 
way the Italian government collects taxes, for example—it is nevertheless still a system.
The systems viewpoint regards the organization as a system of interrelated parts. 
By adopting this point of view, you can look at your organization both as (1) a collec-
tion of subsystems—parts making up the whole system—and (2) a part of the larger 
environment. A college, for example, is made up of a collection of academic depart-
ments, support staffs, students, and the like. But it also exists as a system within the 
environment of education, having to be responsive to parents, alumni, legislators, 
nearby townspeople, and so on.
The Four Parts of a System
The vocabulary of the systems perspective is useful because it gives you a way of un-
derstanding many different kinds of organizations. The four parts of a system are de-
fined as follows:
 1. Inputs are the people, money, information, equipment, and materials required 
to produce an organization’s goods or services. Whatever goes into a system 
is an input.
 2. Transformational processes are the organization’s capabilities in management, 
internal processes, and technology that are applied to converting inputs into out-
puts. The main activity of the organization is to transform inputs into outputs.
 3. Outputs are the products, services, profits, losses, employee satisfaction or 
discontent, and the like that are produced by the organization. Whatever 
comes out of the system is an output.
 4. Feedback is information about the reaction of the environment to the outputs 
that affects the inputs. Are the customers buying or not buying the product? 
That information is feedback.
The four parts of a system are illustrated below. (See Figure 2.4.)
Open & Closed Systems 
Nearly all organizations are, at least to some degree, open 
systems rather than closed systems. An open system continually interacts with its environ-
ment. A closed system has little interaction with its environment; that is, it receives very 

 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
57
little feedback from the outside. The classical management viewpoint often considered 
an organization a closed system. So does the management science perspective, which 
simplifies organizations for purposes of analysis. However, any organization that ignores 
feedback from the environment opens itself up to possibly spectacular failures.
Complexity Theory: The Ultimate Open System 
The systems viewpoint has 
led to the development of complexity theory, the study of how order and pattern arise 
from very complicated, apparently chaotic systems. Complexity theory recognizes that 
all complex systems are networks of many interdependent parts that interact with each 
other according to certain simple rules. Used in strategic management and organiza-
tional studies, the discipline seeks to understand how organizations, considered as 
relatively simple and partly connected structures, adapt to their environments.
Why the Systems Viewpoint—Particularly the Concept of Open Systems—Is Important:
History is full of accounts of products that failed (such as the 1959 Ford Edsel) because 
they were developed in closed systems and didn’t have sufficient feedback. Open systems 
stress multiple feedback from both inside and outside the organization, resulting in a 
continuous learning process to try to correct old mistakes and avoid new ones. ●
Closed versus Open Systems: Penney’s versus Macy’s
Retail shopping habits are being remade by two powerful forces 
(1) the erosion of the middle class and (2) the rise of online sales. 
Thus, stores are either focusing on rock-bottom prices to 
attract penny-pinching customers, reports The New York Times, 
or offering high-end products to attract the rich.31 With in-
creased online purchases and declining walk-in foot traffic, 
even shopping malls face extinction, and chains such as Ra-
dioShack and Staples are closing stores and rethinking their 
Internet strategies.32 This is the difficult environment in which 
J.C. Penney and Macy’s have been operating.
Closed System: Penney’s CEO “Goes with His Gut.” Ron Johnson 
was a well-regarded executive at Target and then had a meteoric 
rise as the developer of Apple’s sleek, hands-on retail stores. In 
2011, he was hired as CEO to revive J.C. Penney, a tired, low-end 
department store chain that he hoped to rebuild into an exciting, 
more upscale brand by, among other things, eliminating discounts, 
sales, and coupons and filling stores with name-brand clothes (Izod, 
Liz Claiborne) highlighted in store-within-a-store boutiques.
Although most retailers regularly try out new ideas in a lim-
ited way before committing them to all their stores, Johnson 
preferred to go with his gut, adhering to a closed system. That 
is, Johnson took the Apple approach, whose then-leader Steve 
Jobs famously once said, “A lot of times, people don’t know 
what they want until you show it to them.” Penney’s customers, 
however, made it clear they were very much into value and that 
coupons and sales were important. Johnson’s strategy failed, 
and in early 2014, Penney reported sales were down 7.4% and 
announced the closing of 33 stores. Johnson left the company.33
Open System: Macy’s Uses Research & “Magic Selling.” 
Led by seasoned retail executive Terry Lundgren, Macy’s has 
so transformed itself that even during difficult times (recession, 
harsh weather) its profits have grown, rising 11% during 
2013.34 What is its secret?
Retailing fashion goods is much less predictable than selling 
staples, such as food, but Macy’s has managed to stay close to its 
customers by using technology that cues a store when, for in-
stance, to restock on particular Clinique cosmetics and at the 
same time reveals that Clinique shoppers are purchasers of fash-
ion jewelry, which can be marketed accordingly. In other words, 
Macy’s operates an open system. Another initiative has been the 
“My Macy’s” localization strategy, in which the goal is to take into 
account local tastes and seek a more personalized touch.35
To compete with websites, Macy’s has refined the “My 
Macy’s” approach by integrating mobile technologies, such as GPS, 
so customers can use their smartphones to navigate store aisles. 
In one key insight, Macy’s found that “more than half of con-
sumers do research online before visiting a physical store,” ac-
cording to one report, “so they expect more insight [from store 
salespeople] than basic product information.” Out of this came 
Macy’s “Magic Selling” program, which empowers employees to 
improve the customer experience by being able “to differentiate 
the in-store experience through their personalities and service, 
while still delivering the basics of price, assortment, and conve-
nience that customers get through online shopping.”36 The 
store’s integrated inventory system also enables salespeople to 
find in-stock products and ship them directly to the customer.
YOUR CALL
“Sometimes you have to destroy your business in order to save 
it,” says financial writer James Surowiecki.”37 Besides the re-
trenching of RadioShack and Staples, can you think of other 
retail businesses that need a makeover—that should do more 
to become open systems? What should they do?
EXAMPLE

The classical viewpoints advanced by Taylor and Fayol assumed that their approaches 
had universal applications—that they were “the one best way” to manage organiza-
tions. The contingency viewpoint began to develop when managers discovered that 
under some circumstances better results could be achieved by breaking the one-best-
way rule. The contingency viewpoint emphasizes that a manager’s approach should 
vary according to—that is, be contingent on—the individual and the environmental 
situation.
A manager subscribing to the Gilbreth approach might try to get workers to be 
more productive by simplifying the steps. A manager of the Theory X/Theory Y per-
suasion might try to use motivational techniques. But the manager following the con-
tingency viewpoint would simply ask, “What method is the best to use under these 
particular circumstances?”
2.6 
Contingency Viewpoint
In the end, is there one best way to manage in all situations?
THE BIG PICTURE
The second viewpoint in the contemporary perspective, the contingency viewpoint, emphasizes that a man-
ager’s approach should vary according to the individual and environmental situation.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
58 
PART 1 
Introduction
EXAMPLE
The Contingency Viewpoint: What Are the Best Kinds of Benefits?
Money is not the only motivator for employee productivity. 
Applying the contingency approach, managers have found 
there are incentives in offering various kinds of fringe benefits—
one recent report listed more than 300 such benefits, from 
health plans to house down-payment assistance.38
Small Incentives. Small businesses may not be able to dangle 
big raises, but they can offer imaginative benefits that big orga-
nizations may find too expensive or impractical. “Free Beer 
Friday” is the morale booster offered by news-media analysis 
company Universal Information Services in Omaha, Nebraska. 
“Bring Your Pet to Work” (no messes or barking, please) is the 
benefit extended by Internet equipment company VoIP Supply of 
Amherst, New York. Litzky Public Relations in Hoboken, New Jer-
sey, provides space for twice-a-week yoga instruction. Next-
StepU.com, a teen-counseling company in Rochester, New York, 
offers a paid week off to volunteer for good causes. Various com-
panies offer other options: at-your-desk meditation, drop-off 
laundry services, free theme park tickets, even adoption assis-
tance and funeral planning.39
Large Incentives. Are little perks all that’s required? Netflix 
has decided that the best way to keep top talent is to hire peo-
ple who are “fully formed adults” who will put the company 
first and  support a high-performance workplace. Thus, instead 
of having a rigid system of vacation days and a formal travel 
and expense policy, Netflix decided to take the ultimate contin-
gency approach, embodied in the policy “Act in Netflix’s best 
interests.” This means salaried employees can take whatever 
time they feel is appropriate and enforce their own travel and 
expense policies—in other words, they are trusted to act as 
fully formed adults.40
YOUR CALL
One career analyst suggests that people are motivated most 
by autonomy, developing their skills, and a sense of higher 
purpose.41 This opinion is echoed in a survey that found the 
top factors in determining people’s happiness at work are 
whether they enjoy the tasks required of them, are able to 
focus on the things they do best, and are proud of their em-
ployer.42 Another study found that people care, first, about the 
office environment, positive culture, and compensation; sec-
ond, a job that makes the world a better place or a company 
that shares their values; and third, company prestige and 
rapid promotion.43 
Considering these findings and applying a contingency 
 approach to stimulating productivity at work, what different kinds 
of incentives or benefits would you offer for hourly shift workers, 
salaried middle managers, and work-at-home employees?

 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
59
Gary Hamel: Management Ideas Are Not Fixed, 
They’re a Process
Discussion of the contingency viewpoint leads us naturally to the thoughts of Gary 
Hamel, co-founder of the Management Innovation Lab and ranked by The Wall Street 
Journal in 2008 as the most influential business thinker.44 “Over time,” he says, “every 
great invention, management included, travels a road that leads from birth to maturity, 
and occasionally to senescence.”45 Hamel holds that much of management theory is 
dated and doesn’t fit the current realities of organizational life and that management 
innovation is essential to future organizational success. Indeed, he suggests, what we 
need to do is look at management as a process, and then make improvements and in-
novation ongoing and systematic. After all, if managers now innovate by creating new 
products or new business strategies, why can’t they be equally innovative in how they 
manage their companies?
How do forward-looking managers get the ball rolling in management innovation, par-
ticularly in a traditional, conventional company? Hamel believes that the answer can be 
found by identifying core beliefs that people have about the organization, especially those 
that detract from the pursuit of management innovation. He suggests that these beliefs can 
be rooted out by repeatedly asking the right questions—namely, the following:
 1. Is this a belief worth challenging? Is it debilitating? Does it get in the way 
of an important organizational attribute that we’d like to strengthen?
 2. Is this belief universally valid? Are there counterexamples? If so, what do 
we learn from those cases?
 3. How does this belief serve the interests of its adherents? Are there people 
who draw reassurance or comfort from this belief?
 4. Have our choices and assumptions conspired to make this belief self- 
fulfilling? Is this belief true simply because we have made it true—and, if so, 
can we imagine alternatives?46
Why the Contingency Viewpoint Is Important: The contingency viewpoint would 
seem to be the most practical of the viewpoints discussed so far because it addresses 
problems on a case-by-case basis and varies the solution accordingly.
Evidence-Based Management: Facing Hard Facts, 
Rejecting Nonsense
Evidence-based management is very much in the spirit of the contingency viewpoint’s 
practical approach to management. Evidence-based management means translating 
Contingency approach. Giving 
employees more money is 
not the only way to motivate 
them to be more productive. 
Sometimes small rewards, such 
as allowing pets at work, 
are equally effective. What 
incentives would make you stay 
at a job for which you are not 
really suited and to do your best 
while there?

60 
PART 1 
Introduction
principles based on best evidence into organizational practice, bringing rationality to 
the decision-making process.
As its two principal proponents, Stanford business scholars Jeffrey Pfeffer 
and Robert Sutton, put it, evidence-based management is based on the belief 
that “facing the hard facts about what works and what doesn’t, understanding the 
dangerous half-truths that constitute so much conventional wisdom about man-
agement, and rejecting the total nonsense that too often passes for sound advice 
will help organizations perform better.”47 
Learning to make managerial decisions based on evidence is the approach we 
hope you will learn to take after studying many other approaches—the perspec-
tives we covered in this chapter. We will consider evidence-based management 
further, along with analytics and Big Data, in Chapter 7. ●
PRACTICAL ACTION
Evidence-Based Management: An Attitude of Wisdom
“These days, there aren’t any hot, new trends, just a lot of 
repackaged ones from the past,” writes Wall Street Journal 
columnist Carol Hymowitz.48 “Executives have been treated to 
an overdose of management guides that mostly haven’t deliv-
ered what they promised. Many bosses have adopted them all, 
regardless of their company’s business model, balance sheet, 
competition, employee bench strength, or any other unique 
qualities. They have become copycat managers, trying to find a 
one-stop, fix-it-all answer to their various problems.”
How will you know whether the next “fix-it-all” book to hit 
the business bestseller list is simply a recycling of old ideas? 
The answer is: you have to have studied history—the subject 
of this chapter.49
Management: Art or Science? Is the practice of management 
an art or a science? Certainly it can be an art. Lots of top execu-
tives have no actual training in management, although General 
Motors CEO Mary Barra, discussed in Chapter 1, has an MBA in 
addition to a degree in electrical engineering. Great managers, 
like great painters or actors, have the right mix of intuition, judg-
ment, and experience.
But management is also a science. That is, rather than being 
performed in a seat-of-the-pants, make-it-up-as-you-go-along 
kind of way—which can lead to big mistakes—management 
can be approached deliberately, rationally, systematically. That’s 
what the scientific method is, after all—a logical process, em-
bodying four steps: (1) You observe events and gather facts. (2) 
You pose a possible solution or explanation based on those 
facts. (3) You make a prediction of future events. (4) You test the 
prediction under systematic conditions.
Following the Evidence. The process of scientific reasoning 
underlies what is known as evidence-based management. As we 
stated, evidence-based management means translating princi-
ples based on best evidence into organizational practice, bringing 
rationality to the decision-making process.50 Evidence-based 
management derives from evidence-based medicine, embracing 
what Jeffrey Pfeffer and Robert Sutton call an attitude of wisdom. 
This is a mind-set that, first, is willing to set aside belief and con-
ventional wisdom and to act on the facts and, second, has an 
unrelenting commitment to gathering information necessary to 
make informed decisions and to keeping pace with new evidence 
to update practices.51
“The way a good doctor or a good manager works,” Sutton 
says, “is to act with knowledge while doubting what you know. 
So if a patient goes to a doctor, you hope the doctor would do 
two things: first look at the literature and make the best deci-
sion given what’s available. Then actually track the progress of 
the treatment and see what unexpected side effects you’re 
having and what things are working.”52
Three Truths. Evidence-based management is based on three 
truths:
• There are few really new ideas: Most supposedly new 
ideas are old, wrong, or both.
• True is better than new: Effective organizations and manag-
ers are more interested in what is true than in what is new.
• Doing well usually dominates: Organizations that do 
simple, obvious, and even seemingly trivial things well will 
dominate competitors who search for “silver bullets and 
instant magic.”
YOUR CALL
Do you think managers are often driven by fads, by what 
they’ve read in the latest book or heard in the latest manage-
ment seminar? Have you ever heard of a manager taking an 
experimental approach, as in trying out a new idea with an 
open mind to see what happens? How could you profit by tak-
ing an evidence-based approach to the ideas we discussed in 
this chapter?

2.7 
Quality-Management Viewpoint
Can the quality-management viewpoint offer guidelines for true managerial success?
THE BIG PICTURE
The quality-management viewpoint, the third category under contemporary perspectives, consists of quality 
control, quality assurance, and especially the movement of total quality management (TQM), dedicated to 
continuous quality improvement, training, and customer satisfaction.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
61
In 1971, in his book Wheels, author Arthur Hailey advised Americans not to buy cars 
that were assembled on Mondays or Fridays—days when cars supposedly suffered 
from quality problems because they were put together when absenteeism and hang-
overs were highest among dissatisfied autoworkers. Although cars are not built all in 
one day (various parts are built at different times) and are not stamped with a “birth 
date,” Hailey’s claim reinforced the notion that, despite the efforts of quantitative man-
agement, the American cars produced on those days were the most shoddily made of 
what were coming to look like generally shoddy products.
The energy crisis of the 1970s showed different possibilities, as Americans began to 
buy more fuel-efficient, better-built cars made in Japan. Today the average American 
car lasts much longer than it used to, and some U.S. cars are equal or superior to the 
best foreign competitors—for example, the 2014 Cadillac CTS 3.6 beat the 2014 
Mercedes-Benz E350, according to one automotive review.53
Although not a “theory” as such, the quality-management viewpoint, which in-
cludes quality control, quality assurance, and total quality management, deserves to be 
considered because of its impact on contemporary management perspectives.
Quality Control & Quality Assurance
Quality refers to the total ability of a product or service to meet customer needs.
Quality is seen as one of the most important ways of adding value to products and 
services, thereby distinguishing them from those of competitors. Two traditional 
strategies for ensuring quality are quality control and quality assurance.
Quality Control 
Quality control is defined as the strategy for minimizing errors by 
managing each stage of production. Quality control techniques were developed in the 
1930s at Bell Telephone Labs by Walter Shewart, who used statistical sampling to locate 
errors by testing just some (rather than all) of the items in a particular production run.
Quality Assurance 
Developed in the 1960s, quality assurance focuses on the 
performance of workers, urging employees to strive for “zero defects.” Quality as-
surance has been less successful because often employees have no control over the 
design of the work process.
Total Quality Management: Creating an Organization 
Dedicated to Continuous Improvement
In the years after World War II, the imprint “Made in Japan” on a product almost guar-
anteed that it was cheap and flimsy. That began to change with the arrival in Japan of 
two Americans, W. Edwards Deming and Joseph M. Juran.
W. Edwards Deming 
Desperate to rebuild its war-devastated economy, Japan ea-
gerly received mathematician W. Edwards Deming’s lectures on “good management.” 
Deming believed that quality stemmed from “constancy of purpose”—steady focus on 

62 
PART 1 
Introduction
TQM pioneer. W. Edwards 
Deming in 1961. Deming 
proposed his so-called 85–15 
rule—namely, when things go 
wrong, there is an 85% chance 
that the system is at fault, only a 
15% chance that the individual 
worker is at fault. Most of the 
time, he thought, managers 
erroneously blamed individuals 
rather than the system.
an organization’s mission—along with statistical measurement and reduction of varia-
tions in production processes. He also thought that managers should stress teamwork, 
be helpful rather than simply give orders, and make employees feel comfortable about 
asking questions.
Joseph M. Juran 
Another pioneer with Deming in Japan’s quality revolution was 
Joseph M. Juran, who defined quality as “fitness for use.” By this he meant that a prod-
uct or service should satisfy a customer’s real needs. Thus, the best way to focus a 
company’s efforts, Juran suggested, was to concentrate on the real needs of customers.
TQM: What It Is 
From the work of Deming and Juran has come the strategic com-
mitment to quality known as total quality management. Total quality management 
(TQM) is a comprehensive approach—led by top management and supported through-
out the organization—dedicated to continuous quality improvement, training, and cus-
tomer satisfaction.
The four components of TQM are as follows:
 1. Make continuous improvement a priority. TQM companies are never satisfied. 
They make small, incremental improvements an everyday priority in all areas of 
the organization. By improving everything a little bit of the time all the time, the 
company can achieve long-term quality, efficiency, and customer satisfaction.
 2. Get every employee involved. To build teamwork, trust, and mutual respect, 
TQM companies see that every employee is involved in the continuous im-
provement process. This requires that workers must be trained and empow-
ered to find and solve problems.
 3. Listen to and learn from customers and employees. TQM companies pay 
attention to their customers, the people who use their products or services. In 
addition, employees within the companies listen and learn from other employ-
ees, those outside their own work areas.
 4. Use accurate standards to identify and eliminate problems. TQM organiza-
tions are always alert to how competitors do things better, then try to improve 
on them—a process known as benchmarking. Using these standards, they ap-
ply statistical measurements to their own processes to identify problems.
Why Total Quality Management Is Important: The total quality management view-
point emphasizes infusing concepts of quality throughout the total organization in a 
way that will deliver quality products and services to customers. The adoption of TQM 
helped American companies deal with global competition.
Want to find out how committed to TQM the organizations are that you are most 
familiar with? Even the most sophisticated organizations, you may be surprised to 
learn in the following self-assessment, may not measure up very well when it comes to 
the quality of their products. ●
To What Extent Is Your Organization Committed 
to Total Quality Management?
This self-assessment is designed to gauge the extent to which 
the organization you have in mind is committed to Total Quality 
Management (TQM). Go to connect.mheducation.com and take 
the self-assessment. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
Which of the five dimensions is most and least important 
to the organization? Are you surprised by this 
conclusion? Explain.
2. 
Based on the three lowest-rated items in the survey, what 
advice would you give to senior leaders in the company?
3. 
Considering all of the questions in the survey, which 
three do you think are most important in terms of 
fostering TQM in a company? Why?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.2
®

The learning organization. 
In rigid organizations, 
employees often keep 
information to themselves. In 
learning organizations, workers 
are encouraged to share 
information with each other—
both inside and outside their 
department.
2.8 
The Learning Organization in an Era of 
Accelerated Change
Organizations must learn or perish. How do I build a learning organization?
THE BIG PICTURE
Learning organizations actively create, acquire, and transfer knowledge within themselves and are able to 
modify their behavior to reflect new knowledge. There are three ways you as a manager can help build a 
learning organization.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Ultimately, the lesson we need to take from the theories, perspectives, and viewpoints 
we have described is this: we need to keep on learning. Organizations are the same 
way: like people, they must continually learn new things or face obsolescence. A key 
challenge for managers, therefore, is to establish a culture of shared knowledge and 
values that will enhance their employees’ ability to learn—to build so-called learning 
organizations.
Learning organizations, says Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor Peter 
Senge, who coined the term, are places “where people continually expand their capac-
ity to create the results they truly desire, where new and expansive patterns of thinking 
are nurtured, where collective aspiration is set free, and where people are continually 
learning how to learn together.”54
The Learning Organization: Handling Knowledge & 
Modifying Behavior
More formally, a learning organization is an organization that actively creates, ac-
quires, and transfers knowledge within itself and is able to modify its behavior to reflect 
new knowledge.55 Note the three parts:
 1. Creating and acquiring knowledge. In learning organizations, managers try 
to actively infuse their organizations with new ideas and information, which 
are the prerequisites for learning. They acquire such knowledge by constantly 
scanning their external environments, by not being afraid to hire new talent 
and expertise when needed, and by devoting significant resources to training 
and developing their employees.
 2. Transferring knowledge. Managers actively work at transferring knowledge 
throughout the organization, reducing barriers to sharing information and 
ideas among employees. Electronic Data Sys-
tems (EDS), for instance, practically invented 
the information-technology services industry, but 
by 1996 it was slipping behind competitors—
missing the onset of the Internet wave, for 
example. When a new CEO, Dick Brown, 
took the reins in 1999, he changed the culture 
from “fix the problem yourself” to sharing in-
formation internally.56
 3. Modifying behavior. Learning organizations 
are nothing if not results oriented. Thus, man-
agers encourage employees to use the new 
knowledge obtained to change their behavior 
to help further the organization’s goals.57
 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
63

64 
PART 1 
Introduction
How to Build a Learning Organization: Three Roles 
Managers Play
To create a learning organization, managers must perform three key functions or roles: 
(1) build a commitment to learning, (2) work to generate ideas with impact, and (3) 
work to generalize ideas with impact.58
 1. You can build a commitment to learning. To instill in your employees an 
intellectual and emotional commitment to the idea of learning, you as a man-
ager need to lead the way by investing in it, publicly promoting it, creating 
rewards and symbols of it, and performing other similar activities. For exam-
ple, to encourage employees to overcome fears about losing their jobs and 
exert some boldness in decision making, Jim Donald, CEO of Extended Stay 
America, created miniature “Get Out of Jail, Free” cards, which employees 
could call in whenever they took a big risk on behalf of the company—in ef-
fect giving them permission to make and learn from mistakes.59
 2. You can work to generate ideas with impact. As a manager, you need to try 
to generate ideas with impact—that is, ideas that add value for customers, 
employees, and shareholders—by increasing employee competence through 
training, experimenting with new ideas, and engaging in other leadership ac-
tivities. Xerox, for example, hired researchers called ”innovation managers” 
to hunt for inventions and products from start-ups in India that could be 
adapted for the North American market. Hewlett-Packard used its research lab 
in India to see how it could adapt mobile phone web-interface applications in 
Asia and Africa to markets in developed countries.60
 3. You can work to generalize ideas with impact. Besides generating ideas 
with impact, you can also generalize them—that is, reduce the barriers to 
learning among employees and within your organization. You can create a 
climate that reduces conflict, increases communication, promotes teamwork, 
rewards risk taking, reduces the fear of failure, and increases cooperation. In 
other words, you can create a psychologically safe and comforting environ-
ment that increases the sharing of successes, failures, and best practices.
Based on the above discussion, do you wonder about the specific behaviors that 
people exhibit in a learning organization? It would be interesting to determine if you 
have ever worked for such an organization. The following self-assessment was created 
to evaluate whether an organization you now work for or formerly worked for could be 
considered a serious learning organization. The survey items provide a good indication 
of what it takes to become a learning organization. ●
Are You Working for a Learning Organization?
This self-assessment provides a measure of the extent to 
which an organization of your choice is a learning organization. 
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take the self-assessment. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
What are the strengths and weaknesses of this company 
in terms of being a learning organization?
2. 
If you were CEO of this organization, what changes would 
you make based on your survey results? Explain.
3. 
What suggestions would you make for how this 
organization might (1) build a commitment to learning, 
(2) work to generate ideas with impact, and (3) work to 
generalize ideas with impact? Discuss.
4. 
How does the learning score for the organization 
probably compare with the scores of other organizations 
you are familiar with?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.3
®

administrative management 47
behavioral science 51
behavioral viewpoint 49
classical viewpoint 45
closed system 56
complexity theory 57
contemporary perspective 44
contingency viewpoint 58
evidence-based management 59
feedback 56
historical perspective 44
human relations movement 50
inputs 56
learning organization 63
management science 53
open system 56
operations management 54
outputs 56
quality 61
quality assurance 61
quality control 61
quality-management viewpoint 61
quantitative management 53
scientific management 45
subsystems 56
system 55
systems viewpoint 56
total quality management 
(TQM) 62
transformation processes 56
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
2.1 Evolving Viewpoints: How We Got to 
Today’s Management Outlook
• The two overarching perspectives on 
management are (1) the historical perspective, 
which includes three viewpoints—classical, 
behavioral, and quantitative; and (2) the 
contemporary perspective, which includes 
three other viewpoints—systems, 
contingency, and quality-management.
• Six practical reasons for studying theoretical 
perspectives are that they provide (1) 
understanding of the present, (2) a guide to 
action, (3) a source of new ideas, (4) clues to 
the meaning of your managers’ decisions, (5) 
clues to the meaning of outside ideas, and (6) 
understanding as to why certain management 
practices produce positive outcomes.
2.2 Classical Viewpoint: Scientific & 
Administrative Management
• The first of the historical perspectives is the 
classical viewpoint, which emphasized finding 
ways to manage work more efficiently. It had 
two branches, scientific management and 
administrative management.
• Scientific management emphasized the 
scientific study of work methods to improve 
productivity by individual workers. It was 
pioneered by Frederick W. Taylor, who offered 
four principles of science that could be 
applied to management, and by Frank and 
Lillian Gilbreth, who refined motion studies 
that broke job tasks into physical motions.
• Administrative management was concerned 
with managing the total organization. Among 
its pioneers were Henri Fayol, who identified 
the major functions of management (planning, 
organizing, leading, controlling), and Max 
Weber, who identified five positive 
bureaucratic features in a well-performing 
organization.
• The classical viewpoint showed that work 
activity was amenable to a rational approach, 
but it has been criticized as being too 
mechanistic, viewing humans as cogs in a 
machine.
2.3 Behavioral Viewpoint: Behavorism, 
Human Relations, & Behavioral 
Science
• The second of the historical perspectives, the 
behavioral viewpoint emphasized the 
importance of understanding human behavior 
and of motivating employees toward 
achievement. It developed over three phases: 
(1) early behaviorism (2) the human relations 
movement, and (3) the behavioral science 
approach.
• Early behaviorism had three pioneers: 
(a) Hugo Munsterberg suggested that 
psychologists could contribute to industry by 
studying jobs, identifying the psychological 
conditions for employees to do their best 
work. (b) Mary Parker Follett thought 
organizations should be democratic, with 
employees and managers working together. 
(c) Elton Mayo hypothesized a so-called 
Hawthorne effect, suggesting that employees 
worked harder if they received added 
attention from managers.
• The human relations movement suggested 
that better human relations could increase 
worker productivity. Among its pioneers were 
(a) Abraham Maslow, who proposed a 
hierarchy of human needs, and (b) Douglas 
McGregor, who proposed a Theory X 
(managers have pessimistic view of workers) 
and Theory Y (managers have positive view 
of workers).
Key Points
 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
65

• The behavioral science approach relied on 
scientific research for developing theories 
about human behavior that can be used to 
provide practical tools for managers.
2.4 Quantitative Viewpoints: Management 
Science & Operations Management
• The third of the historical perspectives, 
quantitative viewpoints emphasized the 
application to management of quantitative 
techniques.
• Two approaches are (1) management science, 
which focuses on using mathematics to aid in 
problem solving and decision making; and (2) 
operations management, which focuses on 
managing the production and delivery of an 
organization’s products or services more 
effectively.
2.5 Systems Viewpoint
• Following the historical perspective, the 
contemporary perspective includes three 
viewpoints: (1) systems, (2) contingency, and 
(3) quality-management.
• The systems viewpoint regards the organization 
as a system of interrelated parts or collection of 
subsystems that operate together to achieve a 
common purpose. A system has four parts: 
inputs, outputs, transformational processes, 
and feedback. A system can be open, 
continually interacting with the environment, or 
closed, having little such interaction.
• The systems viewpoint has led to the 
development of complexity theory, the study 
of how order and pattern arise from very 
complicated, apparently chaotic systems.
2.6 Contingency Viewpoint
• The second viewpoint in the contemporary 
perspective, the contingency viewpoint 
emphasizes that a manager’s approach 
should vary according to the individual and 
the environmental situation.
• In the spirit of the contingency viewpoint is 
evidence-based management, which means 
translating principles based on best evidence 
into organizational practice, bringing 
rationality to the decision-making process.
2.7 Quality-Management Viewpoint
• The third category in the contemporary 
perspective, the quality-management viewpoint 
is concerned with quality, the total ability of a 
product or service to meet customer needs.
• Quality management has three aspects: 
(1) Quality control is the strategy for 
minimizing errors by managing each stage of 
production. (2) Quality assurance focuses on 
the performance of workers, urging 
employees to strive for “zero defects.” 
(3) Total quality management (TQM) is a 
comprehensive approach dedicated to 
continuous quality improvement, training, 
and customer satisfaction.
• TQM has four components: (a) make 
continuous improvement a priority; (b) get 
every employee involved; (c) listen to and 
learn from customers and employees; and 
(d) use accurate standards to identify and 
eliminate problems.
2.8 The Learning Organization in an Era 
of Accelerated Change
• A learning organization is one that actively 
creates, acquires, and transfers knowledge 
within itself and is able to modify its behavior 
to reflect new knowledge.
• Three roles that managers must perform to 
build a learning organization are to (1) build a 
commitment to learning, (2) work to generate 
ideas with impact, and (3) work to generalize 
ideas with impact.
 1. What are the two overarching perspectives about 
management, and what are the three viewpoints that 
each one covers?
 2. What are six practical reasons for studying 
theoretical perspectives?
 3. What are the contributions of scientific 
management?
 4. How would I summarize the behavioral viewpoint 
and what are its contributions?
 5. What is the difference between management science 
and operations management?
 6. What would be an example of the application of the 
four parts of a system?
 7. What would be an example of the application of the 
contingency viewpoint?
 8. Where have I seen an organization employ 
evidence-based management?
 9. Why should I adopt a total quality management 
viewpoint?
 10. What are three roles I could play as a manager in a 
learning organization?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
66 
PART 1 
Introduction

GM’s New CEO, Mary Barra, Must Manage a 
Major Recall
[General Motors CEO Mary] Barra, in a letter to em-
ployees posted on a company blog [March 4, 2014], 
said she is leading a group of senior executives who 
are monitoring the auto maker’s recall of 1.6 million 
vehicles equipped with potentially defective ignition 
switches and built in the years before GM’s publicly 
funded bankruptcy.
The cars could suddenly turn off when the keys are 
jarred, shutting down the engine and the airbags. 
Thirteen deaths have been linked to the problem, which 
GM engineers first discovered more than nine years ago.
GM issued a recall for the affected vehicles late last 
month [February], and the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration has said it is reviewing whether 
the auto maker should be fined for taking so long to 
act. . . .
Ms. Barra had not commented publicly on the situ-
ation until GM posted her letter. In her post, Ms. Barra 
wrote that she is now leading the company’s response 
to the problem, and promised that an internal investi-
gation will produce an “unvarnished report on what 
happened. We will hold ourselves accountable and im-
prove our processes so our customers do not experi-
ence this again.” . . .
Ms. Barra wrote in her letter that the ignition switch 
issue was being reviewed by “experienced technical 
experts” who work independently of managers with 
responsibility for other aspects of the business. The is-
sue was brought to Ms. Barra and other senior execu-
tives “a few weeks ago,” she wrote.
Now, she wrote, she has created “a working group 
of senior executives, which I lead, to direct our re-
sponse, monitor our progress and make adjustments as 
necessary.” Among other steps, GM is working with 
parts makers to get repair parts to dealers more rapidly 
and has provided federal regulators with “comprehen-
sive information on this issue,” she wrote.
“While I deeply regret the circumstances that 
brought us to this point, I appreciate how today’s GM 
has responded so far,” Ms. Barra said. “We have much 
more work ahead of us and I’m confident we will do 
the right thing for our customers.”
Ms. Barra’s comments come amid the growing like-
lihood that GM will face more lawsuits and a federal 
fine for as much as $35 million if regulators determine 
that the auto maker violated federal rules that govern 
the timeliness of recalls. . . .
GM engineers knew of the potential problem in 
2004 when a switch failure incident was reported 
around the time of the launch of the 2005 Cobalt, ac-
cording to a timeline submitted by GM and provided 
to NHTSA last week. GM looked into the problem, but 
decided to close its inquiry with no action.
In 2007, a group of GM employees met with 
NHTSA regulators in Washington, D.C., to discuss an-
other matter when a federal official told the GM per-
sonnel that a fatal crash had occurred on July 29, 2005, 
in which a 2005 Chevrolet Cobalt was involved in a 
front-end collision, and the airbags didn’t deploy, ac-
cording to the GM chronology.
But court documents reviewed by The Wall Street 
Journal show that concerns about the safety of vehi-
cles equipped with the suspect ignition systems con-
tinued to bounce around the company’s engineering 
department in the years after the meeting.
GM, on three separate occasions, “repurchased” ve-
hicles from owners who complained of stalling or los-
ing power while they were driving, according to a 
deposition by a GM employee.
One customer, a New Jersey woman who had her 
2005 Cobalt repurchased, said the vehicle died on the 
highway four times. She only had about 600 miles on 
the vehicle. She said the stalling issue seemed to occur 
on right-hand turns. The dealer reported that the cus-
tomer “has the fear of God in her about the car,” ac-
cording to a deposition.
GM’s chronology says that a higher-level team to 
investigate the ignition switch problem was formed in 
2011. The chronology does not identify the members 
of this team.
Over the next two years, GM conducted tests and 
investigated the problem which finally led to a meeting 
on January 31, 2014, where executives decided a recall 
was needed, the GM chronology states.
On February 13, GM announced it would recall 
about 778,000 Chevrolet Cobalt and Pontiac G5 cars. 
Twelve days later, the company widened the recall to 
1.6 million vehicles after growing consumer complaints 
and issued a second formal apology to consumers. . . .
Ms. Barra in her letter addressed employee con-
cerns about the potential damage to GM’s reputation 
and sales.
“My answer is simple: that’s not the issue,” she 
wrote. “The vehicles we make today are the best in 
memory and I’m confident that they will do fine, on 
their own merits. And our company’s reputation won’t 
be determined by the recall itself, but by how we ad-
dress the problem going forward.”
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. To what extent is GM using evidence-based manage-
ment? Are they overdoing it? Explain your rationale.
 2. To what extent are the managerial practices being 
used at GM consistent with principles associated 
Management in Action
 
Management Theory 
CHAPTER 2 
67

with management science and operations manage-
ment techniques? Discuss.
 3. Use Figure 2.4 to analyze the extent to which GM is 
using a systems viewpoint.
 4. How are the managerial practices being used at GM 
consistent with a quality-management viewpoint? 
Explain your rationale.
 5. To what extent does GM represent a learning organi-
zation? Discuss.
Source: Excerpted from J. Bennett, “Recall Is First Big Test for GM 
Chief Barra,” The Wall Street Journal, March 5, 2014, http://online
.wsj.com/news/articles/SB100014240527023043607045794194941912
16588 (accessed March 5, 2014).
68 
PART 1 
Introduction
Is an Apology Enough?
This dilemma involves a scandal at the University of 
North Carolina (UNC). The issue revolves around 
whether or not the school’s Department of African 
and Afro-American Studies offered courses that never 
met and sponsored hundreds of independent study 
classes of limited value to student athletes. The 
university did an internal review and determined the 
department “offered more than 200 lecture courses that 
never met. The department also sponsored hundreds 
of independent study classes of dubious value. Inter-
nal reviews have identified forged faculty signatures 
and more than 500 grades changed without authoriza-
tion. The students affected were disproportionately 
football and basketball players.”61
College athletics is a $16 billion industry, and 
schools enjoy the related revenues in light of their non-
profit, tax-exempt status as organizations dedicated to 
education and research. This means that it is important 
for the “stars” to keep playing and winning games.
Management at UNC took action and eight em-
ployees either resigned or were fired, including the 
Chancellor. The new Chancellor, Carol Foyt, initially 
resisted calls for further investigation, but changed 
her mind in January 2014. An investigation is cur-
rently taking place.
The scandal was exposed by Mary Willingham, a 
campus reading specialist. Mary told reporters that 
she and other academic advisers “knowingly steered 
some of their charges into the fake classes to keep 
the sports stars eligible.” She said that “18 out of 
about 180 athletes whose records she assessed could 
be considered to read at a grammar school level.”62
Willingham’s comments resulted in her being de-
moted and stripped of her supervisory title and pub-
lic condemnation by some school officials. For 
example, James Dean Jr., the executive vice chancel-
lor and provost, said that “Mary Willingham has 
done our students a great disservice.” He initially de-
clared that Willingham was a liar, but later stated 
that he misspoke. Head basketball coach Roy Williams 
said that Willingham had impugned the moral char-
acter of his players. He claimed that “every one 
of the kids that we’ve recruited in 10 years you’d 
take home and let guard your grandchildren.” Sadly, 
Willingham has in turned received e-mails contain-
ing death threats, and recent reports in Bloomberg
Businessweek revealed that Dean continues to attack 
Willingham in internal meetings.63
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
Assuming that you are the university’s chancellor, 
what would you do at this point in the scandalous 
saga?
 1. Acknowledge wrongdoing, reinstate Mary Willingham 
to her former position, and continue the internal 
investigation.
 2. Acknowledge wrongdoing, but Mary stays where 
she is. She should not have blown the whistle to local 
reporters without first going to upper management at 
the university.
 3. Reprimand both James Dean and the basketball 
coach for their comments, and continue the internal 
investigation.
 4. Invent other options.
Legal/Ethical Challenge


PART 2 
THE ENVIRONMENT OF MANAGEMENT
The Manager’s Changing 
Work Environment & Ethical 
Responsibilities
Doing the Right Thing
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
3.1 The Triple Bottom Line: People, Planet, & Profit
Major Question: Is profit the only important goal of a business? 
What are others?
3.2 The Community of Stakeholders Inside the Organization
Major Question: Stockholders are only one group of 
stakeholders. Who are the stakeholders important to me inside 
the organization?
3.3 The Community of Stakeholders Outside the Organization
Major Question: Who are stakeholders important to me outside 
the organization?
3.4  The Ethical Responsibilities Required of You as a Manager
Major Question: What does the successful manager need to 
know about ethics and values?
3.5  The Social Responsibilities Required of You as a Manager
Major Question: Is being socially responsible really necessary?
3.6 Corporate Governance
Major Question: How can I trust a company is doing the right 
thing?
3

“Students don’t just say ‘OK I cheated in school, but 
now I’m in the workplace and it ends here,’” says an 
Arizona professor of legal and ethical studies. “They are 
forming bad habits that carry over into the market.”1
The “Holier-Than-Thou” Effect & Motivated 
Blindness
Have you ever cheated—had unauthorized help on 
tests? Or plagiarized—misrepresented others’ work 
as your own? If it’s wrong, why do it?
The psychological mechanisms operating here are:
•  The “holier-than-thou” effect. “People tend to 
be overly optimistic about their own abilities and 
fortunes—to overestimate their standing in class, 
their discipline, their sincerity,” suggests science 
writer Benedict Carey. “But this self-inflating bias 
may be even stronger when it comes to moral 
judgment.”2
•  Motivated blindness. This is the tendency to 
overlook information that works against our best 
interest. “People who have a vested self-interest, 
even the most honest among us, have difficulty 
being objective,” says one report. “Worse yet, 
they fail to recognize their lack of objectivity.”3 
Motivated blindness enables us to behave 
unethically while maintaining a positive 
self-image.4
Because of this psychology, cheating and pla-
giarism have become alarming problems in educa-
tion, from high school to graduate school.5 Most 
students rationalize their behavior by saying “I 
don’t usually do this, but I really have to do it.” 
They would rather cheat, that is, than show their 
families they got an F.6
The Dynamics behind Cheating
Habitual cheating, Carey suggests, “begins with small 
infractions—illegally downloading a few songs, skim-
ming small amounts from the register, lies of omission 
on taxes—and grows by increments.” As success is 
rewarded, these “small infractions” can burgeon into 
an ongoing deliberate strategy of deception or fraud.
How do people rationalize cheating? The justifica-
tions are mainly personal and emotional:
•  Cheating provides useful shortcuts. We 
constantly make choices “between short- and 
long-term gains,” suggests Carey, “between the 
more virtuous choice and the less virtuous one.” 
The brain naturally seeks useful shortcuts and so 
may view low-level cheating as productive.
•  Cheating arises out of resentment. People 
often justify lying and cheating because they 
have resentments about a rule or a boss.7
•  Cheating seeks to redress perceived 
unfairness. The urge to cheat may arise from a 
deep sense of unfairness, such as your sense 
that other people had special advantages.
•  Cheating is to avoid feeling like a chump. Many 
people cheat to avoid feeling like a chump—to 
“not being smart” and “finishing out of the money.”
For Discussion How would you justify cheating and 
plagiarism? Is it simply required behavior in order to 
get through college? (“I’m not going to be a chump.”) 
What do you say to the fact that, as the research 
shows, students who cheat and thus don’t actually 
do the assigned work are more likely to fail anyway?8 
Do you think you can stop the lying and deception 
once you’re out in the work world?
the manager’s toolbox
How Do People Excuse Lying & Cheating?
The triple bottom line of People, Planet, and Profit represents new standards of success 
for businesses. This helps define the new world in which managers must operate and 
their responsibilities, including the community of stakeholders, both internal and exter-
nal, they must deal with. The chapter also considers a manager’s ethical and social re-
sponsibilities, as well as the importance of corporate governance.
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
forecast

72 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
3.1 
The Triple Bottom Line: People, Planet, & Profit
Is profit the only important goal of a business? What are others?
THE BIG PICTURE
Many businesses, small and large, are beginning to subscribe to a new standard of success—the triple 
bottom line, representing People, Planet, and Profit. This outlook has found favor with many young adults 
(millennials) who are more concerned with finding meaning than material success.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
“Profit is a tool,” says Judy Wicks, who founded the White Dog Café in Philadelphia 
30 years ago. “The major purpose of business is to serve.”9
In traditional business accounting, the “bottom line” of a revenue-and-expenses 
statement is the organization’s profit (or loss). But in Wicks’s view, making money 
should be only one goal of business. The others are to foster social and environ-
mental consciousness—the two other elements of what’s known as the “triple bot-
tom line.” The   triple bottom line—representing People, Planet, and Profit (the 
3 Ps)—measures an organization’s social, environmental, and financial performance.
In this view of corporate performance, an organization has a responsibility to its 
employees and to the wider community (People), is committed to sustainable 
(green) environmental practices (Planet), and includes the costs of pollution, worker 
displacement, and other factors in its financial calculations (Profit). Success in 
these areas can be measured through a   social audit, a systematic assessment of a 
company’s performance in implementing socially responsible programs, often based 
on predefined goals.
The White Dog Café, for instance, is known for such social and environmental 
 activities as buying wind-powered electricity, organic produce, and humanely raised 
meat and poultry, as well as sharing ideas with competitors and opening up its prem-
ises for educational forums and speakers. But the triple bottom line isn’t just to be 
practiced by small businesses. As a co-author of Everybody’s Business: The Unlikely 
Story of How Big Business Can Fix the World observes, “big businesses can . . . be 
 really powerful, positive engines for social change.”10
The Millennials’ Search for Meaning
The notion of the triple bottom line has particular appeal to many of those in the 
“millennial” generation, which includes the two parts dubbed Generation Y, born 
1977–1989, and Generation Z, born 1990–2000. (The definition of birth years varies.)11
In Chapter 1, we mentioned that one of the great challenges for a manager is in trying 
to achieve personal success, whether in striving for a happy life or a meaningful life—or, 
if possible, both.
“Millennials,” write two scholars who have done research in this area, “appear 
to be more interested in living lives defined by meaning than by what some would 
call happiness. They report being less focused on financial success than they are 
on making a difference.”12 In support of this view, one study found that the princi-
pal factor young adults ages 21–31 wanted in a successful career was a sense of 
meaning.13 Another study found that millennials who came of age during the 
2007–2009 Great Recession reported more concern for others and less interest in 
material goods.14
In this chapter, we discuss two factors in achieving a meaningful life:
■ 
Understanding the environment in which a manager operates—the commu-
nity of stakeholders inside and outside the organization.
■ 
The ethical and social responsibilities of being a manager. ●
72 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management

3.2 
The Community of Stakeholders Inside 
the Organization
Stockholders are only one group of stakeholders. Who are stakeholders important to 
me inside the organization?
THE BIG PICTURE
Managers operate in two organizational environments—internal and external—both made up of stakehold-
ers, the people whose interests are affected by the organization. The first, or internal, environment consists 
of employees, owners, and the board of directors.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
73
San Bruno explosion. This 
2010 gas explosion and fire in 
San Bruno, California, which 
killed eight people, was linked 
to utility PG&E’s low priority 
given to pipeline safety and 
high priority to its “focus on 
financial performance.” What 
group should a company 
be most responsible to—
stockholders, managers, 
customers, the public?
In September 2010, a buried Pacific Gas & Electric natural-gas pipeline in the San 
Francisco–area suburb of San Bruno blew up in a spectacular pillar of fire, killing 
eight people and destroying 38 homes. “The gas-fed flames burned for more than 
90 minutes while PG&E scrambled to find a way to shut off the line,” reported the San 
Francisco Chronicle.15 How did this come about?
To Whom Should a Company Be Responsible?
It turned out that PG&E had relied on gas-leak surveys to determine whether transmission 
pipelines were safe, but the company’s incentive system awarded bonuses to supervisors 
whose crews found fewer leaks and kept repair costs down.16 Indeed, the company’s own 
internal audit found the incentives actually encouraged crews to produce inaccurate surveys.
An independent audit found that over an 11-year period PG&E collected $430 million 
more from its gas operations than the government had authorized—and it “chose to 
use the surplus revenues for general corporate purposes” rather than for improved 
safety.17 In fact, in the three years prior to the explosion, the company spent $56 million a 
year on an incentive plan—stock awards, performance shares, and deferred compensation—
for its executives and directors, including millions to the CEO. Despite this sleazy 
history—which will require the utility to spend $10 billion to test and replace gas lines 

74 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
and cost a proposed $2.45 billion in penalties—it was unclear, the Chronicle said in 
2012, “whether PG&E broke any criminal statutes governing its behavior, unless there 
was fraud.”18 Two years later, however, the utility was indicted on 12 criminal counts, 
for repeatedly violating the federal Pipeline Safety Act.19
Consider: Is a company principally responsible only to its stockholders and executives? 
Or are other groups equal in significance? Further, is it sufficient that a company simply be 
legal, as PG&E believes it was?20 Or, isn’t it equally important that it be ethical as well?
Internal & External Stakeholders
Perhaps we need a broader term than “stockholders” to indicate all those with a stake 
in an organization. That term, appropriately, is stakeholders—the people whose inter-
ests are affected by an organization’s activities.
Managers operate in two organizational environments, both made up of various 
stakeholders. (See Figure 3.1.) As we describe in the rest of this section, the two envi-
ronments are these:
■ 
Internal stakeholders
■ 
External stakeholders
74 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
The General
Environment
Economic forces
The Task
Environment
Customers
EXTERNAL
STAKEHOLDERS
INTERNAL
STAKEHOLDERS
Employees
Owners
Board of directors
Unions
Lenders
Allies
Governments
Distributors
Interest
groups
Suppliers
Media
Competitors
Technological
forces
International
forces
Political-legal
forces
Demographic forces
Sociocultural
forces
FIGURE 3.1 
The Organization’s Environment
The two main groups are internal and external stakeholders
Source: From Diverse Teams at Work by Lee Gardenswartz. Reprinted with permission of the Society for Human Resource Management 
(www.shrm.org), Alexandria, VA. Copyright © 2003, Society for Human Resource Management.

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
75
Internal Stakeholders
Whether small or large, the organization to which you belong has people in it who 
have an important stake in how it performs. These internal stakeholders consist of 
employees, owners, and the board of directors, if any. Let us consider each in turn.
Employees 
As a manager, could you run your part of the organization if you and 
your employees were constantly in conflict? Labor history, of course, is full of ac-
counts of just that. But such conflict may lower the performance of the organization, 
thereby hurting everyone’s stake. In many of today’s forward-looking organizations, 
employees are considered “the talent”—the most important resource.
“My chief assets drive out the gate every day,” says Jim Goodnight, CEO of North 
Carolina–based SAS. “My job is to make sure they come back.”21 SAS is the world’s 
largest privately held software business and was ranked No. 2 (behind Google) on 
Fortune’s 2014 list of “100 Best Companies to Work For.” (It ranked 1, 1, 3, and 2, 
respectively, in the years 2010–2013.) Even during the Great Recession, when there 
were six unemployed workers for every available U.S. job opening, SAS continued to 
treat employees exceptionally well, resulting in a turnover rate of only 2% in 2009, 
compared with a software industry average of 22%.
Owners 
The owners of an organization consist of all those who can claim it as their 
legal property, such as Walmart’s stockholders. In the for-profit world, if you’re run-
ning a one-person graphic design firm, the owner is just you—you’re what is known as 
a sole proprietorship. If you’re in an Internet start-up with your brother-in-law, you’re 
both owners—you’re a partnership. If you’re a member 
of a family running a car dealership, you’re all owners—
you’re investors in a privately owned company. If you 
work for a company that is more than half owned by its 
employees (such as W. L. Gore & Associates, maker 
of Gore-Tex fabric and No. 22 on Fortune’s 2014 
“Best Companies to Work For” list, or Lakeland, Florida, 
Publix Super Markets, No. 75), you are one of the joint 
owners—you’re part of an Employee Stock Ownership 
Plan (ESOP).22 And if you’ve bought a few shares of 
stock in a company whose shares are listed for sale on 
the New York Stock Exchange, such as General Motors, 
you’re one of thousands of owners—you’re a stock-
holder. In all these examples, of course, the stated goal 
of the owners is to make a profit.
Board of Directors 
Who hires the chief executive of a for-profit or nonprofit orga-
nization? In a corporation, it is the board of directors, whose members are elected by 
the stockholders to see that the company is being run according to their interests. In 
nonprofit organizations, such as universities or hospitals, the board may be called the 
board of trustees or board of regents. Board members are very important in setting the 
organization’s overall strategic goals and in approving the major decisions and salaries 
of top management.
Not all firms have a board of directors. A lawyer, for instance, may operate as a 
sole proprietor, making all her own decisions. A large corporation might have eight 
or so members on its board of directors. Some of these directors (inside directors) 
may be top executives of the firm. The rest (outside directors) are elected from out-
side the firm. ●
Employee ownership. 
Employees of New Belgium 
Brewing, maker of Fat Tire ale, 
raised $500,000 for nonprofits 
through the bicycling carnival 
Tour de Fat. The Fort Collins, 
Colorado, brewer is 100% 
employee owned, through a 
device known as an Employee 
Stock Ownership Plan, in which 
employees buy company stock 
in order to become owners. 
Although the idea was conceived 
over 50 years ago, there are only 
about 10,000 ESOPs today out 
of hundreds of thousands of 
businesses. Why do you suppose 
more companies aren’t owned 
by their employees?

In the preceding section we described the environment inside the organization. Here 
let’s consider the environment outside it, which consists of external stakeholders—
people or groups in the organization’s external environment that are affected by it. This 
environment consists of:
■ 
The task environment.
■ 
The general environment.
The Task Environment
The task environment consists of 11 groups that present you with daily tasks to han-
dle: customers, competitors, suppliers, distributors, strategic allies, employee organi-
zations, local communities, financial institutions, government regulators, special-interest 
groups, and mass media.
1. Customers 
The first law of business (and even nonprofits), we’ve said, is take 
care of the customer. Customers are those who pay to use an organization’s goods or 
services. Many customers value service over price, and are generally frustrated by poor 
customer relations at telecommunications companies, airlines, and social media sites. 
“In defense of these industries,” says one observer, “no one notices them when things 
go well, but people get outraged when they lose service or get stuck for hours at an 
airport.”23 On the other hand, he adds, “these industries often don’t have to worry 
about making customers happy” because they have few competitors.
3.3 
The Community of Stakeholders 
Outside the Organization
Who are stakeholders important to me outside the organization?
THE BIG PICTURE
The external environment of stakeholders consists of the task environment and the general environment. 
The task environment consists of customers, competitors, suppliers, distributors, strategic allies, employee 
associations, local communities, financial institutions, government regulators, special-interest groups, and 
the mass media. The general environment consists of economic, technological, sociocultural, demographic, 
political-legal, and international forces.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
76 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
EXAMPLE
Taking Care of Customers: Amazon’s Jeff Bezos Obsesses about 
“the Customer Experience”
Since launching Amazon in 1995, founder and CEO Jeff Bezos 
has been “obsessed,” in his words, with what he calls “the cus-
tomer experience.” Customers “care about having the lowest 
prices, having vast selection, so they have choice, and getting 
the products . . . fast,” Bezos has said. “And the reason I’m so 
obsessed with these drivers of the customer experience is that I 
believe that the success we have had over the past . . . years 
has been driven exclusively by that customer experience.”24
“Simple Is Not Easy.” Amazon has led the “Hall of Fame” of 
one online national survey of customer satisfaction four years 
in a row. The reason? “Amazon has always been very good at 
being simple, and simple is not easy,” says a consultant.25 The 
company’s user-friendly website, low prices, one-click shop-
ping, free-shipping options, no-hassle returns policy, “and even 
the sense of community it fosters,” says one reporter, “has 
welcomed some 180 million happy buyers into the fold. Com-
bined, those contented clickers buy an average of 9.6 million 
items a day.”26
Detractors. Not every stakeholder finds Amazon so conge-
nial. States have objected to its hardball policies on avoiding 

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
77
taxes on Internet sales. Suppliers grumble about being 
squeezed. Walk-in retailers have worried as shoppers have 
deserted them en masse for Amazon e-commerce. Book pub-
lishers and sellers have seethed over loss of readers to online 
order systems and Kindle e-books. And Amazon’s own em-
ployees have complained about severe workplace rules in the 
company’s 115 distribution centers.27 For most customers, 
however, none of this other stuff matters, and Amazon’s 
famed customer service helped the company grow to $74.5 
billion in revenues in 2013.
YOUR CALL
Does it matter to you how harshly a company treats other 
stakeholders so long as it handles its customer relations well? 
To what extent are Amazon’s policies consistent with the triple 
bottom line?
2. Competitors 
Is there any line of work you could enter in which there would not be 
competitors—people or organizations that compete for customers or resources, such as 
talented employees or raw materials? Every organization has to be actively aware of its 
competitors. Owners of florist shops and delicatessens must be aware that customers can 
buy the same products at Safeway or Kroger.
3. Suppliers 
A supplier is a person or an organization that provides supplies—that 
is, raw materials, services, equipment, labor, or energy—to other organizations. Suppli-
ers in turn have their own suppliers: The printer of this book buys the paper on which 
it is printed from a paper merchant, who in turn is supplied by several paper mills, 
which in turn are supplied wood for wood pulp by logging companies with forests in 
the United States or Canada.
4. Distributors 
A distributor is a person or an organization that helps another 
organization sell its goods and services to customers. Publishers of magazines, for 
instance, don’t sell directly to newsstands; rather, they go through a distributor, or 
wholesaler. Tickets to Maroon Five, Phish, or other artists’ performances might be 
sold to you directly by the concert hall, but they are also sold through such distributors 
as TicketMaster, LiveNation, and StubHub.
Distributors can be quite important because in some industries (such as movie the-
aters and magazines) there is not a lot of competition, and the distributor has a lot of 
power over the ultimate price of the product. However, the popularity of the Internet 
has allowed manufacturers of cell phones, for example, to cut out the “middleman”—
the distributor—and to sell to customers directly.
5. Strategic Allies 
Companies, and even nonprofit organizations, frequently link 
up with other organizations (even competing ones) in order to realize strategic advan-
tages. The term strategic allies describes the relationship of two organizations who join 
forces to achieve advantages neither can perform as well alone.
With their worldwide reservation systems and slick marketing, big companies—
Hilton, Hyatt, Marriott, Starwood, and so on—dominate the high-end business-center 
hotels. But in many cities, there are still independents—such as The Rittenhouse in 
Philadelphia, The Hay-Adams in Washington, DC, and The Adolphus in Dallas—that 
compete with the chains by promoting their prestigious locations, grand architecture, 
rich history, and personalized service. In recent years, however, some high-end inde-
pendents have become affiliated with chains as strategic allies because chains can buy 
supplies for less and they have more far-reaching sales channels. The 105-year-old 
U.S. Grant in downtown San Diego, for example, became part of Starwood’s Luxury 
Collection to get better worldwide exposure.
6. Employee Organizations: Unions & Associations 
As a rule of thumb, labor 
unions (such as the United Auto Workers or the Teamsters Union) tend to represent hourly 
workers; professional associations (such as the National Education Association or the 
Newspaper Guild) tend to represent salaried workers. Nevertheless, during a labor 

78 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
dispute, salary-earning teachers in the American Federation of Teachers might well picket 
in sympathy with the wage-earning janitors in the Service Employees International Union.
In recent years, the percentage of the labor force represented by unions has steadily 
declined (from 35% in the 1950s to 11.3% in 2013).28 Indeed, more than five times as 
many union members are now public-sector workers compared to private-sector work-
ers, whose unionizing has sharply fallen off, mainly because of recession-related job 
losses in manufacturing and construction. The composition of the membership has 
also changed, with 45% of the unionized workforce now female and 38% of union 
members holding a four-year college degree or more.29
7. Local Communities 
As more educated Gen Yers (ages 18–34) say they want to live in 
cities, more companies are following them by relocating their headquarters out of suburbia—
as has Motorola Mobility, for instance, moving from small town Libertyville, Illinois, 
to downtown Chicago.30 Is this a problem? Local communities are obviously important 
stakeholders, as becomes evident not only when a big organization arrives but also when it 
leaves, sending government officials scrambling to find new industry to replace it. Schools 
and municipal governments rely on the organization for their tax base. Families and mer-
chants depend on its employee payroll for their livelihoods. In addition, everyone from the 
United Way to the Little League may rely on it for some financial support.
If a community gives a company tax breaks in return for the promise of new jobs and the 
firm fails to deliver, does the community have the right to institute clawbacks—rescinding 
the tax breaks when firms don’t deliver promised jobs? But what is a town to do if a com-
pany goes bankrupt, as did Hoku Materials, manufacturer of materials for solar panels, after 
the struggling town of Pocatello, Idaho, gave it numerous concessions?31
EXAMPLE
Local Communities as Stakeholders: Are Financial Incentives to Business 
Really Necessary?
In 2013, only two movies with production budgets higher than 
$100 million were filmed in Los Angeles. The reason: “success-
ful efforts by a host of states to use tax incentives to poach 
[movie] production business from California,” says one re-
port.32 The states included Georgia, Louisiana, Nevada, New 
Mexico, New York, Oregon, and Texas, all seeking the supposed 
economic benefits film companies bring, such as purchasing 
supplies from local businesses.33
Public Incentives to Private Business. Film productions aren’t 
the only beneficiaries of such government incentives, which may 
come in the form of cash grants and loans, sales tax breaks, in-
come tax credits and exemptions, free services, and property tax 
abatements. In San Francisco, tech companies Twitter, Microsoft, 
Zendesk, Zoosk, and Spotify have sought tax breaks for lo-
cating in seedy areas in need of revival.34 In Arizona, the town 
of Mesa “offered tax breaks, built power lines, fast-tracked 
building permits, and got the state to declare a vacant 1.3 
million-square-foot plant a foreign trade zone,” says one ac-
count, to lure Apple Inc. to build a factory employing 700 
people.35 In Connecticut, the government gave sports net-
work ESPN, with headquarters located in Bristol, $260 million 
in tax breaks and credits over 12 years—just to preclude the 
highly unlikely possibility the multibillion-dollar conglomerate 
might want to move elsewhere.36
Community stakeholder. Sports network ESPN in Bristol, Connecticut, 
is located on 123 acres, employs about 4,000 workers, takes in more 
than $6 billion a year in subscriber fees, and has received millions in 
government tax incentives. No longer a start-up but a billion-dollar 
conglomerate, should the company continue to receive state tax 
subsidies to induce it to stay in Bristol? Or should that money be given 
to struggling entrepreneurs or provide teacher raises?
“Help Us Help You.” Such government inducements are ex-
traordinarily commonplace—but often to the financial detri-
ment of the local community. “A portrait arises,” The New York 
Times wrote, “of mayors and governors who are desperate to 
create jobs, outmatched by multinational corporations, and 

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
79
Special interests. Fast-food 
workers demonstrate to 
demand a $15-an-hour 
guaranteed wage and the right 
to union representation.
short on tools to fact-check what companies tell them. Many of 
the officials said they feared that companies would move jobs 
overseas if they did not get subsidies in the United States.”37
Although most incentive funds are directed toward manufac-
turing, followed by agriculture, the oil, gas, and mining sectors 
are in third place, the film business fourth, and technology 
companies not far behind.
YOUR CALL
How would you advise local public officials to handle the 
whole matter of tax incentives for business—especially if they 
are across the negotiating table from a conglomerate like 
Royal Dutch Shell or heavy-equipment maker Caterpillar? 
What obligations should a community expect of the compa-
nies located there?
8. Financial Institutions 
Want to launch a small company? Although normally re-
luctant to make loans to start-ups, financial institutions—banks, savings and loans, and 
credit unions—may do so if you have a good credit history or can secure the loan with 
property such as a house. During the Great Recession, even good customers found 
loans hard to get. There then emerged a new kind of financing called crowdfunding, or 
crowdsourcing, raising money for a project or venture by obtaining many small amounts 
of money from many people (“the crowd”), as we discuss further in Chapter 10.
Established companies also often need loans to tide them over when revenues are down 
or to finance expansion, but they rely for assistance on lenders such as commercial banks, 
investment banks, and insurance companies.
9. Government Regulators 
The preceding groups are external stakeholders in 
your organization since they are clearly affected by its activities. But why would 
government regulators—regulatory agencies that establish ground rules under which 
organizations may operate—be considered stakeholders?
We are talking here about an alphabet soup of agencies, boards, and commissions that 
have the legal authority to prescribe or proscribe the conditions under which you may 
conduct business. To these may be added local and state regulators on the one hand and 
foreign governments and international agencies (such as the World Trade Organization, 
which oversees international trade and standardization efforts) on the other.
Such government regulators can be said to be stakeholders because not only do they 
affect the activities of your organization, they are in turn affected by it. The Federal 
Aviation Agency (FAA), for example, specifies how far planes must stay apart to pre-
vent midair collisions. But when the airlines want to add more flights on certain routes, 
the FAA may have to add more flight controllers and radar equipment, since those are 
the agency’s responsibility.
10. Special-Interest Groups 
In recent times, efforts to ban horse-drawn car-
riages that serve tourists wanting to take in urban sights have spread across the coun-
try, from Salt Lake City to Atlanta. In New York City, 
the 1,200 operators of horse-drawn carriage rides were 
being pressured by opponents who insisted the horses 
weren’t equipped to handle city noise and traffic, as 
well as intense summer heat. Spurred by some highly 
publicized deaths and injuries to horses, many of the 
complaints came from animal-rights groups, such as 
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA). In 
New York, however, two-thirds of city voters said they 
didn’t want the bans. Some visitors also said they liked 
“the clip-clop of the horse’s feet.”38
Special-interest groups are groups whose members 
try to influence specific issues, some of which may af-
fect your organization. Examples are PETA, Mothers 
Against Drunk Driving, the National Organization for 

80 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
Women, and the National Rifle Association. Special-interest groups may try to exert 
political influence, as in contributing funds to lawmakers’ election campaigns or in 
launching letter-writing efforts to officials. Or they may organize picketing and 
boycotts—holding back their patronage—of certain companies. In 2013, some 
Americans began a boycott of Stolichnaya vodka to protest what they saw as state-
sponsored homophobia in Russia—until they learned the vodka was made not in 
Russia but in Latvia.39
11. Mass Media 
 No manager can afford to ignore the power of the mass media—print, 
radio, TV, and the Internet—to rapidly and widely disseminate news both bad and good. 
Thus, most companies, universities, hospitals, and even government agencies have a public-
relations person or department to communicate effectively with the press. In addition, top-
level executives often receive special instruction on how to best deal with the media.
EXAMPLE
Managing the Media: What’s the Best Practice for Handling Product Recalls?
Every now and then, a company has to issue a product recall 
for defective products, but recently there has been almost a 
“recall sprawl.”
Lululemon Athletica was forced to recall some top-selling yoga 
pants after it found them to be too see-through.40 Children’s car 
seat makers Graco and Evenflo recalled 4.2 million and 1.4 million 
child restraints, respectively, because of buckle problems.41
GlaxcoSmithKline recalled an over-the-counter weight-loss drug 
after customer complaints about missing labels and possible 
tampering with seals.42 The biggest news, however, has been in 
automobiles—most recently those made by General Motors.
GM’s Cobalt Recall. In 2004 (five years before the company’s 
bankruptcy and government takeover), General Motors received 
the first reports of engines suddenly shutting down in Chevrolet 
Cobalts, owing to a defective ignition switch, a condition that ulti-
mately led to 13 fatal crashes. It was not until December 2013, 
however, when Mary Barra (introduced in Chapter 1) was about to 
become GM chief, that top management was alerted to the prob-
lem, proving the adage that the larger an organization gets, the 
less likely bad news will travel smoothly up the hierarchy.43
Although government regulators had been alerted in 2007, they 
did not open an investigation.44 Barra herself said she had known 
nothing about the matter prior to becoming CEO.
Barra Steps Up. In 2014, amid a firestorm of consumer criti-
cism, GM issued recalls, for Cobalts and other vehicles, covering 
6.3 million cars and trucks.45 In a move intended to reassure the 
public that GM had become more trustworthy and less bureau-
cratic and arrogant since it emerged from bankruptcy, Barra also 
testified before a congressional committee, but “her measured, 
carefully worded responses only seemed to inflame senators,” 
says one report.46
On the other hand, Barra has met with families of people 
killed in Cobalt accidents, something old GM managers would 
not have done. She also ordered an internal investigation to find 
out why GM failed to fix a safety defect for more than a decade.47
The Gold Standard. What is a company supposed to do when it 
has a public relations disaster? The gold standard in brand crisis 
management is the path followed by health products company 
Johnson & Johnson in 1982, after several consumers died from 
taking tainted Tylenol pills. J&J responded in a way that has 
 become the preferred strategy taught in business schools, ac-
cording to one account: “Communicate clearly with the public 
about a crisis, cooperate with government officials, swiftly begin 
its own investigation of a problem, and, if necessary, quickly insti-
tute a product recall.”48 A big part of the strategy is communicat-
ing honestly and frequently through the media.
YOUR CALL
For GM, “Mary Barra seems to fully embody the position of the 
CEO who is sorry,” says business ethics professor Amy Sepinwall. 
“She recognizes that she has to pass on the [corporation’s] 
deepest regrets, and I think she’s been pretty convincing on that 
score.”49 Do you agree? What else should she have done?
The General Environment
Beyond the task environment is the general environment, or macroenvironment, which 
includes six forces: economic, technological, sociocultural, demographic, political-
legal, and international.
You may be able to control some forces in the task environment, but you can’t con-
trol those in the general environment. Nevertheless, they can profoundly affect your 

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
81
Sociocultural forces. The U.S. 
obesity rate is one of those 
sociocultural forces capable of 
altering entire industries. Which 
ones do you think would be 
most affected?
organization’s task environment without your knowing it, springing nasty surprises on 
you. Clearly, then, as a manager you need to keep your eye on the far horizon because 
these forces of the general environment can affect long-term plans and decisions.
1. Economic Forces 
Economic forces consist of the general economic conditions 
and trends—unemployment, inflation, interest rates, economic growth—that may affect 
an organization’s performance. These are forces in your nation and region and even the 
world over which you and your organization probably have no control, as happened in 
the Great Recession and its aftermath.
Are banks’ interest rates going up in the United States? Then it will cost you 
more to borrow money to open new stores or build new plants. Is your region’s un-
employment rate rising? Then maybe you’ll have more job applicants to hire from, 
yet you’ll also have fewer customers with money to spend. (A record 46 million 
Americans are presently considered poor; the poverty rate has fallen only to 15% 
from 19% in two generations.)50 Are natural resources getting scarce in an impor-
tant area of supply? Then your company will need to pay more for them or switch 
to alternative sources.
One indicator that managers often pay attention to is productivity growth. Rising 
productivity leads to rising profits, lower inflation, and higher stock prices. In recent 
times, companies have been using information technology to cut costs, resulting in 
productivity growing at an annual rate of 2.7% from 2001 to 2007, slumping to 1.2% 
in the recession year 2008, then roaring back to 3.9% in 2010 and 2.8% in 2011, and 
slipping to 1.8% in 2012 and 2013.51 Aided by technology, U.S. manufacturing has 
actually surged 40.4% since 2001, although manufacturing jobs have declined.52
2. Technological Forces 
Technological forces are new developments in meth-
ods for transforming resources into goods or services. For example, think what the 
United States would have been like if the elevator, air-conditioning, the combustion 
engine, and the airplane had not been invented. No doubt changes in computer and 
communications technology—especially the influence of the Internet—will continue 
to be powerful technological forces during your managerial career. But other techno-
logical currents may affect you as well.
For example, biotechnology may well turn health and medicine upside down in the 
coming decades. Researchers can already clone animals, and some reports say they are 
close to doing the same with humans.
3. Sociocultural Forces 
Americans are driving 
less, more households are without vehicles, and young 
people are evincing a lack of interest in cars—causing 
deep worry in the auto industry.53 Long an American rite 
of passage, the act of getting a driver’s license at age 16 
is no longer as popular as it was and is on the wane 
among the digital generation. In other words, Facebook, 
Twitter, and other social media are altering long-
standing sociocultural patterns.
Sociocultural forces are influences and trends origi-
nating in a country’s, a society’s, or a culture’s human 
relationships and values that may affect an organization. 
Seismic changes are occurring in Americans’ views 
about sociocultural issues, recent polls show: 86% in 
approval of interracial marriage in 2011 (versus 48% in 
1991), 55% in favor of same-sex marriage in 2013 (ver-
sus 27% in 1996), 52% supporting legalization of mari-
juana in 2013 (versus 12% in 1969), and so on.54
Entire industries have been rocked when the culture 
underwent a lifestyle change, most notably changes in 

approaches to health. Diet sodas, for instance, have gone through a nearly decade-long 
decline, causing major concerns for Coca-Cola and PepsiCo, because more Americans 
worry that artificial sweeteners are unhealthy, despite numerous studies that find them 
safe.55 Some killer diseases, such as measles, whooping cough, and meningitis, are 
creeping back because of an anti-vaccine movement based on philosophical and reli-
gious exemptions.56 Recently, with more attention focused on the epidemic of obesity, 
there has been some turnaround, with Americans consuming fewer calories and cutting 
back on fast food, cholesterol, and fat.57
4. Demographic Forces 
Demographics derives from the ancient Greek word for 
“people”—demos—and deals with statistics relating to human populations. Age, gen-
der, race, sexual orientation, occupation, income, family size, and the like are known 
as demographic characteristics when they are used to express measurements of certain 
groups. Demographic forces are influences on an organization arising from changes in 
the characteristics of a population, such as age, gender, or ethnic origin.
Among recent changes: marriage rates are down, more couples are marrying later, 
black-white and same-sex marriages are increasing, one-person households are grow-
ing, the decline in fertility rates is leveling off, divorce rates are down, secularism 
(being nonreligious) is up, more households are multigenerational, and the percentage 
of people living in rural areas is the lowest ever.58 By 2050, it’s predicted, the U.S. 
population will soar to 401 million (from about 317 million today), and minorities are 
expected to exceed 50% of the population by around 2043.59
5. Political-Legal Forces 
Political-legal forces are changes in the way poli-
tics shape laws and laws shape the opportunities for and threats to an organization. 
In the United States, whatever political view tends to be dominant at the moment 
may be reflected in how the government handles antitrust issues, in which one 
company tends to monopolize a particular industry. Should Comcast and Time 
Warner Cable, for instance, be allowed to merge and have a dominant share of the 
pay-TV market?
As for legal forces, some countries have more fully developed legal systems than 
others. And some countries have more lawyers per capita. (The United States report-
edly has more lawyers per person in its population than any of 29 countries studied 
except Greece.)60 American companies may be more willing to use the legal system to 
advance their interests, as in suing competitors to gain competitive advantage. But they 
must also watch that others don’t do the same to them.
6. International Forces 
International forces are changes in the economic, politi-
cal, legal, and technological global system that may affect an organization.
This category represents a huge grab bag of influences. How does the economic 
integration of the European Union create threats and opportunities for American 
companies? U.S. companies that do significant business in Europe are subject to 
regulation by the European Union. For instance, in a three-year antitrust case, sev-
eral companies in Europe were able to get Google to change the way it displays its 
search results, after they complained that, as one consumer rights advocacy group 
stated, Google could “stack its search results as suits itself.”61 We consider global 
concerns in Chapter 4.
How well Americans can handle international forces depends a lot on their training. 
Unfortunately, only 18% of Americans report speaking a language other than English, 
whereas 53% of Europeans, for example, can converse in a second language.62 One 
writer suggests U.S. companies should hire more key managers whose native language 
isn’t English because “research shows that we behave more rationally when we think 
in another language”—that is, it reduces biases in decision making.63 ●
82 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management

Sunshine on gifts. Some doctors say that 
medicine changes so rapidly that they rely 
on drug companies and fellow M.D.’s to 
keep them up to date, as through 
presentations at medical society dinners 
financed by pharmaceutical companies. 
However, the Physician Payments 
Sunshine Act now requires that 
pharmaceutical companies report meals, 
travel expenses, grants, lecture fees, drug 
samples, and other gifts to physicians. Do 
you think such disclosures are necessary?
3.4 
The Ethical Responsibilities Required of You 
as a Manager
What does the successful manager need to know about ethics and values?
THE BIG PICTURE
Managers need to be aware of what constitutes ethics, values, the four approaches to ethical dilemmas, and 
how organizations can promote ethics.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
83
Would you take supplies from the office supply closet on leaving a job? (Twenty-six 
percent of workers said they would, 74% said they wouldn’t, in one survey.)64 That 
may be an easy decision. But how would you handle a choice between paying a client 
money under the table in order to land a big contract, for example, and losing your 
job? That’s a much harder matter.
In business, choosing between economic performance and social performance is 
what most ethical conflicts are about.65 This is known as an ethical dilemma, a situation 
in which you have to decide whether to pursue a course of action that may benefit you 
or your organization but that is unethical or even illegal.
Defining Ethics & Values
Seventy-three percent of American employees working full time say they have ob-
served ethical misconduct at work, and 36% have been “distracted” by it.66 Most of us 
assume we know what “ethics” and “values” mean, but do we? Let’s consider them.
Ethics 
Ethics are the standards of right and wrong that influence behavior. 
These standards may vary among countries and among cultures. Ethical behavior 
is behavior that is accepted as “right” as opposed to “wrong” according to those 
standards.
What are the differences among a tip, a gratuity, a gift, a donation, a commission, a 
consulting fee, a kickback, a bribe? Regardless of the amount of money involved, each 
one may be intended to reward the recipient for providing you with better service, 
either anticipated or performed.

84 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
For years, pharmaceutical companies have provided doctors with small gifts—pads 
with logos, tickets to sports events, free drug samples—to promote their drugs. How-
ever, in recent years, points out one editorial, “those trinkets have evolved into big 
money for doctors to speak to other doctors about new drugs,” as in presentations at 
dinner lectures.67 What if the drug makers’ strategy, as some critics accuse, is to use 
such methods even to expand the whole concept of high blood pressure or attention 
deficit disorder so as to increase the pool of people taking medications?68 Because of 
such concerns, a Sunshine Act provision was written into the Affordable Care Act, re-
quiring drug companies to report payments to individual doctors.69
Values 
Ethical dilemmas often take place because of an organization’s value system, 
the pattern of values within an organization. Values are the relatively permanent and deeply 
held underlying beliefs and attitudes that help determine a person’s behavior, such as the 
belief that “Fairness means hiring according to ability, not family background.” Values and 
value systems are the underpinnings for ethics and ethical behavior.
Organizations may have two important value systems that can conflict: (1) the value 
system stressing financial performance versus (2) the value system stressing cohesion 
and solidarity in employee relationships.70
Four Approaches to Deciding Ethical Dilemmas
How do alternative values guide people’s decisions about ethical behavior? Here are 
four approaches, which may be taken as guidelines:
1. The Utilitarian Approach: For the Greatest Good 
Ethical behavior in the 
utilitarian approach is guided by what will result in the greatest good for the greatest 
number of people. Managers often take the utilitarian approach, using financial 
performance—such as efficiency and profit—as the best definition of what constitutes 
“the greatest good for the greatest number.”71
Thus, a utilitarian “cost-benefit” analysis might show that in the short run the firing 
of thousands of employees may improve a company’s bottom line and provide imme-
diate benefits for the stockholders. The drawback of this approach, however, is that it 
may result in damage to workforce morale and the loss of employees with experience 
and skills—actions not so readily measurable in dollars.
2. The Individual Approach: For Your Greatest Self-Interest Long Term, 
Which Will Help Others 
Ethical behavior in the individual approach is guided by 
what will result in the individual’s best long-term interests, which ultimately are in every-
one’s self-interest. The assumption here is that you will act ethically in the short run to 
avoid others harming you in the long run.
The flaw here, however, is that one person’s short-term self-gain may not, in fact, be 
good for everyone in the long term. After all, the manager of an agribusiness that puts 
chemical fertilizers on the crops every year will always benefit, but the fishing indus-
tries downstream could ultimately suffer if chemical runoff reduces the number of fish. 
Indeed, this is one reason why Puget Sound Chinook, or king salmon, are now threat-
ened with extinction in the Pacific Northwest.72
3. The Moral-Rights Approach: Respecting Fundamental Rights Shared 
by Everyone 
Ethical behavior in the moral-rights approach is guided by respect for 
the fundamental rights of human beings, such as those expressed in the U.S. Constitu-
tion’s Bill of Rights. We would all tend to agree that denying people the right to life, 
liberty, privacy, health and safety, and due process is unethical. Thus, most of us would 
have no difficulty condemning the situation of immigrants illegally brought into the United 
States and then effectively enslaved—as when made to work 7 days a week as maids.
The difficulty, however, is when rights are in conflict, such as employer and em-
ployee rights. Should employees on the job have a guarantee of privacy? Actually, it 

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
85
Ponzi schemer. Phony financier 
R. Allen Stanford on the day of 
his sentencing to 110 years in 
prison without parole for 
masterminding a $7 billion Ponzi 
scheme involving fraudulent 
high-interest certificates of 
deposit at his Caribbean bank. 
A federal prosecutor said Allen 
was “utterly without remorse” 
and “treated all his victims as 
roadkill.” The 28,000 Stanford 
victims received less than one 
penny on the dollar in attempting 
to recover their investments.
is legal for employers to listen to business phone calls and monitor all nonspoken 
personal communications.73
4. The Justice Approach: Respecting Impartial Standards of Fairness 
Eth-
ical behavior in the justice approach is guided by respect for impartial standards of fair-
ness and equity. One consideration here is whether an organization’s policies—such as 
those governing promotions or sexual harassment cases—are administered impartially 
and fairly regardless of gender, age, sexual orientation, and the like.
Fairness can often be a hot issue. For instance, many employees are loudly resentful 
when a corporation’s CEO is paid a salary and bonuses worth hundreds of times more 
than what they receive—even when the company performs poorly—and when fired is 
then given a “golden parachute,” or extravagant package of separation pay and benefits.
White-Collar Crime, SarbOx, & Ethical Training
At the beginning of the 21st century, U.S. business erupted in an array of scandals 
represented in such names as Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, and Adelphia, and their chief 
executives—Jeffrey Skilling, Bernard Ebbers, Dennis Kozlowski, and John Rigas—
went to prison on various fraud convictions. Executives’ deceits generated a great deal 
of public outrage, as a result of which Congress passed the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, as 
we’ll describe. Did that stop the raft of business scandals? Not quite.
Next to hit the headlines were cases of insider trading, the illegal trading of a compa-
ny’s stock by people using confidential company information. In 2004, Sam Waksal, CEO 
of ImClone, a biotechnology company, sold his shares of stock when he learned—before 
the news was made public—that the U.S. government was blocking ImClone’s new can-
cer drug. For this act of insider trading, he ultimately was sentenced to 87 months in 
prison and fined $3 million. (This was the case that affected lifestyle guru Martha Stewart, 
who also went to prison.) In 2011, billionaire hedge-fund manager Raj Rajaratnam was 
sentenced to 11 years in prison for trading on tips from persons at companies who 
slipped him advance word on inside information.74 In 2014, Mathew Martoma, a former 
portfolio manager at SAC Capital Advisors, went on trial for insider trading for using 
confidential information about an experimental Alzheimer’s drug.75 There were even 
cases in which two San Francisco Bay Area men were accused by federal authorities of 
doing insider trading because they traded stocks using confidential information gleaned 
from listening to their wives’ phone conversations.76
Also there was the shocking news of financier Bernard 
Madoff, who confessed to a $50 billion Ponzi scheme, using 
cash from newer investors to pay off older ones.77 He was sen-
tenced to 150 years in prison.78 Another convicted of creating 
a Ponzi scheme was Texas financier R. Allen Stanford, who 
built a flashy offshore $7 billion financial empire; he was sen-
tenced to 110 years in prison in 2012.79
The Sarbanes–Oxley Reform Act 
The Sarbanes–Oxley 
Act of 2002, often shortened to SarbOx, or SOX, established 
requirements for proper financial record keeping for public 
companies and penalties of as much as 25 years in prison 
for noncompliance.80 Administered by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission, SarbOx requires a company’s chief 
executive officer and chief financial officer to personally certify 
the organization’s financial reports, prohibits them from tak-
ing personal loans or lines of credit, and makes them reim-
burse the organization for bonuses and stock options when 
required by restatement of corporate profits. It also requires 
the company to have established procedures and guidelines for 
audit committees.81

86 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
How Do People Learn Ethics? Kohlberg’s Theories 
American business his-
tory is permeated with occasional malfeasance, from railroad tycoons trying to corner 
the gold market (the 1872 Crédit Mobilier scandal) to 25-year-old bank customer ser-
vice representatives swindling elderly customers out of their finances. Legislation such 
as SarbOx can’t head off all such behavior. No wonder that now many colleges and 
universities have required more education in ethics.
“Schools bear some responsibility for the behavior of executives,” says Fred J. 
Evans, dean of the College of Business and Economics at California State University at 
Northridge. “If you’re making systematic errors in the [business] world, you have to go 
back to the schools and ask, ‘What are you teaching?’”82 The good news is that high 
school students are lying, cheating, and stealing less than they did a decade earlier.83 In 
addition, more graduate business schools are changing their curriculums to teach eth-
ics.84 The bad news, however, is that a 2006 survey of 50,000 undergraduates found that 
26% of business majors admitted to serious cheating on exams, and 54% admitted to 
cheating on written assignments.85 Another survey of 5,331graduate students at 32 uni-
versities found that 56% of the graduate business students and 47% of nonbusiness 
graduate students admitted to cheating one or more times during the preceding year.86
Of course, most students’ levels of moral development are established by person-
alities and upbringing long before they get to college, with some being more advanced 
than others. One psychologist, Laurence Kohlberg, has proposed three levels of per-
sonal moral development—preconventional, conventional, and postconventional.87
■ 
Level 1, preconventional—follows rules. People who have achieved this 
level tend to follow rules and to obey authority to avoid unpleasant conse-
quences. Managers of the Level 1 sort tend to be autocratic or coercive, ex-
pecting employees to be obedient for obedience’s sake.
■ 
Level 2, conventional—follows expectations of others. People whose moral 
development has reached this level are conformist but not slavish, generally 
adhering to the expectations of others in their lives. Level 2 managers lead by 
encouragement and cooperation and are more group and team oriented. Most 
managers are at this level.
■ 
Level 3, postconventional—guided by internal values. The farthest along in 
moral development, Level 3 managers are independent souls who follow their 
own values and standards, focusing on the needs of their employees and try-
ing to lead by empowering those working for them. Only about a fifth of 
American managers are said to reach this level.
What level of development do you think you’ve reached?
How Organizations Can Promote Ethics
Ethics needs to be an everyday affair, not a one-time thing. This is why many large U.S. com-
panies now have a chief ethics officer, whose job is to make ethical conduct a priority issue.
There are several ways an organization may promote high ethical standards on the 
job, as follows.88
1. Creating a Strong Ethical Climate 
An ethical climate represents employ-
ees’ perceptions about the extent to which work environments support ethical behavior. 
It is important for managers to foster ethical climates because they significantly affect 
the frequency of ethical behavior. Managers can promote ethical climates through the 
policies, procedures, and practices that are used on a daily basis.
2. Screening Prospective Employees 
Companies try to screen out dishonest, 
irresponsible employees by checking applicants’ resumes and references. Some firms, 
for example, run employee applications through E-Verify, a federal program that al-
lows employers to check for illegal immigrants. Some also use personality tests and 
integrity testing to identify potentially dishonest people.

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
87
3. Instituting Ethics Codes & Training Programs 
A code of ethics consists of 
a formal written set of ethical standards guiding an organization’s actions. Most codes 
offer guidance on how to treat customers, suppliers, competitors, and other stakeholders. 
The purpose is to clearly state top management’s expectations for all employees. As 
you might expect, most codes prohibit bribes, kickbacks, misappropriation of corporate 
assets, conflicts of interest, and “cooking the books”—making false accounting state-
ments and other records. Other areas frequently covered in ethics codes are political 
contributions, workforce diversity, and confidentiality of corporate information.
In addition, according to a Society for Human Resource Management Weekly Sur-
vey, 32% of human resources professionals indicated that their organizations offered 
ethics training.89 The approaches vary, but one way is to use a case approach to present 
employees with ethical dilemmas. By clarifying expectations, this kind of training 
may reduce unethical behavior.90
4. Rewarding Ethical Behavior: Protecting Whistle-Blowers 
It’s not 
enough to simply punish bad behavior; managers must also reward good ethical be-
havior, as in encouraging (or at least not discouraging) whistle-blowers.
A whistle-blower is an employee, or even an outside consultant, who reports organi-
zational misconduct to the public, such as health and safety matters, waste, corruption, or 
overcharging of customers.91 For instance, the law that created the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration allows workers to report unsafe conditions, such as “exposure 
to toxic chemicals; the use of dangerous machines, which can crush fingers; the use of 
contaminated needles, which expose workers to the AIDS virus; and the strain of repeti-
tive hand motion, whether at a computer keyboard or in a meatpacking plant.”92 In some 
cases, whistle-blowers may receive a reward; the IRS, for instance, is authorized to pay 
tipsters rewards as high as 30% in cases involving large amounts of money.93
True whistle-blowing involves acts that are against the law. However, the principal 
kinds of misconduct reported in one study—misuse of company time, abusive behav-
ior, and lying to employees—aren’t necessarily illegal, although they may create an 
offensive work environment, the leading reason people leave their jobs.94 Retaliation 
against whistle-blowers is also on the rise, ranging from giving them the cold shoulder 
to passing them over for promotion.
In exposing unethical behavior, then, it’s important to be clear why you’re doing it 
(trying to help the company or just get someone in trouble), not report something for 
the wrong reason (discuss your concerns with someone who has similar values), and 
follow proper channels (like addressing the supervisor of the supposed culprit). Don’t 
try to report externally (lashing out on Facebook, for instance) without speaking to 
those who might resolve the problem.95
Have you ever thought about blowing the whistle on something you thought was 
unethical or illegal? Yes or no, your decision was guided in part by your own moral 
standards or ethical identity. We created the following self-assessment to aid your 
awareness about your propensity to expose unethical or illegal acts. ●
Assessing Your Ethical Ideology
This survey is designed to assess your ethical ideology. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 3.1. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Where do you stand in terms of idealism and relativism? 
Are you surprised by the results?
2. 
Based on your two lowest-scored items for idealism and 
relativism, what beliefs are getting in the way of 
increasing your ethical ideology?
3. 
How might a low ethical ideology impact your career? 
How about a high ethical ideology?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.1
®

The slow economic recovery from the Great Recession has had a powerful impact on 
today’s college freshmen, with 86.3% in 2013 declaring that getting “a better job” is 
the top reason for going to college, the principal goal of freshmen for the past five 
years. (The second most cited reason, at 81.6%, was “to learn more about things that 
interest me,” which held the top spot for the first half of the past decade.)96 But is 
money the be-all and end-all in business? This is the concern behind the triple bottom 
line discussed earlier (p. 72).
If ethical responsibility is about being a good individual citizen, social responsibil-
ity is about being a good organizational citizen. More formally, social responsibility is 
a manager’s duty to take actions that will benefit the interests of society as well as of 
the organization. When generalized beyond the individual to the organization, social 
responsibility is called corporate social responsibility (CSR), the notion that corpora-
tions are expected to go above and beyond following the law and making a profit.
Corporate Social Responsibility: 
The Top of the Pyramid
According to University of Georgia business scholar Archie B. Carroll, corporate 
social responsibility rests at the top of a pyramid of a corporation’s obligations, right 
up there with economic, legal, and ethical obligations. Some people might hold that a 
company’s first and only duty is to make a profit. However, Carroll suggests the re-
sponsibilities of an organization in the global economy should take the following pri-
orities, with profit being the most fundamental (base of the pyramid) and corporate 
citizenship at the top:97
■ 
Be a good global corporate citizen, as defined by the host country’s expectations.
■ 
Be ethical in its practices, taking host-country and global standards into 
consideration.
■ 
Obey the law of host countries as well as international law.
■ 
Make a profit consistent with expectations for international business.
These priorities are illustrated in the pyramid opposite. (See Figure 3.2.)
Is Social Responsibility Worthwhile? Opposing & 
Supporting Viewpoints
In the old days of cutthroat capitalism, social responsibility was hardly thought of. A 
company’s most important goal was to make money pretty much any way it could, and 
the consequences be damned. Today for-profit enterprises generally make a point of 
“putting something back” into society as well as taking something out.
3.5 
The Social Responsibilities Required of You 
as a Manager
Is being socially responsible really necessary?
THE BIG PICTURE
Managers need to be aware of the viewpoints supporting and opposing social responsibility and whether 
being and doing good pays off financially for the organization.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
88 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
89
Be a good
global
corporate
citizen
Do what is desired
by global stakeholders
Do what is expected
by global stakeholders
Do what is
required by global
stakeholders
Do what is
required by
global
capitalism
Be
ethical
Obey
the
law
Be
profitable
Philanthropic
Responsibility
Ethical
Responsibility
Legal
Responsibility
Economic
Responsibility
FIGURE 3.2 
Carroll’s global corporate social responsibility pyramid
Source: Republished with permission of Academy of Management, from A. Carroll, “Managing Ethically and Global Stakeholders: 
A Present and Future Challenge,” Academy of Management Executive, May 2004, p. 116; permission conveyed through Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc.
Not everyone, however, agrees with these new priorities. Let’s consider the two 
viewpoints.
Against Social Responsibility 
“Few trends could so thoroughly undermine the 
very foundations of our free society,” argued the late free-market economist Milton 
Friedman, “as the acceptance by corporate officials of social responsibility other than 
to make as much money for their stockholders as possible.”98
Friedman represents the view that, as he said, “The social responsibility of business is 
to make profits.” That is, unless a company focuses on maximizing profits, it will be-
come distracted and fail to provide goods and services, benefit the stockholders, create 
jobs, and expand economic growth—the real social justification for the firm’s existence.
This view would presumably support the efforts of companies to set up headquar-
ters in name only in offshore Caribbean tax havens (while keeping their actual head-
quarters in the United States) in order to minimize their tax burden.
For Social Responsibility 
“A large corporation these days not only may engage 
in social responsibility,” said famed economist Paul Samuelson, who passed away in 
2009, “it had damned well better to try to do so.”99 That is, a company must be con-
cerned for society’s welfare as well as for corporate profits.
Beyond the fact of ethical obligation, the rationale for this view is that since busi-
nesses create problems (environmental pollution, for example), they should help solve 
them. Moreover, they often have the resources to solve problems in ways that the non-
profit sector does not. Finally, being socially responsible gives businesses a favorable 
public image that can help head off government regulation.

90 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
One Type of Social Responsibility: Climate Change, 
Sustainability, & Natural Capital
Nearly everyone is aware of the growing threat of climate change and global warming, 
which the vast majority (75%) of Americans agree is real, serious, and man-made.101
(Scientists say global warming is “unequivocal” and that it is extremely likely that 
humans are the primary contributors to it.”102) Climate change refers to major changes 
in temperature, precipitation, wind patterns, and similar matters occurring over several 
decades. Global warming, one aspect of climate change, refers to the rise in global 
average temperature near the Earth’s surface, caused mostly by increasing concentra-
tions in the atmosphere of greenhouse gases, such as carbon emissions from fossil 
fuels.103 Sustainability, as we said in Chapter 1, is economic development that meets 
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs.
The Benefits of Being Green 
“Coca-Cola has always been more focused on its 
economic bottom line than on global warming,” writes reporter Coral Davenport. But 
“as global droughts dried up the water needed to produce its soda,” its profits took 
some serious hits. Now the company “has embraced the idea of climate change as an 
economically disruptive force,” she writes, and is focused on water-conservation tech-
nologies, along with other sustainability measures.104
Today going green has entered the business mainstream, where sustainability pro-
grams are producing not only environmental benefits but also cost savings, revenue 
growth, and competitive advantages.105 Car maker Subaru of Indiana Automotive, for 
example, has proved that adopting environmentally friendly processes does not add to 
the cost of doing business but actually makes it more efficient (reducing water use by 
50%, electricity by 14%, and so on).106 Dow Chemical, collaborating with the Nature 
Conservancy, an environmental group, is exploring coastal marsh and dune restoration 
(and paying nearby homeowners to replace lawns with native plants) to shield its Free-
port, Texas, chemical complex from storm surges coming off the Gulf of Mexico.107
EXAMPLE
Corporate Social Responsibility: Salesforce.com Wants to Change 
the Way the World Works
There are all kinds of ways by which corporate social responsibility is 
expressed. Salesforce.com, a San Francisco business software com-
pany, supports all the following four.100
Operating with Integrity. Salesforce.com has adopted Busi-
ness Conduct Principles and a Code of Conduct that, among 
other things, support ethical business practices, anticorrup-
tion, antidiscrimination, and rejection of forced or involuntary 
labor.
“1/1/1” Charitable Giving. When founder and CEO Marc Benioff 
set up Salesforce.com in 1999, he also created a foundation with 
a powerful but simple vision: donate 1% of Salesforce.com re-
sources, 1% of employees’ time, and 1% of the firm’s technology 
to improving communities around the world.
Journey toward Sustainability. Although Salesforce.com does 
no manufacturing or mineral extraction, it still strives to reduce 
carbon emissions in the operation of its data centers and office 
buildings, as well as in employee travel.
Fostering Employee Success. At Salesforce.com, says the com-
pany, “our goal is to deliver a dreamjob experience for our em-
ployees. We are intense, passionate people on a mission to 
change the way the world works.”
YOUR CALL
Do you believe corporate social responsibility really has bene-
fits? Can you think of any highly profitable and legal businesses 
that do not practice any kind of social responsibility?

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
91
The Value of Earth’s Resources: Natural Capital 
Indeed, Planet (of the triple 
bottom line People, Planet, and Profit) is now identified by the name natural capital 
(or natural capital accounting), which many scholars think should figure seriously in 
economic decision making. Natural capital is the value of natural resources, such as 
topsoil, air, water, and genetic diversity, which humans depend on. “We’re driving natu-
ral capital to its lowest levels ever in human history,” says Stanford University ecolo-
gist Gretchen Daily.108
According to this view, we are approaching the planet’s limitations, with human 
activity threatening to exceed the earth’s capacity to generate resources and absorb 
wastes. For example, the mountain of electrical waste disposed of annually world-
wide—cell phones, laptops, appliances, anything with a battery or a cord—is forecast 
to grow by a third by 2017.109 One United Nations report suggests climate change 
poses a risk to world food supplies, with output dropping perhaps 2% each decade, as 
rising temperatures make it harder for crops to thrive.110 The report also warns that 
waiting to cut carbon emissions could even outstrip technology’s ability to preserve 
the planet.111 Alarming predictions indeed.
Another Type of Social Responsibility: Philanthropy, 
“Not Dying Rich”
“He who dies rich dies thus disgraced,” 19th-century steel magnate Andrew Carnegie 
is supposed to have said, after he turned his interests from making money to 
philanthropy, making charitable donations to benefit humankind. Carnegie became 
well known as a supporter of free libraries.
When Bill Gates of Microsoft, the richest person in the world for 15 of the last 
20 years (present net worth: $72 billion), stepped down from day-to-day oversight of 
Microsoft, the company he co-founded, he turned his attention to the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation, through which he and his wife have pledged to spend billions on 
health, education, and overcoming poverty.112 The Gateses have been joined by other 
billionaires—Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg and his wife (the most generous 
American philanthropists in 2013), oil and gas financier T. Boone Pickens, Berkshire 
Hathaway chairman Warren Buffett, and others—in taking the Giving Pledge, a com-
mitment to dedicate a majority of their wealth to philanthropy.113
Not only do wealthy individuals and companies practice philanthropy, so even do ordi-
nary individuals. Mona Purdy, an Illinois hairdresser, noticed while vacationing in Guate-
mala that many children coated their feet with tar in order to be able to run in a local race. 
So she went home and established the nonprofit Share Your Soles, which collects shoes 
and sends them around the world. “I always thought I was too busy to help others,” she 
says. “Then I started this and found myself wondering where I’d been all my life.”114
How Does Being Good Pay Off?
From a hardheaded manager’s point of view, does ethical behavior and high social re-
sponsibility pay off financially? Here’s what some of the research shows.115
Effect on Customers 
According to one survey, 88% of the respondents said they 
were more apt to buy from companies that are socially responsible than from compa-
nies that are not.116 Another survey of 2,037 adults found that 72% would prefer to 
purchase products and services from a company with ethical business practices and 
higher prices compared with 18% who would prefer to purchase from a company with 
questionable business practices and lower prices.117
Effect on Employees’ Work Effort 
Workers are more efficient, loyal, and  creative 
when they feel a sense of purpose—when their work has meaning, says Daniel H. 
Pink.118 When employers make profits their primary focus, employees develop negative 
Green power. Many electricity 
users can run their homes on 
renewable energy simply by 
asking their local utility.

92 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
feelings toward the organization. “They tend to perceive the CEO as autocratic and fo-
cused on the short term,” says one report, “and they report being less willing to sacrifice 
for the company.”119 When employees observe the CEO balancing the concerns of cus-
tomers, employees, and the community, plus being watchful of environmental effects, 
they report being more willing to exert extra effort—and corporate results improve!120
Effect on Job Applicants & Employee Retention 
Ethics can also affect the 
quality of people who apply to work in an organization, as can a firm’s record on so-
cial and environmental issues.121 One online survey of 1,020 people indicated that 83% 
rated a company’s record of business ethics as “very important” when deciding 
whether to accept a job offer; only 2% rated it as “unimportant.”122 A National Busi-
ness Ethics Survey found that 79% of employees said their firms’ concern for ethics 
was a key reason they remained.123
Effect on Sales Growth 
The announcement of a company’s conviction for illegal 
activity has been shown to diminish sales growth for several years.124 One survey 
found that 80% of people said they decide to buy a firm’s goods or services partly on 
their perception of its ethics.125
Effect on Company Efficiency 
One study found that 71% of employees who 
saw honesty applied rarely or never in their organization had seen misconduct in the 
past year, compared with 52% who saw honesty applied only occasionally and 25% 
who saw it frequently.126
Effect on Company Revenue 
Unethical behavior in the form of employee fraud 
costs U.S. organizations around $652 billion a year, according to the Association of 
Certified Fraud Examiners.127 Employee fraud, which is twice as common as con-
sumer fraud (such as credit card fraud and identity theft), costs employers about 20% 
of every dollar earned.128
Effect on Stock Price 
One survey found that 74% of people polled said their 
perception of a firm’s honesty directly affected their decision about whether to buy its 
stock.129 Other research found that, following fraud or financial restatement (redoing 
an earlier public financial statement), companies on average lose more than a quarter 
of their stock value but can nurse the stock price back to health by stepping up chari-
table giving along with other actions.130
Effect on Profits 
Studies suggest that profitability is enhanced by a reputation for 
honesty and corporate citizenship.131
Ethical behavior and social responsibility are more than just admirable ways of 
operating. They give an organization a clear competitive advantage. Where do you 
stand on these issues? We created the following self-assessment to measure your atti-
tudes toward corporate social responsibility. Taking it will enhance your understanding 
about your views on social responsibility. ●
Assessing Your Attitudes toward Corporate 
Responsibility
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 
3.2. It assesses your attitudes toward corporate social respon-
sibility. Then answer the following questions:
1. 
Where do you stand on corporate social responsibility?
2. 
What life events have influenced your attitudes toward 
corporate social responsibility? Discuss.
3. 
Based on the three lowest-rated items in the survey, how 
might you foster a more positive attitude toward social 
responsibility? Explain.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.2
®

3.6 
Corporate Governance
How can I trust a company is doing the right thing?
THE BIG PICTURE
Corporate governance is the system of governing a company so that the interests of corporate owners and 
other stakeholders are protected. Company directors should be clearly separated in their authority from the 
CEO by insisting on strong financial reporting systems and more accountability.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
93
Where, you might ask, were the company boards of directors in recent years when the 
CEOs of firms such as Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, and Adelphia were doing the things 
that got them convicted for fraud? Aren’t directors supposed to protect the stockhold-
ers and other stakeholders by keeping an eye on senior management? Indeed, after the 
Enron and other scandals, there was a resumed interest in what is known as corporate 
governance, the system of governing a company so that the interests of corporate 
owners and other stakeholders are protected.
The Need for Independent Directors
Perhaps the biggest complaint concerns the independence of the directors. As we men-
tioned earlier in the chapter, inside directors may be members of the firm, but outside 
directors are supposed to be elected from outside the firm. However, in some compa-
nies, the outside directors have been handpicked by the CEO—because they are 
friends, because they have a business relationship with the firm, or because they sup-
posedly “know the industry.” In such instances, how tough do you think the board of 
directors is going to be on its CEO when he or she asks for leeway to pursue certain 
policies?
Now, more attention is being paid to strengthening corporate governance so that 
directors are clearly separated in their authority from the CEO. While, of course, direc-
tors are not supposed to get involved with day-to-day management issues, they are 
now feeling more pressure from stockholders and others to have stronger financial 
 reporting systems and more accountability.132
Corporate Governance: Chesapeake Energy’s CEO Gets Some Unusual 
Breaks from His Board of Directors
In 2008, CEO Aubrey K. McClendon topped the list of highest-
paid chief executives for companies in the Standard & Poor’s 
500-stock index. His firm, Oklahoma City–based Chesapeake 
Energy, which he co-founded at age 23, was the second-
largest producer of natural gas after ExxonMobil, and his per-
sonal fortune was estimated by Forbes as exceeding $1.2 billion. 
One interviewer described him as “without doubt the most 
admired—and feared—man” in the U.S. petroleum and 
natural gas industry but “also the most reckless, . . . with an 
off-the-charts risk tolerance.”133
A Little Help from the Company. Because aggressive financ-
ing practices combined with plunging oil and gas prices in 
2008 lowered the value of Chesapeake stock by 80%, 
McClendon was forced to sell nearly all of his own shares. 
Strapped for cash, he turned to his handpicked board of 
directors, which gave him a $100 million pay package plus 
$75 million over five years to invest for a 2.5% stake in every 
well the company drilled.
In addition, the company agreed to buy McClendon’s per-
sonal collection of historical maps of the American Southwest 
(which decorated the company’s headquarters) for $12.1 mil-
lion.134 The $12.1 million, the firm pointed out, was McClendon’s 
cost of acquiring the collection over the preceding six years—
an appraisal, it noted, that came from “the dealer who had 
assisted Mr. McClendon in acquiring this collection.”135
EXAMPLE

94 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
Shareholders Sue. Besides the 
above-mentioned perks, the Chesa-
peake board also voted to give Mc-
Clendon $600,000 for the private use 
of the corporate jets, nearly 
$600,000 for accounting services, 
and $131,000 for “personal engi-
neering support”—and it agreed to 
pay $4.6 million to sponsor the NBA’s 
Oklahoma City Thunder, the pro bas-
ketball team that is one-fifth owned 
by McClendon.136 But when outsiders 
and stockholders found out about the 
maps, the story took on a life of its 
own, prompting several shareholder 
lawsuits.
Big shareholder groups sued 
Chesapeake for what they consid-
ered an irresponsibly generous 2008 
compensation package to McClendon 
and demanded that the company 
overhaul its compensation practices. 
In the resulting settlement, McClendon 
agreed to buy back the 19th-century 
maps for $12.1 million plus pay a 
2.28% interest for the repurchase. In 
addition, Chesapeake agreed to 
some corporate governance reforms: 
installation of a “more transparent” 
management pay plan, electing board mem-
bers by majority vote, and discontinuance of 
the practice of allowing senior management, 
such as McClendon, use of their company 
stock as collateral to buy more company 
stock, a major cause of the firm’s financial 
strains.137
Unfinished Business. McLendon resigned 
from Chesapeake Energy in 2013, citing “philo-
sophical differences” with a reconstituted 
board, after burning through $19.4 billion in 
2011 and $21.6 billion in 2012. (His successor 
cut those cash outlays in half.) Among the 
unfinished business McClendon left behind are 
lawsuits over hundreds of millions of dollars in 
personal loans made to him by company lend-
ers, a Securities and Exchange Commission in-
vestigation into Chesapeake, and a Justice 
Department investigation into possible violations 
of antitrust law for collusion with another com-
pany over buying some Michigan acreage.138
YOUR CALL
If McClendon had stayed on as Chesapeake 
Energy’s CEO, what kinds of corporate re-
forms would you, as a shareholder, have in-
sisted on so that you could trust what the 
company told you?
The map collector. Aubrey McClendon, chief of 
natural gas producer Chesapeake Energy, was the 
highest-paid of CEOs in 2008. But when plunging 
gas prices reduced the value of company shares 
by 80%, he was forced to sell off an antique map 
collection for $12.1 million. The appraiser: the 
expert who assembled the collection in the first 
place. The buyer: Chesapeake Energy. Does this 
pass the smell test?
The Need for Trust
In the end, suggests Fordham professor Robert Hurley, “We do not have a crisis of eth-
ics in business today. We have a crisis of trust.”139 Customers or employees may well 
think that certain people or companies are ethical—that is, moral, honest, and fair—
but that does not mean they should trust them. Trust, says Hurley, “comes from deliv-
ering every day on what you promise—as a manager, an employee, and a company. It 
involves constant teamwork, communication, and collaboration.”
Trust comes from asking how likely the people you’re dealing with are to serve 
your interests, how much they have demonstrated concern for others, how well they 
delivered on their promises, how much they try to keep their word—and how effec-
tively they communicate these skills.
Would you agree? ●

clawbacks 78
climate change 89
code of ethics 87
competitors 77
corporate governance 93
corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) 88
crowdfunding 72
customers 76
demographic forces 82
distributor 77
economic forces 81
ethical behavior 83
ethical climate 86
ethical dilemma 83
ethics 83
external stakeholders 76
general environment 80
global warning 89
government regulators 79
individual approach 84
insider trading 85
internal stakeholders 75
international forces 82
justice approach 85
macroenvironment 80
moral-rights approach 84
natural capital 90
owners 75
philanthropy 91
political-legal forces 82
Ponzi scheme 85
Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 85
social audit 72
social responsibility 88
sociocultural forces 81
special-interest groups 79
stakeholders 74
strategic allies 77
supplier 77
task environment 76
technological forces 81
triple bottom line 72
utilitarian approach 84
value system 84
values 84
whistle-blower 87
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
3.1 The Triple Bottom Line: People, 
Planet, & Profit
• Many businesses subscribe to a new 
standard of success—the triple bottom 
line, representing People, Planet, and Profit. 
It measures an organization’s social, 
environmental, and financial performance.
• Success in these areas can be measured 
through a social audit, a systematic 
assessment of a company’s performance in 
implementing socially responsible programs, 
often based on predefined goals.
• The triple bottom line has particular appeal to 
many young adults (millennials) who are less 
concerned with finding financial success than 
with making a difference and achieving a 
meaningful life.
3.2 The Community of Stakeholders 
Inside the Organization
• Managers operate in two organizational 
environments—internal and external—both made 
up of stakeholders, the people whose interests 
are affected by the organization’s activities.
• The first, or internal, environment includes 
employees, owners, and the board of directors.
3.3 The Community of Stakeholders 
Outside the Organization
• The external environment of stakeholders 
consists of the task environment and the 
general environment.
• The task environment consists of 11 groups 
that present the manager with daily tasks 
to deal with. (1) Customers pay to use an 
organization’s goods and services. 
(2) Competitors compete for customers or 
resources. (3) Suppliers provide supplies—
raw materials, services, equipment, labor, or 
energy—to other organizations. (4) Distributors 
help another organization sell its goods 
and services to customers. (5) Strategic 
allies join forces to achieve advantages 
neither organization can perform as well 
alone. (6) Employee organizations are 
labor unions and employee associations. 
• (7) Local communities are residents, companies, 
governments, and nonprofit entities that 
depend on the organization’s taxes, payroll, 
and charitable contributions. (8) Financial 
institutions are commercial banks, investment 
banks, and insurance companies that deal 
with the organization. (9) Government 
regulators are regulatory agencies that 
establish the ground rules under which the 
organization operates. (10) Special-interest 
groups are groups whose members try to 
influence specific issues that may affect the 
organization. (11) The mass media are print, 
radio, TV, and Internet sources that affect the 
organization’s public relations.
• The general environment includes six forces. 
(1) Economic forces consist of general economic 
conditions and trends—unemployment, 
inflation, interest rates, economic growth—that 
Key Points
 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
95

96 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
may affect an organization’s performance. 
(2) Technological forces are new developments 
in methods for transforming resources into 
goods and services. (3) Sociocultural forces are 
influences and trends originating in a country, 
society, or culture’s human relationships and 
values that may affect an organization. 
(4) Demographic forces are influences on an 
organization arising from changes in the 
characteristics of a population, such as age, 
gender, and ethnic origin. (5) Political-legal 
forces are changes in the way politics shapes 
laws and laws shape the opportunities for and 
threats to an organization. (6) International 
forces are changes in the economic, political, 
legal, and technological global system that may 
affect an organization.
3.4 The Ethical Responsibilities 
Required of You as a Manager
• Ethics are the standards of right and wrong that 
influence behavior. Ethical behavior is behavior 
that is accepted as “right” as opposed to 
“wrong” according to those standards.
• Ethical dilemmas often take place because 
of an organization’s value system. Values are 
the relatively permanent and deeply held 
underlying beliefs and attitudes that help 
determine a person’s behavior.
• There are four approaches to deciding ethical 
dilemmas. (1) Utilitarian—ethical behavior 
is guided by what will result in the greatest 
good for the greatest number of people. 
(2) Individual—ethical behavior is guided by 
what will result in the individual’s best long-term 
interests, which ultimately is in everyone’s self-
interest. (3) Moral-rights—ethical behavior is 
guided by respect for the fundamental rights of 
human beings, such as those expressed in the 
U.S. Constitution’s Bill of Rights. (4) Justice—
ethical behavior is guided by respect for the 
impartial standards of fairness and equity.
• Public outrage over white-collar crime (Enron, 
Tyco) led to the creation of the Sarbanes–
Oxley Act of 2002 (SarbOx), which 
established requirements for proper financial 
record keeping for public companies and 
penalties for noncompliance.
• Laurence Kohlberg proposed three levels 
of personal moral development: 
(1) preconventional level of moral 
development—people tend to follow rules and 
to obey authority; (2) conventional level—people 
are conformist, generally adhering to the 
expectations of others; and (3) postconventional 
level—people are guided by internal values.
• There are three ways an organization may 
foster high ethical standards. (1) Top managers 
must support a strong ethical climate. (2) The 
organization may have a code of ethics, which 
consists of a formal written set of ethical 
standards. (3) An organization must reward 
ethical behavior, as in not discouraging 
whistle-blowers, employees who report 
organizational misconduct to the public.
3.5 The Social Responsibilities Required 
of You as a Manager
• Social responsibility is a manager’s duty to 
take actions that will benefit the interests of 
society as well as of the organization.
• The idea of social responsibility has opposing and 
supporting viewpoints. The opposing viewpoint is 
that the social responsibility of business is to 
make profits. The supporting viewpoint is that 
since business creates some problems (such as 
pollution) it should help solve them.
• One scholar, Archie Carroll, suggests the 
responsibilities of an organization in the global 
economy should have the following priorities: 
(1) Be a good global corporate citizen; (2) be 
ethical in its practices; (3) obey the law; and 
(4) make a profit.
• One type of social responsibility is sustainability, 
“going green,” or meeting humanity’s needs 
without harming future generations. A major 
threat is climate change, which refers to major 
changes in temperature, precipitation, wind 
patterns, and similar matters over several 
decades. Global warming, one aspect of climate 
change, refers to the rise in global average 
temperature near the Earth’s surface, caused 
mostly by increasing concentrations in the 
atmosphere of greenhouse gases, such as 
carbon emissions from fossil fuels.
• The component of the triple bottom line called 
Planet is now identified by the name natural 
capital, which is the value of natural resources, 
such as topsoil, air, water, and genetic 
diversity, which many scholars think should 
figure seriously in economic decision making.
• Another type of social responsibility is 
philanthropy, making charitable donations to 
benefit humankind.
• Positive ethical behavior and social 
responsibility can pay off in the form of 
customer goodwill, more efficient and loyal 
employees, better quality of job applicants 
and retained employees, enhanced sales 
growth, less employee misconduct and fraud, 
better stock price, and enhanced profits.
3.6 Corporate Governance
• Corporate governance is the system of governing 
a company so that the interests of corporate 
owners and other stakeholders are protected.
• One way to further corporate governance is 
to be sure directors are clearly separated in 
their authority from the CEO by insisting on 
stronger financial reporting systems and more 
accountability.

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
97
 1. How would you explain the difference between 
internal and external stakeholders?
 2. Among external stakeholders, what’s the difference 
between the task environment and the general 
environment?
 3. Of the 11 groups in the task environment, which 
five do you consider most important and why?
 4. Of the six groups in the general environment, which 
one do you think has the least importance, and why?
 5. Distinguish among the four approaches to deciding 
ethical dilemmas.
 6. What’s the difference between insider trading and a 
Ponzi scheme?
 7. How would you summarize Kohlberg’s levels of 
personal moral development?
 8. What are four ways that organizations can promote 
ethics?
 9. Describe the levels in Carroll’s corporate social 
responsibility pyramid. Where does trying to 
achieve sustainability fit in?
 10. How would you explain the concept of corporate 
governance?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
UPS Actively Pursues Sustainability
Kurt Kuehn is the Chief Financial Officer at UPS and 
a 2013 winner of the C. K. Prahalad Award for Global 
Sustainability Leadership.
As a CFO who advocates sustainability, I’ve noticed 
that many of my peers take a lukewarm view of the 
idea, perhaps because they simply don’t see how sus-
tainability can produce returns for a business. I can 
relate: I too am always looking for ways to allocate 
resources effectively and create value. . . .
As a founding member of UPS’s sustainability 
steering committee, I have wrestled with the challenge, 
and I’ve developed a point of view—one that empha-
sizes the power of organizational momentum and 
embraces “enlightened self-interest.” My approach is 
rooted in two beliefs: that companies have a responsi-
bility to contribute to society and the environment, and 
that every investment a company makes should return 
value to the business.
These beliefs don’t have to be at odds. . . . In fact, 
the programs with greatest impact not only align with 
companies’ strategies but move in tandem with their 
activities. . . . UPS has established a five-step approach 
toward sustainability in order to balance the needs of 
various constituents. They are considered below.
 1. Assess your strengths. What does your company 
have to offer that could make a big difference? Find 
out by assessing your core competencies, infrastruc-
tures, and relationships as part of your sustainability 
strategizing. You will probably discover strengths 
that charitable partners often lack, such as:
 
 • Capital
 
 • Specialized knowledge and experience
 
 • Relationships
 
 • Processes
 
 • Physical assets
 
 • Business acumen
 2. Choose your spots. Finding the right space for your 
efforts in sustainability has to begin with narrowing 
down the field somehow. You might take cues from ei-
ther external stakeholders or internal managers. Stake-
holders include customers, shareholders, and suppliers 
that increasingly prefer to do business with companies 
they see as responsible—but also activists, who may 
be a risk. Managers know the company’s capabilities, 
cost structure, and objectives well, and can see the stra-
tegic fit of one proposed initiative versus another.
We think both these perspectives are important, and 
we combine them in what’s called a materiality matrix . . . 
one axis indicates how relevant our external stakehold-
ers believe certain issues are to being a good corporate 
citizen; the other indicates which ones senior execu-
tives consider strategic and important to the company’s 
future success. . . .
One priority that UPS was able to identify through 
this method is safety training for drivers in certain 
emerging economies. Stakeholders were concerned that 
the rapid expansion of the middle class in Vietnam, 
Cambodia, South Africa, and elsewhere has created new 
traffic nightmares—not only more commercial vehicles 
on the road but also a huge influx of first-time drivers. 
They perceived UPS as an expert in road and workplace 
safety because of its systems and performance. Mean-
while, company managers recognized that these coun-
tries are strategically important to UPS as new growth 
markets. Thus a program that involved working with 
nonprofits and humanitarian relief agencies to deliver 
our proven safety training programs wouldn’t encounter 
resistance from either inside or outside stakeholders. 
Even public officials have endorsed it.
Management in Action

98 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
Environmental projects, too, are a strategic fit. 
We know that our vehicles and planes produce emis-
sions and that we have an obligation to invest in a 
cleaner planet.
 3. Find momentum. A materiality matrix narrows the 
field of possibilities, but it rarely points to a specific 
initiative. For example, it might indicate that a given 
company would do well to join the fight against 
AIDS or help preserve pristine forests or improve air 
quality, but within any of those areas numerous orga-
nizations are working in various places on different 
parts of the solution.
 
  
Having a bias toward adding to momentum makes 
the next step easier. It leads you to focus on where 
energy is already in motion and where your compa-
ny’s additional efforts could make a big difference. 
Ideally, your existing operations and initiatives will 
dovetail with societal or environmental needs for 
which others are already driving change.
 
  
Sometimes the momentum a company needs to 
recognize comes from governmental priorities. 
Indeed, failing to respond to them may imperil its 
license to operate. . . .
 4. Build productive partnerships. Most companies 
just sign up existing projects on the assumption that 
they and the NGO [nongovernmental organization] 
will figure out some way to shoehorn in the compa-
ny’s strengths. . . .
 
  
To ensure a productive collaboration from the 
outset, it helps to clearly articulate that the business’s 
hope is to apply its strengths and add to its momen-
tum. Then the partners can proceed to understand 
each other’s strengths, weaknesses, and shared val-
ues and to compare perspectives about the impact 
they want to achieve. Next they should draft a strate-
gic plan; define goals and objectives; establish a 
timetable, metrics, and milestones; and agree on the 
resources required and what will define success. 
Both sides need clear rules of engagement and an 
open dialogue to adjust to each other, or to know 
when it’s time to part ways. . . .
 5. Convene other sources of strength. Large businesses 
all participate in networks of organizations, in their ex-
tended supply chains and across their industries. They 
have the power to convene other players and combine 
their strengths. If they do so for a good sustainability 
cause, they can add even more to its momentum.
 
  
UPS has enjoyed success with multicompany proj-
ects, particularly those relating to humanitarian logis-
tics and disaster relief. Most notably, we’ve joined 
with our competitors TNT and Agility to support the 
UN’s World Food Programme during disasters. . . .
 
  UPS has also joined forces with some customers 
on disaster relief projects, ensuring that their donated 
products are received on time around the world. The 
effort is particularly productive when we can com-
bine multiple customer-donation shipments, reduc-
ing transportation costs for all by sharing trucks and 
planes or using employee volunteers to pack emer-
gency supplies. . . .
What We Are Choosing Not to Do
Following the principle of adding to momentum, UPS 
has moved its philanthropic giving over the past decade 
toward expertise and in-kind donations and has aligned 
it with the corporate mission to enable global commerce 
through logistics. Our more strategic approach to sus-
tainability has led to many of the projects we’ve taken 
on recently. But the test of a good strategy is not just 
whether it has you doing good things; it must also allow 
you to decide what not to do. Aiming for “maximum 
efficiency, minimum effort,” we’ve been able to see 
more clearly that some projects and ideas aren’t for us.
More generally, UPS makes fewer one-off contribu-
tions. When all the components of a sustainability pro-
gram are guided by a materiality matrix analysis and a 
plan to find and increase momentum, connections tend 
to form among them, creating a cumulative effect. . . .
Momentum’s Extra Benefits
When you approach sustainability from a position of 
your strengths, the line between the two realms of 
value creation—helping to make the business profit-
able and helping to keep the planet well—begins to 
blur. As I’ve noted, business competencies can reveal 
social possibilities. At the same time, sustainability 
work can inspire business improvements.
This can happen in very small ways—and small 
ways add up.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. How does UPS’s approach toward sustainability im-
pact the triple bottom line? Be specific.
 2. Which internal and external stakeholders are posi-
tively and negatively affected by UPS’s approach to 
sustainability?
 3. Which of the six general environmental forces influ-
enced Mr. Kuehn’s approach toward sustainability? 
Discuss.
 4. To what extent is UPS’s approach toward sustain-
ability consistent with the four approaches to decid-
ing ethical dilemmas?
 5. Evaluate UPS’s approach toward sustainability 
against Carroll’s model of social responsibility 
shown in Figure 3.2.
 6. How does UPS’s approach toward sustainability 
“pay off”? Discuss.
Source: Extracted from Kurt Kuehn and Lynette McIntire, 
“Sustainability a CFO Can Love,” Harvard Business Review, April 
2014, pp. 66–74.

 
The Manager’s Changing Work Environment & Ethical Responsibilities 
CHAPTER 3 
99
Is It Fair to Have Different Standards for 
Paying Bills versus Collecting Bills?
Mondelez International, a snack and food company 
formerly owned by Kraft Foods, is using different 
time frames to pay and collect money. In 2013, the 
company decided to extend the time it takes to pay 
bills from suppliers. The company sent a letter to all 
of its key suppliers indicating that it would wait 120 
days before paying a bill.
Why would a company extend its payment sched-
ule? Quite simply, the company uses the money for 
investments and thereby increases profits. This prac-
tice, however, can hurt small businesses, which are a 
big driver of new job creation in the U.S. Bill Dunkel-
berg, chief economist for the National Federation of 
Independent Businesses, said “It’s mean” to extend 
payment periods because “a small company is often 
vulnerable because one large customer may make up 
the bulk of its sales, leaving it with no choice but to 
accept the demands of the giant company, effectively 
financing the customer for 120 days.” It’s hard for a 
small company to pay its bills when it has to wait 120 days 
to collect for its goods and services.
According to an article in Fortune, Mondelez Inter-
national has a different standard for collecting from 
companies that owe it money. “The company tailors 
its terms so that customers are penalized if they don’t 
pay for confections within 15 days of receipt and for 
snacks within 25 days.”
Experts contend that this practice takes a toll on the 
supply chain, particularly for small businesses. This 
happens because suppliers will in turn start to pay 
their bills more slowly. Defenders conclude that it’s 
“all just part of a free-market system that will natu-
rally set its own parameters on billing.”
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
Assume that you are a high-level manager at Mondelez 
International and that you can affect the corporate 
 policy of paying bills. What would you suggest that 
the company do in regard to paying and collecting 
money?
 1. Nothing. This is a free market decision and share-
holders are the company’s most important constitu-
ent: This policy maximizes the value to shareholders.
 2. Change the policy so that the company uses a consis-
tent “time standard” in paying and collecting money. 
This approach will also create good will among sup-
pliers.
 3. It’s okay to have different “time standards” for pay-
ing and collecting money, but 120 days seems too 
long. I would use the industry average for both pay-
ing and collecting money.
 4. Invent other options. Discuss.
Source: Excerpted from B. Quick, “A Snack Maker’s Unsavory 
Business Practices,” Fortune, September 2, 2013, p. 54.
Legal/Ethical Challenge

Global Management
Managing across Borders
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
4.1 Globalization: The Collapse of Time & Distance
Major Question: What three important developments of 
globalization will probably affect me?
4.2 You & International Management
Major Question: Why learn about international management, and 
what characterizes the successful international manager?
4.3 Why & How Companies Expand Internationally
Major Question: Why do companies expand internationally, and 
how do they do it?
4.4 The World of Free Trade: Regional Economic 
Cooperation
Major Question: What are barriers to free trade, and what major 
organizations and trading blocs promote trade?
4.5 The Importance of Understanding Cultural Differences
Major Question: What are the principal areas of cultural 
differences?
4

Whether you travel abroad on your own or on a work 
assignment for your company, there are several ways 
to make your experience enhance your career success.
Learn How Not to Be an “Ugly American”
Americans “are seen throughout the world as an arro-
gant people, totally self-absorbed and loud,” says 
Keith Reinhard, former head of advertising conglom-
erate DDB Worldwide, who is leading an effort to re-
verse that through a nonprofit group called Business 
for Diplomatic Action (BDA), from which many sug-
gestions here are drawn.1 A survey conducted by 
DDB in more than 100 countries found that respon-
dents repeatedly mentioned “arrogant,” “loud,” and 
“uninterested in the world” when asked their percep-
tions of Americans.2 Some sample advice for 
Americans traveling abroad is: Be patient, be quiet, 
listen at least as much as you talk, don’t use slang, 
and don’t talk about wealth and status.3
Be Global in Your Focus, but Think Local
Study up on your host country’s local customs and 
try to meet new people who might help you in the 
future. For example, Bill Roedy, President of MTV 
Networks International, spent time hanging out with 
Arab rappers and meeting the mayor of Mecca before 
trying to sign a contract that would launch MTV 
Arabia.4 His efforts helped seal the deal.
Learn What’s Appropriate Behavior
Before you go, spend some time learning about pat-
terns of interpersonal communication. In Japan, for 
instance, it is considered rude to look directly into the 
eye for more than a few seconds. In Greece the 
hand-waving gesture commonly used in America is 
considered an insult. In Afghanistan, a man does not 
ask another man about his wife.5 In China, people 
generally avoid hugs—at least until recently.6
Learn rituals of respect, including exchange of busi-
ness cards.7 Understand that shaking hands is always 
permissible, but social kissing may not be. Dress pro-
fessionally. For women, this means no heavy makeup, 
no flashy jewelry, no short skirts or sleeveless blouses 
(particularly in Islamic countries). In some countries, 
casual dressing is a sign of disrespect. Don’t use first 
names and nicknames with fellow employees overseas, 
especially in countries with strict social strata.8
Know Your Field
If you know your field and behave with courtesy and 
assurance, you will be well received around the world. 
Indra Nooyi successfully uses this advice in her role 
as CEO of PepsiCo. She’s cosmopolitan and well ed-
ucated and is respected by people around the globe.9
Become at Least Minimally Skilled in the 
Language
Whatever foreign country you’re in, at the very least 
you should learn a few key phrases, such as “hello,” 
“please,” and “thank you,” in your host country’s 
language. Successful international managers have 
learned there is no adequate substitute for knowing 
the local language.10
For Discussion Have you done much traveling? What 
tricks have you discovered to make it more satisfying?
the manager’s toolbox
Learning to Be a Success Abroad: How Do You 
Become a World Citizen?
This chapter covers the importance of globalization—the rise of the global village, of 
one big market, of both worldwide megafirms and minifirms. We also describe the char-
acteristics of the successful international manager and why and how companies expand 
internationally. We describe the barriers to free trade and the major organizations pro-
moting trade. Finally, we discuss some of the cultural differences you may encounter if 
you become an international manager.
What’s Ahead in This Chapter

Is everything for sale in the United States now made outside our borders?
Not quite everything—and Roger Simmermaker, 48, an Orlando, Florida, electron-
ics technician who drives a 1996 Michigan-made Lincoln Town Car, is seriously fo-
cused on buying U.S. In fact, Simmermaker has authored a book, How Consumers 
Can Buy American, which lists more than 16,000 U.S.-made products.11 “It’s impor-
tant to understand that workers in China don’t pay taxes to America,” he says.12
As it happens, the vast majority of goods and services sold in the United States are 
still made in this country. However, we might be forgiven for thinking otherwise. With 
shoes and clothing, for instance, about 36% of U.S. dollars are spent on Chinese-made 
products, compared with 25% on U.S.-made items.13
Competition & Globalization: Who Will 
Be No. 1 Tomorrow?
It goes without saying that the world is a competitive place. Where does the United 
States stand in it? What’s our report card?
Although Americans may like to think “We’re No. 1!” on most measures, other na-
tions are in constant pursuit—and in some cases have overtaken us. (China, incidentally, 
was projected to overtake the United States as the world’s largest economy in 2014.14)
Are we the most competitive? Actually, the World Economic Forum ranks the 
United States as No. 5 (down from No. 2 in 2008), behind Switzerland, Singapore, 
Finland, and Germany. (See Table 4.1, left.)
Are we the richest? On a per-person basis, the United States ranks No. 6, behind 
Qatar, Luxembourg, Singapore, Norway, and Brunei Darussalam. Canada is No. 9.15
How about “most free”? Here Hong Kong, a “special administrative region” of the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China, is No. 1. The United States is No. 12, according to criteria embraced 
by the 2014 Index of Economic Freedom (by The Wall Street Journal and the Heritage Foun-
dation). Canada, at No. 6, is considered “free” by this standard; the U.S. is “mostly free.”16
There are many reasons why the winners on these lists achieved their enviable sta-
tus, but one thing is clear: They didn’t do it all by themselves; other countries were 
involved. We are living in a world being rapidly changed by globalization—the trend 
of the world economy toward becoming a more interdependent system. Time and dis-
tance, which have been under assault for 150 years, have now virtually collapsed, as 
reflected in three important developments we shall discuss.17
 1. The rise of the “global village” and electronic commerce.
 2. The world’s becoming one market instead of many national ones.
 3. The rise of both megafirms and Internet-enabled minifirms worldwide.
The Rise of the “Global Village” & Electronic Commerce
The hallmark of great civilizations has been their great systems of communications. In 
the beginning, communications was based on transportation: The Roman Empire had 
4.1 
Globalization: The Collapse of Time & Distance
What three important developments of globalization will probably affect me?
THE BIG PICTURE
Globalization, the trend of the world economy toward becoming a more interdependent system, is reflected 
in three developments: the rise of the “global village” and e-commerce, the trend of the world’s becoming 
one big market, and the rise of both megafirms and Internet-enabled minifirms worldwide.
?
102 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
MAJOR 
QUESTION
TABLE 4.1 
Country 
Rankings for Competitiveness, 
2013–2014
Source: World Economic Forum, 
The Global Competitiveness 
Report 2013–2014, http://www3
.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global
CompetitivenessReport_2013-14
.pdf (accessed April 15, 2014).
 1. Switzerland
 2. Singapore
 3. Finland
 4. Germany
 5. United States
 6. Sweden
 7. Hong Kong
 8. Netherlands
 9. Japan
10. United Kingdom
11. Norway
12. Taiwan
13. Qatar
14. Canada
15. Denmark

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
103
its network of roads, as did other ancient civilizations, such as the Incas. Later the 
great European powers had their far-flung navies. In the 19th century, the United States 
and Canada unified North America by building transcontinental railroads. Later the 
airplane reduced travel time between continents.
From Transportation to Communication 
Transportation began to yield to 
the electronic exchange of information. Beginning in 1844, the telegraph ended 
the short existence of the Pony Express and, beginning in 1876, found itself in 
competition with the telephone. The amplifying vacuum tube, invented in 1906, 
led to commercial radio. Television came into being in England in 1925. During 
the 1950s and 1960s, as television exploded throughout the world, communica-
tions philosopher Marshall McLuhan posed the notion of a “global village,” where 
we all share our hopes, dreams, and fears in a “worldpool” of information. The 
global village refers to the “shrinking” of time and space as air travel and the elec-
tronic media have made it easier for the people around the globe to communicate 
with one another.
Then the world became even faster and smaller. Twenty-five years ago, cell phones, 
pagers, fax, and voice-mail links barely existed. When AT&T launched the first cellu-
lar communications system in 1983, it predicted fewer than a million users by 2000. 
By the end of 1993, however, there were more than 16 million cellular phone subscrib-
ers in the United States.18 And by 2014, there were nearly 7 billion mobile-cellular 
subscriptions, with global penetration reaching almost 96%.19
The Net, the Web, & the World 
Then came the Internet, the worldwide 
computer-linked “network of networks.” Today, of the 7.2 billion people in the world, 
39% are Internet users.20 The Net might have remained the province of academicians 
had it not been for the contributions of Tim Berners-Lee, who came up with the coding 
system, linkages, and addressing scheme that debuted in 1991 as the World Wide Web. 
“He took a powerful communications system [the Internet] that only the elite could 
use,” says one writer, “and turned it into a mass medium.”21
The arrival of the web quickly led to e-commerce, or electronic commerce, the 
buying and selling of products and services through computer networks. U.S. retail 
e-commerce sales were estimated at $263.3 billion for 2013, up 16.9% over the pre-
vious year.22 
One Big World Market: The Global Economy
“We are seeing the results of things started in 1988 and 1989,” said Rosabeth Moss 
Kantor of the Harvard Business School, referring to three historic global changes.23 
The first was in the late 1980s when the Berlin Wall came down, signaling the begin-
ning of the end of communism in Eastern Europe. The second was when Asian coun-
tries began to open their economies to foreign investors. The third was the worldwide 
trend of governments deregulating their economies. These three events set up condi-
tions by which goods, people, and money could move more freely throughout the 
world—a global economy. The global economy refers to the increasing tendency of 
the economies of the world to interact with one another as one market instead of many 
national markets.
It’s no secret the economies of the world are increasingly tied together, connected 
by information arriving instantaneously through currency traders’ screens, CNN news 
reports, twitter feeds, text messages, and other technology. Money, represented by 
digital blips, changes hands globally in a matter of keystrokes.
Positive Effects 
Is a global economy really good for the United States? “Ultimately, 
the medium- to long-term benefits of globalization are positive for everybody,” says the 
CEO of Infosys Technologies in India. “Let me give you an example. As our industry has 

104 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
Globalization. Coke and Pepsi 
already dominate India’s 
beverage market of 1.2 billion 
people, and now both 
companies are going after the 
fruit-juice market among India’s 
increasingly health-conscious 
consumers. Do you see any 
negative effects to this?
increased economic activity in India, it’s becoming a bigger market for American ex-
ports. . . . Today you can’t find any soft drinks in India except Coke or Pepsi.”24
In addition, foreign firms are building plants in the United States, revitalizing 
parts of industrial America.25 Indeed, foreign direct investment makes up 15% of 
the country’s gross domestic product (total value of all goods and services). Com-
panies based overseas provide jobs for approximately 10% of the U.S. work-
force.26 Eventually, suggests Gregg Easterbrook, author of Sonic Boom: 
Globalization at Mach Speed, worldwide economic growth will create “rising 
prosperity and higher living standards. . . . The world will be far more intercon-
nected, leading to better and more affordable products, as well as ever better com-
munication among nations.”27
Negative Effects 
However, global economic interdependency can also be danger-
ous. Financial crises throughout the world resulted in vast surplus funds from global 
investments flowing into the United States and being invested badly in a housing-and-
credit bubble that burst (the so-called subprime mortgages meltdown), leading to the 
2007–2009 Great Recession that hurt so many people.28
Another negative effect is the movement, or outsourcing, of formerly well-paying 
jobs overseas as companies seek cheaper labor costs, particularly in manufacturing. 
Soaring new U.S. skyscrapers, for example, are more apt to have windows made in 
China than in Ohio, a glassmaking state.29 The developers of apps, or software for 
cell phones and other mobile platforms, are more likely to be overseas, even though 
more and more people in the United States owe their jobs to the existence of apps.30 
Some economists fear that many jobs lost through the recession and offshoring may 
simply never come back.31 (But some are, as we will see.)
Indeed, while “the horizon has never been brighter,” says Easterbrook, “we may not 
feel particularly happy about it.” The reasons: “Job instability, economic insecurity, a 
sense of turmoil, the fear that even when things seem good a hammer is about to fall—
these are also part of the larger trend. As world economies become ever more linked by 
computers, job stress will become a 24/7 affair. Frequent shakeups in industries will 
cause increasing uncertainty.”32 But the global economy isn’t going to go away just 
because we don’t like some of its destabilizing aspects.

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
105
Megamerger. For a time 
after Italian automaker Fiat 
acquired U.S. automaker 
Chrysler, the corporate logos 
of both companies appeared 
independently. In 2014, the 
merged entity, Fiat Chrysler 
Automobiles, began to display 
its new logo, FCA. Do you think 
the two companies should have 
retained their distinct identities?
Cross-Border Business: The Rise of Both 
Megamergers & Minifirms Worldwide
The global market driven by electronic information “forces things to get bigger and 
smaller at the same time,” suggests technology philosopher Nicholas Negroponte. 
“There will be an increasing absence of things that aren’t either very local or very 
global.”33
If Negroponte is correct, this means we will see more and more of two opposite 
kinds of businesses: mergers of huge companies into even larger companies, and small, 
fast-moving, start-up companies.
Megamergers Operating Worldwide 
Union 
 Pacific + Southern Pacific. Kmart + Sears. Whole Foods + 
Wild Oats. Bank of America + Merrill Lynch. Roche + 
Genentech. Ticketmaster + Live Nation. Mattel (maker 
of Barbie Doll) + Hit Entertainment (Bob the Builder). 
Signet Jewelers + Zales. Jos. A. Bank + Eddie Bauer. 
Comcast + Time Warner Cable. Cerberus (Albertsons) + 
Safeway.
The last 20 years have seen a surge in mergers.34 
Certain industries—oil, telecommunications, automo-
biles, financial services, and pharmaceuticals, for 
instance—aren’t suited to being midsize, let alone small 
and local, so companies in these industries are trying 
to become bigger and cross-border. The means for do-
ing so is to merge with other big companies. In tele-
communications, for instance, Comcast targeted Time 
Warner Cable and in automobiles Fiat targeted 
Chrysler. Indeed, auto companies are among the firms 
expected to accelerate the trend in partnerships and 
mergers with rivals in order to share the cost of re-
search and streamline their production.35 Utilities have 
also turned to mergers as power demands have slowed 
(despite the increase in tablet computers, data centers, 
and electric vehicles).36
Minifirms Operating Worldwide 
The Internet and 
the World Wide Web allow almost anyone to be global, 
with two important results:
 1. Small companies can get started more easily. 
Because anyone can put goods or services on a website and sell worldwide, 
this wipes out the former competitive advantages of distribution and scope 
that large companies used to have.
 2. Small companies can maneuver faster. Little companies can change direc-
tion faster, which gives them an advantage in terms of time and distance over 
large companies. ●

Part of the action. If “all of the action in business is international,” as one expert 
says, what role do you think you might play in it? Do you think cultural bias against 
women in some foreign countries contributes to the low percentage of U.S. female 
executives working abroad?
Can you see yourself working overseas? It can definitely be an advantage to your ca-
reer. “There are fewer borders,” says Paul McDonald, executive director of recruitment 
firm Robert Half Management Resources. “Anyone with international experience will 
have a leg up, higher salary, and be more marketable.”37 The recent brutal U.S. job 
market has also spurred more Americans to hunt for jobs overseas.38
4.2 
You & International Management
Why learn about international management, and what characterizes the successful 
international manager?
THE BIG PICTURE
Studying international management prepares you to work with foreign customers or suppliers, for a foreign 
firm in the United States or for a U.S. firm overseas. Successful international managers aren’t ethnocentric 
or polycentric but geocentric.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
106 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
EXAMPLE
Americans Working Overseas
When Charles Wang, an industrial engineering major, com-
pleted his junior year at Georgia Institute of Technology, he 
joined UPS (United Parcel Service) as a project manager. His 
assignment: Go to Dubai for 10 months and develop a delivery 
system for the Arab country’s first-ever network of streets and 
addresses. Following graduation, he said he planned to return 
to Dubai for a permanent job “because of . . . my inability to 
find good jobs in the U.S.”39
Jacob Schickler, 25, moved to Beijing and found a job with 
a German company working in business development. He 
hoped the China experience would give him an edge over other 
young adults in the United States. “Many of my friends are 
bright, intelligent people with very expensive degrees,” he said, 
“but they have not been able to put them to use yet. I’m getting 
real work experience.”40
Wang and Schickler aren’t just doing a little travel overseas 
for “exposure” to the culture (which many Americans do, fre-
quently hauling mobile gadgets that allow them to “dwell in a 
snugly tailored reality of our own creation,” complains one 
critic in a column headed “Traveling without Seeing”).41 These 
two young Americans resemble their Chinese counterparts who 
come to the United States or Canada to seek an edge that will 
pay off in career boosts at home.42
This is the kind of experience endorsed by Bob Moritz, who 
leads U.S. consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers. Moritz 
says that living in Japan “taught me big lessons that I actually 
have developed into a leadership style.”43 The lessons: 
(1) “Over there, I was the [racial] minority. . . . I was the guy 
discriminated against. So it gave me a different perspective on 
diversity.” (2) It also taught him “about diversity of thought and 
cultural diversity. In Japan, you respect titles. You respect age. 
And you don’t challenge authority.” This has allowed him to 
understand and practice global business “in a way so that peo-
ple feel good and not threatened.”
YOUR CALL
How do you feel about following these intrepid travelers? How 
can you begin to prepare yourself for working overseas?
Foreign experience demonstrates independence, resource-
fulness, and entrepreneurship, according to management re-
cruiters. “You are interested in that person who can move 
quickly and is nimble and has an inquiring mind,” says one. 
People who have worked and supported themselves overseas, 
she says, tend to be adaptive and inquisitive—valuable skills 
in today’s workplace.44

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
107
Why Learn about International Management?
International management is management that oversees the conduct of operations in or 
with organizations in foreign countries, whether it’s through a multinational corpora-
tion or a multinational organization.
Multinational Corporations  
A multinational corporation, or multinational 
enterprise, is a business firm with operations in several countries. Our publisher, 
McGraw-Hill, is one such multinational (with a presence in 17 foreign cities). In 
terms of sales revenue, the largest American multinational corporations in 2013 were 
Wal-Mart Stores, Exxon Mobil, Chevron, Phillips 66, Apple, Berkshire Hathaway, 
General Motors, General Electric, and Ford. The largest foreign firms were the oil 
companies Royal Dutch Shell (Netherlands), SinoPec China Petroleum, BP (Britain), 
and PetroChina, followed by Volkswagen (Germany), and Toyota Motor (Japan). 
Of the world’s 2,000 largest multinational public companies, the United States has 
543 members, Japan 251, and China 136.45
Multinational Organizations 
A multinational organization is a nonprofit organi-
zation with operations in several countries. Examples are the World Health Organiza-
tion, the International Red Cross, the Church of Latter Day Saints.
Even if in the coming years you never travel to the wider world outside North 
America—an unlikely proposition, we think—the world will assuredly come to you. 
That, in a nutshell, is why you need to learn about international management.
PRACTICAL ACTION
Being an Effective Road Warrior
Since business travelers who fly 100,000-plus miles a year are 
no longer a rare breed, should you prepare for the possibility of 
joining them?
Business travel can have its rewards. Many people like get-
ting away from their everyday workplace, with its endless 
meetings, coworker distractions, and work “fires” to put out. In 
addition, millennials in particular, for whom the line between 
“business” and “personal” time is becoming blurred, in one 
poll cited discovering a new city as the best benefit of business 
travel (65%), along with experiencing new things (45%) and 
connecting with new people (37%).46
Business travelers have learned the following three lessons.
Lesson 1: Frequent Travel May Be Needed because 
Personal Encounters Are Essential. Nearly all business 
travelers—more than nine in 10—agree travel is important to 
achieving their business goals, according to one survey, with 82% 
of U.S. responders being the most positive about the critical value 
of face-to-face client contacts.47 Yes, technologies such as smart-
phones, e-mail, and videoconferencing make it easier to connect 
with others—superficially, at least. “But,” says an investment 
banker, “in a global world you have to get in front of your employ-
ees, spend time with your clients, and show commitment when it 
comes to joint ventures, mergers, and alliances. The key is 
thoughtful travel—traveling when necessary.”48 Adds another top 
executive, “If you are going to disagree with somebody, you cer-
tainly don’t want to do it by e-mail, and if possible you don’t even 
want to do it by phone. You want to do it face to face.”49
Lesson 2: Travel May Be Global, but Understanding Must 
Be Local. “In China, we had translators, but we were still used 
to conducting business American style, where you can get a deal 
done in two hours and everyone leaves happy,” says Ty Morse, 
whose company develops things like text messaging platforms 
and mobile payment processing solutions. “But in Asia, every 
meeting was about 10 hours long and everyone wanted to serve 
us food. We were so stuffed and jet-lagged, it was ridiculous.”50
Being a road warrior is all about making bets with one’s 
time, calculating the strategy of where to be when. Thus, 
world-traveling executives must do their homework to know 
cultures, organizations, and holders of power.
“Cull information on the individuals and companies you’re 
visiting,” says one expert. “Follow the news relating to the re-
gion. If possible try to read a few books about the history and 
culture of the lands you will visit. . . . Learn a few words too.”51 
Because in Asia and the Middle East personal relationships are 
crucial to getting things done, you need to engage in small talk 
and avoid business talk during after-hours outings. Says Ted 
Dale, president of international business consulting firm 
Aperian Global, “You need to spend out-of-office time in social 

108 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
More specifically, consider yourself in the following situations:
You May Deal with Foreign Customers or Partners 
While working for a 
U.S. company you may have to deal with foreign customers. Or you may have to work 
with a foreign company in some sort of joint venture. The people you’re dealing with 
may be outside the United States or visitors to it.54 Either way you would hate to blow 
a deal—and maybe all future deals—because you were ignorant of some cultural as-
pects you could have known about.
Examples are legion.55 One American executive inadvertently insulted or embar-
rassed Thai businessmen by starting gatherings talking about business. “That’s a no-
no,” he says. “I quickly figured out that I was creating problems by talking business 
before eating lunch and by initiating the talks.”
You May Deal with Foreign Employees or Suppliers 
While working for an 
American company you may have to purchase important components, raw materials, 
or services from a foreign supplier.56 And you never know where foreign practices may 
diverge from what you’re accustomed to.
Many software developer jobs, for instance, have been moved outside the United 
States—to places such as India, New Zealand, and Eastern Europe. A lot of U.S. software 
companies—Microsoft, IBM, Oracle, Motorola, Novell, Hewlett-Packard, and Texas 
Instruments—have opened offices in India to take advantage of high-quality labor. General 
Electric, Caterpillar, and 3M have spent millions expanding their overseas research labs.57
You May Work for a Foreign Firm in the United States 
You may some-
time take a job with a foreign firm doing business in the United States, such as 
an electronics, pharmaceutical, or car company. And you’ll have to deal with 
managers above and below you whose outlook is different from yours. For in-
stance, Japanese companies, with their emphasis on correctness and face saving, 
operate in significantly different ways from American companies.
Sometimes it is even hard to know that an ostensibly U.S. company actually 
has foreign ownership. For example, among some classic American brands that 
are now foreign owned are Budweiser beer (introduced in St. Louis in 1876 by 
Anheuser-Busch, which is now owned by Belgian-Brazilian conglomerate InBev), and 
Vaseline (founded in Brooklyn in 1870, now owned by Anglo-Dutch company Unile-
ver), as well as Popsicle (Unilever), Purina (Nestlé of Switzerland), Frigidaire (AB 
Electrolux, Sweden), and 7-Eleven (Seven & I Holdings, Japan).58
You May Work for an American Firm Outside the United States—or for a 
Foreign One 
You might easily find yourself working abroad in the foreign opera-
tion of a U.S. company. Most big American corporations have overseas subsidiaries or 
divisions. On the other hand, you might also well work for a foreign firm in a foreign 
country, such as a big Indian company in Bangalore or Mumbai.
settings.” In Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America, it’s im-
portant to understand organizational hierarchy, as represented 
by professional titles and age.52
Lesson 3: Travel Downtime Can Be Used to Expand Busi-
ness Contacts. It’s tempting at the end of a business day to head 
to your hotel room and the TV set. But savvy travelers know that 
downtime is a great opportunity to network and make new con-
tacts. Columnist Anita Bruzzese points out that some hotels offer 
evening socials that businesspeople can use to meet others in a 
relaxed setting with food and drink at hand. Bruzzese tells of one 
veteran, Patricia Rossi, who contacts her regular Twitter followers 
and asks them to meet her if she’s in their city. “You’ve already 
developed those relationships online,” Rossi says. “But this is a 
chance to get kneecap to kneecap, which is so important.”53
YOUR CALL
As we discussed, managers must be prepared to work for or-
ganizations that operate not only countrywide but worldwide. 
To stay connected with colleagues, employees, clients, and 
suppliers, you may have to travel a lot. Does this give you 
cause for concern? What do you think you should do about it?
Working for a foreign firm. If 
you thought you might work for 
a foreign firm, either at home or 
overseas, what should you be 
doing now to prepare for it?

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
109
The Successful International Manager: Geocentric, 
Not Ethnocentric or Polycentric
Maybe you don’t really care that you don’t have much understanding of the foreign 
culture you’re dealing with. “What’s the point?” you may think. “The main thing is to 
get the job done.” Certainly there are international firms with managers who have this 
perspective. They are called ethnocentric, one of three primary attitudes among inter-
national managers, the other two being polycentric and geocentric.59
Ethnocentric Managers—“We Know Best” 
What do foreign executives fluent 
in English think when they hear Americans using an endless array of baseball, basket-
ball, and football phrases (such as “out of left field” or “Hail Mary pass”).60 Ethnocen-
tric managers believe that their native country, culture, language, and behavior are 
superior to all others. Ethnocentric managers tend to believe that they can export the 
managers and practices of their home countries to anywhere in the world and that they 
will be more capable and reliable. Often the ethnocentric viewpoint is less attributable 
to prejudice than it is to ignorance, since such managers obviously know more about 
their home environment than the foreign environment. Ethnocentrism might also be 
called parochialism—that is, a narrow view in which people see things solely through 
their own perspective.
Is ethnocentrism bad for business? It seems so. A survey of 918 companies with 
home offices in the United States, Japan, and Europe found that ethnocentric policies 
were linked to such problems as recruiting difficulties, high turnover rates, and law-
suits over personnel policies.61
Ethnocentric views also affect our purchasing decisions. Some people believe that 
we should only purchase products made in our home country. What are your views 
about being an ethnocentric consumer? You can find out by taking Self-Assessment 4.1.
Assessing Your Consumer Ethnocentrism
This survey is designed to assess your consumer ethnocen-
trism. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take the Self-
Assessment 4.1. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
Are you surprised by the results? What do they suggest 
about your purchasing decisions? What are the pros and 
cons of being an ethnocentric consumer?
2. 
How do American companies, associations, and unions 
encourage us to be ethnocentric consumers?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.1
®
Polycentric Managers—“They Know Best” 
Polycentric managers take the 
view that native managers in the foreign offices best understand native personnel and 
practices, and so the home office should leave them alone. Thus, the attitude of poly-
centric managers is nearly the opposite of that of ethnocentric managers.
Geocentric Managers—“What’s Best Is What’s Effective, Regardless of 
Origin” 
Geocentric managers accept that there are differences and similarities be-
tween home and foreign personnel and practices and that they should use whatever 
techniques are most effective. Clearly, being an ethno- or polycentric manager takes 
less work. But the payoff for being a geocentric manager can be far greater. The Man-
ager’s Toolbox at the beginning of this chapter gives some tips on being geocentric, 
which you should review again. ●

U.S. export. Popular 
entertainment is a major 
U.S. export, as was the 2014 
film The Amazing Spider-Man 2, 
which took top spot in Chinese 
theaters. Are there any 
negatives to sending American 
popular culture overseas?
4.3 
Why & How Companies Expand Internationally
Why do companies expand internationally, and how do they do it?
THE BIG PICTURE
Multinationals expand to take advantage of availability of supplies, new markets, lower labor costs, access to 
finance capital, or avoidance of tariffs and import quotas. Five ways they do so are by global outsourcing; im-
porting, exporting, and countertrading; licensing and franchising; joint ventures; and wholly-owned subsidiaries.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Who makes Apple’s iPhone? An estimated 90% of the components are manufactured 
overseas, by workers in Germany, Singapore, Korea, and elsewhere. The display 
screens, for instance, come mostly from Asia, especially South Korea and Japan; the 
phone itself is assembled in China.62 Who makes the furniture sold by Ethan Allen, 
that most American of names, evoking Ethan Allen and the Green Mountain Boys of 
the American Revolution? Most of it still is made in the United States, but a lot is 
made by suppliers in Mexico, China, the Philippines, Indonesia, and Vietnam.63 Where 
is consumer-products giant Procter & Gamble going to seek additional consumers? 
Nearly two-thirds of P&G’s sales and more than half its profits come from outside the 
United States, and the company is aggressively pursing business in developing markets 
like Africa and parts of Latin America and Asia.64 (In Mexico, for example, it sells to 
poor consumers at small, rudimentary markets who will buy a single-use P&G sham-
poo packet.)65 There are many reasons why American companies are going global. Let 
us consider why and how they are expanding beyond U.S. borders.
Why Companies Expand 
Internationally
Many a company has made the deliberate decision to re-
strict selling its product or service to just its own country. 
Is anything wrong with that?
The answer is: It depends. It would probably have 
been a serious mistake for NEC, Sony, or Hitachi to have 
limited their markets solely to Japan during the 1990s, a 
time when the country was in an economic slump and 
Japanese consumers weren’t consuming. During that 
same period, however, some American banks might have 
been better off not making loans abroad, when the U.S. 
economy was booming but foreign economies were not. 
Going international or not going international—it can be 
risky either way.
Why, then, do companies expand internationally? 
There are at least five reasons, all of which have to do 
with making or saving money.
1. Availability of Supplies 
Antique and art dealers, 
mining companies, banana growers, sellers of hard 
woods—all have to go where their basic supplies or raw 
materials are located. For years oil companies, for exam-
ple, have expanded their activities outside the United 
States in seeking cheaper or more plentiful sources of oil.
2. New Markets 
Sometimes a company will find, as 
cigarette makers have, that the demand for their product 
110 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
111
has declined domestically but that they can still make money overseas. Or sometimes 
a company will steal a march on its competitors by aggressively expanding into for-
eign markets, as did Coca-Cola over PepsiCo under the leadership of legendary CEO 
Robert Goizueta. From 2000 to 2010, exports of American goods jumped 66%; the 
export of services increased even more—84%.66
3. Lower Labor Costs 
The decline in manufacturing jobs in the United States 
is directly attributable to the fact that American companies have found it cheaper 
to do their manufacturing outside the States. For example, the rationale for using 
maquiladoras—manufacturing plants allowed to operate in Mexico with special 
privileges in return for employing Mexican citizens—is that they provide less expen-
sive labor for assembling everything from appliances to cars. Even professional or 
service kinds of jobs, such as computer programming, may be shipped overseas. 
(However, a countertrend, called “deglobalization,” is that some companies are 
moving production back home, because long supply chains can be easily affected 
by the whims of geopolitics and energy prices and the United States remains a 
manufacturing power for higher-value products.)67
4. Access to Finance Capital 
Companies may be enticed into going abroad by the 
prospects of capital being put up by foreign companies or sudsidies from foreign govern-
ments. For example, Woody Allen’s 2013 film Blue Jasmine, in which Cate Blanchett 
plays a woman whose husband is revealed to be a Bernie Madoff–like con man, received 
most of its financing from overseas investors, as do many other American movies.68
5. Avoidance of Tariffs & Import Quotas 
Countries place tariffs (fees) on im-
ported goods or impose import quotas—limitations on the numbers of products al-
lowed in—for the purpose of protecting their own domestic industries. For example, 
Japan imposes tariffs on agricultural products, such as rice, imported from the United 
States. To avoid these penalties, a company might create a subsidiary to produce the 
product in the foreign country. General Electric and Whirlpool, for example, have for-
eign subsidiaries to produce appliances overseas.
How Companies Expand Internationally
Most companies don’t start out to be multinationals. Generally, they edge their way 
into international business, at first making minimal investments and taking minimal 
risks, as shown in the drawing below. (See Figure 4.1.)
Global
outsourcing
Importing,
exporting, &
countertrading
Licensing &
franchising
Joint
ventures
Wholly-owned
subsidiaries
Lowest risk &
investment
Highest risk
& investment
FIGURE 4.1 
Five Ways of Expanding Internationally
These range from lowest risk and investment (left) to highest risk and investment (right).
Let’s consider the five ways of expanding internationally shown in the figure.
1. Global Outsourcing 
A common practice of many companies, outsourcing is 
defined as using suppliers outside the company to provide goods and services. For 
example, airlines farm out a lot of aircraft maintenance to other companies. Manage-
ment philosopher Peter Drucker believed that in the near future organizations might be 
outsourcing all work that is “support”—such as information systems—rather than rev-
enue producing.

112 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
Global outsourcing extends this technique outside the United States. Global out-
sourcing, or offshoring, is defined as using suppliers outside the United States to 
provide labor, goods, or services. The reason may be that the foreign supplier has 
resources not available in the United States, such as Italian marble. Or the supplier 
may have special expertise, as do Pakistani weavers. Or—more likely these days—
the supplier’s labor is cheaper than American labor. As a manager, your first business 
trip outside the United States might be to inspect the production lines of one of your 
outsourcing suppliers.
2. Importing, Exporting, & Countertrading 
When importing, a company 
buys goods outside the country and resells them domestically. Nothing might seem 
to be more American than Caterpillar tractors, but they are made not only in the 
United States but also in Canada, from which they are imported and made available 
for sale in the United States.69 Many of the products we use are imported, ranging 
from Heineken beer (Netherlands) to Texaco gasoline (Saudi Arabia) to Honda 
snowblowers (Japan).
PRACTICAL ACTION
Global Outsourcing: Which Jobs Are Likely to Fall 
Victim to Offshoring?
Will there be any good jobs left for new college graduates?
Americans are rightly concerned about the changing jobs 
picture, brought about not only by the dismal aftermath of the 
2007–2009 Great Recession but also earlier in part by offshor-
ing of work to low-wage countries such as China, India, and 
the Philippines. Few of the millions of factory jobs that have 
been lost during the last 10 years have been replaced, and to-
day just 9% of American workers are employed in manufacturing. 
This has forced many workers—when they were able to work at 
all—to accept lower-paying alternatives, such as jobs in retail 
and health care, which pay far less than manufacturing jobs.70
More recently, the same trend—global outsourcing—has 
been happening with white-collar jobs. Forrester Research es-
timates that 3.4 million service jobs will have moved offshore 
between 2000 and 2015.71 Among them are jobs in office sup-
port, computer, business operations, architecture, legal, sales, 
and art and design.72
How Can You Prepare for an Offshored World? “I believe 
[companies] should outsource everything for which there is no 
career track that could lead into senior management,” said 
management philosopher Peter Drucker. An example, he said, is 
the job of total-quality-control specialist, work that can be done 
overseas.73
“As soon as a job becomes routine enough to describe in 
a spec sheet, it becomes vulnerable to outsourcing,” says an-
other writer. “Jobs like data entry, which are routine by na-
ture, were the first among obvious candidates for 
outsourcing.” But even “design and financial-analysis skills 
can, with time, become well-enough understood to be spelled 
out in a contract and signed away.”74 Says Fred Levy, a 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist, “If you can 
describe a job precisely, or write rules for doing it, it’s unlikely 
to survive. Either we’ll program a computer to do it, or we’ll 
teach a foreigner to do it.”75
Which Jobs Will Remain in the United States? It is difficult 
to predict which jobs will remain at home, since even the Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics often can’t get it right. However, jobs 
that endure may share certain traits, listed below, regardless of 
the industry they serve:76
• Face-to-face. Some involve face-to-face contact, such 
as being a salesperson with a specific territory or an emer-
gency room doctor.
• Physical contact. Other jobs involve physical contact, 
such as those of dentists, nurses, massage therapists, gar-
deners, and nursing-home aides.
• Making high-end products. High-end products that re-
quire intensive research, precision assembly, and com-
plex technology requiring skilled workers are good 
candidates for the U.S. labor market, says Eric Spiegel, 
CEO of the Siemens Corp. Low-end, low-technology 
products, such as textiles and furniture, will doubtless 
continue to be offshored.77
• Recognizing complex patterns. Others involve the hu-
man ability to recognize complex patterns, which are hard 
to computerize, such as a physician’s ability to diagnose an 
unusual disease (even if the X-rays are read by a radiolo-
gist in India). This also describes such jobs as teaching first 

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
113
grade or selling a mansion to a millionaire or jobs that de-
mand an intimate knowledge of the United States, such as 
marketing to American teenagers or lobbying Congress.
Survival Rules For you, as a prospective manager, there are 
perhaps three ideas to take away from all this:
• Teamwork and creativity. “Jobs that persist are dynamic 
and creative and require the ability to team with others,” 
says Jim Spohrer of the IBM Almaden Research Center in 
San Jose, California, which studies the business operations 
of IBM’s corporate clients. “At its heart, a company is sim-
ply a group of teams that come together to create” prod-
ucts and services.78
• Flexibility. “Jobs used to change very little or not at all 
over the course of several generations,” says Spohrer. 
“Now, they might change three or four times in a single 
lifetime.” Flexibility—as in being willing to undergo 
retraining—thus becomes important. Fortunately, as 
Drucker pointed out, the United States is “the only 
country that has a very significant continuing education 
system. This doesn’t exist anywhere else.” The United 
States is also the only country, he said, in which it is 
easy for younger people to move from one area at 
work to another.79
• Education. The more education one has, the more one is 
apt to prevail during times of economic change. Men and 
women with four years of college, for instance, earn nearly 
45% more on average than those with only a high school 
diploma.80
YOUR CALL
What kind of job or jobs are you interested in that would 
seem to provide you with some hopes of prevailing in a fast-
changing world?
When exporting, a company produces goods domestically and sells them out-
side the country. One of the greatest U.S. exports is American pop culture, in the 
form of movies, music, and fashion. The United States is also a leader in export-
ing computers and other information technology. The U.S. was ranked the num-
ber 3 exporter in the world in 2013, down from number 1 a few years earlier. (See 
Table 4.2.)
RANK IN 1999 
RANK IN 2013
 1. U.S 
China
 2. Germany 
Germany
 3. Japan 
U.S.
 4. France 
Japan
 5. Britain 
France
 6. Canada 
South Korea
 7. Italy 
Netherlands
 8. Netherlands 
Italy
 9. China 
Russia
 10. Belgium 
United Kingdom
TABLE 4.2
Top 10 exporting countries, 
1999 and 2013
Source: “Country Comparison: 
Exports, Top Ten,” Index Mundi 
and CIA Fact Book, www
.indexmundi.com/g/r
.aspx?v=85&t=10 (accessed April 
15, 2014). Exports are measured 
in U.S. dollars.
Sometimes other countries may wish to import American goods but lack the 
currency to pay for them. In that case, the exporting U.S. company may resort to 
countertrading—that is, bartering goods for goods. When the Russian ruble plunged 
in value in 1998, some goods became a better medium of exchange than currency.

114 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
3. Licensing & Franchising 
Licensing and franchising are two aspects of the 
same thing, although licensing is used by manufacturing companies and franchising is 
used more frequently by service companies.
In licensing, a company allows a foreign company to pay it a fee to make or distrib-
ute the first company’s product or service. For example, the Du Pont chemical com-
pany might license a company in Brazil to make Teflon, the nonstick substance that is 
found on some frying pans. Thus, Du Pont, the licensor, can make money without 
having to invest large sums to conduct business directly in a foreign company. More-
over, the Brazilian firm, the licensee, knows the local market better than Du Pont prob-
ably would.
Franchising is a form of licensing in which a company allows a foreign company to 
pay it a fee and a share of the profit in return for using the first company’s brand name 
and a package of materials and services. For example, Burger King, Hertz, and 
Hilton Hotels, which are all well-known brands, might provide the use of their 
names plus their operating know-how (facility design, equipment, recipes, management 
systems) to companies in the Philippines in return for an up-front fee plus a percent-
age of the profits.
By now Americans traveling throughout the world have become accustomed to see-
ing so-called U.S. stores everywhere. Some recently active companies: Toys R Us 
opened a store in Poland. Gap opened an Old Navy store in Japan and a Banana Re-
public store in Paris. Tiffany’s opened a jewelry store in Russia. Starbucks opened a 
store in Colombia.81
4. Joint Ventures 
Strategic allies (described in Chapter 3) are two organizations 
that have joined forces to realize strategic advantages that neither would have if oper-
ating alone. A U.S. firm may form a joint venture, also known as a strategic alliance, 
with a foreign company to share the risks and rewards of starting a new enterprise to-
gether in a foreign country. For in-
stance, General Motors operates 
a joint venture with Shanghai 
Automotive Industry Group to 
build Buicks in China.82 Ford also 
has a joint venture in China with 
 Changan Ford.83
Sometimes a joint venture is the 
only way an American company 
can have a presence in a certain 
country, whose laws may forbid for-
eigners from ownership. Indeed, in 
China, this is the only way foreign 
cars may be sold in that country.
5. Wholly-Owned Subsidiaries 
A wholly-owned subsidiary is a for-
eign subsidiary that is totally owned 
and controlled by an organization. 
The foreign subsidiary may be an 
existing company that is purchased 
outright. A greenfield venture is a 
foreign subsidiary that the owning 
organization has built from scratch.
General Motors owns majority 
stakes in Adam Opel AG in Germany 
and Vauxhall Motor Cars Ltd. in 
the United Kingdom. ●
Volvo. Who owns what car 
brand these days? Formerly 
British brands Jaguar and Land 
Rover now belong to Tata of 
India. Volkswagen owns the 
formerly British Bentley and 
Italian Lamborghini. Volvo, 
whose cars and trucks are still 
made in Sweden, is owned by 
Chinese automaker Geely. Do 
you think the American 
companies General Motors and 
Ford could ever wind up under 
foreign ownership, as Chrysler 
has (owned by Fiat)?

4.4 
The World of Free Trade: Regional 
Economic Cooperation
What are barriers to free trade, and what major organizations and trading blocs 
promote trade?
THE BIG PICTURE
Barriers to free trade are tariffs, import quotas, and embargoes. Organizations promoting international trade 
are the World Trade Organization, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund. Major trading blocs 
are NAFTA, the EU, APEC, ASEAN, Mercosur, and CAFTA.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
If you live in the United States, you see foreign products on a 
daily basis—cars, appliances, clothes, foods, beers, wines, and 
so on. Based on what you see every day, which countries would 
you think are our most important trading partners? China? 
Japan? Germany? United Kingdom? South Korea?
These five countries do indeed appear among the top lead-
ing U.S. trading partners. Interestingly, however, our fore-
most trading partners are our immediate neighbors—Canada 
and Mexico—whose products may not be quite so visible. 
(See Table 4.3, right.)
Let’s begin to consider free trade, the movement of goods 
and services among nations without political or economic 
obstruction.
Barriers to International Trade
Countries often use trade protectionism—the use of govern-
ment regulations to limit the import of goods and services—to 
protect their domestic industries against foreign competition. 
The justification they often use is that this saves jobs. Actually, 
protectionism is not considered beneficial, mainly because of 
what it does to the overall trading atmosphere.
The devices by which countries try to exert protectionism 
consist of tariffs, import quotas, and embargoes.
1. Tariffs 
A tariff is a trade barrier in the form of a customs 
duty, or tax, levied mainly on imports. At one time, for in-
stance, to protect the American shoe industry, the United 
States imposed a tariff on Italian shoes. Actually, there are 
two types of tariffs: One, called a revenue tariff, is designed 
simply to raise money for the government, such as a tax on all oil imported into the 
United States. The other, which concerns us more, is a protective tariff, which is 
intended to raise the price of imported goods to make the prices of domestic products 
more competitive.
Beginning in late 2011, in a dispute that was still ongoing three years later, seven 
U.S. makers of solar panels sought trade tariffs from the U.S. Commerce Department 
of more than 100% on solar panels made in China, on the grounds that it used billions 
of dollars in government subsidies to help gain sales in the American market.84 A 
couple of months later, four U.S. makers of steel towers for wind turbines also filed a 
trade complaint against China and Vietnam seeking tariffs of 60% for the same 
reasons.85 For its part, China raised tariffs on foreign auto brands, presumably to protect 
 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
115
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, “Top Trading Partners—February 
2014,” April 3, 2014, www.census.gov/foreign-trade/statistics
/highlights/top/top1402cm.html (accessed April 15, 2014). 
TABLE 4.3 
Top 10 U.S. trading partners in goods, 
February 2014
TOP 10 NATIONS 
TOP 10 NATIONS
THE U.S.  
THE U.S.
EXPORTS TO 
IMPORTS FROM
 1. Canada 
China
 2. Mexico 
Canada
 3. China 
Mexico
 4. Japan 
Japan
 5. Germany 
Germany
 6. United Kingdom 
South Korea
 7. South Korea 
Saudi Arabia
 8. Brazil 
United Kingdom
 9. Hong Kong 
France
 10. Netherlands 
India

116 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
Playing by the rules? Four of 
the five top solar cell producers 
are based in China, where the 
government has subsidized the 
development of this technology, 
to the detriment of American and 
European solar industries. What 
do you think the United States 
should do to equalize the 
situation? Impose tariffs (special 
taxes) on some Chinese imports? 
Subsidize our own solar industry?
its own domestic car industry.86 (Today a fully loaded Mini Cooper 
costing $52,500 in the United States goes for $85,000 in China, which 
has a 25% import tax plus a 17% value-added and consumption tax.87)
2. Import Quotas 
An import quota is a trade barrier in the form of 
a limit on the numbers of a product that can be imported. Its intent is to 
protect domestic industry by restricting the availability of foreign 
products.
As a condition of being allowed into the World Trade Organization, 
China agreed, starting in 2005, to cancel car import quotas, which it 
had used to protect its domestic car manufacturing industry against im-
ported vehicles from the United States, Japan, and Germany.88 However, it has not done 
the same with export quotas, where it has been found to have broken international trade 
law by imposing quotas on the export from China of rare earth elements (17 minerals 
with names like indium, gallium, and tellurium), which are crucial to making high-
technology products, including mobile phones, hybrid cars, and 3-D TV screens.89
Quotas are designed to prevent dumping, the practice of a foreign company’s ex-
porting products abroad at a lower price than the price in the home market—or even 
below the costs of production—in order to drive down the price of the domestic prod-
uct. In 2009, the U.S. International Trade Commission imposed antidumping duties of 
10%–16% more on Chinese government–subsidized steel imported into the United 
States that damaged the American steel industry.90
3. Embargoes 
Ever seen a real Cuban cigar? They’re difficult for Americans to 
get, since they’re embargoed. An embargo is a complete ban on the import or export of 
certain products. It has been years since anyone was allowed to import Cuban cigars 
and sugar into the United States or for an American firm to do business in Cuba.91 
(Even so, the United States reportedly exported more than $350 million in goods, such 
as food and medicine, to the island in 2013, mainly through cash remittances that Cu-
ban Americans sent relatives.)92 In early 2012, European countries agreed to 
embargo—refuse to import—any oil from Iran, amounting to about a fifth of Iran’s 
total exports, if that country did not agree to allow continued sea traffic through the 
Gulf of Hormuz; the United States is also embargoing Iran.93
Organizations Promoting International Trade
In the 1920s, the institution of tariff barriers did not so much protect jobs as depress the 
demand for goods and services, thereby leading to the loss of jobs anyway—and the 
massive unemployment of the Great Depression of the 1930s.94 As a result of this lesson, 
after World War II the advanced nations of the world began to realize that if all countries 
could freely exchange the products that each could produce most efficiently, this would 
lead to lower prices all around. Thus began the removal of barriers to free trade.
The three principal organizations designed to facilitate international trade are the 
World Trade Organization, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
1. The World Trade Organization (WTO) 
Consisting of 159 member countries, 
the World Trade Organization (WTO) is designed to monitor and enforce trade agree-
ments. The agreements are based on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT), an international accord first signed by 23 nations in 1947, which helped to 
reduce worldwide tariffs and other barriers. Out of GATT came a series of “rounds,” or 
negotiations, that resulted in the lowering of barriers; for instance, the Uruguay Round, 
implemented in 1996, cut tariffs by one-third. The current round of negotiations, the 
Doha Round, which began in Doha, Qatar, is aimed at helping the world’s poor by, 
among other things, reducing trade barriers, including improving customs rules and 
procedures.95

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
117
Founded in 1995 and headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, WTO succeeded 
GATT as the world forum for trade negotiations and has the formal legal struc-
ture for deciding trade disputes. WTO also encompasses areas not previously 
covered by GATT, such as services and intellectual property rights. A particu-
larly interesting area of responsibility covers telecommunications—cell phones, 
pagers, data transmission, satellite communications, and the like—with half of 
the WTO’s 159 members agreeing to open their markets to foreign telecommuni-
cations companies.96
2. The World Bank 
The World Bank was founded after World War II to help 
European countries rebuild. Today the purpose of the World Bank is to provide low-
interest loans to developing nations for improving transportation, education, health, and 
telecommunications. The bank has 188 member nations, with most contributions com-
ing from Britain, the United States, Japan, and Germany.
In recent times, protesters have complained the World Bank has financed projects 
that could damage the ecosystem, such as the Three Gorges Dam on China’s Yangtze 
River, or supported countries that permit low-paying sweatshops or that suppress reli-
gious freedom. Others think it has dragged its feet on getting affordable AIDS drugs to 
less-developed countries in Africa and lent millions to a palm oil company in Honduras 
accused of links to assassinations and forced evictions.97 In 2014 the World Bank 
underwent a sweeping reorganization to encourage better collaboration and a quicker 
response.98 It also announced it was nearly doubling its potential lending to developing 
countries such as China, India, and Brazil.99
3. The International Monetary Fund 
Founded in 1945 and now affiliated 
with the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund is the second pillar sup-
porting the international financial community. Consisting of 188 member nations, 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) is designed to assist in smoothing the flow 
of money between nations. 
The IMF operates as a last-resort lender that makes short-term loans to countries 
suffering from unfavorable balance of payments (roughly the difference between 
money coming into a country and money leaving the country, because of imports, ex-
ports, and other matters). In recent times, the IMF has become more high profile be-
cause of its role in trying to shore up some weaker European economies, including 
making loans to Greece, Portugal, and Ireland and considering how to assist Italy and 
Spain.100 Lately it has been more concerned with addressing income inequality, which 
has worsened in most countries in the past three decades.101
Major Trading Blocs: NAFTA, EU, APEC, ASEAN, 
Mercosur, & CAFTA
A trading bloc, also known as an economic community, is a group of nations within a 
geographical region that have agreed to remove trade barriers with one another. The six 
major trading blocs are the NAFTA nations, the European Union, the APEC countries, 
the ASEAN countries, the Mercosur, and CAFTA.
1. NAFTA—the Three Countries of the North American Free Trade 
Agreement 
Formed in 1994, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) 
is a trading bloc consisting of the United States, Canada, and Mexico, encompassing 
444 million people. The agreement is supposed to eliminate 99% of the tariffs and 
quotas among these countries, allowing for freer flow of goods, services, and capital in 
North America. Trade with Canada and Mexico in 2010 accounted for one-third of the 
U.S. total, up from one-quarter in 1989, and trade among the three nations has gone 
from $290 billion in 1993 to $1 trillion, according to government data.102 Still, as one 

118 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
reporter points out, “the treaty never met many of its sweeping promises to close 
Mexico’s wage gap with the United States, boost job growth, fight poverty, and protect 
the environment.”103
Is NAFTA a job killer, as some have complained? In Mexico, it has failed to gen-
erate substantial job growth and has hurt hundreds of thousands of subsistence farm-
ers, leading to a surge in illegal immigration across the U.S. southern border. As for 
the United States, around 845,000 jobs have been lost because of increased imports 
from Canada and Mexico and the relocation of factories in the past two decades, ac-
cording to government watchdog group Public Citizen.104 However, some experts 
suggest that many jobs lost to Mexico during this period would probably have gone 
to China or elsewhere.105 It also spurred a U.S. trade deficit—$177 billion in 2013, a 
nearly sevenfold increase above the pre-NAFTA level.106 However, supporters insist 
NAFTA ultimately will result in more jobs and a higher standard of living among all 
trading partners.
2. The EU—the 28 Countries of the European Union 
Formed in 
1957, the European Union (EU) consists of 28 trading partners in Europe, cov-
ering nearly 500 million consumers.
Nearly all internal trade barriers have been eliminated (including move-
ment of labor between countries), making the EU a union of borderless 
neighbors and the world’s largest free market, with a gross domestic prod-
uct of $15.83 trillion in 2013, second only to that of the United States 
($16.72 trillion).107
By 2002, such national symbols as the franc, the mark, the lira, the peseta, 
and the guilder had been replaced with the EU currency, the euro, which has 
been adopted by 18 European countries. There was even speculation that 
someday the euro could replace the U.S. dollar as the dominant world cur-
rency.108 However, in 2010 and 2011, the shaky finances and massive govern-
ment debts of Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain (so-called PIIGS) revealed 
an inherent weakness of the union—that both weak and strong economies were ex-
pected to coexist.
3. APEC—21 Countries of the Pacific Rim 
Founded in 1989, the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) is a group of 21 Pacific Rim countries whose 
purpose is to improve economic and political ties. Most countries with a coastline 
on the Pacific Ocean are members of the organization, as highlighted below, al-
though there are a number of exceptions. APEC members, which include the United 
States, Canada, and China, work to reduce tariffs and other trade barriers across the 
Asia-Pacific region.

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
119
4. ASEAN—10 Countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is a trading bloc consisting of 
10 countries in Asia: Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar 
(Burma), the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. Like other trading blocs, 
ASEAN is working on reducing trade barriers among member countries. ASEAN na-
tions comprise a market of 610 million people; in January 2010, a China-ASEAN 
Free Trade Area was established, the largest free trade area in the world in terms of 
population.109
5. Mercosur—12 Countries of Latin America 
The Mercosur is the largest 
trade bloc in Latin America and has five core members—Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, 
Uruguay, and Venezuela—and seven associate members: Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, and Suriname. Besides reducing tariffs by 75%, Mercosur na-
tions are striving for full economic integration, and the alliance is also negotiating 
trade agreements with NAFTA, the EU, and Japan.110
6. CAFTA-DR—Seven Countries of Central America 
The Central America 
Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR), which involves the United States and Costa Rica, 
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua, is intended 
to reduce tariffs and other barriers to free trade.
Most Favored Nation Trading Status
Besides joining together in trade blocs, countries will also extend special, “most 
favored nation” trading privileges to one another. Most favored nation trading sta-
tus describes a condition in which a country grants other countries favorable trading 
treatment such as the reduction of import duties. The purpose is to promote stronger 
and more stable ties between companies in the two countries.
Exchange Rates
The exchange rate is the rate at which the currency of one area or country can be ex-
changed for the currency of another’s. Americans deal in dollars with each other, but 
beyond the U.S. border we have to deal with pounds in England, euros in Europe, 
pesos in Mexico, and yuan in China. Because of changing economic conditions, the 
values of currencies fluctuate in relation to each other, so that sometimes a U.S. dollar, 
for example, will buy more goods and sometimes it will buy less. ●

120 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
Get out much? Over one-third 
of Americans (110 million) have 
passports, more than double 
the number of U.S. passports 
(48 million) in circulation in 
2000 and 15 times those in 
1989 (7 million). At the same 
time, more visitors from 
foreign countries are coming 
to the United States, with four 
countries expected to account 
for 59% of the projected growth 
in the near future: Canada 
(23%), China (18%), Mexico 
(11%), and Brazil (7%). How 
does the travel boom figure 
in your career plans?
EXAMPLE
An American in London Dealing with Currency Exchange—
How Much Are Those Jeans, Really?
Let’s pretend $1 trades equal to 1 British pound, symbolized by 
£1. Thus, an item that costs 3 pounds (£3) can be bought for $3. 
If the exchange rate changes so that $1 buys £1½, then an item 
that costs £3 can be bought for $2 (the dollar is said to be 
“stronger” against the pound). If the rate changes so that $1 
buys only ½ a pound (£0.5), an item that costs £6 can be pur-
chased for $9 (the dollar is “weaker”).111 In mid-2014, the dollar 
was weaker, buying only .59 of a pound, whereas back in 2010 
it had reached a high, averaging .67 of a pound. (Stated another 
way, £1 bought $1.56 in 2010 and $1.68 in April 2014.)
How the Exchange Rate Matters. As this is written, the dollar is 
weaker again, and will buy only .59 of a pound. Thus, staying in 
London became more expensive for Americans. A hotel room that 
rents for £100 cost an American only $156 in 2010, but cost $168 
in 2014. Indeed, if during those years, 2010 to 2014, you were an 
American living in England working for a U.S. company and paid 
in dollars, your standard of living went down.
The Varying Cost of Living for Different Cities. Prices also 
vary among countries and cities throughout the world, with the 
standard of living of Chicago, say, being 40% less than that of 
London (the most expensive city in the world). To give you a 
sense of what an American’s purchasing power is worth in London 
when $1 equals .59 British pound (or £1 equals $1.68)—the 
exchange rate in April 2014—consider these prices for various 
goods in Chicago versus London (estimated in U.S. dollars, 
computed on www.expatistan.com):
 
CHICAGO 
LONDON
2-liter Coke 
$1.74 
$3.20 (£1.90)
Big Mac meal 
$6 
$9 (£5.60)
Levi’s 501 jeans 
$57 
$108 (£64)
Nike sports shoes 
$88 
$107 (£63)
Volkswagen Golf 2.0 TDI 
$22,526 
$38,315 (£22,797)
With this example you can see why it’s important to under-
stand how exchange rates work and what value your U.S. dol-
lars actually have.
Of course, if you’re a Londoner looking at this kind of cur-
rency exchange rate and price differentials, it’s a terrific time to 
visit Chicago.112
YOUR CALL
Planning to visit Mexico, Canada, or one of those European 
countries (Germany, France) that uses the euro? Go online to 
www.x-rates.com and figure out the exchange rate of the U.S. dol-
lar and that country’s currency. Then go to www.expatistan.com 
and figure out what things cost in that country’s principal city 
versus a U.S. city near you. Could you afford to go?

4.5 
The Importance of Understanding Cultural 
Differences
What are the principal areas of cultural differences?
THE BIG PICTURE
Managers trying to understand other cultures need to understand the importance of national culture and 
cultural dimensions and basic cultural perceptions embodied in language, interpersonal space, 
communication, time orientation, religion, and law and political stability.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
121
In 2007, while hooking up his laptop to a projector to make a video presentation to a 
roomful of Chinese executives in Shanghai, American management consultant Scott 
Margolis put up on the screen a desktop photo of his three children for a few seconds—
and, he says, “the room got very quiet.” The reason, a Chinese colleague explained later: 
Displaying multiple children in a country that allowed only one child per family was 
potentially insulting.113 Today China is loosening its single-child rule, but Margolis’s 
story shows the potential cultural pitfalls of doing business in other countries. “Whether 
a multinational or a start-up business out of a garage, everybody is global these days,” 
says international consultant Dean Foster. “In today’s economy, there is no room for 
failure. Companies have to understand the culture they are working in from Day 1.”114
There are a lot of cultural differences American managers are going to have to get 
used to. In China, for instance, people draw different lines between personal and work 
spaces, so that, for example, it is permissible for office colleagues to inquire about the 
size of your apartment and your salary and to give assessments of your wardrobe and 
your muscle tone, matters considered personal in the United States. In South Korea, if 
you want to give a gift that’s considered classy and glamorous, you might present a 
can or two of Spam—yes, Spam, viewed as a thrifty tinned-meat staple in the United 
States but in Korea still thought of as a symbol of luxury descending from a time of 
deprivation during the Korean war when only Americans had the product.115 In the 
Arab world, which has historically been segregated by sex, men spend a lot of time 
together, and so holding hands, kissing cheeks, and long handshakes are meant to 
Tipping point. The culture of tipping in restaurants 
varies from country to country. Whereas in the U.S. 
and Canada 15%–20% of the total bill is considered a 
standard tip (and 10% insulting), in Japan and China 
tips are not expected and are even considered 
inappropriate. In Hong Kong and Singapore, it’s up to 
the diner’s discretion (a 10% service charge is already 
added to the bill). In Europe, hotels and restaurants 
add a 10% charge and tipping is expected only for 
exceptional service. In Latin America, a tip of 10% is 
customary in most restaurants, and you’re expected 
to hand it to the person directly, not just leave it on the 
table. All clear?

122 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
express devotion and equality in status. We considered some other cultural differences 
in the Manager’s Toolbox that opened this chapter.
The Importance of National Culture
A nation’s culture is the shared set of beliefs, values, knowledge, and patterns of 
behavior common to a group of people. We begin learning our culture starting at an 
early age through everyday interaction with people around us. This is why, from the 
outside looking in, a nation’s culture can seem so intangible and perplexing. As cultural 
anthropologist Edward T. Hall puts it, “Since much of culture operates outside our 
awareness, frequently we don’t even know what we know. . . . We unconsciously learn 
what to notice and what not to notice, how to divide time and space, how to walk and 
talk and use our bodies, how to behave as men or women, how to relate to other peo-
ple, how to handle responsibility. . . .”116 Indeed, says Hall, what we think of as “mind” 
is really internalized culture.
And because a culture is made up of so many nuances, this is why visitors to an-
other culture may experience culture shock—the feelings of discomfort and disorienta-
tion associated with being in an unfamiliar culture. According to anthropologists, 
culture shock involves anxiety and doubt caused by an overload of unfamiliar expecta-
tions and social cues.117
Cultural Dimensions: The GLOBE Project
Misunderstandings and miscommunications often arise in international business relation-
ships because people don’t understand the expectations of the other side. A person from 
North America, Great Britain, Scandinavia, Germany, or Switzerland, for example, comes 
from a low-context culture in which shared meanings are primarily derived from written 
and spoken words. Someone from China, Korea, Japan, Vietnam, Mexico, or many Arab 
cultures, on the other hand, comes from a high-context culture in which people rely heav-
ily on situational cues for meaning when communicating with others, relying on nonverbal 
cues as to another person’s official position, status, or family connections.
One way to avoid cultural collisions is to have an understanding of various cultural 
dimensions, as expressed in the GLOBE project.
The GLOBE Project’s Nine Cultural Dimensions 
Started in 1993 by Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania professor Robert J. House, the GLOBE project is a massive and 
ongoing cross-cultural investigation of nine cultural dimensions involved in leadership 
and organizational processes.118 (GLOBE stands for Global Leadership and Organiza-
tional Behavior Effectiveness.) GLOBE has evolved into a network of more than 150 
scholars from 62 societies, and most of the researchers are native to the particular 
cultures they study. The nine cultural dimensions are as follows:
■ 
Power distance—how much unequal distribution of power should there 
be in organizations and society? Power distance expresses the degree to 
which a society’s members expect power to be unequally shared.
■ 
Uncertainty avoidance—how much should people rely on social norms 
and rules to avoid uncertainty? Uncertainty avoidance expresses the extent 
to which a society relies on social norms and procedures to alleviate the un-
predictability of future events.
■ 
Institutional collectivism—how much should leaders encourage and re-
ward loyalty to the social unit? Institutional collectivism expresses the ex-
tent to which individuals are encouraged and rewarded for loyalty to the group 
as opposed to pursuing individual goals.
■ 
In-group collectivism—how much pride and loyalty should people have 
for their family or organization? In contrast to individualism, in-group 

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
123
collectivism expresses the extent to which people should take pride in being 
members of their family, circle of close friends, and their work organization.119
■ 
Gender egalitarianism—how much should society maximize gender role 
differences? Gender egalitarianism expresses the extent to which a society 
should minimize gender discrimination and role inequalities.
■ 
Assertiveness—how confrontational and dominant should individuals be in 
social relationships? Assertiveness represents the extent to which a society expects 
people to be confrontational and competitive as opposed to tender and modest.
■ 
Future orientation—how much should people delay gratification by plan-
ning and saving for the future? Future orientation expresses the extent to 
which a society encourages investment in the future, as by planning and saving.
■ 
Performance orientation—how much should individuals be rewarded for 
improvement and excellence? Performance orientation expresses the extent 
to which society encourages and rewards its members for performance im-
provement and excellence.
■ 
Humane orientation—how much should society encourage and reward 
people for being kind, fair, friendly, and generous? Humane orientation 
represents the degree to which individuals are encouraged to be altruistic, car-
ing, kind, generous, and fair.
Data from 18,000 managers yielded the country profiles shown  below. (See Table 4.4.)
TABLE 4.4 
Countries Ranking Highest and Lowest on the Globe Cultural Dimensions
Source: Adapted from M. Javidan and R. J. House, “Cultural Acumen for the Global Manager: Lessons from Project GLOBE,” Organizational Dynamics, 
Spring 2001, pp. 289–305.
DIMENSION 
HIGHEST 
LOWEST
Power distance 
Morocco, Argentina, Thailand,  
Denmark, Netherlands, South Africa 
 
Spain, Russia  
(black sample), Israel, Costa Rica
Uncertainty avoidance 
Switzerland, Sweden, Germany 
Russia, Hungary, Bolivia, Greece, 
 
(former West), Denmark, Austria  
Venezuela
Institutional collectivism 
Sweden, South Korea, Japan,  
Greece, Hungary, Germany (former East), 
 
Singapore, Denmark  
Argentina, Italy
In-group collectivism 
Iran, India, Morocco,  
Denmark, Sweden, New Zealand, 
 
China, Egypt  
Netherlands, Finland
Gender egalitarianism 
Hungary, Poland, Slovenia,  
South Korea, Egypt, Morocco,  
 
Denmark, Sweden  
India, China
Assertiveness 
Germany (former East), Austria,  
Sweden, New Zealand, Switzerland, 
 
Greece, United States, Spain  
Japan, Kuwait
Future orientation 
Singapore, Switzerland,  
Russia, Argentina, Poland, 
 
Netherlands, Canada (English 
Italy, Kuwait
 
speaking), Denmark
Performance orientation 
Singapore, Hong Kong, New 
Russia, Argentina, Greece, 
 
Zealand, Taiwan, United States  
Venezuela, Italy
Human orientation 
Philippines, Ireland, Malaysia,  
Germany (former West), Spain, France, 
 
Egypt, Indonesia  
Singapore, Brazil

124 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
Have you thought about how you stand in relation to various norms—in both your 
society and others? Would your views affect your success in taking an international 
job? The following self-assessment was created to provide feedback regarding these 
questions and to aid your awareness about your views of the GLOBE dimensions.
Assessing Your Standing on the GLOBE Dimensions
This survey is designed to assess your values in terms of the 
GLOBE dimensions. Go to connect.mheducation.com and 
take Self-Assessment 4.2. When you’re done, answer the 
 following questions:
1. 
What are your three highest and lowest rated dimensions? 
How might these beliefs affect your ability to work with 
people from Europe, Asia, and South America?
2. 
How do your dimensional scores compare to the norms 
for Americans shown in Table 4.4?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.2
®
Recognizing Cultural Tendencies to Gain Competitive Advantage 
The 
GLOBE dimensions show a great deal of cultural diversity around the world, but they 
also show how cultural patterns vary. For example, the U.S. managerial sample scored 
high on assertiveness and performance orientation—which is why Americans are 
widely perceived as being pushy and hardworking. Switzerland’s high scores on un-
certainty avoidance and future orientation help explain its centuries of political neu-
trality and world-renowned banking industry. Singapore is known as a great place to do 
business because it is clean and safe and its people are well educated and hardworking—
no surprise, considering the country’s high scores on social collectivism, future orien-
tation, and performance orientation. By contrast, Russia’s low scores on future 
orientation and performance orientation could foreshadow a slower-than-hoped-for 
transition from a centrally planned economy to free-enterprise capitalism. The practi-
cal lesson to draw from all this: Knowing the cultural tendencies of foreign business 
partners and competitors can give you a strategic competitive advantage.120
GLOBE researchers also set out to find which, if any, attributes of leadership were 
universally liked or disliked. Throughout the world, visionary and inspirational leaders 
who are good team builders generally do the best; self-centered leaders seen as loners 
or face-savers received a poor reception.
Other Cultural Variations: Language, Interpersonal 
Space, Communication, Time Orientation, Religion, & 
Law & Political Stability
How do you go about bridging cross-cultural gaps? It begins with understanding. Let’s 
consider variations in six basic culture areas: (1) language, (2) interpersonal space, 
(3) communication, (4) time orientation, (5) religion, and (6) law and political stability.
Note, however, that such cultural differences are to be viewed as tendencies rather 
than absolutes. We all need to be aware that the individuals we are dealing with may 
be exceptions to the cultural rules. After all, there are talkative and aggressive Japa-
nese, just as there are quiet and deferential Americans, stereotypes notwithstanding.121
1. Language 
More than 3,000 different languages are spoken throughout the world, 
and it’s indeed true that global business speaks English.122 However, even if you are 
operating in English, there are nuances between cultures that can lead to mispercep-
tions. For instance, in Asia, a “yes” answer to a question “simply means the question is 
understood,” says one well-traveled writer. “It’s the beginning of negotiations.”123
In communicating across cultures you have four options: (a) You can speak your 
own language. (The average American believes that about half the world can speak 

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
125
English, when actually it’s close to 18%.)124 (b) You can use a translator. (Try to get 
one who will be loyal to you rather than to your overseas host.) (c) You can try using a 
translation app, such as Google Translate, that turns a smartphone into an interpreter, 
although this can be cumbersome.125 (d) You can learn the local language—by far the 
best option. In 2011, Gallup pollsters surveyed 2,007 U.S. citizens and 250 opinion 
leaders and asked them, “If you were given a chance to learn a new foreign language, 
which language would you rather learn?” Spanish led the way (58%), followed by 
Chinese (15%), Arabic (11%), and Japanese (10%).126
2. Interpersonal Space 
Men holding hands may raise eyebrows among most 
Americans, but it is common in the Middle East and does not carry any sexual conno-
tation. “Holding hands is the warmest expression of affection between men,” says one 
Lebanese sociologist. “It’s a sign of solidarity and friendship.”127
People of different cultures have different ideas about what is acceptable interper-
sonal space—that is, how close or far away one should be when communicating with 
another person. For instance, the people of North America and northern Europe tend to 
conduct business conversations at a range of 3–4 feet. For people in Latin American 
and Asian cultures, the range is about 1 foot. For Arabs, it is even closer.
This can lead to cross-cultural misunderstandings. “Arabs tend to get very close and 
breathe on you,” says anthropologist Hall. “The American on the receiving end can’t 
identify all the sources of his discomfort but feels that the Arab is pushy. The Arab comes 
close, the American backs up. The Arab follows, because he can only interact at certain 
distances.”128 However, once the American understands that Arabs handle interpersonal 
space differently and that “breathing on people is a form of communication,” says Hall, 
the situation can sometimes be redefined so that the American feels more comfortable.
3. Communication 
For small companies doing business abroad, “the important thing 
to remember is that you don’t know what you don’t know,” says the head of a U.S. firm 
that advises clients on cross-cultural matters.129 For instance, an American who had lived 
in Brazil and was fluent in Portuguese was angling to make a deal in São Paulo and 
thought his pitch was going well. “It was picture-perfect until my client suggested I stay 
for the weekend to go to a soccer game” and enjoy the local food with him. The American 
diplomatically declined the invitation, but the next day found the prospective clients not as 
receptive, saying they liked the program but would need more time to decide. On the 
plane home, he analyzed what had gone wrong and realized he had given them a “task” 
reason instead of a “relationship” reason for declining the invitation. “It’s a relationship 
culture, and I could just as easily and more successfully [have said], ‘There are people 
back home who are expecting me to be with them.’ ” But the reason he gave “sent the mes-
sage that I was not as Brazilian as they initially thought—and it came out of my profit.”130
Even single words and sounds can pose difficulties: Promoters of Apple’s “iPad,” 
it’s been pointed out, might encounter difficulties in Ireland, where the sound is indis-
tinguishable from “iPod,” or in Japan, where the language doesn’t even have a sound 
for the “a” in iPad.131
If you, like a growing number of young Americans, head to China for employment, 
you need to recall that you were brought up in a commercial environment, but younger 
Chinese were raised at a time when China was evolving from a government-regulated 
economy to a more free-market system, and so they may have less understanding of 
business concepts and client services. “In the West, there is such a premium on getting 
things done quickly,” says an American manager, “but when you come to work in 
China, you need to work on listening and being more patient and understanding of 
local ways of doing business.”132 In particular, Americans have to be careful about giving 
criticism directly, which the Chinese consider rude and inconsiderate.
We consider communication matters in more detail in Chapter 15.
4. Time Orientation 
Time orientation is different in many cultures. For example, 
Americans are accustomed to calling ahead for appointments, but South Koreans 

126 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
believe in spontaneity. Thus, when Seoul erupted in protests over tainted American 
beef, Korean legislators simply hopped on a plane to the United States, saying they 
would negotiate with the U.S. government. “But since they failed to inform the Ameri-
cans ahead of time,” says one report, “they were unable to meet with anyone of 
importance.”133
Anthropologist Hall makes a useful distinction between monochronic time and 
polychronic time:
■ 
Monochronic time. This kind of time is standard American business practice—
at least until recently. That is, monochronic time is a preference for doing one 
thing at a time. In this perception, time is viewed as being limited, precisely 
segmented, and schedule driven. This perception of time prevails, for example, 
when you schedule a meeting with someone and then give the visitor your 
undivided attention during the allotted time.134
Indeed, you probably practice monochronic time when you’re in a job in-
terview. You work hard at listening to what the interviewer says. You may well 
take careful notes. You certainly don’t answer your cell phone or gaze repeat-
edly out the window.
■ 
Polychronic time. This outlook on time is the kind that prevails in 
Mediterranean, Latin American, and especially Arab cultures. Polychronic 
time is a preference for doing more than one thing at a time. Here time is 
viewed as being flexible and multidimensional.
This perception of time prevails when you visit a Latin American client, 
find yourself sitting in the waiting room for 45 minutes, and then learn in the 
meeting that the client is dealing with three other people at the same time.
EXAMPLE
Dinner at 10? Spain’s Cultural Differences in Time
Spaniard Miguel Carbayo, 26, who once interned in the 
Netherlands, where work started at 8 and ended at 5, with a 
half hour for lunch, is appalled at the notion of Spain doing 
away with its customary two- or three-hour midday meal. 
“Reduce lunchtime?” he said. “No, I’m completely against that. 
It is one thing to eat. It is another thing to nourish oneself.”135
Out of Whack. Spain operates on its own clock and rhythms, dif-
ferent from the rest of Europe. But the country’s apportionment of 
time, say critics, is out of whack, “dictating notoriously late hours 
that sap the country of efficiency and make it hard for anyone 
with a regular job to have time for much else,” says one report.136
Spaniards generally start work at 9, pause for a late-morning 
snack (which cuts into work productivity), then quit for lunch around 
2 or 2:30 to take a siesta break—although fewer and fewer people 
actually take naps. They then return to work around 4 or so and 
work well into the evening. Most workplaces close at 9.
Thus, at a time when people in other countries are getting ready 
for bed, that is the point in the day when Spaniards are sitting down 
to dinner. Prime-time television shows start at 10 p.m. and don’t 
end until after 1 a.m. Night life goes on into the wee hours.
Longer on the Job & Sleepier. What’s the effect of this? “Every-
thing is late in Spain, and this has a detrimental effect on every-
one,” says a business school professor. “We live in a permanent 
jet lag.”137 She points out that, compared to other Europeans, 
Spaniards sleep nearly an hour less per night and frequently doze 
in school and at work. Spanish workers are also on the job longer 
than German workers but complete only 59% of their daily tasks, 
says the president of the Association for the Rationalization of 
Spanish Working Hours, which advocates revising the country’s 
business hours.138 Finally, for 70 years, the entire country has 
been one hour out of step with the countries around it.
Varying Tempos. Every culture has its own “tempo,” or sense of 
time, points out psychologist Robert Levine, with different defini-
tions of “what constitutes early and late, waiting and rushing, the 
past, the present, and the future.”139 Cultures that work on “clock 
time” (such as the United States and most of Europe), where a 
timepiece governs the start and end of activities, tend to value 
punctuality. In cultures that work on “event time” (such as Mexico, 
Brazil, and Indonesia), schedules are spontaneous and events 
happen when participants “feel” the time is right.140
YOUR CALL
Where does Spain fit in here in terms of tempo? If you were 
starting a business in Spain that depended on close interaction 
with nearby European countries observing different business 
times, how would you ask your Spanish staff to adjust?

 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
127
Prayer. The term “Muslim 
culture” covers many diverse 
groups—Middle Eastern, African, 
Asian Muslim, and European 
and American Muslims—each 
with its own customs. Muslims 
are required to pray five times 
a day, prostrating themselves 
on a prayer mat. Some American 
Muslims keep a prayer mat 
in their cars.
TABLE 4.5 
Current Followers of the 
Major World Religions
All population counts are estimated. Adherents
.com actually puts “Secular/nonreligious/
agnostic/atheist” in third place, with a 
population of 1.1 billion. Judaism is estimated 
to have 14 million followers.
Source: Adapted from Adherents.com, “Major 
Religions of the World Ranked by Major Adherents,” 
last modified August 9, 2007, www.adherents
.com/Religions_By_Adherents.html (accessed 
April 15. 2014).
 
 
NUMBER OF 
 RELIGION 
ADHERENTS
Christianity 
2.1 billion
Islam 
1.5 billion
Hinduism 
900 million
Buddhism 
376 million
Chinese traditional 
394 million
religions
Primal-indigenous 
300 million
African traditional  
100 million
& diasporic
5. Religion 
Trying to get wealthy Muslim investors in Dubai to buy 
some of your bank’s financial products? Then you need to know that any 
investment vehicle needs to “conform to the spirit of the Koran, which 
forbids any investments that pay interest,” as one writer puts it. “No mort-
gages. No bonds.”141 Are you a Protestant doing business in a predomi-
nantly Catholic country? Or a Muslim in a Buddhist country? What are the 
most popular world religions, and how does religion influence the work-
related values of the people we’re dealing with? (See Table 4.5.)
A study of 484 international students at a midwestern university uncov-
ered wide variations in the work-related values for different religious affilia-
tions.142 For example, among Catholics, the primary work-related value was 
found to be consideration. For Protestants, it was employer effectiveness; for 
Buddhists, social responsibility; for Muslims, continuity. There was, in fact, 
virtually no agreement among religions as to what is the most important 
work-related value. This led the researchers to conclude: “Employers might 
be wise to consider the impact that religious differences (and more broadly, 
cultural factors) appear to have on the values of employee groups.”
6. Law & Political Stability 
Every firm contemplating establishing 
itself abroad must deal with other countries’ laws and business practices, 
which frequently involves making calculations about political risk that 
might cause loss of a company’s assets or impair its foreign operations. 
Among the risks an organization might anticipate abroad are instability, 
expropriation, corruption, and labor abuses.
■ 
Instability. Even in a developed country a company may be victim-
ized by political instability, such as riots or civil disorders, as hap-
pened in 2014 among Russian-speaking populations in Ukraine. In 
some developed nations, their very existence is threatened by sepa-
ratist movements, with large sections clamoring to split off and 
become independent states—Quebec from Canada, 
Scotland from the United Kingdom, and Catalonia 
from Spain, for example—which could result 
in changes to the currency in use. (Would an 
independent Scotland stay with the British pound 
or switch to the euro, for example?)
■ 
Expropriation. Expropriation is defined as a 
government’s seizure of a domestic or foreign 
company’s assets. After socialist Hugo Chavez 
became president of Venezuela, his government 
stepped up a campaign to seize land and busi-
nesses, such as a rice plant owned by Cargill, one 
of the United States’ largest privately owned 
companies. The government has also taken over 
oil, electricity, steel, cement, and telecommuni-
cations companies.143
■ 
Corruption. Whether it’s called mordida (Mexico), huilu (China), or vzyatka 
(Russia), it means the same thing: a bribe. Although the United States is rela-
tively free of such corruption, it is an acceptable practice in other countries. In 
African, Latin American, and newly independent states, frequent bribe paying 
is the norm; in Asia and the Pacific and southeast Europe, it is moderate; and in 
North America and the European Union, bribes are seldom paid for services.144
 American businesspeople are prevented from participating in overseas 
bribes under the 1978 Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which makes it illegal for 
employees of U.S. companies to make “questionable” or “dubious” contributions 

128 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management
to political decision makers in foreign nations. While this creates a competitive 
disadvantage for Americans working in foreign countries in which government 
bribery may be the only way to obtain business, the United Nations Global 
Compact is attempting to level the playing field by promoting anti-corruption 
standards for business.
■ 
Labor abuses. Overseas suppliers may offer low prices, but working condi-
tions can be harsh, as has been the case with garment makers in Bangladesh, 
Cambodia, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Mexico, Pakistan, and Vietnam. 
Among the problems: “padlocked fire exits, buildings at risk of collapse, fal-
sified wage records, and repeated hand punctures from sewing needles when 
workers were pushed to hurry up,” according to one report.145 Some suppliers 
have been accused of using underage workers, and some (such as Apple 
iPhone suppliers) of pushing their workers to the point of suicide.146
U.S. Managers on Foreign Assignments: 
Why Do They Fail?
Somewhere between 2.2 million and 6.8 million Americans live outside American bor-
ders, in at least 100 countries—a class of people known as expatriates—people living 
or working in a foreign country.147 Many of them, perhaps 300,000, are managers, and 
supporting them and their families overseas is not cheap. A partner at one human re-
sources consulting firm estimates that it costs twice an executive’s $300,000 salary to 
send him or her from the United States to Shanghai for a year.148 Are the employers 
getting their money’s worth? Probably not.
One study of about 750 companies (U.S., European, and Japanese) asked expatri-
ates and their managers to evaluate their experiences. They found that 10%–20% of all 
U.S. managers sent abroad returned early because of job dissatisfaction or adjustment 
difficulties. Of those who stayed for the length of their assignments, about one-third 
did not perform to their superiors’ expectations and one-fourth left the company, often 
to join a competitor—a turnover rate double that of managers who did not go abroad.149
Unfortunately, problems continue when expatriates return home. “Studies suggest 
between 8% to 25% of managers may leave a company after returning to the U.S.,” 
says one report.150 Another study indicated that 25% of repatriated employees quit 
their jobs within one year. Organizations can help reduce this turnover by communi-
cating with employees throughout the international assignment and by providing at 
least 6 months’ notice of when employees will return home.151
If you were to go abroad as a manager, what are the survival skills or outlook you would 
need? Perhaps the bottom line is revealed in a study of 72 human resource managers who were 
asked to identify the most important success factors in a foreign assignment. Nearly 35% said 
the secret was cultural adaptability: patience, flexibility, and tolerance for others’ beliefs.152
Do you think you have what it takes to be an effective global manager? The follow-
ing self-assessment can provide input to answering this question. It assesses your po-
tential to be a successful global manager. ●
Assessing Your Global Manager Potential
This survey is designed to assess how well suited you are to be-
coming a global manager. Go to connect.mheducation.com and 
take Self-Assessment 4.3. When you’re done, answer the follow-
ing questions:
1. 
What is your reaction to the results?
2. 
Based on considering your five lowest-rated survey 
items, what can you do to improve your global manager 
potential?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.3
®

Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC) 118
Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN) 119
Central America Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA) 119
countertrading 113
culture 122
dumping 116
e-commerce 103
embargo 116
ethnocentric managers 109
European Union (EU) 118
exchange rate 119
expatriates 128
exporting 113
expropriation 127
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 127
franchising 114
free trade 115
geocentric managers 109
global economy 103
global outsourcing 112
global village 103
globalization 102
GLOBE project 122
greenfield venture 114
high-context culture 122
import quota 116
importing 112
International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) 117
joint venture 114
licensing 114
low-context culture 122
maquiladoras 111
Mercosur 119
monochronic time 126
most favored nation 119
multinational corporation 107
multinational organization 107
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA) 117
offshoring 112
outsourcing 111
parochialism 109
polycentric managers 109
polychronic time 126
tariff 115
trade protectionism 115
trading bloc 117
wholly-owned subsidiary 114
World Bank 117
World Trade Organization 
(WTO) 116
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
4.1 Globalization: The Collapse of 
Time & Distance
• Globalization is the trend of the world 
economy toward becoming more 
interdependent. Globalization is reflected in 
three developments: (1) the rise of the global 
village and e-commerce; (2) the trend of the 
world’s becoming one big market; and (3) the 
rise of both megafirms and Internet-enabled 
minifirms.
• The rise of the “global village” refers to the 
“shrinking” of time and space as air travel and 
the electronic media have made global 
communication easier. The Internet and the 
web have led to e-commerce, the buying and 
selling of products through computer networks.
• The global economy is the increasing 
tendency of the economies of nations to 
interact with one another as one market.
• The rise of cross-border business has led to 
megamergers, as giant firms have joined 
forces, and minifirms, small companies in 
which managers can use the Internet and 
other technologies to get enterprises started 
more easily and to maneuver faster.
4.2 You & International Management
• Studying international management prepares 
you to work with foreign customers or 
partners, with foreign suppliers, for a foreign 
firm in the United States, or for a U.S. firm 
overseas. International management is 
management that oversees the conduct of 
operations in or with organizations in foreign 
countries.
• The successful international manager 
is not ethnocentric or polycentric but 
geocentric. Ethnocentric managers believe 
that their native country, culture, language, 
and behavior are superior to all others. 
Polycentric managers take the view that 
native managers in the foreign offices best 
understand native personnel and practices. 
Geocentric managers accept that there are 
differences and similarities between home 
and foreign personnel and practices, and 
they should use whatever techniques are 
most effective.
4.3 Why & How Companies Expand 
Internationally
• Companies expand internationally for at least 
five reasons. They seek (1) cheaper or more 
plentiful supplies, (2) new markets, (3) lower 
labor costs, (4) access to finance capital, and 
(5) avoidance of tariffs on imported goods or 
import quotas.
• There are five ways in which companies 
expand internationally. (1) They engage in 
Key Points
 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
129

global outsourcing, using suppliers outside 
the company and the United States to provide 
goods and services. (2) They engage in 
importing, exporting, and countertrading 
(bartering for goods). (3) They engage in 
licensing (allow a foreign company to pay a 
fee to make or distribute the company’s 
product) and franchising (allow a foreign 
company to pay a fee and a share of the profit 
in return for using the first company’s brand 
name). (4) They engage in joint ventures, a 
strategic alliance to share the risks and 
rewards of starting a new enterprise together 
in a foreign country. (5) They become wholly-
owned subsidiaries, or foreign subsidiaries 
that are totally owned and controlled by an 
organization.
4.4 The World of Free Trade: Regional 
Economic Cooperation
• Free trade is the movement of goods and 
services among nations without political or 
economic obstructions.
• Countries often use trade protectionism—the 
use of government regulations to limit the 
import of goods and services—to protect their 
domestic industries against foreign 
competition. Three barriers to free trade are 
tariffs, import quotas, and embargoes. (1) A 
tariff is a trade barrier in the form of a customs 
duty, or tax, levied mainly on imports. (2) An 
import quota is a trade barrier in the form of a 
limit on the numbers of a product that can be 
imported. (3) An embargo is a complete ban 
on the import or export of certain products.
• Three principal organizations exist that are 
designed to facilitate international trade. 
(1) The World Trade Organization is designed 
to monitor and enforce trade agreements. 
(2) The World Bank is designed to provide 
low-interest loans to developing nations for 
improving transportation, education, health, 
and telecommunications. (3) The International 
Monetary Fund is designed to assist in 
smoothing the flow of money between 
nations.
• A trading bloc is a group of nations within a 
geographical region that have agreed to 
remove trade barriers. There are six major 
trading blocs: (1) North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA: U.S., Canada, and 
Mexico); (2) European Union (EU: 28 trading 
partners in Europe); (3) the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN, 10 
countries); (4) Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC, 21 Pacific Rim countries); 
(5) Mercosur (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and 
Uruguay); and (6) the Central America Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA: United States and 
six Central American countries).
• Besides joining together in trade blocs, 
countries also extend special, “most favored 
nation” trading privileges—that is, grant other 
countries favorable trading treatment such as 
the reduction of import duties.
• When doing overseas trading, managers must 
consider exchange rates, the rate at which the 
currency of one area or country can be 
exchanged for the currency of another’s, such 
as American dollars in relation to Mexican 
pesos or European euros.
4.5 The Importance of Understanding 
Cultural Differences
• Misunderstandings and miscommunications 
often arise because one person doesn’t 
understand the expectations of a person from 
another culture. In low-context cultures, 
shared meanings are primarily derived from 
written and spoken words. In high-context 
cultures, people rely heavily on situational 
cues for meaning when communicating with 
others.
• Robert House and others created the GLOBE 
(for Global Leadership and Organizational 
Behavior Effectiveness) Project, a massive 
and ongoing cross-cultural investigation of 
nine cultural dimensions involved in 
leadership and organizational processes: 
(1) power distance, (2) uncertainty avoidance, 
(3) institutional collectivism, (4) in-group 
collectivism, (5) gender egalitarianism, 
(6) assertiveness, (7) future orientation, 
(8) performance orientation, and (9) humane 
orientation.
• A nation’s culture is the shared set of beliefs, 
values, knowledge, and patterns of behavior 
common to a group of people. Visitors to 
another culture may experience culture 
shock—feelings of discomfort and 
disorientation. Managers trying to understand 
other cultures need to understand six basic 
cultural perceptions embodied in (1) language, 
(2) interpersonal space, (3) communication, 
(4) time orientation, (5) religion, and (6) law 
and political stability.
• Regarding language, when you are trying to 
communicate across cultures you have three 
options: Speak your own language (if others 
can understand you), use a translator, or learn 
the local language.
• Interpersonal space involves how close or far 
away one should be when communicating 
with another person, with Americans being 
comfortable at 3–4 feet but people in other 
countries often wanting to be closer.
• Communication involves not only differences 
in understanding about words and sounds 
and their meanings but also in expectations 
about relationships and business concepts.
130 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management

• Time orientation of a culture may be either 
monochronic (preference for doing one thing 
at a time) or polychronic (preference for doing 
more than one thing at a time).
• Managers need to consider the effect of 
religious differences. In order of size 
(population), the major world religions are 
Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, 
Chinese traditional religions, primal-
indigenous, and African traditional and 
diasporic religions.
• Every company must deal with other 
countries’ laws and business practices, 
which means weighing the risks of political 
instability; expropriation, or government 
seizure of a domestic or foreign company’s 
assets; political corruption, including bribery; 
and labor abuses.
 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
131
 1. What are three important developments in 
globalization?
 2. What are some positives and negatives of 
globalization?
 3. What are the principal reasons for learning about 
international management?
 4. How do ethnocentric, polycentric, and geocentric 
managers differ?
 5. What are five reasons companies expand 
internationally, and what are five ways they go 
about doing this expansion?
 6. What are some barriers to international trade?
 7. Name the three principal organizations designed 
to facilitate international trade and describe what 
they do.
 8. What are the principal major trading blocs?
 9. Define what’s meant by “culture” and describe 
some of the cultural dimensions studied by the 
GLOBE project.
 10. Describe the six important cultural areas that 
international managers have to deal with in doing 
cross-border business.
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
Norwegian Air Shuttle Aspires to Become the 
Cheapest Global Airline
It’s snowing in Copenhagen as Norwegian Air Shuttle 
Flight DY7041 lifts off. There are nearly 30 passen-
gers on board, most of them Norwegians, Swedes, and 
Danes eager to escape the gloom that engulfs their part 
of the world in late November. Today they will arrive 
in Florida faster than usual. This is the first direct 
flight from Scandinavia to Fort Lauderdale. And it’s 
a bargain: The tickets are a fraction of what larger 
airlines charge.
Norwegian Air Shuttle Chief Executive Officer Bjorn 
Kjos has come along to celebrate the occasion. . . .
Norwegian is Europe’s fourth-largest discount air-
line. Until recently, it was little known outside Scandi-
navia. Then, in 2012, Kjos made the largest airplane 
order in European history, buying 222 jets from Boe-
ing and Airbus Group for $21.5 billion. Most of these 
are narrow-bodied Boeing 737 Max 8’s and Airbus 
A320neos that will begin arriving in 2016. Kjos will 
use them to increase Norwegian’s presence in Europe 
and challenge the top three discount carriers: Ireland’s 
Ryanair, Britain’s EasyJet, and Germany’s Air Berlin. 
Last year, Norwegian acquired its first two Dreamlin-
ers, which list for as much as $289 million each. Kjos 
is using these wider-bodied jets to offer cheaper inter-
national flights to distant places such as New York, Los 
Angeles, and Bangkok, undercutting established carri-
ers in Europe and the U.S. Norwegian’s $180 tickets 
between New York and Oslo cost 10% of the equivalent 
ticket on British Airways. In effect, Kjos wants Norwegian 
to become a global version of Southwest Airlines.
Other upstart airlines have tried this and failed. 
Kjos says Norwegian will succeed because it has the 
Dreamliner and a new group of travelers to fly: the 
emerging middle-class citizens of China and India. 
He predicts that in the next decade there will also be 
500 million new airline passengers, and he hopes to 
attract them with low fares.
Kjos will have to do many things right for it all to 
work, and he’s already run into turbulence. He nar-
rowly averted a strike by 600 pilots in November. They 
Management in Action

are unhappy with his plan to base Dreamliner flights 
outside Norway and to staff them with lower-paid 
workers from Thailand and elsewhere. The Dreamliner 
still needs debugging. Kjos’s new jets have been 
grounded repeatedly by technical problems. . . .
Four U.S. airlines are trying to keep the U.S. De-
partment of Transportation [DOT] from allowing Nor-
wegian flights into the country because they worry that 
their foreign competitor will launch what they describe 
as an unfair price war with them. Kjos, however, 
doesn’t think anything will get in the way of his plan 
to reshape international travel. “In the future, you will 
travel to Asia for nothing,” he says, “You think I’m 
joking. You wait and see.”
Obscure outside the aviation industry, Kjos is a celeb-
rity at home; he’s Norway’s Richard Branson. In the early 
Aughts, Kjos introduced low-cost flights to a region that 
has historically been dominated by Scandinavian Airlines 
(SAS). At the time, SAS, which is controlled by the gov-
ernments of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, had some 
of the highest fares in Europe. “He has changed the lives 
of many, many Scandinavians,” says Hans Erik Jacobsen, 
an analyst at First Securities ASA. . . .
The company went public in December 2003 at 32 
kroner a share. Then, Kjos says, SAS reduced its 
prices in an effort to destroy its rival. (SAS denies that 
this was its intent.) Norwegian again lowered its prices. 
Its revenue dwindled, along with its stock price. . . . 
Then, they say, they learned from government investi-
gators that SAS had been tapping into Norwegian’s 
computer system and using data about its ticket sales 
to underprice it. Norwegian sued SAS for illegally 
using its trade secrets, eventually winning a 160 million 
kroner judgment in 2010. SAS says it accepts the court 
judgment.
Kjos says the revelations ended SAS’s predatory 
pricing, and Norwegian had its first profitable year in 
2005. But Kjos soon had something else to worry 
about: rising oil prices. Oil had soared from $25 to $75 
per barrel in the previous five years. Kjos and his top 
executives modeled what would happen if oil prices 
continued to climb at that rate. “We found out . . . if we 
hit $120, we’re going bankrupt,” Kjos says. Norwe-
gian’s planes were burning too much gas. The com-
pany needed a new fleet to survive. . . .
In August 2007, Kjos reached an agreement to buy 
42 new jets from Boeing for $3 billion. Frode Foss, 
Norwegian’s CFO, said the company couldn’t afford 
it. “Frode, would you like to go bankrupt with old air-
planes or with new airplanes?” Kjos swaggeringly 
replied. He later increased the order to 84.
Three years later in 2010, revenue and profit had 
more than doubled. Norwegian was flying twice as 
many passengers and routes. The new planes “really 
enabled them to drive down the cost level,” says 
Jacobsen. “It was a big step forward.” Later that same 
year, Kjos ordered Norwegian’s eight Dreamliners, 
but he also concluded that his newish fleet of short-
range planes was already becoming outmoded. In 
2012 he and [Norwegian Airlines chairman of the 
board Bjorn] Kise took advantage of the euro crisis 
to get favorable terms from both Boeing and Airbus 
for 100 planes. . . .
Norwegian’s international routes will prevail, Kjos 
says, because the Dreamliner burns much less fuel 
than previous jets. “The Dreamliner is the first airplane 
that can do it,” he says. He’s also counting on lower 
personnel costs. Although the airline is headquartered 
in a country with some of the highest salaries in 
 Europe, Kjos is trying to get around this by basing flights 
in lower-salaried countries such as Thailand. That’s why 
Norwegian’s pilots wanted assurances that he wouldn’t 
try to use geography to cut their salaries. . . .
Norwegian also faces opposition in the U.S., where 
American Airlines, Delta Airlines, United Airlines, 
and US Airways are urging the federal government to 
reject an application by Norwegian Air International. 
The company is a Norwegian subsidiary that Kjos has 
set up in Ireland to operate its Dreamliner flights. 
Norwegian’s critics say Kjos is doing this so he can 
hire cheap nonunion pilots and cabin crews. “[Norwe-
gian’s] scheme must be immediately and unequivo-
cally rejected,” Lee Moak, president of the Air Line 
Pilots Association International in Washington, said in 
a statement last month. “The DOT must not permit 
U.S. airlines and their employees to face an unfair 
competitive advantage from this runaway shop.” A 
Norwegian spokesman, Lasse Sandaker-Nielsen, says 
the company isn’t doing anything improper and its 
critics are making “false and misleading statements.”
As for the Dreamliners, they have been problem-
atic. The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration 
ordered Boeing to stop delivering them last year until 
it fixed their lithium batteries, which had caught fire. 
Norwegian’s Dreamliners never burned, but one jet 
was grounded in Bangkok in September [2013] 
because of pump problems, stranding 200 passengers 
bound for Stockholm. In December, Stockholm-
bound Norwegian customers were stuck in Fort Lau-
derdale before Christmas because of a disabled 
Dreamliner. On New Year’s Eve, 276 passengers 
headed for Oslo spent the night stewing in hotels near 
John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York 
because of brake problems on one of the jets. Norwe-
gian’s Sandaker-Nielsen says the company apolo-
gizes for the delays. . . .
Kjos responded to the latest crisis by doubling 
down. He announced in December that Norwegian 
would lease two more Dreamliners.
Source: Excerpted from Devin Leonard, “Barbarian at Gate G17,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 13–19, 2014, pp. 58, 60–61.
132 
PART 2 
The Environment of Management

FOR DISCUSSION
 1. What are the biggest challenges Norweigan experi-
enced in trying to expand its airline across the globe?
 2. To what extent did you observe examples of ethno-
centric, polycentric, or geocentric attitudes in this 
case? Provide examples to support your conclusions.
 3. Use Table 4.3 to identify cultural differences that are 
likely to arise between Norwegian employees work-
ing in Denmark and Sweden and Thailand. How 
might these differences affect interpersonal interac-
tions, and what can the company do to reduce any 
unintended conflict from these differences?
 4. What are the most important lessons to be learned 
about global management from this case? Discuss.
Should Families of Passengers on Malaysia 
Flight 370 Be Allowed to Sue for Damages in 
the U.S.?
This challenge revolves around the mysterious crash 
of Malaysia Flight 370 en route from Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, to Beijing: To date, no remains of the plane 
have been found. Two-thirds of the passengers on this 
flight were Chinese. There were three Americans on 
the plane.
Lawyers from multiple countries have been meet-
ing with families of missing passengers discussing 
the possibility of filing lawsuits. “If Chinese families 
sued the Malaysian carrier in China, they could get 
around 1.5 million yuan ($250,000) per passenger, 
depending on their age, job income and other 
factors” said Beijing-based lawyer Zhang Quhuai. In 
contrast, a suit in Malaysia would problably result in 
the court’s decision to “not stray too far from the 
$175,000 compensation limit set by the Montreal 
convention,” according to Jeremy Joseph, a lawyer 
from Malaysia.
Some lawyers are encouraging families to file suit 
against Boeing in the U.S.: Boeing is the maker of the 
missing plane. Lawyers are doing this because “America 
is the land of liability opportunity,” said Professor 
Steve Dedmono, an aviation law expert. Wang Guanhua, 
a Chinese-based lawyer, commented that “as long as 
the possibility that the Boeing plane is related to the 
incident is not eliminated, there are no limitations on 
seeking compensation from Boeing.” Wang believes 
that he can get $6 million in damages for each pas-
senger. Other lawyers believe that this approach is 
misleading to families and that they would be better 
served by trying to reach a settlement with Malaysia 
Airlines insurers.
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
Do you think lawyers should encourage families to 
sue Boeing in the U.S.?
 1. No. There is no evidence that Boeing was responsi-
ble for the crash, and people should get what they 
can from Malaysian Airlines.
 2. No. Such suits should be filed in the country in 
which the accident occurred.
 3. Yes. This is a tragedy and families should get all they 
can.
 4. No. Malaysia Airlines has agreed to pay at least 
$5,000 to each family. Also, large settlements might 
bankrupt Malaysia Airlines and the Montreal Con-
vention provides damages for passengers on interna-
tional flights.
Source: Materials drawn from Gillain Wong, “Malaysia Airlines 
Lawsuits Unlikely to Be Heard in U.S.,” Claims Journal, April 17, 2014, 
www.claimsjournal.com/news/national/2014/04/17/247610.htm (accessed 
April 20, 2014); and W. J. Hennigan, Ralph Vartabedian, and Don Lee, 
“Missing Malaysia Plane: Relatives Protest and Legal Action Begins,” 
Los Angeles Times, March 25, 2014, www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-
malaysia-plane-20140326,0,6450323 (accessed April 20, 2014).
Legal/Ethical Challenge
 
Global Management 
CHAPTER 4 
133

PART 3 
PLANNING
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
5.1 Planning & Strategy
Major Question: What are planning, strategy, and strategic 
management, and why are they important to me as a manager?
5.2 Fundamentals of Planning
Major Question: What are mission and vision statements, and 
what are three types of planning?
5.3 Goals & Plans
Major Question: What are the three types of goals, and what are 
different kinds of plans?
5.4 Promoting Goal Setting: SMART Goals & Management 
by Objectives
Major Question: What are SMART goals and MBO and how can 
they be implemented?
5.5 The Planning/Control Cycle
Major Question: How does the planning/control cycle help keep 
a manager’s plans headed in the right direction?
Planning
The Foundation of Successful Management
5

and energetic when entering a new group.8 Some 
advice for writing out—and achieving—your biggest 
goals are as follows:9
•  Make a concrete plan—which embeds your 
intentions firmly in your memory.
•  Break your goals into manageable bites—and 
set out clear steps that you can use to record 
and track your progress.
•  Put something of value on the line—such 
as money that will be forfeited if you’re 
unsuccessful. (You can deposit the money at 
stickK.com.)
•  Bundle your temptations or rewards to your 
efforts—such as tying your reading of pleasurable 
trashy novels to when you do gym workouts.
•  Seek social support—pursue your goal with the 
help of a mentor or fellow strivers.
If you fail, don’t give up entirely. Realize that 
you may have other opportunities to make a 
fresh start.
For Discussion One writer advises setting one 
somewhat “crazy” personal goal from time to time. 
This is a stretch goal, he suggests, “that if accom-
plished would create a new, different, and exciting 
future state, the kind of goal that if you can only get 
halfway there, you will still feel good about the 
progress you have made and will be better for the 
effort.”10 What would that goal be for you?
What’s a big goal? A four-year college degree. 
Worth it? Not getting a degree has been 
estimated at about half a million dollars in lost income 
over your lifetime!1 People with such degrees aver-
aged 98% more an hour than those without them.2 
College graduates ages 25–32 are more apt than 
non–college graduates (86% versus 57%) to say their 
job is a path to a career.3
Big Goals, Hard Goals
Getting a college degree is not only a big goal, it’s a 
hard goal—difficult, stressful, expensive, time con-
suming. Still, do you perform better when you set dif-
ficult goals? If goals are made harder, people may 
achieve them less often, but they nevertheless per-
form at a higher level.4
If you have outsize ambitions, you might set your-
self a really hard goal (“Increase study time 50%)—
what’s known as a stretch goal, “stretching yourself 
beyond what your mind might think is safe,” in one 
definition.5 Richard Branson, founder of Virgin Atlan-
tic airlines, Virgin records, and many other enter-
prises, has done a lot of incredible things, in part 
because of setting stretch goals: “My interest in life,” 
he says, “comes from setting myself huge, apparently 
unachievable challenges and trying to rise above 
them.”6 However, in organizations, stretch goals may 
spur extraordinary efforts but may also lead to exces-
sive risk taking, cheating, and interpersonal strife.7
Writing Out Your Goals
Research suggests that writing about two paragraphs 
outlining your goals will help you feel more confident 
the manager’s toolbox
Setting Big Goals: Is This the Road to Success?
forecast
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
We describe planning and its link to strategy. We define planning, strategy, and strate-
gic management and state why they are important. We deal with the fundamentals 
of planning, including the mission and vision statements and the three types of 
planning—strategic, tactical, and operational. We consider goals, action plans, and 
operating plans; SMART goals and management by objectives; and finally the 
planning/control cycle.

5.1 
Planning & Strategy
What are planning, strategy, and strategic management, and why are they important to 
me as a manager?
THE BIG PICTURE
The first of four functions in the management process is planning, which involves setting goals and deciding 
how to achieve them and which is linked to strategy. We define planning, strategy, and strategic manage-
ment. We then describe three reasons why strategic management and strategic planning are important and 
how they may work for both large and small firms.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
The management process, as you’ll recall (from Chapter 1), involves the four management 
functions of planning, organizing, leading, and controlling, which form four of the part 
divisions of this book. In this and the next two chapters we discuss planning and strategy.
Planning, Strategy, & Strategic Management
Planning, which we discuss in this chapter, is used in conjunction with strategy and 
strategic management, as we describe in Chapter 6. Let’s consider some definitions.
Planning: Coping with Uncertainty 
As we’ve said (Chapter 1), planning is de-
fined as setting goals and deciding how to achieve them. Another definition: planning
is coping with uncertainty by formulating future courses of action to achieve specified 
results.11 When you make a plan, you make a blueprint for action that describes what 
you need to do to realize your goals.
Example: One important type of plan is a business plan, a document that outlines a 
proposed firm’s goals, the strategy for achieving them, and the standards for measuring 
success. Here you would describe the basic idea behind your business—the business 
model, which outlines the need the firm will fill, the operations of the business, its com-
ponents and functions, as well as the expected revenues and expenses. It also de-
scribes the industry you’re entering, how your product will be different, how you’ll 
market to customers, how you’re qualified to run the business, and how you will 
finance your business.
136 
PART 3 
Planning
EXAMPLE
Is Planning Necessary? Launching a Vending-Machine Business on $425
Brian Allman of Reno, Nevada, was 17 years old when he 
bought a simple vending machine at Sam’s Club for $425 
and used it to start Bear Snax Vending, stocking the machine 
and four others he added later with Skittles, M&Ms, and 
Snickers to serve several small to midsize businesses, such 
as banks. Allman did this without apparently drawing up a 
business plan.12
Why Plan? Almost everyone starting a new business is advised to 
write a business plan. The reasons: Creating such a plan helps 
you get financing. (“If you want us to invest our money, show us 
your plan.”) It helps you think through important details. (“Don’t 
rush things; it’s best to get the strategy right.”) Finally, it better 
guarantees your firm will succeed. (A study of 396 entrepreneurs 
in Sweden found that a greater number of firms that failed never 
had a formal business plan.13)
“Going with What You’ve Got.” Even so, sometimes major deci-
sions, including starting up companies, are made without much 
planning. Indeed, one study found that 41% of Inc. magazine’s 
1989 list of fastest-growing private firms didn’t have a business 
plan and 26% had only rudimentary plans, percentages essen-
tially unchanged in 2002.14 Planning of any sort, of course, re-
quires time, and sometimes you need to make a quick decision 
and “go with what you’ve got”—with or without a plan.15
YOUR CALL
Nine years after founding Bear Snax Vending without a formal 
business plan, Brian Allman was still running it. (Allman was also 
working as a financial advisor for financial services firm Edward 
Jones.) If you had a few hundred dollars with which to launch a 
small business, do you think writing a business plan would help 
you or just be a waste of time? 

 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
137
Strategy: Large-Scale Action Plan 
A strategy is a large-scale action plan that 
sets the direction for an organization. It represents an “educated guess” about what 
must be done in the long term for the survival or the prosperity of the organization or 
its principal parts. We hear the word expressed in terms like “Budweiser’s ultimate 
strategy . . .” or “Visa’s overseas strategy . . .” or financial strategy, marketing strategy, 
and human resource strategy.
An example of a strategy is “Find out what customers want, then provide it to them 
as cheaply and quickly as possible” (the strategy of Walmart). However, strategy is not 
something that can be decided on just once. It needs to be revisited from time to time 
due to ever changing business conditions.
Strategic Management: Involving All Managers in Strategy 
In the late 
1940s, most large U.S. companies were organized around a single idea or product line. 
By the 1970s, Fortune 500 companies were operating in more than one industry and 
had expanded overseas. It became apparent that to stay focused and efficient, compa-
nies had to begin taking a strategic-management approach.
Strategic management is a process that involves managers from all parts of the or-
ganization in the formulation and the implementation of strategies and strategic goals. 
This definition doesn’t mean that managers at the top dictate ideas to be followed by 
people lower down. Indeed, precisely because middle managers in particular are the 
ones who will be asked to understand and implement the strategies, they should also 
help to formulate them.
As we will see, strategic management is a process that involves managers from all 
parts of the organization—top managers, middle managers, and first-line managers—
in the formulation, implementation, and execution of strategies and strategic goals to 
advance the purposes of the organization. Thus, planning covers not only strategic 
planning (done by top managers) but also tactical planning (done by middle managers) 
and operational planning (done by first-line managers).
Planning and strategic management derive from an organization’s mission and vi-
sion about itself, as we describe in the next section. (See Figure 5.1.)
5. Maintain
strategic
control
4. Implement
the strategy
3. Formulate
the grand strategy
& strategic,
tactical, &
operational plans
2. Assess 
the current 
reality
1. Establish
the mission
and vision
FIGURE 5.1 
Planning and strategic management
The details of planning and strategic management are explained in Chapters 5 and 6.
Why Planning & Strategic Management Are Important
An organization should adopt planning and strategic management for three reasons: 
They can (1) provide direction and momentum, (2) encourage new ideas, and above all 
(3) develop a sustainable competitive advantage.16 Let’s consider these three matters.
1. Providing Direction & Momentum 
Some executives are unable even to ar-
ticulate what their strategy is.17 Others are so preoccupied with day-to-day pressures 
that their organizations can lose momentum. But planning and strategic management 
can help people focus on the most critical problems, choices, and opportunities.
If a broad group of employees is involved in the process, that can foster teamwork, 
promote learning, and build commitment across the organization. Indeed, as we describe 

138 
PART 3 
Planning
in Chapter 8, strategy can determine the very structure of the organization—for example, 
a top-down hierarchy with lots of management levels, as might be appropriate for an 
electricity-and-gas power utility, versus a flat-organization with few management levels 
and flexible roles, as might suit a fast-moving social media start-up.
Unless a plan is in place, managers may well focus on just whatever is in front of 
them, putting out fires—until they get an unpleasant jolt when a competitor moves out 
in front because it has been able to take a long-range view of things and act more 
quickly. In recent times, this surprise has been happening over and over as companies 
have been confronted by some digital or Internet trend that emerged as a threat—as 
Amazon.com was to Borders; as digital cameras were to Kodak’s film business; as 
Google News, blogs, and citizen media were to newspapers.18
But there are many other instances in which a big company didn’t take competitors 
seriously (as Sears didn’t Walmart, IBM didn’t Microsoft, and GM didn’t Toyota). 
“We were five years late in recognizing that [microbreweries] were going to take as 
much market as they did,” says August Busch III, CEO of massive brewer Anheuser-
Busch, “and five years late in recognizing we should have joined them.”19
Of course, a poor plan can send an organization in the wrong direction. Bad plan-
ning usually results from faulty assumptions about the future, poor assessment of an 
organization’s capabilities, ineffective group dynamics, and information overload.20 
And it needs to be said that while a detailed plan may be comforting, it’s not necessar-
ily a strategy.21
2. Encouraging New Ideas 
Some people object that planning can foster rigid-
ity, that it creates blinders that block out peripheral vision and reduces creative think-
ing and action. “Setting oneself on a predetermined course in unknown waters,” says 
one critic, “is the perfect way to sail straight into an iceberg.”22
Actually, far from being a straitjacket for new ideas, strategic planning can help 
encourage them by stressing the importance of innovation in achieving long-range 
success. Management scholar Gary Hamel says that companies such as Apple have 
been successful because they have been able to unleash the spirit of “strategy innova-
tion.” Strategy innovation, he says, is the ability to reinvent the basis of competition 
within existing industries—“bold new business models that put incumbents on the 
defensive.”23
100 Montaditos. Characterized 
as a “Spanish Starbucks for 
sandwiches” or “the dollar store 
of fast-food franchises,” 100 
Montaditos is a hugely successful 
Spanish restaurant chain that has 
set its sights on the United 
States. Named for bargain-rate 
traditional 5-inch sandwiches 
(such as those stuffed with 
Serrano ham or duck mousse 
with crispy onions for only $1), 
the chain’s strategy emphasizes 
atmosphere combined with low 
prices. Starting with this Miami 
restaurant in 2011, it aimed to 
open 4,000 outlets from Canada 
to Argentina during the next five 
years—a growth rate that would 
exceed even that of Starbucks, 
which took three decades to 
achieve the same number of U.S. 
stores. Some business analysts 
say the Spanish company’s plans 
are too ambitious. Is there 
anything wrong with a strategy 
built on bold dreams?

 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
139
Some successful innovators are companies creating new wealth in the food and 
restaurant industries, where Starbucks Coffee, Trader Joe’s, ConAgra, and Walmart, 
for example, developed entirely new grocery product categories and retailing concepts. 
Chili’s, the casual-dining chain, has installed table-top computer screens that take 
menu orders, accept payments by credit card, and let diners play videogames, chang-
ing how diners and wait staff interact.24 GrubHub Seamless, an online takeout and 
delivery company, serves customers armed with cell phones and delivery apps, deliver-
ing pizzas and other foods anywhere they want—at the gym, in the park, on the play-
ground.25 Vending machines are now serving everything from salads to smoothies to 
caviar, and supermarkets are experimenting with personalized pricing, using complex 
shopping data to ascertain the unique needs of individual customers.26
3. Developing a Sustainable Competitive Advantage 
Strategic manage-
ment provides a sustainable competitive advantage, which, you’ll recall (from Chapter 
1), is the ability of an organization to produce goods or services more effectively than 
its competitors do, thereby outperforming them. Sustainable competitive advantage 
occurs when an organization is able to get and stay ahead in four areas: (1) in being 
responsive to customers, (2) in innovating, (3) in quality, and (4) in effectiveness. To-
day technology has made achieving a sustainable competitive advantage nearly impos-
sible in many industries, so the advantage may well be fleeting.27 ●
Developing Competitive Advantage: What’s the Best Strategy in an 
E-Commerce Age?
E-commerce has completely changed retail shopping, as more 
Americans skip going into stores and order via their tablets 
and smartphones instead.28 The result has severely impacted 
such chains as Staples, RadioShack, and Sears, which have 
reduced the number of stores, and forced other big retailers, 
such as Walmart, to ramp up their online buying and delivery 
operations.29
Adjusting to Online Competition. Other stores have shifted their 
focus and their services:30 J. Crew has gone to a new format 
(J. Crew Mercantile) to appeal to discount shoppers. Abercombie 
& Fitch is reaching out to teens with less nudity on its clothing 
dummies, more black apparel, and larger sizes. Sears, Saks, and 
Macy’s are instructing their clerks to encourage virtual customers 
by picking and packing items from the stores themselves (rather 
than the warehouses) and ordering a same-day UPS or FedEx 
pickup, to avoid losing shoppers to Amazon.
IKEA’S Advantage. However, 71-year-old Sweden-based IKEA, 
the world’s largest furniture retailer, with 345 stores in 42 coun-
tries (50 in North America), has a different strategy—add more 
physical stores, as well as competing online and with catalogs. 
“We see that Internet and e-commerce is growing,” says IKEA 
CEO Peter Agnefjäll, “but at the same time, when buying a new 
bed a lot of people want to try it first, and if you buy a sofa you 
may want to touch the fabric.”31
YOUR CALL
For what kinds of products is a visit to a physical store a more 
attractive shopping experience for consumers than buying on-
line? How realistic is the prospect of the use of holograms 
(which could enable consumers to try clothes on at home) and 
3-D printers (which could print out three-dimensional products 
remotely) in the shopping experience within the next 15 years?
EXAMPLE

“Everyone wants a clear reason to get up in the morning,” writes journalist Dick 
Leider. “As humans we hunger for meaning and purpose in our lives.”32
And what is that purpose? “Life never lacks purpose,” says Leider. “Purpose is 
innate—but it is up to each of us individually to discover or rediscover it.”
An organization has a purpose, too—a mission. And managers must have an idea of 
where they want the organization to go—a vision. The approach to planning can be 
summarized in the diagram below, which shows how an organization’s mission 
 becomes translated into goals and action plans. (See Figure 5.2.)
5.2 
Fundamentals of Planning
What are mission and vision statements, and what are three types of planning?
THE BIG PICTURE
Planning consists of translating an organization’s mission and vision into objectives. The organization’s 
purpose is expressed as a mission statement, and what it becomes is expressed as a vision statement. 
From these are derived strategic planning, then tactical planning, then operational planning.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
140 
PART 3 
Planning
Operational
planning:
Done by first-
line managers
for the next
1–52 weeks
Goals
Action plans
Action plans
Tactical
planning:
Done by
middle
managers
for the next
6–24 months
Goals
Vision
statement:
“What do
we want to
become?”
Mission
statement:
“What is our
reason for
being?”
Action plans
Strategic
planning:
Done by top
managers for
the next
1–5 years
Goals
Mission & Vision Statements
The planning process begins with two attributes: a mission statement (which answers 
the question “What is our reason for being?”) and a vision statement (which answers 
the question “What do we want to become?”).
The Mission Statement—“What Is Our Reason for Being?” 
An organiza-
tion’s mission is its purpose or reason for being. Determining the mission is the re-
sponsibility of top management and the board of directors. It is up to them to formulate 
a mission statement, which expresses the purpose of the organization.
“Only a clear definition of the mission and purpose of the organization makes pos-
sible clear and realistic . . . objectives,” said Peter Drucker.33 Whether the organization 
FIGURE 5.2 
Making plans
An organization’s reason for being is expressed in a mission statement. What the organization wishes to become is expressed in a vision 
statement. From these are derived strategic planning, then tactical planning, and finally operational planning. The purpose of each kind of 
planning is to specify goals and action plans that ultimately pave the way toward achieving an organization’s vision.

 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
141
is for-profit or nonprofit, the mission statement identifies the goods or services the 
organization provides and will provide. Sometimes it also gives the reasons for provid-
ing them (to make a profit or to achieve humanitarian goals, for example).
Mission Statements for Three Different Companies: Hilton, 
Amazon, & Patagonia
Vision Statements for Three Different Companies: Hilton, 
Amazon, & Patagonia
Mission statements answer the question, “What is our reason 
for being?” or “Why are we here?”
Here are the mission statements for three companies, 
drawn from their websites. The mission statement for Hilton 
Hotels, a large company, reads: “To fill the earth with the light 
and warmth of hospitality.”
Amazon’s mission statement is “Use the Internet to offer 
products that educate, inform, and inspire. We decided to build 
an online store that would be customer friendly and easy to 
navigate and would offer the broadest possible selection. . . . 
Vision statements answer the question, “What do we want to 
become?” or “Where do we want to go?”
Here is Hilton Hotels’ statement: “To be the first choice of 
the world’s travelers, building on the rich heritage and strength 
of our brands by consistently delighting our customers, invest-
ing in our team members, delivering innovative products and 
services, expanding our family of brands, and continuously im-
proving performance.”
Amazon’s vision statement: “Our vision is to be earth’s 
most customer-centric company; to build a place where 
We believe that a fundamental measure of our success will be 
the shareholder value we create over the long term.”
Clothing maker Patagonia’s mission statement is to “Build the 
best product, cause no unnecessary harm, [and] use business to 
inspire and implement solutions to the environmental crisis.”
YOUR CALL
Do you think any of these mission statements could be adapted 
to different companies offering different products or services? 
Give an example.
people can come to find and discover anything they might 
want to buy online.”
Patagonia’s statement: “We prefer the human scale to the 
corporate, vagabonding to tourism, and the quirky to the toned-
down and flattened out.”
YOUR CALL
Do these vision statements work? Do they meet Fortune’s crite-
rion of describing “what’s happening in the world you compete in 
and what you want to do about it. It should guide decisions”?
EXAMPLE
EXAMPLE
The Vision Statement—“What Do We Want to Become?” 
A vision is a 
long-term goal describing “what” an organization wants to become. It is a clear sense 
of the future and the actions needed to get there. “[A] vision should describe what’s 
happening to the world you compete in and what you want to do about it,” says one 
Fortune article. “It should guide decisions.”34
After formulating a mission statement, top managers need to develop a vision 
statement, which expresses what the organization should become, where it wants to 
go strategically.35
The concept of a vision statement also is important for individuals. Harvard profes-
sor Clayton Christensen believes that creating a personal life vision statement is akin 
to developing a strategy for your life. He finds that people are happier and lead more 
meaningful lives when they are directed by personal vision statements.36 Do you have 
a vision for your future career? Is it vague or specific? The following self-assessment 
was created to help you evaluate the quality of your career vision and plan.

142 
PART 3 
Planning
Three Types of Planning for Three Levels of 
Management: Strategic, Tactical, & Operational
Inspiring, clearly stated mission statements and vision statements provide the focal 
point of the entire planning process. Then three things happen:
■ 
Strategic planning by top management. Using their mission and vision state-
ments, top managers do strategic planning—they determine what the organi-
zation’s long-term goals should be for the next 1–5 years with the resources 
they expect to have available. “Strategic planning requires visionary and di-
rectional thinking,” says one authority.37 It should communicate not only gen-
eral goals about growth and profits but also ways to achieve them. Today, 
because of the frequency with which world competition and information tech-
nology alter marketplace conditions, a company’s strategic planning may 
have to be done closer to every 1 or 2 years than every 5. Still, at a big com-
pany like Boeing or Ford or Amazon (see Example box below), top executives 
cannot lose sight of long-range, multiyear planning.
Assessing Your Career Vision & Plan
This self-assessment is designed to measure the quality 
of your personal vision statement and associated plan. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take the self-assessment. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
What is the qualitative status of your vision statement 
and plan? Are you surprised by the results? 
2. 
Based on the three lowest rated survey items, what 
can you do in the near term to enhance your vision 
and plan? 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 5.1
®
EXAMPLE
Strategic Planning by Top Management: Amazon Manages for the Future, 
to the Frustration of Short-Term Investors
One thing Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos is famous for is unconven-
tional thinking (or, in that hackneyed expression, “thinking 
outside the box”). For instance, his early decision to allow 
customers to post their own book reviews, both negative as 
well as positive, on the Amazon website puzzled competing 
booksellers, who thought negative reviews would diminish 
sales. Bezos’s point of view—“We will sell more if we help 
people make purchasing decisions”—proved correct.38 
(Some of his latest ideas involve same-day delivery and de-
livery via drones.)39
Talking Long Term. Similarly, Bezos has an unconven-
tional opinion about profitability. With most publicly owned 
companies, which Amazon is (Bezos holds 18% of the 
stock, worth $25.4 billion; most of the rest is owned by in-
stitutional investors such as Capital World or mutual funds 
such as American Funds), shareholders constantly pressure 
management to produce profits that will boost the stock 
every quarter (3 months) or so.40 But back in 1997, Bezos 
warned stockholders that “it’s all about the long term. We 
may make decisions and weigh trade-offs differently than 
some companies.”41
Most top managers do strategic planning on a one- to 
three-year time line. Says Bezos, “If everything you do needs to 
work on a three-year time horizon, then you’re competing 
against a lot of people. But if you’re willing to invest on a 
seven-year horizon, you’re now competing against a fraction of 
those people, because very few people are willing to do that.” 
Actually, Bezos is very long term, operating on a 10- to 20-year 
time line.
Ambitions for the Future. The large time window and free-
dom from having to deliver immediate profits allow Amazon 
to pursue the powerful long-range strategy it has planned.42 
It is spending money to open new airplane hangar–size 
storage and shipping facilities, bringing them to an expected 94 

 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
143
Top management
chief executive officer,
president, vice president,
general managers,
division heads
Middle management
functional managers,
product-line managers,
department managers
First-line management
unit managers, team leaders,
first-line supervisors
Strategic planning:
1–5 years
Tactical planning:
6–24 months
Operational planning:
1–52 weeks
Make long-term decisions 
about overall direction of
organization. Managers need
to pay attention to
environment outside the
organization, be future oriented,
deal with uncertain
and highly competitive
conditions.
Implement policies and plans
of top management, supervise
and coordinate activities of
first-line managers below,
make decisions often without
base of clearly defined
information procedures.
Direct daily tasks of
nonmanagerial personnel;
decisions often predictable,
following well-defined set of
routine procedures.
FIGURE 5.3 
Three levels of management, three types of planning
Each type of planning has different time horizons, although the times overlap because the plans are somewhat elastic.
by the end of 2013.43 It continues to cut prices on its mer-
chandise, which will undercut its retail competitors (Borders 
is gone; Barnes & Noble and Best Buy are struggling).44 
It is realizing Walmart-like economies of scale, achieving 
enormous savings from buying supplies in huge quantities. It 
has been slashing prices on its Kindle e-book reader and its 
Fire tablet to get more units into more buyers’ hands, devel-
oping a future customer base for its e-books, apps, media, 
and other digital products.45
Profits? “Profits will come down the road,” says business 
writer James Stewart, “when Kindle [and Fire] users buy con-
tent through Amazon.”46 Says Bezos, “We’re willing to plant 
seeds, let them grow—and we’re very stubborn.”
YOUR CALL
If Amazon’s strategy hurts short-run profits, should your par-
ents or grandparents invest in Amazon? Should you? What if 
Amazon’s strategic plan is wrong?
■ 
Tactical planning by middle management. The strategic priorities and 
policies are then passed down to middle managers, who must do tactical 
planning—that is, they determine what contributions their departments or 
similar work units can make with their given resources during the next 
6–24 months.
■ 
Operational planning by first-line management. Middle managers then pass 
these plans along to first-line managers to do operational planning—that is, 
they determine how to accomplish specific tasks with available resources 
within the next 1–52 weeks.
The three kinds of managers are described further in the figure below. (See Figure 5.3.) ●

5.3 
Goals & Plans
What are the three types of goals, and what are different kinds of plans?
THE BIG PICTURE
The purpose of planning is to set a goal and then an action plan and an operational plan. Types of plans 
include standing and single-use plans. 
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Whatever its type—strategic, tactical, or operational—the purpose of planning is to set 
a goal and then to formulate an action plan.
Three Types of Goals: Strategic, 
Tactical, & Operational
A goal, also known as an objective, is a specific commitment to achieve a measurable 
result within a stated period of time.
As with planning, goals are of the same three types—strategic, tactical, and opera-
tional. Also, like planning, goals are arranged in a hierarchy known as a means-end 
chain because in the chain of management (operational, tactical, strategic) the accom-
plishment of low-level goals is the means leading to the accomplishment of high-level 
goals or ends.
■ 
Strategic goals are set by and for top management and focus on objectives for 
the organization as a whole.
■ 
Tactical goals are set by and for middle managers and focus on the actions 
needed to achieve strategic goals.
■ 
Operational goals are set by and for first-line managers and are concerned 
with short-term matters associated with realizing tactical goals.
As we will see later in Section 5.4, goals should be SMART—specific, measurable, 
attainable, results-oriented, and with target dates.
The Action Plan & the Operating Plan
The goal should be followed by an action plan, which defines the course of action 
needed to achieve the stated goal, such as a marketing plan or sales plan.
The operating plan, which is typically designed for a one-year period, defines how 
you will conduct your business based on the action plan; it identifies clear targets such 
as revenues, cash flow, and market share.
144 
PART 3 
Planning
EXAMPLE
Strategic, Tactical, & Operational Goals: Southwest Airlines
Ranking No. 9 on Fortune’s 2014 Most Admired Companies 
list, Dallas-based Southwest Airlines has inspired a host of 
low-fare imitators—big ones like Alaska and JetBlue and 
small ones like Allegiant, Frontier, Spirit, Sun Country, 
and Virgin America—which have grown rapidly in recent 
years compared to mainline carriers such as United, Delta, 
American, and US Airways. It has continually achieved its 
strategic goals and as of 2014 had been profitable for 
41 consecutive years.47
Strategic Goals. The goal of Southwest’s top managers is to 
ensure that the airline is highly profitable, following the general 
strategy of (a) keeping costs and fares down, (b) offering a 
superior on-time arrival record, and (c) keeping passengers 

 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
145
happy. One of the most important strategic decisions South-
west made was to fly just one type of airplane—Boeing 737s. 
(Several dozen Boeing 717s, inherited when the company ac-
quired AirTran, were leased to Delta. Southwest has about 680 
jets overall.) Thus, it is able to hold down training, maintenance, 
and operating expenses.48
Another strategic decision was to create a strong corporate 
culture that, according to one former CEO, allows people to “feel 
like they’re using their brains, they’re using their creativity, 
they’re allowed to be themselves and have a sense of humor, 
and they understand what the mission of the company is.”49
Tactical Goals. Cutting costs and keeping fares low has traditionally 
been a key tactical goal for Southwest’s middle managers. For ex-
ample, the organization cut costs in its maintenance program by 
doing more work on a plane when it’s in for a check instead of bring-
ing it in three different times. In addition, it has tried to get more use 
out of its planes every day by limiting the turnaround time between 
flights to 20 minutes, compared to up to an hour for other airlines.
Although now it flies longer flights between bigger cities, 
which uses fuel more efficiently but is more subject to delays, 
until recently Southwest flew short-haul flights to midsize cit-
ies to save time and money by avoiding traffic. There is just one 
class of seating, doing away with the distinction between 
coach and first class. Originally, even the boarding passes were 
reusable, being made of plastic (most passengers print out 
their own passes now). Finally, the airline saves by not feeding 
passengers: it serves mostly peanuts, no in-flight meals.
How do you make arrival times more reliable? To achieve 
this second tactical goal, middle managers did away with guar-
anteed seat reservations before ticketing, so that no-shows 
wouldn’t complicate (and therefore delay) the boarding pro-
cess. (It changed that policy slightly in 2007 to ensure that pas-
sengers paying extra for “business select” fares would be 
placed at the front of the line.)
In addition, as mentioned, the airline has tried to turn planes 
around in exactly 20 minutes, so that on-time departures are 
more apt to produce on-time arrivals. Although the airline is about 
83% unionized, turnaround was helped by looser work rules, so 
that workers could pitch in to do tasks outside their normal jobs. 
“If you saw something that needed to be done,” said one former 
employee, “and you thought you could do it, you did.”50
Unfortunately, in 2013, in an attempt to offer more conve-
nient flight schedules, the airline instituted a new system to re-
duce times it allowed for flights and compressed its turnaround 
times even further—the result of which sent its on-time perfor-
mance reeling to last place among U.S. carriers. Its involuntarily 
denied–boarding rate and mishandled-baggage rate also in-
creased slightly.51 
Despite the delays, Southwest still retained its top ranking 
for having the lowest customer complaints.52 The difference lies 
in small things: the free peanuts (an emotional subject among 
travelers), switching of flights without charge, and no charge for 
checked-in luggage up to two pieces. (The airline does, how-
ever, charge for checking a third bag.)
Operational Goals. Consider how Southwest’s first-line managers 
can enhance productivity in the unloading, refueling, and cleaning 
of arriving planes. “One example [of productivity] customers men-
tion all the time,” said former chairman Herb Kelleher, “is if you 
look out the window when the airplane is taxiing toward the jet-
way, you see our ground crews charging before the airplane has 
even come to rest. Customers tell me that with other airlines no-
body moves until the airplane has turned off its engines.”53
The New Southwest. In January 2014, Southwest began ventur-
ing into the international market, marking a significant shift.54 Its 
initial flights are to the Caribbean, but other international routes 
may be attempted later. Some operations, such as fast turnaround 
times, may be difficult to implement because of departure restric-
tions.55 Southwest also faces costly upgrades to its computer 
systems and an antiquated phone system, its traditionally low 
fares are not so low anymore, and it is negotiating with workers to 
try to achieve more productivity and flexibility.56
YOUR CALL
Do you think recent changes will allow the company to con-
tinue to achieve its strategic goals?
Lookalikes. One key to the 
success of Southwest Airlines 
is that all the planes in its fleet 
have been the same type, 
Boeing 737s, which saves on 
maintenance and training costs. 

146 
PART 3 
Planning
Standing Plans: Policies, Procedures, & Rules 
Standing plans are plans de-
veloped for activities that occur repeatedly over a period of time. Standing plans consist 
of policies, procedures, and rules.
■ 
A policy is a standing plan that outlines the general response to a designated 
problem or situation. Example: “This workplace does not condone swearing.” 
This policy is a broad statement that gives managers a general idea about what 
is allowable for employees who use bad language, but gives no specifics.
■ 
A procedure (or standard operating procedure) is a standing plan that outlines 
the response to particular problems or circumstances. Example: McDonald’s 
specifies exactly how a hamburger should be dressed, including the order in 
which the mustard, ketchup, and pickles are applied.
■ 
A rule is a standing plan that designates specific required action. Example: 
“No smoking is allowed anywhere in the building.” This allows no room for 
interpretation.
Single-Use Plans: Programs & Projects 
Single-use plans are plans devel-
oped for activities that are not likely to be repeated in the future. Such plans can be 
programs or projects.
■ 
A program is a single-use plan encompassing a range of projects or activities. 
Example: The U.S. government space program has had several projects, in-
cluding the Challenger project, the Hubble Telescope project, and the space 
shuttle project.
■ 
A project is a single-use plan of less scope and complexity than a program. 
Example: The space shuttle project, one of several projects in the govern-
ment’s space program, consisted of three shuttles: Discovery, Endeavour, and 
Atlantis. ●
TABLE 5.1
Standing Plans and 
Single-Use Plans
There are three types of 
standing plans and two 
types of single-use plans.
PLAN 
DESCRIPTION
Standing plan 
For activities that occur repeatedly over a period of time
• Policy 
Outlines general response to a designated problem or situation
• Procedure 
Outlines response to particular problems or circumstances
• Rule 
Designates specific required action
Single-use plan 
For activities not likely to be repeated in the future
• Program 
Encompasses a range of projects or activities
• Project 
Has less scope and complexity than a program
Types of Plans: Standing Plans & Single-Use Plans
Plans are of two types—standing plans and single-use plans. (See Table 5.1.)

5.4 
Promoting Goal Setting: SMART Goals & 
Management by Objectives
What are SMART goals and MBO and how can they be implemented?
THE BIG PICTURE
This section discusses SMART goals—goals that are Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Results-oriented, and 
have Target dates. It also discusses a technique for setting goals, management by objectives (MBO), a four-
step process for motivating employees.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Anyone can define goals. But as we mentioned earlier, the five characteristics of a 
good goal are represented by the acronym SMART.
SMART Goals
A SMART goal is one that is Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Results-oriented, and 
has Target dates.
Specific 
Goals should be stated in specific rather than vague terms. The goal “As many 
planes as possible should arrive on time” is too general. The goal that “Ninety percent of 
planes should arrive within 15 minutes of the scheduled arrival time” is specific.
Measurable 
Whenever possible, goals should be measurable, or quantifiable (as 
in “90% of planes should arrive within 15 minutes . . .”). That is, there should be some 
way to measure the degree to which a goal has been reached.
Of course, some goals—such as those concerned with improving quality—are not 
precisely quantifiable. In that case, something on the order of “Improve the quality of 
customer relations by instituting 10 follow-up telephone calls every week” will do. 
You can certainly quantify how many follow-up phone calls were made.
Attainable 
Goals should be challenging, of course, but above all they 
should be realistic and attainable. It may be best to set goals that are quite 
ambitious so as to challenge people to meet high standards. Always, however, 
the goals should be achievable within the scope of the time, equipment, and 
financial support available. (See Figure 5.4.)
If too easy (as in “half the flights should arrive on time”), goals won’t im-
pel people to make much effort. If impossible (“all flights must arrive on 
time, regardless of weather”), employees won’t even bother trying. Or they 
will try and continually fail, which will end up hurting morale. Or they will 
cheat. (An example was the unrealistic goal of cutting wait times for appoint-
ments by more than half at Veterans Affairs hospitals, as revealed in 2014 
scandals in which VA administrators were found to have falsified figures.)57
Results-Oriented 
Only a few goals should be chosen—say, five for 
any work unit. And they should be results-oriented—they should support 
the organization’s vision.
In writing out the goals, start with the word “To” and follow it with 
action-oriented verbs—“complete,” “acquire,” “increase” (“to decrease by 
10% the time to get passengers settled in their seats before departure”).
Some verbs should not be used in your goal statement because they im-
ply activities—the tactics used to accomplish goals (such as having bag-
gage handlers waiting). For example, you should not use “to develop,” “to 
conduct,” “to implement.”
 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
147
High
Low
Performance
Goal Difficulty
Low 
   Challenging 
Impossible
Performance
A Committed individuals with
 adequate ability
B Committed individuals who
 are working at capacity
C Individuals who lack commitment
   to high goals
A
B
C
Moderate
FIGURE 5.4 
Relationship between 
goal difficulty and performance
Source: Adapted from E. A. Locke and G. P. 
Latham, A Theory of Goal Setting and Task 
Performance (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1990).

148 
PART 3 
Planning
Target Dates 
Goals should specify the target dates or deadline dates when they 
are to be attained. For example, it’s unrealistic to expect an airline to improve its on-
time arrivals by 10% overnight. However, you could set a target date—3 to 6 months 
away, say—by which this goal is to be achieved. That allows enough time for lower-
level managers and employees to revamp their systems and work habits and gives 
them a clear time frame in which they know what they are expected to do.
EXAMPLE
Setting Goals: Walmart Lays Out an Agenda for Environmental Change
Tired of criticism of Walmart’s busi-
ness practices, its CEO at the time, 
H. Lee Scott Jr., in a 2008 speech laid 
out new environmental goals.58 Be-
sides continuing to promote energy-
saving products at low prices in its 
stores, such as fluorescent light bulbs, 
Scott said the company would also 
work with suppliers of high-energy-
use products, such as air conditioners, 
microwave ovens, and televisions, to 
make such products 25% more en-
ergy efficient within three years. Later 
Walmart pledged to eliminate 20 mil-
lion tons of carbon emissions from its 
global supply chain by 2015.59
More Milestones. At its 2013 Global 
Sustainability Milestone Meeting, the 
company listed the two following 
goals, to be achieved by the end of 
2020: (1) a 600% increase (over 2010 
levels) in power purchases of renew-
able energy globally every year, and 
(2) a reduction by 20% globally (com-
pared to 2010) in kilowatts required to 
power Walmart buildings. The new 
commitments would avoid 9 million metric tons of greenhouse 
gas, taking the equivalent of 1.5 million cars off the road. Such 
efficiencies would be achieved by 
adding solar power to buildings and 
buying wind, hydro, and geothermal 
sources of energy, as well as increas-
ing LED lighting in and around stores.60
Endgame. By 2014, the company 
had shot from 15th to 6th place in 
the Environmental Protection Agen-
cy’s rankings of the country’s 
top purchasers of green power—
electricity produced by wind, solar, 
and similar means.61 However, some 
organizations, such as the Institute 
for Local Self-Reliance, produced 
studies that reported that Walmart’s 
greenhouse gas emissions had actu-
ally grown 14% because the compa-
ny’s calculations had failed to 
account for major sources of pollu-
tion such as those of international 
shipping, new store construction, 
and product manufacturing.62
YOUR CALL
Whether or not Walmart has included 
all the sources of emissions in its 
calculation, as critics assert, how do the objectives outlined 
above reflect the criteria for SMART goals?
Management by Objectives: The Four-Step Process 
for Motivating Employees
First suggested by Peter Drucker in 1954, management by objectives has spread 
largely because of the appeal of its emphasis on converting general objectives into 
specific ones for all members of an organization.63
Management by objectives (MBO) is a four-step process in which (1) managers and 
employees jointly set objectives for the employee, (2) managers develop action plans, 
(3) managers and employees periodically review the employee’s performance, and 
(4) the manager makes a performance appraisal and rewards the employee according 
to results. The purpose of MBO is to motivate rather than to control subordinates.
Better environmental objectives. Walmart aims to 
reduce its greenhouse gas emissions, using alternative 
sources of energy such as wind and solar.

 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
149
Jointly setting objectives. An 
important part of MBO is joint 
manager/subordinate participation 
in setting objectives. Have you 
ever held a job that featured 
this kind of process?
Before we begin discussing these four steps, you may want to consider the quality of 
the goal-setting process in a current or former employer. The following self-assessment 
was developed to provide insight into the quality of goal setting within an organization.
What Is the Quality of Goal Setting within a 
Current or Past Employer?
This self-assessment is designed to assess the quality of goal 
setting in a company. Go to connect.mheducation.com 
and take the self-assessment. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
What are the strengths and weaknesses of goal setting in 
the company you selected? 
2. 
Based on your results, what recommendations would you 
provide to senior management about improving the goal-
setting process in this company? Explain.
3. 
What actions could you take to improve the goal-setting 
process in this company? Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 5.2
®
1. Jointly Set Objectives 
You sit down with your 
manager and the two of you jointly set objectives for you 
to attain. Later you do the same with each of your own 
subordinates. Joint manager/subordinate participation is 
important to the program. It’s probably best if the objec-
tives aren’t simply imposed from above (Don’t say, “Here 
are the objectives I want you to meet”). Managers also 
should not simply approve the employee’s objectives 
(“Whatever you aim for is okay with me”). It’s necessary 
to have back-and-forth negotiation to make the objectives 
practicable.64
One result of joint participation, research shows, is that it 
impels people to set more difficult goals—to raise the level 
of their aspirations—which may have a positive effect on 
their performance.65 The objectives should be expressed in writing and should be SMART. 
There are three types of objectives, shown in the following table. (See Table 5.2.)
Improvement Objectives
Purpose Express performance to be accomplished in a specific way for a specific area
Examples “Increase sport utility sales by 10%.” “Reduce food spoilage by 15%.”
Personal Development Objectives
Purpose Express personal goals to be realized
Examples “Attend five days of leadership training.” “Learn basics of Microsoft Office 
software by June 1.”
Maintenance Objectives
Purpose Express the intention to maintain performance at previously established levels
Examples “Continue to meet the increased sales goals specified last quarter.” “Produce 
another 60,000 cases of wine this month.”
TABLE 5.2 
Three Types of Objectives Used in MBO

150 
PART 3 
Planning
2. Develop Action Plan 
Once objectives are set, managers at each level should 
prepare an action plan for attaining them. Action plans may be prepared for both indi-
viduals and for work units, such as departments.
3. Periodically Review Performance 
You and your manager should meet 
reasonably often—either informally as needed or formally every three months—to 
review progress, as should you and your subordinates. Indeed, frequent communica-
tion is necessary so that everyone will know how well he or she is doing in meeting 
the objectives.
During each meeting, managers should give employees feedback, and objectives 
should be updated or revised as necessary to reflect new realities. If you were manag-
ing a painting or landscaping business, for example, changes in the weather, loss of 
key employees, or a financial downturn affecting customer spending could force you 
to reconsider your objectives.
4. Give Performance Appraisal & Rewards, If Any 
At the end of 6 or 12 months, 
you and your subordinate should meet to discuss results, comparing performance with 
initial objectives. Deal with results, not personalities, emotional issues, or excuses.
Because the purpose of MBO is to motivate employees, performance that meets the 
objectives should be rewarded—with compliments, raises, bonuses, promotions, or 
other suitable benefits. Failure can be addressed by redefining the objectives for the 
next 6- or 12-month period, or even by taking stronger measures, such as demotion. 
Basically, however, MBO is viewed as being a learning process. After step 4, the MBO 
cycle begins anew.66
Cascading Objectives: MBO from the Top Down
For MBO to be successful, the following three things have to happen.
1. Top Management Must Be Committed 
“When top-management commit-
ment [to MBO] was high,” said one review, “the average gain in productivity was 56%. 
When commitment was low, the average gain in productivity was only 6%.”67
2. It Must Be Applied Organizationwide 
The program has to be put in place 
throughout the entire organization. That is, it cannot be applied in just some divisions 
and departments; it has to be done in all of them.
3. Objectives Must “Cascade” 
MBO works by cascading objectives down 
through the organization; that is, objectives are structured in a unified hierarchy, 
becoming more specific at lower levels of the organization. Top managers set general 
organizational objectives, which are translated into divisional objectives, which are 
translated into departmental objectives. The hierarchy ends in individual objectives set 
by each employee.
The Importance of Deadlines
There’s no question that college is a pressure cooker for many students. The reason, of 
course, is the seemingly never-ending deadlines. But consider: Would you do all the 
course work you’re doing—and realize the education you’re getting—if you didn’t 
have deadlines?
As we saw under the “T” (for “has Target dates”) in SMART goals, deadlines are as 
essential to goal setting in business as they are to your college career. Because the 
whole purpose of planning and goals is to deliver to a client specified results within a 
specified period of time, deadlines become a great motivator, both for you and for the 
people working for you.

 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
151
It’s possible, of course, to let deadlines mislead you into focusing too much on im-
mediate results and thereby ignore overall planning—just as students will focus too 
much on preparing for a test in one course while neglecting others. In general, how-
ever, deadlines can help you keep your eye on the “big picture” while simultaneously 
paying attention to the details that will help you realize the big picture. Deadlines can 
help concentrate the mind, so that you make quick decisions rather than put them off. 
Deadlines help you ignore extraneous matters (such as cleaning up a messy desk) in 
favor of focusing on what’s important—realizing the goals on time and on budget. 
Deadlines provide a mechanism for giving ourselves feedback. ●
PRACTICAL ACTION
How to Achieve Your Important Goals: Don’t Keep Every Option Open
We’ve all been told that “It’s important to keep your options 
open.” But should we?
“You don’t even know how a camera’s burst-mode flash 
works, but you persuade yourself to pay for the extra feature 
just in case,” writes a journalist about this phenomenon. “You 
no longer have anything in common with someone who keeps 
calling you, but you hate to just zap the relationship. Your child 
is exhausted from after-school soccer, ballet, and Chinese les-
sons, but you won’t let her drop the piano lessons. They could 
come in handy.”68
Where’s the Money? The natural reluctance to close any door 
is pointed out by Dan Ariely, a behavioral economist at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology and author of Predictably Irra-
tional: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions.69 In that 
book, he describes experiments involving hundreds of MIT stu-
dents who showed that they could not bear to let go of their 
options—even though it was bad strategy. The experiments involved 
playing a computer game in which students had 100 mouse 
clicks to look for money behind three doors on the screen and 
were paid real cash each time they found it. To earn the most 
money, a student would quickly find out that the best strategy 
was to check out the three doors and settle on the one with the 
highest rewards. But when students stayed out of a room, the 
door would start shrinking and eventually disappear. Researchers 
found that most students would waste clicks by rushing back to 
reopen doors, even though they lost money by doing so—and 
they continued to frantically keep all their doors open even when 
they were fined for switching.
Fear of Loss? Were the students just trying to “keep their op-
tions open”? Ariely doesn’t think so. The real motivation, he sug-
gests, is fear of loss. “Closing a door on an option is experienced 
as a loss, and people are willing to pay a price to avoid the emo-
tion of loss,” he says.
YOUR CALL
Obviously, this lesson has some practical payoffs for all of us 
who are overscheduled and overworked and need all the help 
we can get to stay focused on our important goals. Are you 
presently considering adding a class, switching majors, or pur-
suing another career? Are you wondering whether to continue 
a personal relationship that no longer benefits you? What 
would be the advantages of—just saying no?

5.5 
The Planning/Control Cycle
How does the planning/control cycle help keep a manager’s plans headed in the 
right direction?
THE BIG PICTURE
The four-step planning/control cycle helps you keep in control, to make sure you’re headed in the 
right direction.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
152 
PART 3 
Planning
Once you’ve made plans, how do you stay in control to make sure you’re headed in 
the right direction? Actually, there is a continuous feedback loop known as the plan-
ning/control cycle. (The “organizing” and “leading” steps within the Planning-
Organizing-Leading-Controlling sequence are implied here.) The planning/control 
cycle has two planning steps (1 and 2) and two control steps (3 and 4), as follows: 
(1) Make the plan. (2) Carry out the plan. (3) Control the direction by comparing results 
with the plan. (4) Control the direction by taking corrective action in two ways—namely 
(a) by correcting deviations in the plan being carried out or (b) by improving future 
plans. (See Figure 5.5.)
The Two
Planning Steps
The Two
Control Steps
      Control the direction
in two ways:
(a) by correcting
     deviations in the
     plan being carried
     out (return to
     step 2), or
(b) by improving
     future plans (go
     to step 1 to
     start over)
Make the plan
Carry out the plan
1
2
4
      Control the
direction by
comparing the
results with the plan
3
FIGURE 5.5
The planning/control cycle
This describes a constant 
feedback loop designed to 
ensure plans stay headed in the 
right direction.
Source: From Robert Kreitner, 
Management, 8th edition, 
copyright © 2001 South-Western, 
a part of Cengage Learning, Inc. 
Reproduced with permission. 
www.cengage.com/permissions.
The planning/control cycle loop exists for each level of planning—strategic, tacti-
cal, and operational. The corrective action in step 4 of the cycle (a) can get a project 
back on track before it’s too late or (b) if it’s too late, can provide data for improving 
future plans. ●

 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
153
The Planning/Control Cycle: Apple Keeps Its Products Secret 
to Generate Buzz70
Most electronics and computer mak-
ers talk about their products well in 
advance of releasing them in order to 
give big customers and users a 
chance to prepare for them. Not 
Apple Inc., maker of the iPhone, iPod, 
and iPad and Fortune’s No. 1 Most 
Admired Company seven years in a 
row, 2008–2014. In 2008, it was also 
ranked No. 1 among Fortune 500 
companies for total return to share-
holders over the preceding 10 years. 
Apple has also passed Coca-Cola as 
the most valuable brand, according to 
consulting company Interbrand.71
Secrecy is a big part of the com-
pany’s marketing strategy. And the 
planning/control cycle figures closely 
in how well it is accomplished.
Step 1: The Plan. About 60% of all 
personal computers are bought by cor-
porate customers and other big tech-
nology purchasers. Because of the 
hefty investment involved, these customers favor suppliers that 
let them see major product plans a year in advance. However, 
former Apple CEO Steve Jobs determined that he favored selling 
technology directly to consumers rather than to corporate buyers 
and chief technology officers.
By keeping a new product secret, Apple stimulates a great 
deal of public curiosity. “There’s a great deal of mystery and 
speculation about what it will be,” says one seasoned market-
ing executive. “That’s created a marketing aura for them.” 
Such was the plan, for example, when Apple and Hewlett-Packard 
made a deal to repackage Apple’s iPod digital music player and 
sell it under the H-P label.
Step 2: Carrying Out the Plan. Following its plan to keep new 
products secret to generate marketing buzz, Apple often didn’t tell 
H-P about new iPod models until the day before they were intro-
duced to the public. It also insisted that H-P work on iPods under 
tight security, even though Apple’s versions were already dis-
played on store shelves.
The same has been true with other Apple products, with 
employees being sworn to secrecy for years. When, for exam-
ple, the company decided to open its own chain of retail stores, 
an exact replica of a 6,000-square-foot store was built entirely 
inside a sealed-off warehouse away from Apple’s main Cupertino, 
California, headquarters. When Apple 
decided to switch to Intel micropro-
cessors, engineers worked on the 
project for five years under hush-hush 
conditions to adapt the Macintosh 
operating system to Intel chips.
Step 3: Comparing Results. The 
use of mystery “helps Apple attract 
crowds at its retail stores and gen-
erally garner much more visibility 
than its relatively modest advertis-
ing budget would suggest,” says a 
Wall Street Journal story. “While 
new wares from Dell Inc. or H-P 
rarely get front-page treatment, Mr. 
Jobs has repeatedly appeared on 
the covers of Time, Newsweek, and 
Fortune showing off a new iPod or 
Macintosh computer.”
Secrecy was a particular boon to 
the growth of Apple’s fast-growing 
iPod line, with consumers showing 
their willingness to abandon their old 
iPods in favor of newer ones that Apple unveiled with great pub-
licity and fanfare. However, the company has followed the same 
strategy in announcing its other products, including various ver-
sions of the iPhone, first released in 2007, and the iPad, which 
debuted in 2010. In mid-2014, the rumor mill was rife with spec-
ulation about Apple revealing a smartwatch, a TV—even an 
iCar.72 It announced the iPhone 6 and Apple Watch in September.
Step 4: Taking Corrective Action. Leaks have occurred, 
and Apple has learned that secrecy requires strong mea-
sures. Thus, Apple has fired and later sued employees who 
leaked news about unannounced products. It has even 
sued websites that have published gossip about Apple 
products. The company also assigns different departments 
dissimilar code names for the same product, so it can more 
easily track where leaks come from. Employees are outfit-
ted with special electronic badges that grant them access 
only to specific areas within the fortresslike Apple corpo-
rate headquarters.
YOUR CALL
Can you think of a more effective way to generate consumer 
interest in a forthcoming product than just keeping it secret? 
What kind of planning/control cycle issues would it raise?
EXAMPLE
Secret product. The newest version of the 
iPhone, the iPhone6, was kept secret until its 
appearance in September 2014. Has Apple’s 
strategy of great secrecy been successful at 
generating buzz?

Key Terms Used in This Chapter
action plan 144
business model 136
business plan 136
cascading 150
goal 144
management by objectives 
(MBOs) 148
means-end chain 144
mission 140
mission statement 140
objective 144
operating plan 144
operational goals 144
operational planning 143
planning 136
planning/control cycle 152
policy 146
procedure 146
program 146
project 146
rule 146
single-use plan 146
SMART goal 147
standing plan 146
strategic goals 144
strategic management 137
strategic planning 142
strategy 137
tactical goals 144
tactical planning 143
vision 141
vision statement 141
Key Points
5.1 Planning & Strategy
• Planning is defined as setting goals and 
deciding how to achieve them. It is also 
defined as coping with uncertainty by 
formulating future courses of action to 
achieve specified results.
• One important type of plan is a business plan, 
a document that outlines a proposed firm’s 
goals, the strategy for achieving them, and 
the standards for measuring success. The 
business plan describes the business model, 
which outlines the need the firm will fill, the 
operations of the business, its components 
and functions, as well as the expected 
revenues and expenses.
• A strategy is a large-scale action plan that 
sets the direction for an organization.
• Strategic management is a process that involves 
managers from all parts of the organization in the 
formulation and implementation of strategies 
and strategic goals.
• An organization should adopt planning and 
strategic management for three reasons: 
They can (1) provide direction and momentum, 
(2) encourage new ideas, and above all 
(3) develop a sustainable competitive advantage.
5.2 Fundamentals of Planning
• An organization’s reason for being is 
expressed in a mission statement.
• A vision is a long-term goal describing “what” 
an organization wants to become. It is a clear 
sense of the future and the actions needed to 
get there.
• From these are derived strategic planning, 
then tactical planning, then operational 
planning. In strategic planning, managers 
determine what the organization’s long-term 
goals should be for the next 1–5 years. In 
tactical planning, managers determine what 
contributions their work units can make 
during the next 6–24 months. In operational 
planning, they determine how to accomplish 
specific tasks within the next 1–52 weeks.
5.3 Goals & Plans
• Whatever its type, the purpose of planning is 
to set a goal, also known as an objective, a 
specific commitment to achieve a measurable 
result within a stated period of time.
• As with planning, goals are of the same three 
types—strategic, tactical, and operational—
arranged in a hierarchy known as a means-
end chain because in the chain of 
management the accomplishment of low-
level goals is the means leading to the 
accomplishment of high-level goals or ends.
• Strategic goals are set by and for top 
management and focus on objectives for the 
organization as a whole. Tactical goals are set 
by and for middle managers and focus on the 
actions needed to achieve strategic goals. 
Operational goals are set by and for first-line 
managers and are concerned with short-term 
matters associated with realizing tactical goals.
• The goal should be followed by an action 
plan, which defines the course of action 
needed to achieve the stated goal. The 
operating plan, which is typically designed 
for a one-year period, defines how you will 
conduct your business based on the action 
plan; it identifies clear targets such as 
revenues, cash flow, and market share.
• Plans may be either standing plans, 
developed for activities that occur repeatedly 
154 
PART 3 
Planning

over a period of time, or single-use plans, 
developed for activities that are not likely to 
be repeated in the future.
• There are three types of standing plans: 
(1) A policy is a standing plan that outlines the 
general response to a designated problem or 
situation. (2) A procedure outlines the response 
to particular problems or circumstances. 
(3) A rule designates specific required action.
• There are two types of single-use plans: 
(1) A program encompasses a range of 
projects or activities. (2) A project is a 
single-use plan of less scope and complexity.
5.4 Promoting Goal Setting: SMART 
Goals & Management by Objectives
• The five characteristics of a good goal 
are represented by the acronym SMART. 
A SMART goal is one that is Specific, 
Measurable, Attainable, Results oriented, 
and has Target dates.
• Management by objectives (MBO) is a four-
step process in which (1) managers and 
employees jointly set objectives for the 
employee, (2) managers develop action plans, 
(3) managers and employees periodically 
review the employee’s performance, and 
(4) the manager makes a performance appraisal 
and rewards the employee according to results. 
The purpose of MBO is to motivate rather than 
to control subordinates.
• For MBO to be successful three things have 
to happen. (1) The commitment of top 
management is essential. (2) The program 
must be applied organizationwide. 
(3) Objectives must cascade—becoming more 
specific at lower levels of the organization.
• Deadlines are essential to planning because 
they become great motivators both for the 
manager and for subordinates.
5.5 The Planning/Control Cycle
• Once plans are made, managers must stay 
in control using the planning/control cycle, 
which has two planning steps (1 and 2) 
and two control steps (3 and 4), as follows: 
(1) Make the plan. (2) Carry out the plan. 
(3) Control the direction by comparing results 
with the plan. (4) Control the direction by 
taking corrective action in two ways—namely, 
(a) by correcting deviations in the plan being 
carried out or (b) by improving future plans.
 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
155
 1. What are planning, strategy, and strategic management?
 2. Why are they important?
 3. What is the difference between a mission and a 
vision, a mission statement and a vision statement?
 4. What are three types of planning?
 5. What are three types of goals?
 6. What are different kinds of plans?
 7. What are SMART goals?
 8. What is Management by Objectives?
 9. What three things have to happen for MBO to be 
successful?
 10. Explain the planning/control cycle.
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
GE’s Poor Planning Results in Delays & 
Increased Costs
General Electric Co. ran into a problem with how it 
had planned to move drilling equipment from the U.S. 
to Alberta, Canada. The equipment, called an evapora-
tor, is used to extract crude oil from the ground, and it 
spans almost double the length of a Space Shuttle 
Orbiter.
The Wall Street Journal reported that “GE lost an 
attempt to overrule a federal injunction preventing it 
from using a stretch of scenic Idaho highway to haul 
the giant piece of equipment.” As you would expect, 
the company appealed the injunction. For now, how-
ever, the equipment is “stuck near the Port of Wilma in 
Clarkson, Washington, without a way to get to its des-
tination hundreds of miles away.”
“Moving it takes tow trucks—one pulling and an-
other pushing—with 20 axles along multiple trailers 
stretching the load out to 250 feet. Interstate highways 
aren’t an option, because the load can’t get under the 
overpasses,” according to the newspaper report.
GE is very concerned about moving the equipment 
because failure to do so could cost the company about 
Management in Action

$75 million in sales, according to The Wall Street Jour-
nal. One option is to follow the lead of Imperial Oil. 
Two years ago the company encountered a similar 
problem, leading it to disassemble the equipment and 
then transport it along various interstate highways.
Transportation of the equipment is being challenged 
by the Nez Perce Tribe and conservation group Idaho 
Rivers United. These groups “are concerned the giant 
convoys will change the national forest’s character and 
infringe on tribal values,” the Journal said.
The holdup is a key issue for GE because the com-
pany has a strategy to grow revenue by focusing on its 
oil business. For example, “the company has been 
building up its oil field services businesses for the past 
decade, and GE Chief Executive Jeff Immelt has in-
vested to expand its offerings in unconventional fields 
like shale gas and the oil sands.
“GE’s Resource Conservation Company Interna-
tional has delivered about 20 evaporators to oil sands 
projects since 2002 using different routes. This time it 
contracted a British Columbia firm to make the evapo-
rator after getting the order from an undisclosed client 
in early 2012.”
The company did not take the transportation of the 
equipment lightly. Continues the report: “It mapped 
out a transport route that follows 100 miles of U.S. 
Highway 12, which cuts through Idaho’s National For-
est along switchbacks up to the Bitterroot Range’s 
Lolo Pass.” The company also decided to travel only at 
night so that it would not disrupt travel on the high-
way. The plan was to drive 15 minutes and then pull 
over so that other vehicles could pass. The company 
also planned to have an ambulance follow the convoy 
so that it could take care of any emergencies that might 
occur along the highway.
Part of GE’s planning included a trial run over the 
same route. There were no incidents and the company 
received permits from the state highway patrol. This ex-
perience led the company to conclude that there would 
not be any problems with transporting the equipment. 
“The fact that GE had the full support of Idaho’s 
transportation Department gave us a very high degree 
of confidence,” said William Heins, RCCI’s operating 
chief. But despite 15 months of detailed planning, GE 
failed to get approval from the Nez Perce Tribe, which 
lives on the land around the scenic highway, or from 
the Forest Service, which has authority over the 
100-mile-long stretch of highway. The Nez Perce 
Tribe and Idaho Rivers United objected and in August 
went to court, winning an injunction to stop the mega-
load shipments pending a review of how the traffic 
would impact the environment.
“GE tried to get the court to reconsider the injunc-
tion noting that the delay would be burdensome. Mr. 
Heins told the court the injunction could cost the com-
pany $3.6 million in damages from liquidated con-
tracts, $5 million in increased transportation and 
equipment costs, and up to $75 million in potential lost 
revenue,” reported The Wall Street Journal. “The judge 
was not swayed by these arguments. The judge con-
cluded that the company made ‘an informed gamble,’ 
and then declined to override the injunction.” 
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. Which of the fundamentals of planning did GE exe-
cute ineffectively? Explain your rationale.
 2. Which of the three types of goals were ineffectively 
managed by GE? Explain.
 3. State two SMART goals for GE based on the case. Given 
the political issues discussed in the case, how might GE 
ensure that these goals are attainable? Discuss.
 4. Using Figure 5.5, describe what GE could have done 
to improve the process of transporting the evapora-
tor. Provide specific recommendations. 
 5. What did you learn about planning based on this 
case? Explain.
Source: Excerpted from from K. Linebaugh, “Road Hog: GE’s Rig Is 
Stuck in Idaho,” The Wall Street Journal, October 17, 2013, pp. B1,B2. 
156 
PART 3 
Planning
How Do You Think Companies Should Respond 
to Accusations Made by a Whistle-Blower?
We defined a whistle-blower in Chapter 3 as an em-
ployee who reports organizational misconduct to the 
public. Whistle-blowing is important to organizations 
for many reasons. One critical one is that the Sarbanes-
Oxley law, which was discussed in Chapter 3, man-
dates that companies develop processes and procedures 
for handling whistle-blowing. The Dodd-Frank law 
further provides financial rewards for employees who 
implicate security fraud and other types of wrong-
doing. Civilians have received millions for exposing 
wrongdoing in companies that do business with the 
U.S. government.
This challenge involves consideration of how orga-
nizations should plan to respond to claims of miscon-
duct or illegal activity. Consider what happened at 
Legal/Ethical Challenge

Renault SA. An employee at Renault provided an 
anonymous accusation that a senior manager negoti-
ated a bribe. “After a four-month investigation, Renault 
in January [2011] dismissed the executive and two 
other managers. The employees professed their inno-
cence, but the company’s chief executive, Carlos 
Ghosn, said publicly that the company had evidence 
against them. Over the past two months, however, 
Renault has uncovered no evidence against the trio.” 
The company’s chief operating officer, Patrick Pélata, 
told The Wall Street Journal that “the company may 
have been ‘tricked’ into bringing the allegations.”
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
What do you think management at Renault should 
have done about the anonymous accusation about a 
senior official negotiating a bribe?
 1. A four-month investigation is enough time to investi-
gate the claim of bribery. Renault obviously was 
“tricked” by the anonymous tipper. I thus would punish 
the person who made the false claim and hire back 
the three employees. These employees should also 
receive pay for the time they were dismissed.
 2. Renault obviously did not conduct a thorough inves-
tigation prior to firing the three employees. The com-
pany needs to develop detailed guidelines for how 
such matters should be investigated. It also needs to 
hire back the employees and pay them for the time 
they were dismissed.
 3. Renault should have hired an outside firm to investi-
gate the claim, or they should have consulted with an 
outside law firm to review results from the investiga-
tion and render an opinion to senior executives. They 
also need to hire back the employees and pay them 
for the time they were dismissed.
 4. Invent other options.
Source: Excerpted from Ashby Jones and Joann S. Lublin, 
“Firms Revisit Whistleblowing,” The Wall Street Journal, March 14, 
2011, p. B5.
 
Planning 
CHAPTER 5 
157

Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
6.1 
What Is Effective Strategy?
Major Question: What is strategic positioning, and what are the 
three principles that underlie it?
6.2 
The Strategic-Management Process
Major Question: What’s the five-step recipe for the strategic-
management process?
6.3 
Establishing the Mission & the Vision
Major Question: What are the characteristics of good mission 
and vision statements?
6.4 
Assessing the Current Reality
Major Question: What tools can help me describe where the 
organization stands from a competitive point of view?
6.5 
Formulating the Grand Strategy
Major Question: How can three techniques—Porter’s four 
competitive strategies, diversification and synergy, and the 
BCG matrix—help me formulate strategy?
6.6 
Implementing & Controlling Strategy: Execution
Major Question: How does effective execution help managers 
during the strategic-management process?
Strategic Management
How Exceptional Managers Realize 
a Grand Design
6

the manager’s toolbox
Being a Successful Manager: Look beyond the Fads, 
Be Willing to Make Painful Decisions
“How can we build organizations that are as nimble 
as change itself—not only operationally, but strategi-
cally?” asks management professor Gary Hamel.1
Many people deal with uncertainty by succumbing 
to fads, or short-lived enthusiasms, suggests the 
author of a book on why smart people fall for fads.2 A 
fad, he says, “is seen as the way of the future, a gen-
uine innovation that will help solve a big problem. . . . 
A lot of the attraction of a fad is that if you embrace it 
early, then you feel that you’re ahead of other people, 
that you’re hipper and maybe smarter than they are.”3
Fads are evident in the stream of business books 
touting the newest cure-all. Still, some ideas that started 
out as management fads survive. Why? Because 
they’ve been found to actually work. One of these is 
strategic planning, as we describe in this chapter.
Two lessons of successful managers:
Lesson 1—In an Era of Management Fads, 
Strategic Planning Is Still Tops
Business consultant Bain & Company annually con-
ducts a survey on the most popular management 
tools. The 2013 survey found that the most widely 
used management tool in 2012 was used 12 or even 
14 years earlier—namely, strategic planning, thought 
to be effective by about 80% of the senior managers 
surveyed. The use of mission and vision statements 
also continued to be popular, also favored by about 
80%.4 Strategic planning is concerned with develop-
ing a comprehensive program for long-term success. 
Mission statements describe the organization’s 
purpose and vision statements describe its intended 
long-term goal. Successful managers know how 
to use all of them.
Lesson 2—Managers Must Be Willing to Make 
Painful Decisions to Suddenly Alter Strategy
Another lesson is that in a world of discontinuous 
change, managers must always be  prepared to make 
large, painful decisions and radically alter their busi-
ness design—“exiting businesses,  firing people, ad-
mitting you were wrong (or at least not omniscient),” 
as writer Geoffrey Colvin puts it. “So the future will 
demand ever more people with the golden trait, the 
fortitude to accept and even seek psychic pain.”5
For Discussion Earlier we described the impor-
tance of practicing evidence-based management, 
with managers “seeing the truth as a moving target, 
always facing the hard facts, avoiding falling prey to 
half-truths, and being willing to admit when they’re 
wrong and change their ways.”6 Do you think you 
would have this mind-set when thinking about the 
overall direction of your organization or work unit?
forecast
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
We begin by discussing strategic positioning and the five steps in the strategic- 
management process. We then describe competitive intelligence, SWOT analysis, fore-
casting, benchmarking, and Porter’s model for industry analysis. We next consider 
Porter’s four competitive strategies, single-product versus diversification strategies, 
and the BCG matrix. Finally, we discuss execution.

6.1 
What Is Effective Strategy?
What is strategic positioning, and what are the three principles underlying it?
THE BIG PICTURE 
Strategic positioning attempts to achieve sustainable competitive advantage by preserving what is distinc-
tive about a company. It is based on the principles that strategy is the creation of a unique and valuable 
 position, requires trade-offs in competing, and involves creating a “fit” among activities.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Harvard Business School professor Michael Porter “is the single most 
important strategist working today, and maybe of all time,” raved Kevin 
Coyne of consulting firm McKinsey & Co.7 He is “the most famous and 
influential business professor who has ever lived,” says Fortune writer 
Geoffrey Colvin. “He is widely and rightly regarded as the all-time 
greatest strategy guru.”8
Is this high praise deserved? Certainly Porter’s status as a leading 
authority on competitive strategy is unchallenged. The Strategic Man-
agement Society, for instance, voted Porter the most influential living 
strategist. We refer to him repeatedly in this chapter.
Strategic Positioning & Its Principles
According to Porter, strategic positioning attempts to achieve sustain-
able competitive advantage by preserving what is distinctive about 
a company. “It means,” he says, “performing different activities from rivals, or 
performing similar activities in different ways.”9
Three key principles underlie strategic positioning:10
1. Strategy Is the Creation of a Unique & Valuable Position 
 Strategic 
position emerges from three sources:
■ 
Few needs, many customers. Strategic position can be derived from serving 
the few needs of many customers. Example: Jiffy Lube provides only lubri-
cants, but it provides them to all kinds of people with all kinds of motor 
 vehicles.
■ 
Broad needs, few customers. A strategic position may be based on serving 
the broad needs of just a few customers.  Example: Wealth management and 
investment advisory firm Bessemer Trust focuses exclusively on high–net 
worth clients.
■ 
Broad needs, many customers. Strategy may be oriented toward serving the 
broad needs of many customers. Example: National movie theater operator 
Carmike Cinemas operates only in cities with populations of fewer than 
200,000 people.
2. Strategy Requires Trade-offs in Competing 
As a glance at the preceding 
choices shows, some strategies are incompatible. Thus, a company has to choose not 
only what strategy to follow but what strategy not to follow. Example: Neutrogena 
soap, points out Porter, is positioned more as a medicinal product than as a cleansing 
agent. In achieving this narrow positioning, the company gives up sales based on de-
odorizing, gives up large volume, and accordingly gives up some manufacturing 
efficiencies.
160 
PART 3 
Planning
Strategy guru. Harvard 
Business School professor 
Michael Porter suggests that 
every company is subject to five 
forces: its current competitors, 
possible new competitors, the 
threat of substitutes for its 
products or services, the 
bargaining power of its suppliers, 
and the bargaining power of its 
customers. Operating within that 
five-forces framework, a 
company must choose the right 
strategy—or be beaten by 
competitors. Do you think there 
are other forces that are equally 
important in forming strategy?

 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
161
3. Strategy Involves Creating a “Fit” among Activities 
“Fit” has to do with 
the ways a company’s activities interact and reinforce one another. Example: A mutual 
fund such as Vanguard Group follows a low-cost strategy and aligns all its activities 
accordingly, distributing funds directly to consumers and minimizing portfolio turn-
over. However, when the short-lived (1993–1995) Continental Lite airline tried to 
match some but not all of Southwest Airlines’ activities, it was not successful because 
it didn’t apply Southwest’s entire interlocking system.
Does Strategic Management Work for Small 
as Well as Large Firms?
You would expect that a large organization, with its thousands of employees and even 
larger realm of “stakeholders,” would benefit from strategic management and plan-
ning. After all, how can a huge company such as Bank of America run without some 
sort of grand design?
 But what about smaller companies (under 500 employees), which account for 
about half of private-sector employment and two-thirds of net new jobs in recent 
years?11 One analysis of several studies found that strategic planning was appropriate 
not just for large firms—indeed, companies with fewer than 100 employees could 
benefit as well, although the improvement in financial performance was small. Never-
theless, the researchers concluded, “it may be that the small improvement in perfor-
mance is not worth the effort involved in strategic planning unless a firm is in a very 
competitive industry where small differences in performance may affect the firm’s 
survival potential.”12 ●
Comparing Strategies: Big-Company “Make the Consumer a Captive” 
versus Small-Firm “Offer Personal Connections”
Big companies—especially big-tech companies such as Amazon, 
Google, or Apple—“are no longer content simply to enhance 
part of your life,” says one report. “The new strategy is to build 
a device, sell it to consumers, and then sell them the content to 
play on it. And maybe some ads too.”13
Big-Company Ways. That is, the idea is to get consumers tied 
not just to a brand or device or platform but to make them captive 
of the company’s ecosystem—and to get them connected “as 
tightly as possible so they and their content are locked into one 
system,” says analyst Michael Gartenberg.14 Thus, Amazon, for 
example, sells the Kindle e-book readers at a low price so that it 
can then sell e-books. “Amazon is in a race to embed itself into 
the fabric of world-wide commerce in a way that would make it 
indispensable to everyone’s shopping habits,” says one colum-
nist, “and to do so before its rivals wise up.”15 Similarly, Apple 
enables users to easily create book content on its iBook Authors 
book-creation tool, but authors will only be able to sell the results 
through Apple. Google attempted to promote its Google Nexus 
smartphone as a platform for selling Google Wallet, a cell-phone 
payment system.
Small-Company Ways. “I don’t feel they behave in a way that I 
want to support with my consumer dollars,” says Chicago profes-
sor Harold Pollack about big Internet retailers like Amazon.16 So 
instead, Pollack started buying from small online retailers. Their 
prices are often higher, but he says he now has a clear conscience.
Whereas the strategy of big e-commerce companies is to try 
to tightly connect consumers with discounted prices, free ship-
ping, and easy-to-use apps, the strategy of small retailers—like 
Hello Hello Books in Maine—is to discourage price comparisons 
(as in creating “buy it where you try it” campaigns or refusing to 
carry popular items carried by big retailers), offer freebies, and 
attempt to establish a personal or emotional connection with 
customers. They also try to exploit the sympathies of shoppers to 
“support the little guy,” as Pollack is doing.
YOUR CALL
Considering the proliferation of price comparison sites (Price-
grabber.com, Bizrate.com, FreePriceAlerts.com) that will usu-
ally direct consumers to big e-commerce retailers, do you think 
low prices will always win in the end? Is there any strategy a 
small retailer can take to maintain an advantage?17
EXAMPLE

162 
PART 3 
Planning
6.2 
The Strategic-Management Process
What’s the five-step recipe for the strategic-management process?
THE BIG PICTURE 
The strategic-management process has five steps: Establish the mission and the vision. Assess the current 
reality. Formulate the grand strategy. Implement the strategy. Maintain strategic control. All the steps may be 
affected by feedback that enables the taking of constructive action.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
When is a good time to begin the strategic-management process? Often it’s touched off 
by some crisis.
Back before General Motors recalled 25.69 million vehicles (in the first six months 
of 2014 alone) with defective ignition switches, Toyota went through its own recall 
crisis. In 2009 and 2010 the Japanese automaker encountered severe quality problems 
involving what seemed to be uncontrollable acceleration in its automobiles. Toyota 
Motor’s President Akio Toyoda concluded that these problems were partly due to the 
company’s “excessive focus on market share and profits,” requiring that the company 
reorient its strategy toward quality and innovation.18 For Edward Lampert, who in 
2005 merged Kmart and Sears into megaretailer Sears Holdings, the pressure was felt 
in years of underperforming returns despite cost cutting and store closures.19
EXAMPLE
Crisis Leading to the Strategic-Management Process: 
Starbucks Reclaims Its Soul
Among the many things that Starbucks has going for it is this: 
it survived a near-death experience.20
Today’s CEO, Howard Schultz, joined the Seattle-based 
company as marketing director in 1982, when it was only a 
small chain selling coffee equipment. Over nearly two decades, 
he gained control and, inspired by the coffee houses of Europe, 
transformed the company into a comfortable “third place” be-
tween home and work, a place with a neighborhood feel selling 
fresh-brewed by-the-cup lattes and cappuccinos. By 2000, 
Starbucks (named for the first mate of the whaling ship in Her-
man Melville’s Moby Dick) had become the world’s largest spe-
cialty coffee retailer, with 3,501 stores, 78% of them in the 
United States.21
“Starbucks became, for many of us, what we talk about 
when we talk about coffee,” wrote one reporter. “It changed 
how we drink it (on a sofa, with Wi-Fi, or on the subway), how 
we order it (‘for here, grande, two-pump vanilla, skinny extra 
hot latte’), and what we are willing to pay for it,” such as $4.99 
for a Frappuccino.”22
Schultz Steps Down. Schultz stepped down as CEO in 2000 (re-
maining as chairman), and for a while the business continued to 
thrive. Then two things happened that provoked a crisis. First, the 
company “lost a certain soul,” says Schultz, as the management 
became more concerned with profits than store atmosphere and 
company values and extended existing product lines rather than 
creating new ones. Second, as the Great Recession took hold in 
2007, tight-fisted consumers abandoned specialty coffees, caus-
ing the stock price to nosedive. In January 2008, after an eight-
year absence, Schultz returned as CEO.
The Reinvention Begins. “I didn’t come back to save the 
company—I hate that description,” Schultz told an interviewer. “I 
came back to rekindle the emotion that built it.”23
Among the risks he took to restore the company’s luster, he 
closed 800 U.S. stores, laid off 4,000 employees, and let go 
most top executives. As a morale booster, he flew 10,000 store 
managers to New Orleans, recently destroyed by Hurricane 
 Katrina. Along with attending strategy sessions, they bonded in 
community-service activities, contributing thousands of volun-
teer hours to helping to restore parts of the city. “We wanted to 
give back to that community post-Katrina,” says Schultz, “and 
remind and rekindle the organization with the values and guid-
ing principles of our company before we did a stitch of busi-
ness.” Later he closed all U.S. stores for half a day so baristas 
could be retrained in how to make espresso.
The Payoff. After a couple of years, the company turned 
around, the result of better operations, modernized technology, a 
reinvigorated staff, and innovations such as Via premium instant 

 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
163
The Five Steps of the Strategic-Management Process
The strategic-management process has five steps, plus a feedback loop, as shown be-
low. (See Figure 6.1.) Let’s consider these five steps.
coffee. (Since then it has acquired its own Costa Rican farm to 
develop proprietary coffee varieties; teamed with Oprah Winfrey 
to introduce Oprah Chai tea; acquired the La Boulange bakery 
chain; enabled customers to pay for coffee via a mobile-payment 
app; and even launched alcohol sales.)24 In mid-2014, it was 
serving more than 70 million customers face to face, in 20,200 
stores in 64 countries, and its stock price was nine times what it 
had been in 2008.25
Schultz feels strongly that “there’s an opportunity for 
businesses to demonstrate a role in society that’s beyond 
profitability,” providing health insurance even for temps, cre-
ating tuition reimbursement, helping to raise loans for small 
businesses.
YOUR CALL
Some critics feel Starbucks is the symbol of “affordable lux-
ury.” If we can’t afford a McMansion or a Lexus, says one ob-
server, we may be “willing to make that $5 splurge at Starbucks 
simply because it makes us feel a bit better about ourselves.”26
Thus, despite the innovation in products, attempts to rekindle 
the cozy neighborhood café, and emphasis on positive social 
values, do you think another economic downturn could alter 
Starbucks’s fortunes?
5. Maintain
strategic
control
Feedback:  Revise actions, if necessary, based on feedback
4. Implement
the strategy
2. Assess 
the current
reality
1. Establish
the mission
and the vision
3. Formulate the
grand strategy
FIGURE 6.1 
The strategic-management process
The process has five steps.
Step 1: Establish the Mission & the Vision 
We discussed mission and vision 
in Chapter 5 and explain them further in the next section. The mission, you’ll recall, is 
the organization’s purpose or reason for being, and it is expressed in a mission state-
ment. An organization’s vision is its long-term goal describing what it wants to be-
come, and it is expressed in a vision statement, which describes its long-term direction 
and strategic intent.
Step 2: Assess the Current Reality 
The second step is to do a current reality 
assessment, or organizational assessment—to look at where the organization stands 
and see what is working and what could be different so as to maximize efficiency and 
effectiveness in achieving the organization’s mission.27 Among the tools for assessing 
Starbucks in China. This coffee cafe is located in Chengdu in Sichuan 
province.

164 
PART 3 
Planning
the current reality are SWOT analysis, forecasting, benchmarking, and Porter’s model 
for industry analysis, all of which we discuss in Section 6.4.
Step 3: Formulate the Grand Strategy 
The next step is to translate the broad 
mission and vision statements into a grand strategy, which, after the assessment of the 
current reality, explains how the organization’s mission is to be accomplished. Three com-
mon grand strategies are growth, stability, and defensive, as we’ll describe.
Strategy formulation is the process of choosing among different strategies and al-
tering them to best fit the organization’s needs. Formulating strategy is a time-consum-
ing process both because it is important and because the strategy must be translated 
into more specific strategic plans, which determine what the organization’s long-term 
goals should be for the next 1–5 years.
In Section 6.5, we consider the three common grand strategies (growth, stability, 
and defensive); Porter’s four competitive strategies, single-product strategy versus di-
versification strategy, and the BCG matrix.
Step 4: Implement the Strategy 
Putting strategic plans into effect is strategy 
implementation. Strategic planning isn’t effective, of course, unless it can be trans-
lated into lower-level plans. This means that top managers need to check on possible 
roadblocks within the organization’s structure and culture and see if the right people 
and control systems are available to execute the plans.28
Step 5: Maintain Strategic Control: The Feedback Loop 
Strategic control 
consists of monitoring the execution of strategy and making adjustments, if necessary. 
To keep strategic plans on track, managers need control systems to monitor progress 
and take corrective action—early and rapidly—when things start to go awry. Correc-
tive action constitutes a feedback loop in which a problem requires that managers re-
turn to an earlier step to rethink policies, redo budgets, or revise personnel 
arrangements.
We describe strategic implementation and strategic control in Section 6.6.
We discuss the details of the steps in the strategic-management process in the rest of 
this chapter. ●
A public library’s new 
strategy. As Americans spend 
more time online, public 
libraries are having to find new 
strategies for remaining 
relevant. After the Skokie Public 
Library near Chicago put its 
reference collection online, it 
turned the newly freed-up 
space into a “fully functioning, 
Wi-Fi equipped office suite, 
capable of accommodating 
more than 50 people,” 
according to one report. “Users 
who can’t afford their own 
office space reserve it by the 
hour.”29 Can you think of other 
public or nonprofit institutions 
that need to reinvent themselves 
because information technology 
has altered their original purpose?

6.3 
Establishing the Mission & the Vision
What are the characteristics of good mission and vision statements?
THE BIG PICTURE 
A mission statement should express the organization’s purpose or reason for being. A vision statement 
should be positive and inspiring, and it should stretch the organization and its employees to achieve a 
desired future state that appears beyond its reach.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
165
Why am I here? What am I trying to do? What do I want to become?
These are bedrock questions that you should ask about your education. They are 
also the kind that top managers should ask about their organizations, whether profit or 
not-for-profit, as expressed in the mission statement and vision statement.
If you were called on to write a mission statement and a vision statement, how 
would you go about it?
Characteristics of a Good Mission Statement 
The mission, we said, is the organization’s purpose or reason for being; it is expressed 
in a mission statement. For example, the mission statement of McGraw-Hill, publisher 
of this book, is as follows:
To serve the worldwide need for knowledge at a fair profit by gathering, evalu-
ating, producing, and distributing valuable information in a way that benefits 
our customers, employees, authors, investors, and our society.
Family business. Do small, family-
owned businesses need a mission 
statement and a vision statement? 
If no, why not? How many small-
business owners with firms of, say, 
five employees or fewer, would you 
guess have taken the time to compose 
such statements?

166 
PART 3 
Planning
TABLE 6.1 
Mission Statements and Vision Statements
Sources: F. R. David, “How Companies Define Their Mission,” Long Range Planning, February 1989, pp. 90–97; and B. Nanus, Visionary Leadership: 
Creating a Compelling Sense of Direction for Your Organization (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1992), pp. 28–29.
MISSION STATEMENTS: DOES YOUR COMPANY’S MISSION STATEMENT ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS?
 1. Who are our customers?
 2. What are our major products or services?
 3. In what geographical areas do we compete?
 4. What is our basic technology?
 5. What is our commitment to economic objectives?
 6. What are our basic beliefs, values, aspirations, and philosophical priorities?
 7. What are our major strengths and competitive advantages?
 8. What are our public responsibilities, and what image do we wish to project?
 9. What is our attitude toward our employees?
VISION STATEMENTS: DOES YOUR COMPANY’S VISION STATEMENT ANSWER “YES” TO THESE QUESTIONS?
 1. Is it appropriate for the organization and for the times?
 2. Does it set standards of excellence and reflect high ideals?
 3. Does it clarify purpose and direction?
 4. Does it inspire enthusiasm and encourage commitment?
 5. Is it well articulated and easily understood?
 6. Does it reflect the uniqueness of the organization, its distinctive competence, what it stands for, what it’s able to achieve?
 7. Is it ambitious?
Characteristics of a Good Vision Statement 
An organization’s vision, its long-term goal of what it wants to become, is expressed 
in a vision statement, which describes its long-term direction and strategic intent. For 
example, Walt Disney’s original vision for Disneyland went in part like this:
Disneyland will be something of a fair, an exhibition, a playground, a commu-
nity center, a museum of living facts, and a showplace of beauty and magic. It 
will be filled with the accomplishments, the joys and hopes of the world we 
live in. And it will remind us and show us how to make those wonders part of 
our own lives.30
Although a vision statement can be short, it should be positive and inspiring, and it 
should stretch the organization and its employees to achieve a desired future state that 
appears beyond its reach. Google’s vision, for example, is “to organize the world’s 
information and make it universally accessible and useful.” Former Google CEO Eric 
Schmidt estimated that it might take 300 years to achieve the company’s vision, which 
would require Google to have strategic patience and to develop a grand strategy that is 
broad in focus.31
Guidelines for constructing powerful mission statements and vision statements are 
shown below. (See Table 6.1.) “Visions that have these properties challenge and inspire 
people in the organization and help align their energies in a common direction,” says 
Burt Nanus of the University of Southern California’s School of Business Administra-
tion. “They prevent people from being overwhelmed by immediate problems because 
they help distinguish what is truly important from what is merely interesting.”32 ●

Competitive intelligence 
venue. Since 1967, the 
International Consumer 
Electronics Show (CES) in Las 
Vegas has traditionally been a 
place where blockbuster 
products were introduced. 
Recently, however, the hottest 
gadgets from Apple, Amazon, 
and Microsoft have been 
unveiled in other, more exclusive 
venues. Still, CES remains the 
world’s largest consumer 
technology convention.
6.4 
Assessing the Current Reality
What tools can help me describe where the organization stands from a competitive 
point of view?
THE BIG PICTURE
To develop a grand strategy, you need to gather data and make projections, using the tools of competitive 
intelligence, SWOT analysis, forecasting, benchmarking, and Porter’s five competitive forces.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
The second step in the strategic-management process, assess the current reality, looks at 
where the organization stands internally and externally—to determine what’s working and 
what’s not, to see what can be changed so as to increase efficiency and effectiveness in 
achieving the organization’s vision. An assessment helps to create an objective view of 
 everything the organization does: its sources of revenue or funding, its work-flow processes, 
its organizational structure, client satisfaction, employee turnover, and other matters.33
Among the tools for assessing the current reality are competitive intelligence, SWOT 
analysis, forecasting, benchmarking, and Porter’s model for industry analysis.
Competitive Intelligence
Practicing competitive intelligence means gaining information about one’s competi-
tors’ activities so that you can anticipate their moves and react appropriately. If you are 
a manager, one of your worst nightmares is that a competitor will surprise you with a 
service or product—as boutique beers did major brewers and mountain bikes did ma-
jor bicycle makers—that will revolutionize the market and force you to try to play 
catch-up. Successful companies make it a point to conduct competitive intelligence.
 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
167

168 
PART 3 
Planning
Gaining competitive intelligence isn’t always easy, but there are several avenues—
and, surprisingly, most of them are public sources—including the following:
■ 
The public prints and advertising. A product may be worked on in secret 
for several years, but at some point it becomes subject to announcement—
through a press release, advertising piece, news leak, or the like. Much of 
this is available free through the Internet or by subscription to certain spe-
cialized databases, such as Nexus, which contains hundreds of thousands 
of news stories.
■ 
Investor information. Information about new products and services may also 
be available through the reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission and through corporate annual reports.
■ 
Informal sources. People in the consumer electronics industry every year 
look forward to major trade shows, such as the International Consumer Elec-
tronics Show in Las Vegas, when companies roll out their new products.34 At 
such times, people also engage in industry-gossip conversation to find out 
about future directions. Finally, salespeople and marketers, who are out call-
ing on corporate clients, may return with tidbits of information about what 
competitors are doing.
SWOT Analysis 
After competitive intelligence, the next point in establishing a grand strategy is 
environmental scanning, careful monitoring of an organization’s internal and exter-
nal environments to detect early signs of opportunities and threats that may influ-
ence the firm’s plans. The process for doing such scanning is SWOT analysis—also 
known as a situational analysis—which is a search for the Strengths, Weaknesses, 
Opportunities, and Threats affecting the organization. A SWOT analysis should pro-
vide you with a realistic understanding of your organization in relation to its inter-
nal and external environments so you can better formulate strategy in pursuit of its 
mission. (See Figure 6.2.)
INSIDE MATTERS—Analysis of Internal Strengths & Weaknesses
S—Strengths: inside matters
Strengths could be work processes,
organization, culture, staff, product quality,
production capacity, image, financial
resources & requirements, service levels,
other internal matters.
O—Opportunities: outside matters
Opportunities could be market segment
analysis, industry & competition analysis, 
impact of technology on organization,
product analysis, governmental impacts,
other external matters.
W—Weaknesses: inside matters
Weaknesses could be in the same 
categories as stated for Strengths: work
processes, organization, culture, etc.
T—Threats: outside matters
Threats could be in the same categories
as stated for Opportunities: market
segment analysis, etc.
OUTSIDE MATTERS—Analysis of External Opportunities & Threats
FIGURE 6.2 
Swot Analysis
SWOT stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats.

 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
169
The SWOT analysis is divided into two parts: inside matters and outside matters—
that is, an analysis of internal strengths and weaknesses and an analysis of external 
opportunities and threats. The following table gives examples of SWOT characteris-
tics that might apply to a college. (See Table. 6.2.)
S—STRENGTHS  
W—WEAKNESSES
(INTERNAL STRENGTHS) 
(INTERNAL WEAKNESSES)
• 
Faculty teaching and research abilities 
• 
Limited programs in business
• 
High-ability students 
• 
High teaching loads
• 
Loyal alumni 
• 
Insufficient racial diversity
• 
Strong interdisciplinary programs 
• 
Lack of high-technology infrastructure
O—OPPORTUNITIES  
T—THREATS
(EXTERNAL OPPORTUNITIES) 
(EXTERNAL THREATS)
• 
Growth in many local skilled jobs 
• 
Depressed state and national economy
• 
Many firms give equipment to college 
• 
High schools enrollments in decline
• 
Local minority population increasing 
• 
Increased competition from other colleges
• 
High school students take college classes 
• 
Funding from all sources at risk
TABLE 6.2 
SWOT Characteristics That Might Apply to a College
Inside Matters: Analysis of Internal Strengths & Weaknesses 
Does your 
organization have a skilled workforce? a superior reputation? strong financing? These 
are examples of organizational strengths—the skills and capabilities that give the or-
ganization special competencies and competitive advantages in executing strategies in 
pursuit of its vision.
Or does your organization have obsolete technology? outdated facilities? a shaky 
marketing operation? These are examples of organizational weaknesses—the draw-
backs that hinder an organization in executing strategies in pursuit of its vision.
Outside Matters: Analysis of External Opportunities & Threats 
Is your 
organization fortunate to have weak rivals? emerging markets? a booming economy? 
These are instances of organizational opportunities—environmental factors that the 
organization may exploit for competitive advantage.
Alternatively, is your organization having to deal with new regulations? a shortage 
of resources? substitute products? These are some possible organizational threats—
environmental factors that hinder an organization’s achieving a competitive advantage.
SWOT Analysis: How Would You Analyze Toyota?
“I fear the pace at which we have grown may have been too 
quick,” said Akio Toyoda, the grandson of Toyota Motor’s 
founder, in 2010 testimony before a U.S. congressional com-
mittee looking into sudden acceleration problems. “Priorities 
became confused, and we were not able to stop, think, and 
make improvements as much as we were able to before.”35 
Toyota’s U.S. sales fell 9% that month because of safety-
related recalls of millions of vehicles, and by late 2010 journalists 
were writing that the company had lost its edge.36 By the end 
of 2011, Toyota Motor, formerly the world’s largest automaker, 
had slipped to third place in production behind General Motors 
and Volkswagen.
EXAMPLE

170 
PART 3 
Planning
Toyota’s new young president, Akio Toyoda, whose motto is 
“be fast, be flexible,” energetically took on the automaker’s 
problems, traveling to the United States to fire up dealers, per-
sonally taking charge of the sagging Lexus brand, and rede-
signing the firm’s reporting system and flattening the 
management hierarchy.37 In late 2013, profits were up 70%, 
close to their previous record high, and the company had dis-
placed General Motors as the world’s largest automaker; by the 
following year, net profit was up more than fivefold.38
Still, the challenges have kept on coming. If you were a top 
Toyota manager, what would be the kinds of things you would 
identify in a SWOT analysis?
The Internal Strengths. Originally the “Toyota Way,” as prac-
ticed from assembly line to boardroom, stressed the values of 
continuous improvement (“kaizen”) and eliminating waste 
(“muda”). The Toyota Way, says 
one report, “mandates planning 
for the long term; highlighting 
problems instead of hiding 
them; encouraging teamwork 
with colleagues and suppliers; 
and, perhaps most important, 
instilling a self-critical culture 
that fosters continuous and un-
relenting improvement.”39 De-
veloped in the 1950s, these 
precepts later became the ba-
sis for such concepts as lean 
manufacturing and just-in-time 
inventory management (dis-
cussed in Chapter 2). 
“At their core,” says one 
analysis, “was an attention to detail and a noble frugality that 
shunned waste of every kind.”40 Said its top engineer, “Basi-
cally, Toyota’s growth has been underpinned by QDR [quality, 
dependability, reliability] that was very high compared with 
competitors’.”41 As of 2014, Toyota continues to lead most 
other car companies in quality rankings: All three of its 2011 
brands appeared in the top 10 J.D. Power 2014 rankings for 
reliability, with 15 Toyota, Lexus, and Scion models winning or 
tied for first place in their vehicle categories.42
The Internal Weaknesses. In the 1990s, Toyota launched an 
effort to become the world’s largest automaker, embarking on 
aggressive overseas expansion and doubling its plants in 
North America, Asia, and Europe. During this time, the focus 
on cost reduction intensified to the point that the virtue be-
came a vice. Suppliers were continually pushed to design 
parts that were 10% cheaper and 10% lighter. Common parts 
were used in most Toyota models, acquired from outside com-
panies instead of trusted traditional suppliers.43 Toyota also 
began to treat its cars like “transportation appliances,” caus-
ing it to fall behind in design leadership, making buyers feel 
less of an emotional connection with Toyota products. The 
company was said to have succumbed to “big-company dis-
ease,” becoming ponderous and bureaucratic, with every de-
cision tightly controlled in Japan, to the detriment of its 
managers in the United States.44
Then suddenly, from 2000 to 2010, driver complaints to the 
National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration about “ve-
hicle speed control” issues soared, with 11.7% of faulty vehicle 
components identified as Toyota’s.45 Next came widely publi-
cized problems with sticking accelerators, prompting two huge 
recalls of 10 million vehicles and suspension of the sales and 
production of eight models in the American market.46 Later it 
developed that the “unintended acceleration” was probably 
caused by sticky pedals or floor mats rather than Toyota elec-
tronics (although some critics thought it traced to driver error).47 
By then, however, the damage to Toyota’s vaunted reputation for 
quality was severe. “When your 
whole deal was quality, every 
mistake is a big deal,” said a 
manufacturing expert.48
In 2014, Toyota agreed to a 
$1.2 billion penalty to end a 
U.S. criminal probe into the 
sudden-acceleration prob-
lems.49 No sooner had it done 
so, however, than the compa-
ny’s reputation for reliability 
and assembly-line mastery 
took another massive hit, when 
Toyota was forced to recall 6.4 
million vehicles for five poten-
tial hazards, including faulty 
power-window switches, pos-
sibly unstable steering column brackets, and potential hin-
drances to deployment of driver’s-side airbags.50
The External Opportunities. Although slow to awaken to its 
quality problems in 2009–2010, the company went into full PR 
battle mode, moving to discredit critics who blamed accelerator 
problems on faulty electronics and stressing its commitment to its 
millions of U.S. customers.51 Today, under the new president’s di-
rection, the 1950s-style traditional organization has been mod-
ernized, with layers of management removed and with Akio 
meeting weekly with five top advisors to make on-the-spot deci-
sions. The company has also reorganized its vehicle-development 
system to speed decision making, cut costs, and generate more 
world-wide appeal.52
In addition, Toyota moved to give its cars more exciting de-
signs, taking initiatives to “improve upon the emotion of cars” 
with better styling and high-quality interiors.53 It joined forces 
with Ford to develop a gas-electric hybrid fuel system for 
trucks and sport utility vehicles and has continued to push 
green technology, as with the plug-in Prius and a new concept 
car powered by hydrogen fuel cells.54 It launched the sporty 
$375,000 Lexus LFA, a carbon fiber supercar.
Toyota. How fast, how flexible?

 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
171
quality gap, with the Ford Fusion, Hyundai Sonata, Volkswagen 
Passat, and other midsize vehicles severely impacting sales of the 
Toyota Camry.58
By 2011, Toyota’s market share in the United States had 
fallen all the way from 18.3% to 12.9%, recovering to 14.3% in 
2013, putting it in third place behind General Motors at 17.9% 
and Ford at 15.9% (Chrysler had 11.5%).59 According to one 
source, Toyota was predicted to achieve an American market 
share of 14.6% in 2015.60
YOUR CALL
“Comfortably preoccupied with rooting out internal weakness,” 
said one writer in 2010, “the Toyota Way is lost when it comes 
to contending with outside threats. . . . If a flaw does get 
through, the company as a whole is loath to admit that the 
system broke down.”61 Do you agree? How well do you think 
Akio Toyoda is doing in dealing with Toyota’s threats and op-
portunities, both internal and external?
General Motors’s fatal ignition switch mistakes, described by 
GM’s own CEO, Mary Barra, as representing “a pattern of incom-
petence and neglect,” and the recall of 2.6 million 2000–2011 
small cars worldwide (for a total of 11.2 million vehicles in 2014) 
presents Toyota with an unprecedented opportunity to grab its 
rival’s customers.55 Will Toyota benefit from this development—
especially in light of its own 2014 recall announcement?
The External Threats. Toyota was able to work past its 
accelerator-sticking troubles of 2009–2010, which presented its 
American and European rivals with a chance to cut into the Japanese 
automaker’s market share.56 Toyota also faced the worldwide 
Great Recession, which damaged auto spending. In addition, 
Toyota had to face setbacks brought about by the 2011 deadly 
earthquake and tsunami, which devastated plants in the north of 
Japan and disrupted the supply of over 500 parts; flooding in 
Thailand, which led to new supply difficulties; and currency prob-
lems of a strong yen against a weak U.S. dollar, which further re-
duced revenues.57 Finally, Toyota competitors began to close the 
Forecasting: Predicting the Future
Once they’ve analyzed their organization’s Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and 
Threats, planners need to do forecasting for making long-term strategy. A forecast is a 
vision or projection of the future.
Lots of people make predictions, of course—and often they are wrong. In the 1950s, 
the head of IBM, Thomas J. Watson, estimated that the demand for computers would 
never exceed more than five for the entire world. In the late 1990s, many computer 
experts predicted power outages, water problems, transportation disruptions, bank 
shutdowns, and far worse because of computer glitches (the “Y2K bug”) associated 
with the change from year 1999 to 2000.
Of course, the farther into the future one makes a prediction, the more difficult it is 
to be accurate, especially in matters of technology. Yet forecasting is a necessary part 
of planning.
Two types of forecasting are trend analysis and contingency planning.
Trend Analysis 
A trend analysis is a hypothetical extension of a past series of 
events into the future. The basic assumption is that the picture of the present can be 
projected into the future. This is not a bad assumption, if you have enough historical 
data, but it is always subject to surprises. And if your data are unreliable, they will 
produce erroneous trend projections.
An example of trend analysis is a time-series forecast, which predicts future data 
based on patterns of historical data. Time-series forecasts are used to predict long-term 
trends, cyclic patterns (as in the up-and-down nature of the business cycle), and sea-
sonal variations (as in Christmas sales versus summer sales).
Contingency Planning: Predicting Alternative Futures 
Contingency 
planning—also known as scenario planning and scenario analysis—is the creation of 
alternative hypothetical but equally likely future conditions. For example, scenarios may 
be created with spreadsheet software such as Microsoft Excel to present alternative 
combinations of different factors—different economic pictures, different strategies by 
competitors, different budgets, and so on.

172 
PART 3 
Planning
Climate change damage? 
With so much storm damage, 
such as that in 2012 when 
Hurricane Sandy hit the New 
Jersey coast, what kind of 
contingency planning should 
insurance companies do?
EXAMPLE
Contingency Planning for Climate Change: Drought, Rain, & Fire
Several U.S. government agencies have launched contingency 
planning to prepare for the effects of climate change—from 
the Navy studying the threat of rising seas to naval operations 
to the Department of Agriculture’s planning for possible effects 
of drought and wildfire on agriculture and livestock to the De-
partment of Transportation’s exploration of risk of high tem-
peratures on highways and bridges. Even some governments 
of coastal cities, such as those in Florida and Virginia, are trying 
to make plans to anticipate the effect of rising oceans on their 
infrastructures.62
But what kinds of contingency planning is being done in 
private industry for the impact of climate change? Many CEOs 
of energy, food, and food distribution companies, for example, 
are reportedly not unduly concerned about the effect of global 
warming on their businesses.63 But shouldn’t the top managers 
of insurance companies be?
The Evidence of the Present.  “Climate change, once consid-
ered an issue for a distant future, has moved firmly into the pres-
ent,” says the 2014 National Climate Assessment.64 “From 
Hurricane Sandy’s devastating blow to the Northeast to the pro-
tracted drought that hit the Midwest Corn Belt,” pointed out eco-
nomic writer Eduardo Porter, “natural catastrophes pounded 
insurers [in 2012], generating $35 billion in privately insured prop-
erty damage, $11 billion more than the average over the last de-
cade.”65 The insurance industry, he reported, expected the situation 
to get worse, a view reinforced by a 2014 report by the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change, a United Nations group.66
Anticipating the Worst? Despite the mounting weather-
related claims, which included damage by floods and wildfires, a 
report by Ceres, a Boston-based nonprofit promoting eco-minded 
business practices, said most U.S. insurance companies, large 
and small, did not have comprehensive strategies to cope with 
climate change.67 “Of 184 companies surveyed,” says one 
account, “only 23 had such strategies, and 13 of those were 
foreign-owned.”68
However, research by a scientist at the federally funded 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, which studied large 
global insurers, said the industry was stepping up to the chal-
lenge, having made 1,148 efforts to adapt and mitigate climate 
change.69
Whatever the past behavior, the Geneva Association, an in-
ternational think tank for strategically important insurance and 
risk management issues, called on insurers to start setting 
rates “based on climate-modeling scenarios rather than his-
toric trends traditionally employed.”70
YOUR CALL
Based on contingency planning for climate variability and 
volatility in every part of the globe, what is the responsibil-
ity of insurance companies? Just try to avoid catastrophic 
losses by raising premiums, adding exclusions, and refus-
ing to cover high-risk communities? Or try to educate con-
sumers about building more resilient structures in less 
risky areas?

 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
173
Because the scenarios try to peer far into the future—perhaps five or more years—
they are necessarily written in rather general terms. Nevertheless, the great value of 
contingency planning is that it not only equips an organization to prepare for emergen-
cies and uncertainty, it also gets managers thinking strategically.
Benchmarking: Comparing with the Best
Benchmarking is a process by which a company compares its performance with that of 
high-performing organizations.71 Professional sports teams do this all the time, but so 
do other kinds of organizations, including nonprofit ones. Example: Airlines use such 
benchmarks as average turnaround time, on-time arrivals, cost per seat per passenger 
mile, fuel cost, numbers of lost bags, and so on. At Xerox Corp., generally thought to 
be the first American company to use benchmarking, it is defined as, in one descrip-
tion, “the continuous process of measuring products, services, and practices against 
the toughest competitors or those companies recognized as industry leaders.”72
Porter’s Five Competitive Forces
What determines competitiveness within a particular industry? After studying several 
kinds of businesses, strategic-management expert Michael Porter suggested in his 
Porter’s model for industry analysis that business-level strategies originate in five 
primary competitive forces in the firm’s environment: (1) threats of new entrants, 
(2) bargaining power of suppliers, (3) bargaining power of buyers, (4) threats of substitute 
products or services, and (5) rivalry among competitors.73
1. Threats of New Entrants 
New competitors can affect an industry almost over-
night, taking away customers from existing organizations. Example: Kraft Macaroni & 
Cheese is a venerable, well-known brand but is threatened from the low end by store 
brands, such as Walmart’s brand, and from the high end by Annie’s Organic & Natural 
Mac and Cheese.
Threat of new entrants. McDonald’s 
is being threatened by new so-called 
fast-casual restaurants  such as 
Chipotle and Five Guys, which attract 
customers in their 20s and 30s, who 
are seeking fresher, healthier food and 
customizable menu options. What’s 
your opinion of these new chains 
compared to the older ones?

174 
PART 3 
Planning
2. Bargaining Power of Suppliers 
Some companies are readily able to switch 
suppliers in order to get components or services, but others are not. Example: Clark 
Foam of Laguna Niguel, California, supplied nearly 90% of the foam cores used do-
mestically to make custom surfboards. When it suddenly closed shop in late 2005, 
blaming government agencies for trying to shut it down, many independent board 
shapers and small retailers found they couldn’t afford to get foam from outside the 
country. On the other hand, Surftech in Santa Cruz, California, was one of the few 
board manufacturers to use resin instead of foam, and so it saw a spike in sales.74
3. Bargaining Power of Buyers 
Customers who buy a lot of products or services 
from an organization have more bargaining power than those who don’t. Customers 
who use the Internet to shop around are also better able to negotiate a better price. Ex-
ample: Buying a car used to be pretty much a local activity, but now potential car buyers 
can use the Internet to scout a range of offerings within a 100-mile or larger radius, 
giving them the power to force down the asking price of any one particular seller.
4. Threats of Substitute Products or Services 
Again, particularly because of 
the Internet, an organization is in a better position to switch to other products or ser-
vices when circumstances threaten their usual channels. Example: Oil companies wor-
ried when Brazil achieved energy self-sufficiency in 2006, able to meet its growing 
demand for vehicle fuel by substituting ethanol derived from sugar cane for 
petroleum—until 2007, when population and economic growth forced the country to 
start importing oil again.75
5. Rivalry among Competitors 
The preceding four forces influence the fifth 
force, rivalry among competitors. Think of the wild competition among makers 
and sellers of portable electronics, ranging from smartphones to tablets to videogame 
systems. Once again, the Internet has intensified rivalries among all kinds 
of organizations.
An organization should do a good SWOT analysis that examines these five competi-
tive forces, Porter felt. Then it was in a position to formulate effective strategy, using 
what he identified as four competitive strategies, as we discuss in the next section.
To what extent do you think that a current or past employer was good at strategic 
thinking? Based on past research, firms that are better at strategic thinking should out-
perform those that are not. You can assess the strategic thinking of a current or past 
employer by taking Self-Assessment 6.1. ●
Assessing Strategic Thinking
This survey is designed to assess an organization’s level 
of strategic thinking. Go to connect.mheducation.com and 
take Self-Assessment 6.1. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
What is the level of strategic thinking? Are you surprised 
by the results?
2. 
If you were meeting with an executive from the company 
you evaluated, what advice would you provide based on 
the survey results and what you learned about assessing 
current reality?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 6.1
®

6.5 
Formulating the Grand Strategy 
How can three techniques—Porter’s four competitive strategies, diversification and 
synergy, and the BCG matrix—help me formulate strategy?
THE BIG PICTURE
Strategies may be growth, stability, or defensive strategies. Strategy formulation makes use of several con-
cepts, including Porter’s four competitive strategies, diversification and synergy, and the BCG matrix.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION 
After assessing the current reality (Step 2 in the strategic-management process), it’s 
time to turn to strategy formulation—developing a grand strategy (Step 3). Examples 
of techniques that can be used to formulate strategy are Porter’s four competitive strat-
egies, diversification and synergy, and the BCG matrix.
The grand strategy must then be translated into more specific strategic plans, which 
determine what the organization’s long-term goals should be for the next 1–5 years. 
These should communicate not only the organization’s general goals about growth and 
profits but also information about how these goals will be achieved. Moreover, like all 
goals, they should be SMART—Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Results-oriented, 
and specifying Target dates (Chapter 5).
Three Common Grand Strategies
The three common grand strategies are growth, stability, and defensive.
1. The Growth Strategy 
A growth strategy is a grand strategy that involves 
expansion—as in sales revenues, market share, number of employees, or number of cus-
tomers or (for nonprofits) clients served. Example: IBM under its previous CEO, Samuel 
J. Palmisano, decided to get out of low-profit businesses that were fading, such as the 
personal computer business, and shift to services and software, often delivered over the 
Internet from data centers connecting all kinds of devices—the growth business of cloud 
computing.76 (Since then, however, the company has had a “rocky time,” says present 
CEO Virginia Rometty, as IBM found itself lagging in cloud computing sales, having 
lost important business to Amazon, and is now attempting to refocus its business.)77
2. The Stability Strategy 
A stability strategy is a grand strategy that involves 
little or no significant change. Example: Without much changing their product, the 
makers of Timex watches decided to stress the theme of authenticity (“Wear it well”) 
over durability (the old slogan was “It takes a licking and keeps on ticking”). In an age 
of smartphones and other gadgets, when people don’t need a watch to tell the time, the 
new theme of authenticity makes sense, according to The New York Times, “as con-
sumers watching what they spend seek out products with longevity whose ability to 
stand the test of time implies they are worth buying.”78
3. The Defensive Strategy 
A defensive strategy, or a retrenchment strategy, is a 
grand strategy that involves reduction in the organization’s efforts. Example: Redbox, 
which installed more than 40,000 DVD movie-rental kiosks in groceries, 7-Elevens, and 
Walmart stores during a seven-year growth period, in 2014 began uninstalling kiosks 
(more than 500 in the United States) and switching to a defensive strategy. Not only had 
the company run out of good locations in which to place its machines, it was also con-
tending with challenges from online streaming and more original television programs.79
 Variations of the three strategies are shown on the next page. (See Table 6.3.)
 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
175

176 
PART 3 
Planning
Porter’s Four Competitive Strategies
Porter’s four competitive strategies (also called four generic 
strategies) are (1) cost-leadership, (2) differentiation, (3) cost-
focus, and (4) focused-differentiation.80 The first two strate-
gies focus on wide markets, the last two on narrow markets. 
(See Figure 6.3.) Time Warner, which produces lots of media 
and publications, serves wide markets around the world. Your 
neighborhood video store (if one still exists) serves a narrow 
market of just local customers.
Let’s look at these four strategies.
1. Cost-Leadership Strategy: Keeping Costs & Prices 
Low for a Wide Market 
The cost-leadership strategy is to 
keep the costs, and hence prices, of a product or service below those of competitors 
and to target a wide market.
This puts the pressure on R&D managers to develop products or services that can 
be created cheaply, production managers to reduce production costs, and marketing 
managers to reach a wide variety of customers as inexpensively as possible.
Firms implementing the cost-leadership strategy include Timex, computer maker 
Acer, hardware retailer Home Depot, and pen maker Bic.
2. Differentiation Strategy: Offering Unique & Superior Value for a 
Wide Market 
The differentiation strategy is to offer products or services that are 
of unique and superior value compared with those of competitors but to target a wide 
market.
Because products are expensive, managers may have to spend more on R&D, mar-
keting, and customer service. This is the strategy followed by Ritz-Carlton hotels and 
the makers of Lexus automobiles.
GROWTH STRATEGY
• 
It can improve an existing product or service to attract more buyers.
• 
It can increase its promotion and marketing efforts to try to expand its market share.
• 
It can expand its operations, as in taking over distribution or manufacturing previously handled 
by someone else.
• 
It can expand into new products or services.
• 
It can acquire similar or complementary businesses.
• 
It can merge with another company to form a larger company.
STABILITY STRATEGY
• 
It can go for a no-change strategy (if, for example, it has found that too-fast growth leads to 
foul-ups with orders and customer complaints).
• 
It can go for a little-change strategy (if, for example, the company has been growing at breakneck 
speed and feels it needs a period of consolidation).
DEFENSIVE STRATEGY
• 
It can reduce costs, as by freezing hiring or tightening expenses.
• 
It can sell off (liquidate) assets—land, buildings, inventories, and the like.
• 
It can gradually phase out product lines or services.
• 
It can divest part of its business, as in selling off entire divisions or subsidiaries.
• 
It can declare bankruptcy.
• 
It can attempt a turnaround—do some retrenching, with a view toward restoring profitability.
TABLE 6.3
How a Company Can 
Implement a Grand Strategy
Strategy
Wide
Type of
market targeted
Narrow
1. Cost-leadership
2. Differentiation
3. Cost-focus
4. Focused-differentiation
FIGURE 6.3 
Porter’s four competitive strategies

 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
177
Focused differentiation. The 
world’s largest cruise ship, the 
1,181-foot-long, 16-deck MS 
Allure of the Seas, features such 
amenities as four swimming 
pools, a skating rink, a small 
golf course, volleyball and 
basketball courts, a multi-deck 
dining room that can seat 
3,000, and lavish lodging 
quarters. Clearly, there’s 
something here for everyone—
if you can afford it.
The strategy is also pursued by companies trying to create brands to differentiate 
themselves from competitors. Although Coca-Cola may cost only cents more than a 
supermarket’s own house brand of cola, Coke spends millions on ads.
3. Cost-Focus Strategy: Keeping Costs & Prices Low for a Narrow Market 
The cost-focus strategy is to keep the costs, and hence prices, of a product or service 
below those of competitors and to target a narrow market.
This is a strategy you often see executed with low-
end products sold in discount stores, such as low-cost 
beer or cigarettes, or with regional gas stations, such as 
the Terrible Herbst, Rotten Robbie, and Maverik 
chains in parts of the West.
Needless to say, the pressure on managers to keep 
costs down is even more intense than it is with those in 
cost-leadership companies.
4. Focused-Differentiation Strategy: Offering 
Unique & Superior Value for a Narrow Market 
The focused-differentiation strategy is to offer prod-
ucts or services that are of unique and superior value 
compared to those of competitors and to target a 
narrow market.
Some luxury cars are so expensive—Rolls-Royce, Ferrari, Lamborghini—that only 
a few car buyers can afford them. Other companies following the strategy are jeweler 
Cartier and shirtmaker Turnbull & Asser. Yet focused-differentiation products need not 
be expensive. The publisher Chelsea Green has found success with niche books, such 
as The Straw Bale House.
Single-Product Strategy versus 
Diversification Strategy
A company also needs to think about whether to have a single-product strategy or a 
diversification strategy. After all, if you have only one product to sell, what do you do 
if that product fails?
The Single-Product Strategy: Focused but Vulnerable 
In a single-product 
strategy, a company makes and sells only one product within its market. This is the 
kind of strategy you see all the time as you drive past the small retail businesses in a 
small town: There may be one shop that sells only flowers, one that sells only security 
systems, and so on.
The single-product strategy has both positives and negatives:
■ 
The benefit—focus. Making just one product allows you to focus your 
manufacturing and marketing efforts just on that product. This means 
that your company can become savvy about repairing defects, upgrading 
production lines, scouting the competition, and doing highly focused adver-
tising and sales.
 
A small-business example: Green Toys of Mill Valley, California, makes all 
its toddler tea sets, toy trucks, and building blocks out of plastic recycled from 
milk jugs and, in a strategy called “reverse globalization,” carries out all its op-
erations in California, a push back against offshoring and outsourcing.81 Another 
example: See’s Candies, a chain of 200 stores throughout the West, specializes in 
making boxed chocolates—something it does so well that when See’s was 
acquired by Berkshire Hathaway, its corporate owner chose not to tamper with 
success and runs it with a “hands-off” policy.

178 
PART 3 
Planning
■ 
The risk—vulnerability. The risk, of course, is that if you do not focus on all 
aspects of the business, if a rival gets the jump on you, or if an act of God in-
tervenes (for a florist, roses suffer a blight right before Mother’s Day), your 
entire business may go under.
 
Example: Indian Motorcycle Company, once a worthy rival to Harley-
Davidson, sold only motorcycles. It went bankrupt twice, the second time be-
cause of quality problems, notably an overheating engine. (Purchased by Polaris 
Industries in 2011, it is presently being manufactured in Spirit Lake, Iowa.)82
The Diversification Strategy: Operating Different Businesses to Spread 
the Risk 
The obvious answer to the risks of a single-product strategy is diversification, 
operating several businesses in order to spread the risk. You see this at the small 
retailer level when you drive past a store that sells gas and food and souvenirs and 
rents DVD movies.
There are two kinds of diversification—unrelated and related.
Unrelated Diversification: Independent Business Lines If you operate a 
small shop that sells flowers on one side and computers on the other, you are exercis-
ing a strategy of unrelated diversification—operating several businesses under one 
ownership that are not related to one another. This has been a common big-company 
strategy. General Electric, for instance, which began by making lighting products, di-
versified into such unrelated areas as plastics, broadcasting, and financial services. 
Disney, Time Warner, and Sony run different divisions specializing in television, mu-
sic, publishing, and the like.
Related Diversification: Related Business Lines In some parts of the 
world you have to do all your grocery shopping in separate stores—the butcher, the 
baker, the greengrocer, and so on. In most U.S. grocery stores, all these businesses ap-
pear under the same roof, an example of the strategy of related diversification, in which 
an organization under one ownership operates separate businesses that are related to 
one another. A big-company example: The famous British raincoat maker Burberry 
started by making and marketing outerwear clothing but since then has expanded into 
related business lines, including accessories such as umbrellas, children’s clothing, 
and even fragrances, which it sells in its own stores.
Related diversification has three advantages:
■ 
Reduced risk—because more than one product. If one product is weak, 
others may take up the slack. Example: When rainwear sales are slow, Bur-
berry’s economic risk is reduced by sales of its other product lines, such as 
children’s clothes.
■ 
Management efficiencies—administration spread over several businesses. 
Whatever the business, it usually has certain obligatory administrative costs—
accounting, legal, taxes, and so on. Example: Burberry need not have separate 
versions of these for each business line. Rather, it can actually save money by 
using the same administrative services for all its businesses.
■ 
Synergy—the sum is greater than the parts. When a company has special 
strengths in one business, it can apply those to its other related businesses. 
Example: PepsiCo can apply its marketing muscle not only to Pepsi Cola 
but also to 7-Up and Mountain Dew, which it also owns. This is an example 
of synergy—the economic value of separate, related businesses under one 
ownership and management is greater together than the businesses are 
worth separately.
An example of a company that went from a single-product strategy to a diversifica-
tion strategy is Skilled Manufacturing Inc. of Traverse City, Michigan, which used to 
supply power-train components to the auto industry, but shuttered one of its two Michigan 

 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
179
plants in 2005 after one of its automotive clients moved the work to Mexico. Now 
it has reopened the factory because it has branched out to other sectors, such as 
aerospace, in addition to continuing to serve the auto industry.83
The BCG Matrix
Developed by the Boston Consulting Group, the BCG matrix is a means of evaluating 
strategic business units on the basis of (1) their business growth rates and (2) their 
share of the market. Business growth rate is concerned with how fast the entire indus-
try is increasing. Market share is concerned with the business unit’s share of the mar-
ket in relation to competitors.
In general, the BCG matrix suggests that an organization will do better in fast-growing 
markets in which it has a high market share rather than in slow-growing markets in 
which it has a low market share. These concepts are illustrated below. (See Figure 6.4.)
FIGURE 6.4
The BCG matrix
Market growth is divided into 
two categories, low and high. 
Market share is also divided into 
low and high. Thus, in this 
matrix, “Stars” are business 
units that are highly desirable 
(high growth, high market 
share), compared to “Dogs,” 
which are not so desirable (low 
growth, low market share).
High
High
Stars
Have high growth, high
market share—definite
keepers
Cash cows
Have slow growth but
high market share—
income finances stars
and question marks
Question marks
Risky new ventures—
some will become stars,
some dogs
Dogs
Have low growth, low
market share—should
be gotten rid of
Market
growth
rate
Market share
Low
Low
Now that you have learned about the tools companies use to create their grand 
strategies, what type of skills do you think managers need to use these tools? Do you 
think you possess those skills? If you are curious, then we encourage you to take 
Self-Assessment 6.2. ●
Core Skills Required for Strategic Planning
This survey is designed to assess the skills needed in strategic 
planning. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-
Assessment 6.2. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
Do you have what it takes? Are you surprised by the results?
2. 
Based on the results, what are your top two strengths 
and deficiencies when it comes to strategic planning?
3. 
Assuming you wanted to do strategic planning at some 
point in your career, what can you do to improve your 
skills associated with strategic planning? Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 6.2
®

6.6 
Implementing & Controlling Strategy: Execution 
How does effective execution help managers during the strategic-management 
process?
THE BIG PICTURE
Strategic implementation is closely aligned with strategic control. Execution is a process that helps align 
these two phases of the strategic-management process.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Stage 1 of the strategic-management process was establishing the mission and the 
vision. Stage 2 was assessing the current reality. Stage 3 was formulating the grand 
strategy. Now we come to the last two stages—4, strategic implementation, and 5, 
strategic control.
Implementing the Strategy
Strategy implementation is putting strategic plans into effect. As we said, this means 
dealing with roadblocks within the organization’s structure and culture and seeing if 
the right people and control systems are available to execute the plans.
Often implementation means overcoming resistance by people who feel the plans 
threaten their influence or livelihood. This is particularly the case when the plans must 
be implemented rapidly, since delay is the easiest kind of resistance there is (all kinds 
of excuses are usually available to justify delays). Thus, top managers can’t just an-
nounce the plans; they have to actively sell them to middle and supervisory managers.
Maintaining Strategic Control
Strategic control consists of monitoring the execution of strategy and taking corrective 
action, if necessary. To keep a strategic plan on track, suggests Bryan Barry, you need 
to do the following:84
■ 
Engage people. You need to actively engage people in clarifying what your 
group hopes to accomplish and how you will accomplish it.
■ 
Keep it simple. Keep your planning simple, unless there’s a good reason to 
make it more complex.
■ 
Stay focused. Stay focused on the important things.
■ 
Keep moving. Keep moving toward your vision of the future, adjusting your 
plans as you learn what works.
Execution: Getting Things Done
In implementing strategy and maintaining strategic 
control, what we are talking about is effective execu-
tion. Larry Bossidy, former CEO of AlliedSignal 
(later Honeywell), and Ram Charan, a business ad-
viser to senior executives, are authors of Execution: 
The Discipline of Getting Things Done.85 Execution,
they say, is not simply tactics, it is a central part of 
any company’s strategy. It consists of using question-
ing, analysis, and follow-through to mesh strategy 
with reality, align people with goals, and achieve 
results promised.
180 
PART 3 
Planning
Execution. Occupying a 
sprawling campus in Cary, North 
Carolina, software maker SAS 
has always been ranked in the 
top three positions on Fortune’s 
lists of “100 Best Companies to 
Work For” (No. 1 in 2010 and 
2011, No. 2 in 2013 and 2014, 
and No. 3 in 2012). Its ability to 
execute effectively has also 
made it highly profitable and the 
world’s largest privately owned 
software company.

 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
181
How important is execution to organizational success in today’s global economy? A 
survey of 769 global CEOs from 40 countries revealed that “excellence in execution” 
was their most important concern—more important than “profit growth,” “customer 
loyalty,” “stimulating innovation,” and “finding qualified employees.”86
Bossidy and Charan outline how organizations and managers can improve the ability 
to execute. Effective execution requires managers to build a foundation for execution 
within three core processes found in any business: people, strategy, and operations.87
The Three Core Processes of Business: People, 
Strategy, & Operations
A company’s overall ability to execute is a function of effectively executing according 
to three processes: people, strategy, and operations. Because all work ultimately en-
tails some human interaction, effort, or involvement, Bossidy and Charan believe that 
the people process is the most important.
The First Core Process—People: “You Need to Consider Who Will Benefit 
You in the Future” 
“If you don’t get the people process right,” say Bossidy and 
Charan, “you will never fulfill the potential of your business.” But today most organi-
zations focus on evaluating the jobs people are doing at present, rather than consider-
ing which individuals can handle the jobs of the future. An effective leader tries to 
evaluate talent by linking people to particular strategic milestones, developing future 
leaders, dealing with nonperformers, and transforming the mission and operations of 
the human resource department.
The Second Core Process—Strategy: “You Need to Consider How Suc-
cess Will Be Accomplished” 
In most organizations, the strategies developed 
fail to consider the “how” of execution. According to the authors, a good strategic plan 
addresses nine questions. (See Table 6.4.) In considering whether the organization can 
execute the strategy, a leader must take a realistic and critical 
view of its capabilities and competencies. If it does not have 
the talent in finance, sales, and manufacturing to accomplish 
the vision, the chances of success are drastically reduced.
The Third Core Process—Operations: “You Need to 
Consider What Path Will Be Followed” 
The strategy 
process defines where an organization wants to go, and the 
people process defines who’s going to get it done. The third 
core process, operations, or the operating plan, provides the 
path for people to follow. The operating plan, as we de-
scribed in Chapter 5, should address all the major activities 
in which the company will engage—marketing, production, 
sales, revenue, and so on—and then define short-term objec-
tives for these activities, to provide targets for people to aim 
at. We also discuss operations management in Chapter 16.
How Execution Helps Implement & 
Control Strategy
Many executives appear to have an aversion to execution, 
which they associate with boring tactics—with the tedium of 
doing, as opposed to the excitement of visioning—and which 
they hand off to subordinates. Further, there are many orga-
nizational obstacles to effective execution, and many of these 
TABLE 6.4 
Necessary Answers: What Questions 
Should a Strong Strategic Plan Address?
Source: From Execution by Larry Bossidy and Ram Charan, 
Copyright © 2002 by Larry Bossidy and Ram Charan. Used by 
permission of Crown Business, a division of Random House, Inc.
 1. What is the assessment of the external environment?
 2.  How well do you understand the existing customers 
and markets?
 3.  What is the best way to grow the business profitably, 
and what are the obstacles to growth?
 4.  Who is the competition?
 5.  Can the business execute the strategy?
 6. Are the short term and long term balanced?
 7.  What are the important milestones for executing the plan?
 8.  What are the critical issues facing the business?
 9.  How will the business make money on a sustainable basis?

182 
PART 3 
Planning
are associated with organizational culture. Organizational culture is a system of shared 
beliefs and values within an organization that guides the behavior of its members. In 
this context, effective execution will not occur unless the culture supports an emphasis 
on getting quality work done in a timely manner. Chapter 8 presents 11 ways managers 
can attempt to create an execution-oriented culture.88
PRACTICAL ACTION 
Building a Foundation of Execution
The foundation of execution is based on leadership (as we dis-
cuss in Chapter 14) and organizational culture (discussed in 
Chapter 8). Bossidy and Charan suggest that there are seven 
essential types of leader behaviors that are needed to fuel the 
engine of execution. Managers are advised to engage in seven 
kinds of behaviors, as follows:
Know Your People & Your Business: “Engage Intensely 
with Your Employees” In companies that don’t execute, lead-
ers are usually out of touch with the day-to-day realities. Bossidy 
and Charan insist leaders must engage intensely and personally 
with their organization’s people and its businesses. They cannot 
rely on secondhand knowledge through other people’s observa-
tions, assessments, and recommendations.
Insist on Realism: “Don’t Let Others Avoid Reality” Many 
people want to avoid or shade reality, hiding mistakes or avoiding 
confrontations. Making realism a priority begins with the leaders 
being realistic themselves, and making sure realism is the goal of 
all dialogues in the organization.
Set Clear Priorities: “Focus on a Few Rather Than Many 
Goals” Leaders who execute focus on a very few clear priorities 
that everyone can grasp.
Follow Through: “Establish Accountability & Check on 
Results” Failing to follow through is a major cause of poor 
execution. “How many meetings have you attended where 
people left without firm conclusions about who would do what 
and when?” Bossidy and Charan ask. Accountability and 
follow-up are important.
Reward the Doers: “Show Top Performers That They Mat-
ter” If people are to produce specific results, they must be re-
warded accordingly, making sure that top performers are 
rewarded far better than ordinary performers.
Expand People’s Capabilities: “Develop the Talent” Coach-
ing is an important part of the executive’s job, providing useful 
and specific feedback that can improve performance.
Know Yourself: “Do the Hard Work of Understanding Who 
You Are” Leaders must develop “emotional fortitude” based on 
honest self-assessments. Four core qualities are authenticity, 
self-awareness, self-mastery, and humility.
Do you think your current or a past employer was good at execution? What obsta-
cles may have impaired the company’s ability to execute? You can answer these ques-
tions by taking Self-Assessment 6.3.
Assessing the Obstacles to Strategic Execution
This survey is designed to assess the obstacles to strategic exe-
cution that may be impacting an organization’s ability to execute. 
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 6.3. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
How does the company stand with respect to execution?
2. 
Based on the results, what are the company’s strengths 
and weaknesses when it comes to execution?
3. 
What advice would you give to senior management about 
improving the company’s ability to execute based on the 
results? Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 6.3
®
In conclusion, by linking people, strategy, and operating plans, execution allows 
executives to direct and control the three core processes that will advance their 
strategic vision. ●

BCG matrix 179
benchmarking 173
competitive intelligence 167
contingency planning 171
cost-focus strategy 177
cost-leadership strategy 176
current reality assessment 163
defensive strategy 175
differentiation strategy 176
diversification 178
environmental scanning 168
execution 180
focused-differentiation strategy 177
forecast 171
grand strategy 164
growth strategy 175
organizational opportunities 169
organizational strengths 169
organizational threats 169
organizational weaknesses 169
Porter’s four competitive 
strategies 176
Porter’s model for industry 
analysis 173
related diversification 178
scenario analysis 171
single-product strategy 177
stability strategy 175
strategic control 164
strategic positioning 160
strategy formulation 164
strategy implementation 164
SWOT analysis 168
synergy 178
trend analysis 171
unrelated diversification 178
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
6.1 What Is Effective Strategy?
• Strategic positioning attempts to achieve 
sustainable competitive advantage by 
preserving what is distinctive about a company.
• Strategic positioning is based on the 
principles that strategy is the creation of a 
unique and valuable position, requires trade-
offs in competing, and involves creating a “fit” 
among activities, so that they interact and 
reinforce each other.
• Strategic management works best for large 
firms, but can also be effective for small firms.
• Every organization needs to have a “big picture” 
about where it’s going and how to get there, 
which involves strategy, strategic management, 
and strategic planning. A strategy is a large-
scale action plan that sets the direction for an 
organization. Strategic management involves 
managers from all parts of the organization in 
the formulation and implementation of 
strategies and strategic goals. Strategic 
planning determines the organization’s long-
term goals and ways to achieve them.
• Three reasons why an organization should adopt 
strategic management and strategic planning: 
They can (1) provide direction and momentum, 
(2) encourage new ideas, and (3) develop a 
sustainable competitive advantage. Sustainable 
competitive advantage occurs when an 
organization is able to get and stay ahead in four 
areas: (1) in being responsive to customers, (2) in 
innovating, (3) in quality, and (4) in effectiveness.
6.2 The Strategic-Management Process
• The strategic-management process has five 
steps plus a feedback loop.
• Step 1 is to establish the mission statement 
and the vision statement. The mission 
statement expresses the organization’s 
purpose. The vision statement describes the 
organization’s long-term direction and 
strategic intent.
• Step 2 is to do a current reality assessment, 
to look at where the organization stands and 
see what is working and what could be 
different so as to maximize efficiency and 
effectiveness in achieving the organization’s 
mission. Among the tools for assessing the 
current reality are SWOT analysis, forecasting, 
benchmarking, and Porter’s model for 
industry analysis (described below).
• Step 3 is strategy formulation, to translate the 
broad mission and vision statements into a 
grand strategy that explains how the 
organization’s mission is to be accomplished. 
Strategy formulation is the translation of the 
grand strategy into more specific strategic plans, 
choosing among different strategies and altering 
them to best fit the organization’s needs.
• Step 4 is strategy implementation—putting 
strategic plans into effect.
• Step 5 is strategic control, monitoring the 
execution of strategy and making 
adjustments.
• Corrective action constitutes a feedback loop 
in which a problem requires that managers 
return to an earlier step to rethink policies, 
budgets, or personnel arrangements.
6.3 Establishing the Mission & the 
Vision
• A mission statement should express the 
organization’s purpose or reason for being.
Key Points
 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
183

• A vision statement should be positive and 
inspiring, and it should stretch the organization 
and its employees to achieve a desired future 
state that appears beyond its reach.
6.4 Assessing the Current Reality
• Step 2 in the strategic-management process, 
assess the current reality, looks at where the 
organization stands internally and externally—
to determine what’s working and what’s not, 
to see what can be changed so as to increase 
efficiency and effectiveness in achieving the 
organization’s vision.
• An assessment helps to create an objective view 
of everything the organization does: its sources 
of revenue or funding, its work-flow processes, 
its organizational structure, client satisfaction, 
employee turnover, and other matters.
• Among the tools for assessing the current 
reality are competitive intelligence, SWOT 
analysis, forecasting, benchmarking, and 
Porter’s model for industry analysis.
• Practicing competitive intelligence means 
gaining information about one’s competitors’ 
activities, through public news sources, 
investor information, and informal sources, so 
that you can anticipate their moves and react 
appropriately.
• The next point in establishing a grand strategy 
is environmental scanning, careful monitoring 
of an organization’s internal and external 
environments to detect early signs of 
opportunities and threats that may influence 
the firm’s plans. The process for doing such 
scanning is called SWOT analysis, a search 
for the Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, 
and Threats affecting the organization.
• Organizational strengths are the skills and 
capabilities that give the organization special 
competencies and competitive advantages. 
Organizational weaknesses are the drawbacks 
that hinder an organization in executing 
strategies. Organizational opportunities are 
environmental factors that the organization 
may exploit for competitive advantage. 
Organizational threats are environmental 
factors that hinder an organization’s achieving 
a competitive advantage.
• Another tool for developing a grand strategy is 
forecasting—creating a vision or projection of 
the future. Two types of forecasting are (1) trend 
analysis, a hypothetical extension of a past 
series of events into the future; and (2) 
contingency planning, the creation of alternative 
hypothetical but equally likely future conditions.
• Benchmarking is a process by which a 
company compares its performance with that 
of high-performing organizations.
• Porter’s model for industry analysis suggests that 
business-level strategies originate in five primary 
competitive forces in the firm’s environment: 
(1) threats of new entrants, (2) bargaining power 
of suppliers, (3) bargaining power of buyers, 
(4) threats of substitute products or services, 
and (5) rivalry among competitors.
6.5 Formulating the Grand Strategy
• Three common grand strategies are (1) a 
growth strategy, which involves expansion—
as in sales revenues; (2) a stability strategy, 
which involves little or no significant change; 
and (3) a defensive strategy, which involves 
reduction in the organization’s efforts.
• Strategy formulation (Step 3 in the strategic-
management process) makes use of several 
concepts, including (1) Porter’s four 
competitive strategies, (2) diversification and 
synergy, and (3) the BCG matrix.
• Porter’s four competitive strategies are as 
follows: (1) The cost-leadership strategy is to 
keep the costs, and hence the prices, of a 
product or service below those of competitors 
and to target a wide market. (2) The 
differentiation strategy is to offer products or 
services that are of unique and superior value 
compared with those of competitors but to 
target a wide market. (3) The cost-focus 
strategy is to keep the costs and hence prices 
of a product or service below those of 
competitors and to target a narrow market. 
(4) The focused-differentiation strategy is to 
offer products or services that are of unique 
and superior value compared with those of 
competitors and to target a narrow market.
• Companies need to choose whether to have a 
single-product strategy, making and selling 
only one product within their market, or a 
diversification strategy, operating several 
businesses to spread the risk.
• There are two kinds of diversification: unrelated 
diversification consists of operating several 
businesses that are not related to each other; 
related diversification consists of operating 
separate businesses that are related to each 
other, which may reduce risk, produce 
management efficiencies, and produce synergy 
or the sum being greater than the parts.
• The BCG matrix is a means of evaluating 
strategic business units on the basis of (1) their 
business growth rates and (2) their share of the 
market. In general, organizations do better in 
fast-growing markets in which they have a high 
market share rather than slow-growing markets 
in which they have low market shares.
6.6 Implementing & Controlling 
Strategy: Execution
• The last two steps of the strategic-
management process are strategy 
implementation and strategic control.
184 
PART 3 
Planning

• Strategy implementation is putting strategic 
plans into effect, dealing with roadblocks 
within the organization’s structure and culture, 
and seeing if the right people and control 
systems are available to execute the plans.
• Strategic control consists of monitoring the 
execution of strategy and taking corrective 
action, if necessary. To keep a strategic plan 
on track, you should engage people, keep 
your planning simple, stay focused, and keep 
moving.
• Implementing strategy and maintaining 
strategic control require effective execution. 
Execution is not simply tactics, it is a central 
part of any company’s strategy; it consists of 
using questioning, analysis, and follow-through 
to mesh strategy with reality, align people with 
goals, and achieve results promised.
• Three core processes of execution are 
people, strategy, and operations. (1) You 
have to evaluate talent by linking people to 
particular strategic milestones, developing 
future leaders, dealing with nonperformers, 
and transforming the mission and operations 
of the human resource department. (2) In 
considering whether the organization can 
execute the strategy, a leader must take 
a realistic and critical view of its capabilities 
and competencies. (3) The third core 
process, operations, or the operating plan, 
provides the path for people to follow. 
The operating plan should address all the 
major activities in which the company will 
engage and then define short-term 
objectives for these activities, to provide 
targets for people to aim at. By linking 
people, strategy, and operating plans, 
execution allows executives to direct and 
control the three core processes that will 
advance their strategic vision.
 1. What is strategic positioning, and what are the three 
principles that underlie it?
 2. What are the five steps in the strategic management 
process?
 3. Name some characteristics of good mission and 
vision statements.
 4. What is competitive intelligence?
 5. What are the tools that can help you assess the 
current reality?
 6. Explain what SWOT is.
 7. Describe three techniques that can help you 
formulate a grand strategy.
 8. What are three common grand strategies?
 9. Explain Porter’s four competitive strategies.
 10. In execution, what are the three core processes of 
business?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
Putting AutoZone into Drive
Joseph “Pitt” Hyde III, 70, knew nothing about cars. 
But after turning his grandfather’s company, Malone 
& Hyde, into the nation’s third-largest wholesale food 
distributor, he figured there was money to be made un-
der the hood. Touting low everyday prices (a strategy 
he learned from serving on the board of Walmart), he 
founded AutoZone, which is now the nation’s largest 
retail auto parts chain. . . .
I was born in Memphis, and grew up here. My 
grandfather started Malone & Hyde, a wholesale food 
distributor, in 1907. He ran it, my father ran it, and I 
ran it. From the time I was 4 or 5, my grandfather 
would take me to visit the stores, and my father always 
discussed the big decisions being made with me. I was 
always told that I had the opportunity to run Malone & 
Hyde, and the obligation to do it better than my grand-
father and father did. I never knew I had a choice. . . .
After I graduated from the University of North 
Carolina with an economics degree, my father grew ill. 
So in 1968, at 26, I had to take over. It was the ultimate 
baptism by fire. Most of the people reporting to me 
were twice my age. That year, we had $240 million in 
sales. Fortunately, I was able to continue to grow the 
company.
Management in Action
 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
185

In the mid-1970s I had concerns about the long-
term outlook, and looked for areas to diversify into. 
We had a successful drug chain [called Super D] and 
felt comfortable with specialty retailing. So when this 
small company, Checker Auto Parts in Phoenix, came 
up for sale, I checked it out. I saw how it was growing 
with auto parts geared to the do-it-yourself market. We 
passed, and Lucky Supermarkets bought it. We started 
looking at chains like Pep Boys.
I could see the auto parts business was growing 
rapidly and wasn’t as price-sensitive as food. I didn’t 
see anyone doing a superior job of customer service, 
and most were not well kept. I thought we could 
bring a lot to the table. We decided to start a company 
from scratch.
We opened our first store in Forrest City, 
Arkansas, on July 4, 1979, and called it Auto Shack. 
We changed the name after we were sued by 
RadioShack [for trademark infringement]. Auto 
Shack initially won the lawsuit, but RadioShack suc-
cessfully appealed. Rather than fight it, we changed 
the name to AutoZone.
In 1988 we sold Malone & Hyde, which by then 
had $3.3 billion in sales. We had set up AutoZone in its 
own corporate structure, so when we sold the base 
business, I kept AutoZone. I’d never been a do-it-your-
selfer and didn’t know the auto parts business, but I 
knew there was an opportunity. We worked on small 
margins and were very tight operators, so that disci-
pline helped us through as we learned the business.
We started with four stores and were the first auto 
parts store with electronic catalogues, so customers 
could instantly look up parts and warranty informa-
tion. Our objective was to build a culture around 
superior customer service, and to have everyday low 
prices in good-looking stores.
In 1991 we went public, and the competition saw 
how well we were doing. They started copying our 
store layout and pricing. But none of them could copy 
our culture. Today we have 5,000 stores. . . .
When you’re running a big business, you spend 
80% of the time addressing small things and 20% on 
the big things that really make a difference. It took me 
35 years to figure out if you spend 80% of the time on 
the big things, and 20% on the small things, life will 
be much more meaningful. Money is a small part of 
the equation for success. Sweat equity is what makes 
things work.
Source: Excerpted from an Interview by D. Eng, “Putting AutoZone 
into Drive,” Fortune, August 12, 2013, pp. 17–18.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. Using no more than two sentences, describe Auto-
Zone’s strategy.
 2. Based on Michael Porter’s discussion of the charac-
teristics of an effective strategy, does AutoZone have 
a good strategy for growth? Explain.
 3. To what extent is AutoZone following the five steps 
of the strategic-management process?
 4. Conduct an environmental scan or SWOT analysis of 
AutoZone’s current reality and recommend whether 
the company’s current strategy is poised to succeed.
 4. Which of Michael Porter’s four competitive strate-
gies is AutoZone trying to follow? Discuss.
 5. What is the greatest takeaway from this case in terms 
of strategic management?
Should Companies Be Pressured to Recruit 
Females for Boards of Directors?
A company’s board of directors plays a role in the 
strategic management process. Not only can a board 
provide input into the planning process, but it ulti-
mately signs off on the intended strategies. Interest-
ingly, a 2011 study by Catalyst, a nonprofit 
organization, compared financial performance of 
companies with zero female board members versus 
those with three or more female members. Results in-
dicated that female representation was associated with 
(1) 84% higher return on sales, (2) 60% higher return 
on sales, and (3) 46% higher return on equity. This 
challenge pertains to whether it is appropriate for out-
side groups to pressure a company to include women 
on its board of directors.
Small percentages of female board members may 
be caused by many factors, such as a lack of specific 
experience (e.g., finance), limited social networks, 
and negative stereotypes. Regardless of the cause, ex-
ternal groups are sprouting up around the United 
States that are focused on putting pressure on compa-
nies to recruit female directors. One example is a 
group that calls itself “2020 Women on Boards.” This 
nonprofit group has a goal of mobilizing stakeholders 
Legal/Ethical Challenge
186 
PART 3 
Planning

to encourage companies to increase female represen-
tation on boards of directors. The group plans to pub-
lish a list of the Fortune 1000 companies that have no 
female directors. Some believe that efforts like this 
will promote good corporate governance, while others 
see it as an intrusion into the internal functioning of 
an organization.
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
Where do you stand on this issue?
 1. It is a great idea to pressure companies to include 
more females on boards of directors. After all, the 
Catalyst study showed that female representation 
was associated with higher financial performance.
 2. Companies should be allowed to select people for 
boards based on their experience, networks, and 
performance. Gender should not be considered as a 
relevant criterion for selecting board members. I am 
not in favor of this type of social pressure because it 
does not ensure that the most qualified people are 
placed on boards of directors.
 3. I’m middle of the road on this issue. Part of me feels 
that organizations should be left alone to put who-
ever they want on a board. At the same time, some-
times organizational leaders need to be nudged to do 
the right thing, such as putting females on the board. 
I thus think that social pressure from groups like 
“2020 Women on Boards” is okay, but organizations 
should not feel forced to do anything they do not 
want to do.
 4. Invent other options. Discuss.
Source: This case is based on Joann Lublin, “Female Directors: 
Why So Few?” The Wall Street Journal, December 27, 2011, p. B5.
 
Strategic Management 
CHAPTER 6 
187

Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
7.1 Two Kinds of Decision Making: Rational & Nonrational
Major Question: How do people know when they’re being logical 
or illogical?
7.2 Making Ethical Decisions
Major Question: What guidelines can I follow to be sure that 
decisions I make are not just lawful but ethical?
7.3 Evidence-Based Decision Making & Analytics
Major Question: How can I improve my decision making using 
evidence-based management and business analytics?
7.4 Four General Decision-Making Styles
Major Question: How do I decide to decide?
7.5 How to Overcome Barriers to Decision Making
Major Question: Trying to be rational isn’t always easy. 
What are the barriers?
7.6 Group Decision Making: How to Work with Others
Major Question: How do I work with others to make 
things happen?
Individual & Group 
Decision Making
How Managers Make Things Happen
7

forecast
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
We begin by distinguishing between rational and nonrational decision making, and we 
describe two nonrational models. We next discuss ethical decision making. We then 
consider evidence-based decision making and the use of analytics. Next we describe 
general decision-making styles. We follow by considering how individuals respond to 
decision situations and nine common decision-making biases. We conclude with a dis-
cussion of group decision making, including group problem-solving techniques.
The biggest part of a manager’s job is making 
decisions—and quite often they are wrong. Some 
questions you might ask next time you’re poised 
to make a decision:
“Am I Too Cocky?” The Overconfidence Bias
If you’re making a decision in an area in which you 
have considerable experience or expertise, you’re 
less likely to be overconfident. Interestingly, however, 
you’re more apt to be overconfident when dealing 
with questions on subjects you’re unfamiliar with or 
questions with moderate to extreme difficulty.1 
Recommendation: When dealing with unfamiliar or 
difficult matters, think how your impending decision 
might go wrong. Afterward pay close attention to the 
consequences of your decision.
“Am I Considering the Actual Evidence, 
or Am I Wedded to My Prior Beliefs?” 
The Prior-Hypothesis Bias
Do you tend to have strong beliefs? When confronted 
with a choice, decision makers with strong prior 
beliefs tend to make their decision based on their 
beliefs—even if evidence shows those beliefs are 
wrong. This is known as the prior-hypothesis bias.2 
Recommendation: Although it’s more comforting 
to look for evidence to support your prior beliefs, you 
need to be tough-minded and weigh the evidence.
“Are Events Really Connected, or Are They Just 
Chance?” The Ignoring-Randomness Bias
Is a rise in sales in athletic shoes because of your 
company’s advertising campaign or because it’s the 
start of the school year? Many managers don’t un-
derstand the laws of randomness.
Recommendation: Don’t attribute trends or 
connections to a single, random event.
“Is There Enough Data on Which to Make a 
Decision?” The Unrepresentative Sample Bias
If all the secretaries in your office say they 
prefer dairy creamer to real cream in their coffee, 
is that enough data on which to launch an ad 
campaign trumpeting the superiority of dairy 
creamer? It might if you polled 3,000 secretaries, 
but 3 or even 30 is too small a sample. 
Recommendation: You need to be attuned to the 
importance of sample size.
“Looking Back, Did I (or Others) Really Know 
Enough Then to Have Made a Better Decision?” 
The 20-20 Hindsight Bias
Once managers know what the consequences of a 
decision are, they may begin to think they could have 
predicted it. They may remember the facts as being a 
lot clearer than they actually were.3 
Recommendation: Try to keep in mind that hind-
sight does not equal foresight.
For Discussion Facing the hard facts about 
what works and what doesn’t, how able do you 
think you are to make the tough decisions that 
effective managers have to make? Can you describe 
an instance in which you were badly wrong about 
something or someone?
the manager’s toolbox
How Exceptional Managers Check to See 
If Their Decisions Might Be Biased

7.1 
Two Kinds of Decision Making: 
Rational & Nonrational
How do people know when they’re being logical or illogical?
THE BIG PICTURE
Decision making, the process of identifying and choosing alternative courses of action, may be rational, but often 
it is nonrational. Four steps in making a rational decision are (1) identify the problem or opportunity, (2) think up 
alternative solutions, (3) evaluate alternatives and select a solution, and (4) implement and evaluate the solution 
chosen. Two examples of nonrational models of decision making are (1) satisficing and (2) intuition.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
The subject of decisions and decision making is a fascinating subject that is at the 
heart of what managers do.
A decision is a choice made from among available alternatives. Decision making is 
the process of identifying and choosing alternative courses of action.
If your company’s product is first place in its market and is making tons of money, 
is that a sign of great decision making?
190 
PART 3 
Planning
EXAMPLE
How Can Being the Best Affect Your Decision Making?
Most Fortune 500 companies averaged profit margins of 
around 5% the past 60 years. Imagine a company whose profit 
margin was an awesome 80%—for years and years.
No, we’re not talking about Apple, whose profit margin in 
2013 was a spectacular 40%. We are referring to one of the 
biggest brands ever . . . Kodak.
The Curse of Being Out Front. Founded in 1888, the once-great 
film company filed for bankruptcy in early 2012, blindsided by the 
digital revolution and foreign competition.4 Before then, however, it 
dominated the world of film and popular photography, with film in 
particular driving the company’s expansion. “It is very hard,” said 
Kodak’s director of research in those heady days, “to find anything 
[with profit margins] like color photography that is legal.”5
Some believe, however, that film’s profitability contributed 
to Kodak’s doom—that managers feared introducing technolo-
gies that would disrupt the company’s film business. Indeed, 
Kodak had talented research-and-development engineers and 
scientists who churned out some of the world’s leading innova-
tions, which were never introduced. “The irony,” said one in-
novator, “is that many—CCD arrays, digital X-rays, etc.—
eventually did Kodak in.”6
In fact, in 1975, says one account, “the company invented 
the digital camera—then stuck it in a safe lest it destroy its 
lucrative film business. By the time Kodak was ready to 
unleash its digital prowess, everyone from Canon to Sony was 
selling their own digital cameras.”7
Tough Decisions about Innovation. Companies often have dif-
ficulty making decisions about how to manage innovation, says 
Wharton professor Christian Terwiesch. “Either they are focused 
on what they currently do and seek incremental innovation, or 
when they talk of research, they talk about what will happen in 
10 years,” he says. Innovations reaching for a middle ground, 
such as envisioning product lines two or five years away, are 
much more elusive and often don’t have someone championing 
them within the organization.8
Afraid to cannibalize its existing business—selling film—
Kodak continued to push forward with its present business 
model rather than look at what the market wanted. “Long-run 
strategies work better if you stand in the shoes of your custom-
ers and think how you are going to solve their problems,” notes 
Wharton professor George S. Day. “Kodak never really 
embraced that.”9
YOUR CALL
Is being in first place the most dangerous place for decision 
makers? Do you think some of today’s hot companies—Apple, 
Google, FedEx, or Costco—on Fortune’s Most Admired 
list could experience what happened to Kodak?
Decision Making in the Real World
Sometimes we are able to make thoughtful decisions, making rational choices among 
well-defined alternatives. But that is not always the way it works in the real world.

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
191
Two Systems of Decision Making 
 In Thinking, Fast and Slow, psychologist 
Daniel Kahneman, winner of the 2002 Nobel Prize in economics, describes two kinds 
of thinking, which he labels System 1 and System 2:10
■ 
System 1—intuitive and largely unconscious: System 1 operates automati-
cally and quickly; it is our fast, automatic, intuitive, and largely unconscious 
mode, as when we detect hostility in a voice or detect that one object is more 
distant than another. 
■ 
System 2—analytical and conscious: System 2 is our slow, deliberate, ana-
lytical, and consciously effortful mode of reasoning, which swings into action 
when we have to fill out a tax form or park a car in a narrow space. 
 “System 1 uses association and metaphor to produce a quick and dirty draft of real-
ity,” says one explanation, “which System 2 draws on to arrive at explicit beliefs and 
reasoned choices.”11
Why don’t we use the more deliberate and rational System 2 more often? Because 
it’s lazy and tires easily, so instead of slowing things down and analyzing them, it is 
content to accept the easy but unreliable story that System 1 feeds it.
The “Curse of Knowledge” 
Why do some engineers design electronic products 
(such as DVD remote controls) with so many buttons, devices ultimately useful only to 
other engineers? Why are some professional investors and bankers prone to taking ex-
cess risks?12 Why are some employees so reluctant to adopt new processes? The answer 
may be what’s known as the curse of knowledge. As one writer put it about engineers, 
for example, “People who design products are experts cursed by their knowledge, and 
they can’t imagine what it’s like to be as ignorant as the rest of us.”13 In other words, as 
our knowledge and expertise grow, we may be less and less able to see things from an 
outsider’s perspective—hence, we are often apt to make irrational decisions.
Let us look at the two approaches managers may take to making decisions: They 
may follow a rational model or various kinds of nonrational models.
Rational Decision Making: Managers Should 
Make Logical & Optimal Decisions
The rational model of decision making, also called the classical model, explains how 
managers should make decisions; it assumes managers will make logical decisions that 
will be the optimum in furthering the organization’s best interests.
Typically there are four stages associated with rational decision making. (See Figure 7.1.)
Stage 4
Implement
& evaluate
the solution
chosen.
Stage 2
Think up
alternative
solutions.
Stage 1
Identify the
problem or
opportunity.
Stage 3
Evaluate
alternatives
& select
a solution.
FIGURE 7.1 
The four steps in rational decision making
Stage 1: Identify the Problem or Opportunity—
Determining the Actual versus the Desirable
As a manager, you’ll probably find no shortage of problems, or difficulties that inhibit 
the achievement of goals. Customer complaints. Supplier breakdowns. Staff turnover. 
Sales shortfalls. Competitor innovations.

192 
PART 3 
Planning
However, you’ll also often find opportunities—situations that present possibilities 
for exceeding existing goals. It’s the farsighted manager, however, who can look past 
the steady stream of daily problems and seize the moment to actually do better than 
the goals he or she is expected to achieve. When a competitor’s top salesperson unex-
pectedly quits, that creates an opportunity for your company to hire that person away 
to promote your product more vigorously in that sales territory.
Whether you’re confronted with a problem or an opportunity, the decision you’re 
called on to make is how to make improvements—how to change conditions from the 
present to the desirable. This is a matter of diagnosis—analyzing the underlying causes.
EXAMPLE
Making a Correct Diagnosis: Who’s Better at Financial Decisions, 
Men or Women?
When men and women are asked to self-assess their financial 
knowledge, according to a study of eight countries, men tend to give 
themselves high scores and women give themselves lower 
scores—even when that is not warranted by their actual knowl-
edge.14 “Women are aware of their lack of knowledge,” says a study 
author, while “men are less willing to admit what they don’t know.”15
Men, it seems, are put under a lot pressure to understand—
or pretend they understand—financial matters. The financial 
industry also uses a lot of male-speak (“dominating the field”) 
that make women feel excluded. In general, women are less 
confident than men about making investment decisions.16
The Better Investors. So which sex is the better class of inves-
tors? A seven-year study of single (unmarried) investors found 
females outperformed males by 2.3%, female investment groups 
outperformed male groups by 4.6%, and women overall outper-
formed men by 1.4%.17 The basic reason: “Women trade much 
less often than men, do a lot more research, and tend to base 
their investment decisions on considerations other than just num-
bers,” according to one account.18 Men, says another report, 
“tend to trade more, and the more you trade, typically the more 
you lose—not to mention running up transaction costs.”19
The Buffet Approach. Warren Buffett is the renowned billionaire 
investor (the third richest person in the world, worth $65.9 billion 
in mid-2014) known as the “Oracle of Omaha” who heads the fi-
nancial juggernaut Berkshire Hathaway.20 His investment deci-
sions are so successful that $1,000 invested with him in 1957 
reportedly was worth upwards of $30 million in 2014.21
Buffett is said to “invest like a girl,” taking the same cautious 
approach that many women do.22 He uses basic arithmetic to 
analyze several file-cabinet drawers of annual reports and other 
readily available company financial documents and to look for a 
record of “high returns on equity capital, low debt, and a consis-
tent, predictable business with sustainable advantages—like 
Coca-Cola’s soft-drink franchise.”23 In other words, Buffett takes 
pains to make a correct diagnosis before making a decision.
YOUR CALL
When preparing to make important decisions—especially fi-
nancial decisions—do you spend a lot of time trying to make a 
correct diagnosis, doing deep research (as women investors 
are said to do), or do you chase “hot” tips and make snap judg-
ments (as men reportedly do)?
Stage 2: Think Up Alternative Solutions—Both the 
Obvious & the Creative
Employees burning with bright ideas are an employer’s greatest competitive resource. 
“Creativity precedes innovation, which is its physical expression,” says Fortune maga-
zine writer Alan Farnham. “It’s the source of all intellectual property.”24
After you’ve identified the problem or opportunity and diagnosed its causes, you 
need to come up with alternative solutions.
Stage 3: Evaluate Alternatives & Select a Solution—
Ethics, Feasibility, & Effectiveness
In this stage, you need to evaluate each alternative not only according to cost and quality 
but also according to the following questions: (1) Is it ethical? (If it isn’t, don’t give it a 
second look.) (2) Is it feasible? (If time is short, costs are high, technology unavailable, 

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
193
or customers resistant, for example, it is not.) (3) Is it ultimately effective? (If the deci-
sion is merely “good enough” but not optimal in the long run, you might reconsider.)
Stage 4: Implement & Evaluate the Solution Chosen
With some decisions, implementation is usually straightforward (though not necessar-
ily easy—firing employees who steal may be an obvious decision, but it can still be 
emotionally draining). With other decisions, implementation can be quite difficult; 
when one company acquires another, for instance, it may take months to consolidate 
the departments, accounting systems, inventories, and so on.
Successful Implementation 
For implementation to be successful, you need to 
do two things:
■ 
Plan carefully. Especially if reversing an action will be difficult, you need to 
make careful plans for implementation. Some decisions may require written 
plans.
■ 
Be sensitive to those affected. You need to consider how the people affected 
may feel about the change—inconvenienced, insecure, even fearful, all of which 
can trigger resistance. This is why it helps to give employees and customers 
latitude during a changeover in business practices or working arrangements.
Now that you understand the four stages of the rational model, to what extent do 
you think you use them when making decisions? Would you like to improve your 
problem-solving skills? If yes, then you will find the following self-assessment valu-
able. It assesses your problem-solving skills.
Assessing Your Problem-Solving Potential
This survey is designed to assess your approach to problem 
solving. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-
Assessment 7.1. When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
What is the status of your problem-solving skills? Are you 
surprised by the results?
2. 
Based on identifying the four lowest scored items on the 
assessment, what can you do to improve your problem-
solving skills? Explain.
3. 
Reflect on a recent decision you made that did not 
turn out to your satisfaction. Now, consider what you 
learned about the rational model and your problem-
solving skills and think through the decision for a 
second time. What would you do differently based on 
these considerations?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 7.1
®
Faulty Implementation: Customer Service Is Often “Just Talk”
“My claim to fame, the only thing I’ve ever been really good 
at, is returning people’s phone calls every single day,” says 
Mark Powers. No doubt it is that kind of customer service 
that is the reason why Excelsior Roofing of San Francisco, 
founded by Powers’s grandfather over 100 years ago, is still 
in business.25
Just Talk. “Executives talk about the importance of responding 
to customers’ needs with top-notch customer service,” writes 
Wall Street Journal columnist Carol Hymowitz. “But often it’s 
just talk.”26
The problem with faulty customer service, however, is that 
sometimes the company may be the last to hear about it, but a 
EXAMPLE

194 
PART 3 
Planning
great many other potential customers may hear of it by word of 
mouth. One study found that only 6% of shoppers who experi-
enced a problem with a retailer contacted the company. How-
ever, 31% went on to tell friends, family, and colleagues what 
had happened. Indeed, if 100 people have a bad experience, a 
retailer stands to lose between 32 and 36 current or potential 
customers, according to the study.27
In the Shoes of Customers. Consultants working for one large 
telecommunications company encouraged customer service 
reps at one call center to share their problems and successes 
with each other and bring in customers to report their positive 
and negative experiences with the call center. To encourage 
customer reps to “step inside the shoes of customers,” 
the consultants also presented a weekly award of a pair of 
baby shoes to the employee who solved the most customer 
problems.28
YOUR CALL
We’re all accustomed to pumping our own gas and doing our 
own banking through ATMs and online. Now many retailers 
have moved toward self-service checkout lanes, as is done 
by some Home Depot stores, and the airlines with their 
self-check-in kiosks.29
What do you think the self-serve trend means for customer 
service?
Evaluation 
One “law” in economics is the Law of Unintended Consequences—
things happen that weren’t foreseen. For this reason, you need to follow up and 
evaluate the results of the decision.
What should you do if the action is not working? Some possibilities:
■ 
Give it more time. You need to make sure employees, customers, and so on 
have had enough time to get used to the new action.
■ 
Change it slightly. Maybe the action was correct, but it just needs 
“tweaking”—a small change of some sort.
■ 
Try another alternative. If Plan A doesn’t seem to be working, maybe you 
want to scrap it for another alternative.
■ 
Start over. If no alternative seems workable, you need to go back to the draw-
ing board—to Stage 1 of the decision-making process.
EXAMPLE
Evaluation: The Boeing 787 Dreamliner, a Bet-the-Company Decision
At a time when Boeing Co., the Chicago-headquartered aero-
space giant, was losing business to its European rival Airbus 
and rising fuel costs were dramatically impacting the commer-
cial airline industry, Boeing management made a bold decision: 
It would build a new medium-sized commercial jet, the 787 
Dreamliner, its first new aircraft in 10 years, designed to fly 
faster than the competition and to consume 20% less fuel than 
similar-sized planes.
To achieve this, the 787 would feature more fuel-efficient 
engines and the fuselage would be built from plastic composite 
materials instead of aluminum. This would cut down on struc-
tural fatigue and corrosion, thereby reducing the number of 
inspections necessary and increasing the number of flights 
possible. “A light, strong plane is the big payoff for the huge 
technical risk Boeing is taking in crafting parts out of compos-
ites,” said one aerospace reporter.30
A Bumpy Ride. First planned for a summer 2007 launch, the date 
was revised for 2008. Then, in mid-2006, the company began 
encountering the first of many stories of bad news. The fuselage 
section had failed in testing, and engineers had discovered worri-
some bubbles in its skin. The carbon-fiber wing was too heavy, 
Customer support. “I really need some help here.”

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
195
adding to the plane’s overall weight. To hold costs down, Boeing 
had outsourced about 70% of the production to major suppliers 
acting as risk-sharing partners and playing a greater role in de-
sign and manufacturing. In return for investing more up front and 
taking on a share of the development costs, suppliers were given 
major sections of the airplane to build.31
By late 2007, however, it was apparent that suppliers were 
struggling to meet the exacting technological demands and 
deadlines, and their software programs were having trouble 
communicating with each other. In October, Boeing announced 
it would no longer meet its May 2008 target date and was 
postponing its first delivery to late fall of that year.32
Changing Dates. In early 2008, the company said the poor qual-
ity of outsourced work and the unprecedented amount of coordi-
nation among suppliers caused Boeing to shift much of the work 
back to its Everett, Washington, assembly plant, adding to delays. 
It said it was working to try to begin deliveries to customers not in 
late 2008 but in the first quarter of 2009, which then became the 
third quarter.33 Then in 2009, stress testing revealed new flaws 
around bolts inside the wings.34
Finally, after six delays and nearly 10 years of anticipation, 
the Dreamliner had its first flight, on December 15, 2009.35
Then, on October 28, 2011, after months of testing and three 
years behind schedule, the 787 was put into service for the 
first time, carrying 264 passengers for All Nippon Airways from 
Tokyo to Hong Kong.36
After More Problems, Finally Success. Then in January 2013, 
two Japanese-owned 787 Dreamliners experienced mysterious 
battery fires, resulting in the entire fleet of jetliners being 
grounded worldwide for 3½ months.37 Japan Airlines, after 10 
years of ordering aircraft from Boeing, switched to Airbus.38 After 
addressing the battery problem, in March 2014 Boeing and a key 
supplier discovered hairline cracks while inspecting the wings of 
42 yet-to-be-delivered Dreamliners, which forced changes to the 
manufacturing process.39
Through it all, as Boeing dealt with the additional set-
backs, it continued to pick up orders as the airlines’ financial 
health improved in the wake of the Great Recession and as 
high fuel prices continued to drive demand for more efficient 
aircraft like the Dreamliner.40 Both Boeing and its rival Airbus 
ended 2013 with more than 10,000 jets of all kinds on order 
and have continued to boost aircraft production.41 In 2014, 
the U.S. company expected to deliver up to 725 of the aircraft. 
The plane was also cleared to fly longer oceanic and polar 
routes for as much as 5½ hours.42 Profits rose for Boeing’s 
commercial division two years in a row, and jet deliveries also 
surpassed those of Airbus for two years running.43 Still, the 
787 was put into service three years late and cost twice the 
original estimate of $5 billion.44
The New “Dash Nine.” Boeing also began testing a larger 
version of the Dreamliner, the 787-9 (the “Dash Nine”), which 
is 20 feet longer than its predecessor, the 787-8; can hold 
about 40 more passengers; and fly a few hundred miles fur-
ther without additional fuel.45 The company also learned from 
its earlier mishaps by bringing more of the Dash Nine’s manu-
facturing process back in-house after outsourcing it, to avoid 
the design and production missteps that plagued the earlier 
Dreamliner. The Dash Nine, which was on schedule to start 
deliveries in 2014, is Boeing’s “chance to make things right, 
and live up to the original promise of the program,” said an 
aerospace consultant.46
YOUR CALL
How would you evaluate Boeing’s decisions? Do you think de-
spite all the effort on the 787-8 that the Dash Nine could cause 
Boeing to fail to break even on the 787-8, with airlines switch-
ing their orders to the newer aircraft? Was this a risky bet-the-
company decision?
What’s Wrong with the Rational Model?
The rational model is prescriptive, describing how managers ought to make deci-
sions. It doesn’t describe how managers actually make decisions. Indeed, the ra-
tional model makes some highly desirable assumptions—that managers have 
complete information, are able to make an unemotional analysis, and are able to 
make the best decision for the organization. (See Table 7.1, next page.) We all 
know that these assumptions are unrealistic.
Dream on. Boeing’s 787 Dreamliner.

196 
PART 3 
Planning
Nonrational Decision Making: Managers Find It 
Difficult to Make Optimal Decisions
Nonrational models of decision making explain how managers make decisions; they 
assume that decision making is nearly always uncertain and risky, making it difficult for 
managers to make optimal decisions. The nonrational models are descriptive rather 
than prescriptive: They describe how managers actually make decisions rather than 
how they should. Two nonrational models are (1) satisficing and (2) intuition.
1. Bounded Rationality & the Satisficing Model: “Satisfactory Is Good 
Enough” 
During the 1950s, economist Herbert Simon—who later received the 
Nobel Prize—began to study how managers actually make decisions. From his re-
search he proposed that managers could not act truly logically because their rationality 
was bounded by so many restrictions.47 Called bounded rationality, the concept sug-
gests that the ability of decision makers to be rational is limited by numerous con-
straints, such as complexity, time and money, and their cognitive capacity, values, 
skills, habits, and unconscious reflexes. (See Figure 7.2.)
• 
Complete information, no uncertainty: You should obtain complete, error-free information 
about all alternative courses of action and the consequences that would follow from each choice.
• 
Logical, unemotional analysis: Having no prejudices or emotional blind spots, you are able to 
logically evaluate the alternatives, ranking them from best to worst according to your personal 
preferences.
• 
Best decision for the organization: Confident of the best future course of action, you coolly choose 
the alternative that you believe will most benefit the organization.
TABLE 7.1
Assumptions of the 
Rational Model
 Different cognitive capacity,
values, skills, habits, and
unconscious reflexes:
Managers aren’t all built the
same way, of course, and all
have personal limitations and
biases that affect their
judgment.
 
Imperfect information:
Managers have imperfect,
fragmentary information about
the alternatives and their
consequences.
 Information overload: 
There is too much information for
one person to process.
 Different priorities:
Some data are considered more
important, so certain facts
are ignored.
 Conflicting goals:
Other managers, including
colleagues, have conflicting goals.
 Complexity:
The problems that need solving
are often exceedingly complex,
beyond understanding.
 Time and money constraints:
There is not enough time or
money to gather all relevant
information.
 
FIGURE 7.2 
Some hindrances to perfectly rational decision making
Because of such constraints, managers don’t make an exhaustive search for the 
best alternative. Instead, they follow what Simon calls the satisficing model—that is, 
managers seek alternatives until they find one that is satisfactory, not optimal. While 
“satisficing” might seem to be a weakness, it may well outweigh any advantages 
gained from delaying making a decision until all information is in and all alterna-
tives weighed.

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
197
Nonrational decision making? 
Many cigarette smokers are 
capable of quitting, so why do 
they continue doing it—
especially since they know it’s 
expensive and bad for their 
health? It’s not that they are 
especially tolerant of risk. 
Perhaps, some scientists 
suggest, it’s because they have 
poor self-control and “can’t 
resist the short-term pleasure 
despite the prospect of 
long-term disaster.”48 How 
do you deal with this kind 
of nonrational decision?
However, making snap decisions can also backfire. In the 1990s, for instance, 
Campbell Soup Co. tried to penetrate China’s soup market, where 20 billion servings 
are consumed a year (versus only 14 billion in the United States). But rather than re-
search Chinese tastes and cooking customs, which would have revealed that most 
soups are made from scratch, the company simply exported its line of condensed 
soups—an example of satisficing. Wondering why they should pay for something that 
could be easily made from scratch and objecting to the can-like tastes of prepared 
soups, Chinese consumers rejected the Campbell product.49
2. The Intuition Model: “It Just Feels Right” 
Small entrepreneurs often 
can’t afford in-depth marketing research and so they make decisions based on 
hunches—their subconscious, visceral feelings. For instance, Ben Hugh, 32, de-
cided to buy I Can Has Cheezburger?, a blog devoted to silly cat pictures paired 
with viewer-submitted quirky captions, when it linked to his own pet blog and 
caused it to crash from a wave of new visitors. Putting up $10,000 of his own 
money and acquiring additional investor financing, he bought the site for $2 mil-
lion from the Hawaiian bloggers who started it. “It was a white-knuckle deci-
sion,” he said later. But he expanded the Cheezburger blog into an empire that 
now includes 53 sites.50
“Going with your gut,” or intuition, is making a choice without the use of con-
scious thought or logical inference.51 Intuition that stems from expertise—a person’s 
explicit and tacit knowledge about a person, situation, object, or decision opportu-
nity—is known as a holistic hunch. Intuition based on feelings—the involuntary 
emotional response to those same matters—is known as automated experience. It is 
important to try to develop your intuitive skills because they are as important as 
rational analysis in many decisions.52 Some suggestions appear on the next page. 
(See Table 7.2.)
As a model for making decisions, intuition has at least two benefits. (1) It can 
speed up decision making, useful when deadlines are tight.53 (2) It can be helpful to 
managers when resources are limited. A drawback, however, is that it can be difficult 
to convince others that your hunch makes sense. In addition, intuition is subject to 
the same biases as those that affect rational decision making, as we discuss in 
Section 7.5.54 Finally, says one senior executive, intuition is fine for start-ups but 

198 
PART 3 
Planning
“often deceives CEOs as their businesses become more complex.”55 Still, we believe 
that intuition and rationality are complementary and that managers should develop 
the courage to use intuition when making decisions.56
To what extent do you use intuition when making decisions? Are you curious 
about how you can improve your level of intuition? You can find out by taking 
Self-Assessment 7.2. ●
SELF-ASSESSMENT 7.2
®
Assessing Your Level of Intuition
This survey is designed to assess the extent you use intuition in 
your current job. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take 
Self-Assessment 7.2. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
Are you intuitive at work? Did the results surprise you?
2. 
What can you do to increase the amount of intuition you 
use at work? Describe.
3. 
What factors are inhibiting your use of intuition? What if 
anything can be done to eliminate these hindrances?
TABLE 7.2 
Guidelines for Developing Intuitive Awareness
Source: E. Sadler-Smith and E. Shefy, “The Intuitive Executive: Understanding and Applying Gut Feel in Decision Making,” Academy of Management 
Executive, November 2004, p. 88. Copyright © 2004 by Academy of Management. Reproduced with permission of Academy of Management via 
Copyright Clearance Center.
RECOMMENDATION 
DESCRIPTION
 1. Open up the closet. 
 To what extent do you experience intuition; trust your feelings; count on intuitive judgments; 
suppress hunches; covertly rely upon gut feel.
 2. Don’t mix up your I’s. 
 Instinct, Insight, and Intuition are not synonymous; practice distinguishing between your 
instincts, your insights, and your intuitions.
 3. Elicit good feedback. 
 Seek feedback on your intuitive judgments; build confidence in your gut feel; create a learning 
environment in which you can develop better intuitive awareness.
 4. Get a feel for your 
Benchmark your intuitions; get a sense of how reliable hunches are; ask yourself how your
  batting average. 
intuitive judgment might be improved.
 5. Use imagery. 
 Use imagery rather than words; literally visualize potential future scenarios that take your gut 
feelings into account.
 6. Play devil’s advocate. 
 Test out intuitive judgments; raise objections to them; generate counterarguments; probe how 
robust gut feel is when challenged.
 7. Capture and validate 
Create the inner state to give your intuitive mind the freedom to roam; capture your creative
  your intuitions. 
intuitions; log them before they are censored by rational analysis.

7.2 
Making Ethical Decisions
What guidelines can I follow to be sure that decisions I make are not just lawful but ethical?
THE BIG PICTURE
A graph known as a decision tree can help one make ethical decisions. In addition, one should be 
aware of “the magnificent seven” general moral principles for managers.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
The ethical behavior of businesspeople has become of increasing concern in recent 
years, brought about by a number of events.
The Dismal Record of Business Ethics
First were the business scandals of the early 2000s, from Enron to WorldCom, produc-
ing photos of handcuffed executives. “The supposedly ‘independent’ auditors, direc-
tors, accountants, and stock market advisers and accountants were all tarnished,” wrote 
Mortimer Zuckerman, editor-in-chief of U.S. News & World Report. “The engine of 
the people’s involvement, the mutual fund industry, was shown to be permeated by rip-
off artists rigging the system for the benefit of insiders and the rich.”57 Then, as the 
Iraq war wore on, reports came back of sweetheart deals and gross abuses by civilian 
contractors working in Iraq war zones. 
In 2007, it became apparent that banks and others in the financial industry had forsaken 
sound business judgment—including ethical judgments—by making mortgage loans (sub-
prime loans) to essentially unqualified buyers, which led to a wave of housing foreclosures and 
helped push the country into a recession. Since then, the media have presented us with a dis-
play of Ponzi schemes (Bernard Madoff, Allen Stanford), insider trading (Sam Waksal, Raj 
Rajaratnam), and corporate sleaziness (work-stressed suicides at Apple’s China supplier Fox-
conn, a fatal accident at a Kentucky coal mine evading safety regulations), and similar matters.
Through it all, voices were being raised that American capitalism was not doing 
enough to help the poorer nations in the world. Companies in wealthier countries, Mi-
crosoft’s Bill Gates has urged, should focus on “a twin mission: making profits and 
also improving lives for those who don’t fully benefit from market forces.”58
All these concerns have forced the subject of right-minded decision making to the 
top of the agenda in many organizations. Indeed, many companies now have an ethics 
officer, someone trained about matters of ethics in the workplace, particularly about 
resolving ethical dilemmas. More and more companies are also creating values state-
ments to guide employees as to what constitutes desirable business behavior.59 As a 
result of this raised consciousness, managers now must try to make sure their decisions 
are not just lawful but also ethical.60
Road Map to Ethical Decision Making: 
A Decision Tree
Undoubtedly the greatest pressure on top executives is to maximize 
shareholder value, to deliver the greatest return on investment to the 
owners of their company. But is a decision that is beneficial to 
shareholders yet harmful to employees—such as forcing them to 
contribute more to their health benefits, as IBM has done—unethi-
cal? Harvard Business School Professor Constance Bagley sug-
gests that what is needed is a decision tree to help with ethical 
decisions.61 A decision tree is a graph of decisions and their possi-
ble consequences; it is used to create a plan to reach a goal. Deci-
sion trees are used to aid in making decisions. Bagley’s ethical 
decision tree is shown on the next page. (See Figure 7.3.)
 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
199
The one-to-one model. Blake 
Mycoskie built his shoe empire, 
Toms, by selling one pair of 
inexpensive shoes and giving 
another pair away to a needy 
person. Later he extended this 
model to sell eyeglasses. More 
recently he unveiled Toms coffee, 
the sales of which will be used to 
provide clean water for cooking, 
drinking, and sanitation for 
people lacking these essentials. 
Are you more inclined to buy 
from companies like Toms (or 
eyewear seller Warby Parker or 
luxury department store Nieman 
Marcus) that tie sales of their 
products to helping impoverished 
people around the world?

200 
PART 3 
Planning
Is the proposed
action legal?
yes
no
Does it maximize
shareholder value?
Do it but disclose the
effect of the action to
shareholders.
yes
no
Is it ethical?
(To answer, weigh the effect on customers,
employees, the community, the environment,
and suppliers against the benefit to the
shareholders.)
yes
no
Would it be ethical
not to take the action?
(To answer, weigh the harm or cost that
would be imposed on shareholders against
the costs or benefits to other stakeholders.)
yes
no
Do it.
Don’t do it.
Don’t do it.
Don’t do it.
FIGURE 7.3
The ethical decision tree: 
What’s the right thing to do?
Source: Reprinted by permission of 
Harvard Business Review. Exhibit 
from “The Ethical Leader’s Decision 
Tree,” by C. E. Bagley, February 
2003. Copyright © 2003 by the 
Harvard Business School Publishing 
Corporation; all rights reserved.
When confronted with any proposed action for which a decision is required, a manager 
should ask the following questions:
1. Is the Proposed Action Legal? 
This may seem an obvious question. But, 
Bagley observes, “corporate shenanigans suggest that some managers need to be re-
minded: If the action isn’t legal, don’t do it.”
2. If “Yes,” Does the Proposed Action Maximize Shareholder Value? 
If 
the action is legal, one must next ask whether it will profit the shareholders. If the an-
swer is “yes,” should you do it? Not necessarily.
3. If “Yes,” Is the Proposed Action Ethical? 
As Bagley, points out, though 
directors and top managers may believe they are bound by corporate law to always 
maximize shareholder value, the courts and many state legislatures have held they are 
not. Rather, their main obligation is to manage “for the best interests of the corpora-
tion,” which includes the interests of the larger community.
Thus, says Bagley, building a profitable-but-polluting plant in a country overseas may 
benefit the shareholders but be bad for that country—and for the corporation’s relations 
with that nation. Ethically, then, managers should add pollution-control equipment.
4. If “No,” Would It Be Ethical Not to Take the Proposed Action? 
If the ac-
tion would not directly benefit shareholders, might it still be ethical to go ahead with it?
Not building the overseas plant might be harmful to other stakeholders, such as 
employees or customers. Thus, the ethical conclusion might be to build the plant with 
pollution-control equipment but to disclose the effects of the decision to shareholders.
As a basic guideline to making good ethical decisions on behalf of a corporation, 
Bagley suggests that directors, managers, and employees need to follow their own indi-
vidual ideas about right and wrong.62 There is a lesson, she suggests, in the response of 
the pension fund manager who, when asked whether she would invest in a company doing 
business in a country that permits slavery, responded, “Do you mean me, personally, or as 
a fund manager?” When people feel entitled or compelled to compromise their own per-
sonal ethics to advance the interests of a business, “it is an invitation to mischief.”63
To learn more about your own ethics, morality, and/or values (while also contribut-
ing to scientific research), go to www.yourmorals.org.64 ●

7.3 
Evidence-Based Decision Making & Analytics
How can I improve my decision making using evidence-based management and 
business analytics?
THE BIG PICTURE
Evidence-based decision making, which depends on an “attitude of wisdom,” rests on three truths. This section 
describes seven principles for implementing evidence-based management. We also describe why it is hard to 
bring this approach to bear on one’s decision making. Finally, we describe analytics and its three key attributes.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
201
It was the jet that Boeing didn’t build that avoided what could have been possibly the 
worst disaster in the company’s history and gave the aircraft builder the opportunity to 
go in a new direction.
In late 2002, Boeing was desperately trying to figure out what kind of passenger air-
liner to build that would allow the company to effectively compete with its European 
 rival Airbus. In October, Boeing executives met with several global airline representa-
tives in Seattle. A Boeing manager drew a graph on a whiteboard, with axes representing 
cruising range and passenger numbers. Then he asked airline representatives to locate 
their ideal position on the graph. “The distribution of the data,” reports Time, “favored 
efficiency over speed—the exact opposite of what Boeing was thinking. Two months 
later, Boeing ditched plans for a high-speed, high-cost jetliner to embark on a new pro-
gram”—what became the massive attempt to build the 787 Dreamliner.65
Evidence-Based Decision Making
 “Too many companies and too many leaders are more interested in just copying others, 
doing what they’ve always done, and making decisions based on beliefs in what ought 
to work rather than what actually works,” say Stanford professors Jeffrey Pfeffer and 
Robert Sutton. “They fail to face the hard facts and use the best evidence to help navi-
gate the competitive environment.”66 This is what Boeing narrowly averted in that Se-
attle conference, when it was getting ready to spend billions of dollars trying to 
outcompete Airbus by building a faster aircraft. Companies that use evidence-based 
management—the translation of principles based on best evidence into organizational 
practice, bringing rationality to the decision-making process, as we defined it in Chap-
ter 2—routinely trump the competition, Pfeffer and Sutton suggest.67
Seven Implementation Principles 
Pfeffer and Sutton identify seven implemen-
tation principles to help companies that are committed to doing what it takes to profit 
from evidence-based management:68
■ 
Treat your organization as an unfinished prototype. Leaders need to think 
and act as if their organization is an unfinished prototype that won’t be ruined 
by dangerous new ideas or impossible to change because of employee or 
management resistance. Example: Some Internet start-ups that find their orig-
inal plan not working have learned to master “the art of the pivot,” to fail 
gracefully by cutting their losses and choosing a new direction—as did the 
founders of Fabulus, a review site and social network that attracted no users, 
and so they launched a high-end e-commerce site called Fab.com.69
■ 
No brag, just facts. This slogan is an antidote for over-the-top assertions about 
forthcoming products, such as “the deafening levels of managed hype across 
much of Silicon Valley,” as one reporter characterized it.70 Other companies, such 
as DaVita, which operates dialysis centers, take pains to evaluate data before mak-
ing decisions. Google has used data to find out what makes a better boss.71

202 
PART 3 
Planning
Evidence-based decisions. 
Google used evidence-based 
analysis to find out what makes a 
better boss. They found that what 
employees value most are even-
keeled bosses who take an 
interest in employees’ lives and 
careers, who make time for one-
on-one meetings, and who help 
people work through problems by 
asking questions instead of 
dictating answers. Would you 
expect a “just-the-facts” 
approach to be normal in high-
tech businesses or unusual?
■ 
See yourself and your organization as outsiders do. Most managers are af-
flicted with “rampant optimism,” with inflated views of their own talents and 
prospects for success, which causes them to downplay risks and continue on a 
path despite evidence things are not working. “Having a blunt friend, mentor, 
or counselor,” Pfeffer and Sutton suggest, “can help you see and act on better 
evidence.”
■ 
Evidence-based management is not just for senior executives. The best 
organizations are those in which everyone, not just the top managers, is 
guided by the responsibility to gather and act on quantitative and qualitative 
data and share results with others.
■ 
Like everything else, you still need to sell it. “Unfortunately, new and excit-
ing ideas grab attention even when they are vastly inferior to old ideas,” the 
Stanford authors say. “Vivid, juicy stories and case studies sell better than 
detailed, rigorous, and admittedly dull data—no matter how wrong the stories 
or how right the data.” To sell an evidence-based approach, you may have to 
identify a preferred practice based on solid if unexciting evidence, then use 
vivid stories to grab management attention.
■ 
If all else fails, slow the spread of bad practice. Because many manag-
ers and employees face pressures to do things that are known to be inef-
fective, it may be necessary for you to practice “evidence-based 
misbehavior”—that is, ignore orders you know to be wrong or delay their 
implementation.
■ 
The best diagnostic question: What happens when people fail? “Failure 
hurts, it is embarrassing, and we would rather live without it,” the authors 
write. “Yet there is no learning without failure. . . . If you look at how the 
most effective systems in the world are managed, a hallmark is that when 
something goes wrong, people face the hard facts, learn what happened and 
why, and keep using those facts to make the system better.” From the U.S. 
civil aviation system, which rigorously examines airplane accidents, near 
misses, and equipment problems, to Home Depot deciding to close 400 of its 
U.S. stores after declining sales, evidence-based management makes the point 
that failure is a great teacher.72 This means, however, that the organization 
must “forgive and remember” people who make mistakes, not be trapped by 
preconceived notions, and confront the best evidence and hard facts.
What Makes It Hard to Be Evidence Based 
Despite your best intentions, it’s 
hard to bring the best evidence to bear on your decisions. Among the reasons:73 (1) 
There’s too much evidence. (2) There’s not enough good evidence. (3) The evidence 

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
203
doesn’t quite apply. (4) People are trying to mislead you. (5) You are trying to mislead 
you. (6) The side effects outweigh the cure. (Example: Despite the belief that social 
promotion in school is a bad idea—that is, that schools shouldn’t advance children to 
the next grade when they haven’t mastered the material—the side effect is skyrocket-
ing costs because it crowds schools with older students, and angrier students, demand-
ing more resources.) (7) Stories are more persuasive, anyway.
Evidence-Based Decision Making: “If People Are Your Most Important 
Assets, Why Would You Get Rid of Them?”
It’s an axiom of many managers that it’s often necessary to cut 
back on workers during economic downturns—or even in good 
times—because it helps to increase profitability or drive the 
company’s stock price higher. But Stanford professor Jeffrey 
Pfeffer, advocate for evidence-based management, takes issue 
with this assumption. “There is a growing body of academic 
research suggesting that firms incur big costs when they cut 
workers,” he writes.74
What Are the Costs of Layoffs? While agreeing that there are 
circumstances in which layoffs are necessary for a firm to 
survive (as when an industry is shrinking or competitors are 
resorting to cheaper overseas labor), Pfeffer suggests compa-
nies incur big costs when they cut their labor forces. He cites 
the direct and indirect costs of layoffs listed by University of 
Colorado professor Wayne Cascio in his book Responsible Re-
structuring: “severance pay; paying out accrued vacation and 
sick pay; outplacement costs; higher unemployment-insur-
ance taxes; the cost of rehiring employees when business im-
proves; low morale and risk-averse survivors; potential 
lawsuits, sabotage, or even workplace violence from ag-
grieved employees or former employees; loss of institutional 
memory and knowledge; diminished trust in management; 
and reduced productivity.”
Looking at the evidence, Pfeffer finds that firms that an-
nounce layoffs actually do not enjoy higher stock prices than 
their peers, either immediately or over time. Layoffs also don’t 
increase individual company productivity and, in fact, don’t 
even reliably cut costs (because companies often lose the best 
people first; there is lower morale among survivors, resulting in 
reduced customer service, innovation, and productivity; and 
remaining employees are spurred to look for other jobs once 
things improve).
The Most Successful Airline. Following the 9/11 tragedy in 
2001, which coincided with the start of a recession, all U.S. 
airlines except one announced tens of thousands of layoffs. 
The exception was Southwest, which has never had an invol-
untary layoff in its 40-year history and which most Americans 
voted the most desirable brand in 2012.75 “If people are your 
most important assets,” Pfeffer quotes a former head of the 
airline’s human resources department, “why would you get 
rid of them?”
YOUR CALL
Can you think of any instances of people being laid off unnec-
essarily? What is your evidence that it was not necessary?
EXAMPLE
In Praise of Analytics
Perhaps the purest application of evidence-based management is the use of analytics,
or business analytics, the term used for sophisticated forms of business data analysis.
One example of analytics is portfolio analysis, in which an investment adviser evalu-
ates the risks of various stocks. Another example is the time-series forecast, which 
predicts future data based on patterns of historical data.
Some leaders and firms have become exceptional practitioners of analytics. Gary 
Loveman, CEO of the Harrah’s gambling empire, wrote a famous paper, “Diamonds in 
the Data Mine,” in which he explained how data-mining software was used to analyze 
vast amounts of casino customer data to target profitable patrons.76 Marriott Interna-
tional, through its Total Hotel Optimization program, has used quantitative data to es-
tablish the optimal price for hotel rooms, evaluate use of conference facilities and 
catering, and develop systems to optimize offerings to frequent customers.77 To aid in 
recruitment, Microsoft studies correlations between its successful workers and the 
schools and companies they arrived from.78

204 
PART 3 
Planning
EXAMPLE
Analytics in Athletics: The Personal “Moneyball” Coach
Some pro basketball players have personal trainers and chefs, 
and now some even have their own personal statistician.
Justin Zormelo, 30, a graduate of Georgetown University 
and the founder of Best Ball Analytics, is described by The 
New York Times as “the go-to source for [basketball] players 
who want a private guide through the emerging world of ad-
vanced analytics.”79 He has worked with over 30 NBA clients, 
including Kevin Durant (Oklahoma Thunder), John Wall (Wash-
ington Wizards), and Rajon Rondo (Boston Celtics). Studying 
game films and poring over metrics, he provides data and ad-
vice such as whether players should take two dribbles instead 
of four or whether their shooting is off because they leave 
their feet too soon. Zormelo spends hours on his laptop com-
puter, and his advice is as much informed by spreadsheets as 
by coaches’ playbooks.
Better Indicators of Player Success. Zormelo is the logical 
result of the whole Moneyball phenomenon. The film of that 
name, which starred Brad Pitt and supporting actor Jonah Hill 
and which received six 2012 Academy Award nominations, 
was adapted from a book by Michael Lewis, Moneyball: The 
Art of Winning an Unfair Game. The book described how the 
Oakland Athletics, one of the poorest teams in Major League 
Baseball (2002 payroll $41 million, versus the New York Yan-
kees’ $126 million), managed to go to the playoffs five times 
in seven years against better-financed contenders. They ac-
complished this by avoiding the use of traditional baseball sta-
tistics and finding better indicators of player success in 
on-base percentage, slugging percentage, and the like. For a 
time, this creative use of analytics enabled managers of the 
California club to concentrate their limited payroll resources 
on draft picks who were primarily talented college players 
rather than veteran professionals.80
Analytics in the NBA & NFL. Since then the use of unusual ana-
lytics to find better ways to value players and strategies has found 
its way into other sports. In basketball, for instance, the Houston 
Rockets discovered they had allocated such a huge part of the 
payroll to superstars (Tracy McGrady, Yao Ming) that they couldn’t 
afford more stars. “So we went looking for nonsuperstars that we 
thought were undervalued,” says Daryl Morey, who was hired to 
rethink Rockets basketball.81 Looking at midlevel NBA players, he 
finally settled on forward Shane Battier, who doesn’t post many 
points, rebounds, assists, steals, or blocked shots but who applies 
a superior intelligence to an overview of the game that helps his 
teams produce winning records. (Battier was most recently with 
the Miami Heat.) Analytics has also spread to pro football, as 
 successfully used by the San Francisco 49ers.82 Now it’s a tool 
 adopted by individual players.
YOUR CALL
Executives and personnel people in other lines of work are of-
ten like the old sports traditionalists, relying on resume, de-
gree, years of experience, and even looks in evaluating job 
applicants. What other, more quantifiable measures might be 
used instead when hiring new college graduates?
Thomas H. Davenport and others at Babson College’s Working Knowledge Re-
search Center studied 32 organizations that made a commitment to quantitative, fact-
based analysis and found three key attributes among analytics competitors: use of 
modeling, having multiple applications, and support from top management.83
1. Use of Modeling: Going beyond Simple Descriptive Statistics 
Compa-
nies such as Capital One look well beyond basic statistics, using data mining and pre-
dictive modeling to identify potential and most profitable customers. Predictive 
modeling is a data-mining technique used to predict future behavior and anticipate the 
consequences of change. Thus, Capital One conducts more than 30,000 experiments a 
year, with different interest rates, incentives, direct-mail packaging, and other vari-
ables to evaluate which customers are most apt to sign up for credit cards and will pay 
back their debt.
2. Having Multiple Applications, Not Just One 
UPS (formerly United Parcel 
Service) applies analytics not only to tracking the movement of packages but also to 
examining usage patterns to try to identify potential customer defections so that sales-
people can make contact and solve problems. More recently, it began testing whether 
UPS could be in the business of delivering direct mail, to serve as an alternative to 

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
205
marketing mail delivered by the U.S. Post Service.84 Analytics competitors “don’t gain 
advantage from one killer app [application], but rather from multiple applications sup-
porting many parts of the business,” says Babson College’s Davenport. 
3. Support from the Top 
“A companywide embrace of analytics impels changes 
in culture, processes, behavior, and skills for many employees,” says Davenport. “And 
so, like any major transition, it requires leadership from executives at the very top who 
have a passion for the quantitative approach.”
The Uses of “Big Data”
A recent study suggests the world’s information will reach 40 zettabytes by 2020, 
a 50% growth over 2010 and equal to 57 times the number of grains of sand on all 
the beaches of the world.85 This has led to a concept known as Big Data, stores of 
data so vast that conventional database management systems cannot handle them 
and so very sophisticated analysis software and supercomputing-level hardware 
are required.86 Big Data includes not only data in corporate databases but also 
web-browsing data trails, social network communications, sensor data, and surveil-
lance data.87Attracting a lot of attention in science, business, medicine, and tech-
nology, the concept of Big Data has been dubbed “the next frontier for innovation, 
competition, and productivity.”88
Big Data analytics is the process of examining large amounts of data of a variety of 
types to uncover hidden patterns, unknown correlations, and other useful information. 
While Big Data analytics can be used to tackle large-scale problems such as how to 
make electricity grids and traffic flow more effective, it also has specific, practical uses 
in business.89 HP Labs researchers, for instance, used Twitter data to accurately predict 
box-office revenues of Hollywood movies.90 Business is also interested in analyzing 
online behavior “to create ads, products, or experiences that are most appealing to 
consumers—and thus most lucrative to companies,” says one technology journalist. 
“There’s also great potential to more accurately predict market fluctuations or react 
faster to shifts in consumer sentiment or supply chain issues.”91 ●
Serving you. This server 
farm, or data center, 
contains thousands of 
computers storing terabytes 
of information on everyone 
and everything—“Big Data” 
that can be subjected to 
data analytics to work on 
large-scale projects. With 
data centers like this, you 
can see why everything you 
enter online, whether via 
e-mail, Facebook, texting, or 
twittering, no matter how 
innocuous, can be stored 
and used later to try to sell 
you things. Are you okay 
with this?

7.4  Four General Decision-Making Styles
How do I decide to decide?
THE BIG PICTURE
Your decision-making style reflects how you perceive and respond to information. It could be directive, ana-
lytical, conceptual, or behavioral.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
A decision-making style reflects the combination of how an individual perceives and 
responds to information. A team of researchers developed a model of decision-making 
styles based on the idea that styles vary along two different dimensions: value orienta-
tion and tolerance for ambiguity.92
Value Orientation & Tolerance for Ambiguity
Value orientation reflects the extent to which a person focuses on either task and techni-
cal concerns or people and social concerns when making decisions. Some people, for 
instance, are very task focused at work and do not pay much attention to people issues, 
whereas others are just the opposite.
The second dimension pertains to a person’s tolerance for ambiguity. This individ-
ual difference indicates the extent to which a person has a high need for structure or 
control in his or her life. Some people desire a lot of structure in their lives (a low tol-
erance for ambiguity) and find ambiguous situations stressful and psychologically un-
comfortable. In contrast, others do not have a high need for structure and can thrive in 
uncertain situations (a high tolerance for ambiguity). Ambiguous situations can ener-
gize people with a high tolerance for ambiguity.
When the dimensions of value orientation and tolerance for ambiguity are com-
bined, they form four styles of decision making: directive, analytical, conceptual, and 
behavioral. (See Figure 7.4.)
206 
PART 3 
Planning
FIGURE 7.4 
Decision-making styles
High
Analytical
Directive
Conceptual
Behavioral
Tolerance
for
ambiguity
Task &
technical
concerns
Value orientation
People
& social
concerns
Low

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
207
Fortune 500 restaurant CEO. 
Don Thompson is CEO of 
McDonald’s,  a Fortune 500 
company that has 32,000 
restaurants worldwide and 
serves 68 million meals each 
day. A bright student, he holds a 
degree in electrical engineering 
from Purdue University. Because 
of racial stereotyping, African 
American leaders operate at a 
disadvantage, according to one 
study, with strong performance 
being misattributed to market 
factors outside their control or to 
humor or public speaking skills 
rather than to intellectual 
prowess.93 What kind of 
decision-making style would you 
expect Thompson to have?
1. The Directive Style: Action-Oriented 
Decision Makers Who Focus on Facts
People with a directive style have a low tolerance for ambiguity and are 
oriented toward task and technical concerns in making decisions. They 
are efficient, logical, practical, and systematic in their approach to 
solving problems.
People with this style are action oriented and decisive and like to 
focus on facts. In their pursuit of speed and results, however, these 
individuals tend to be autocratic, to exercise power and control, and 
to focus on the short run.
2. The Analytical Style: Careful Decision Makers 
Who Like Lots of Information & Alternative Choices
Managers with an analytical style have a much higher tolerance for ambiguity and are 
characterized by the tendency to overanalyze a situation. People with this style like to 
consider more information and alternatives than those following the directive style.
Analytic individuals are careful decision makers who take longer to make decisions 
but who also respond well to new or uncertain situations.
3. The Conceptual Style: Decision Makers Who Rely 
on Intuition & Have a Long-Term Perspective
People with a conceptual style have a high tolerance for ambiguity and tend to focus 
on the people or social aspects of a work situation. They take a broad perspective to 
problem solving and like to consider many options and future possibilities.
Conceptual types adopt a long-term perspective and rely on intuition and discus-
sions with others to acquire information. They also are willing to take risks and are 
good at finding creative solutions to problems. However, a conceptual style can foster 
an indecisive approach to decision making.
4. The Behavioral Style: The Most People-Oriented 
Decision Makers 
The behavioral style is the most people oriented of the four styles. People with this 
style work well with others and enjoy social interactions in which opinions are openly 
exchanged. Behavioral types are supportive, receptive to suggestions, show warmth, 
and prefer verbal to written information.
Although they like to hold meetings, people with this style have a tendency to avoid 
conflict and to be concerned about others. This can lead behavioral types to adopt a 
wishy-washy approach to decision making and to have a hard time saying no.
Which Style Do You Have?
Research shows that very few people have only one dominant decision-making style. 
Rather, most managers have characteristics that fall into two or three styles. Studies 
also show that decision-making styles vary across occupations, job level, and coun-
tries.94 There is not a best decision-making style that applies to all situations.

208 
PART 3 
Planning
You can use knowledge of decision-making styles in three ways:
Know Thyself 
Knowledge of styles helps you to understand yourself. Awareness of 
your style assists you in identifying your strengths and weaknesses as a decision maker 
and facilitates the potential for self-improvement.
Influence Others 
You can increase your ability to influence others by being aware 
of styles. For example, if you are dealing with an analytical person, you should pro-
vide as much information as possible to support your ideas.
Deal with Conflict 
Knowledge of styles gives you an awareness of how people 
can take the same information and yet arrive at different decisions by using a variety of 
decision-making strategies. Different decision-making styles represent one likely 
source of interpersonal conflict at work.
What style of decision making do you prefer? Would you like to learn how to use all 
of the styles more effectively? The following self-assessment can help. ●
SELF-ASSESSMENT 7.3
®
What Is Your Decision-Making Style?
This survey is designed to assess your decision-making style. 
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 
7.3. When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
What is your dominant decision-making style?
2. 
What are the pros and cons of your style?
3. 
Based on your results, what are some things you can do 
to incorporate aspects of your less dominant styles into 
your decision making? Explain.
Success. Russell Wilson, quarterback for 
the Seattle Seahawks, led his team to 
victory 48-3 over the Denver Broncos in 
the 2014 Super Bowl. As the leader of his 
team, a quarterback must make many 
decisions about what is the right way to 
success. If you were a quarterback, which 
of the four general decision-making styles 
do you think you would embody?

7.5 
How to Overcome Barriers to Decision Making
Trying to be rational isn’t always easy. What are the barriers?
THE BIG PICTURE
Responses to a decision situation may take the form of four ineffective reactions or three effective 
reactions. Managers should be aware of nine common decision-making biases.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Do your moods influence your decisions? Do you, for instance, spend more when 
you’re sad and self-absorbed? That’s what one experiment found: When researchers 
exposed student participants to a sadness-inducing video clip about the death of a 
boy’s mentor, the students were inclined to offer more money for a product (a sporty-
looking water bottle) than were other subjects who had watched a neutral clip.95
Decision Making & Expectations about Happiness
Not just the moods themselves but your expectations about how happy or unhappy you 
think future outcomes will make you perhaps also can influence your decisions. It 
seems that people expect certain life events to have a much greater emotional effect 
than in fact they do, according to Harvard University psychologist Daniel Gilbert, who 
has studied individual emotional barometers in decision making. College professors, 
for example, expect to be quite happy if they are given tenure and quite unhappy if 
they aren’t. However, Gilbert found those who received tenure were happy but not as 
happy as they themselves had predicted, whereas those denied tenure did not become 
very unhappy.
The expectation about the level of euphoria or disappointment was also found to be 
true of big-jackpot lottery winners and of people being tested for HIV infection. That 
is, people are often right when they describe what outcome will make them feel good 
or bad, but they are often wrong when asked to predict how strongly they will feel that 
way and how long the feeling will last. Even severe life events have a negative impact 
on people’s sense of well-being and satisfaction for no more than three months, after 
which their feelings at least go back to normal.96
Perhaps knowing that you have this “immune system” of the mind, which blunts 
bad feelings and smoothes out euphoric ones, can help make it easier for you to make 
difficult decisions.
How Do Individuals Respond to a Decision Situation? 
Ineffective & Effective Responses
What is your typical response when you’re suddenly confronted with a challenge in 
the form of a problem or an opportunity? There are perhaps four ineffective reactions 
and three effective ones.97
Four Ineffective Reactions 
There are four defective problem-recognition and 
problem-solving approaches that act as barriers when you must make an important 
decision in a situation of conflict:
1. Relaxed Avoidance—“There’s No Point in Doing Anything; Nothing 
Bad’s Going to Happen.” 
In relaxed avoidance, a manager decides to take no 
action in the belief that there will be no great negative consequences. This condition, 
then, is a form of complacency: You either don’t see or you disregard the signs of dan-
ger (or of opportunity).
 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
209

210 
PART 3 
Planning
Example: Relaxed avoidance was vividly demonstrated in the months before the 
subprime mortgage meltdown, when banks made cheap housing loans to a lot of un-
qualified buyers, precipitating a huge financial crisis and drying up of credit. During 
that time, a lot of smart people in denial said not to worry, that the mortgage mess 
would be “contained.” They included many bank presidents and even Ben Bernanke, 
chairman of the Federal Reserve.98 One nationwide online survey has also found that 
investors’ forecasts of future returns go up after the stock market has risen and go 
down after it has fallen—complacency indeed.99
2. Relaxed Change—“Why Not Just Take the Easiest Way Out?” 
In 
relaxed change, a manager realizes that complete inaction will have negative conse-
quences but opts for the first available alternative that involves low risk. This is, of 
course, a form of “satisficing”; the manager avoids exploring a variety of alternatives 
in order to make the best decision.
Example: Perhaps people really don’t like a lot of choices. In one experiment, 40% of 
customers stopped by a large assortment of jam jars (24) and only 30% by a small assort-
ment (6)—but only 3% made a purchase in the first case versus 30% in the second.100
3. Defensive Avoidance—“There’s No Reason for Me to Explore Other 
Solution Alternatives.” 
In defensive avoidance, a manager can’t find a good 
solution and follows by (a) procrastinating, (b) passing the buck, or (c) denying the risk 
of any negative consequences. This is a posture of resignation and a denial of respon-
sibility for taking action. 
By procrastinating, you put off making a decision (“I’ll get to this later”).101 In pass-
ing the buck, you let someone else take the consequences of making the decision (“Let 
George do it”). In denying the risk that there will be any negative consequences, you are 
engaging in rationalizing (“How bad could it be?”). As one article states, deliberating on 
the matter of why no one at Penn State did more to pursue allegations that an assistant 
football coach was abusing young boys, “companies overlook internal problems that at 
best impede performance and at worst could bring down the entire organization.”102
Example: Defensive avoidance often occurs in firms with high turnover. Although 
some executives try to stop high performers from exiting by offering raises or promo-
tions, others react defensively, telling themselves that the person leaving is not a big 
loss. “It’s psychologically threatening to those who are staying to acknowledge there’s 
a reason some people are leaving,” says the CEO of a corporate-psychology consulting 
company, “so executives often dismiss them as untalented or even deny that an exodus 
is occurring.”103 He mentions one financial-services company whose executives insisted 
turnover was low when in fact 50% of hundreds of new employees quit within years.
4. Panic—“This Is So Stressful, I’ve Got to Do Something—Anything—to 
Get Rid of the Problem!” This reaction is especially apt to occur in crisis situa-
tions. In panic, a manager is so frantic to get rid of the problem that he or she can’t deal 
with the situation realistically. This is the kind of situation in which the manager has com-
pletely forgotten the idea of behaving with “grace under pressure,” of staying cool and 
calm. Troubled by anxiety, irritability, sleeplessness, and even physical illness, if you’re 
experiencing this reaction, your judgment may be so clouded that you won’t be able to 
accept help in dealing with the problem or to realistically evaluate the alternatives.
Example: Not only panic but frequent worry and anxiety, of the sort experienced by 
poor people, can adversely affect decision making. For instance, shoppers at a New 
Jersey mall were asked to make decisions about how they would spend money when 
facing emergency expenses. When the expenses were large, the cognitive performance 
of low-income shoppers fell by 13 IQ points (equivalent to a lost night’s sleep), 
whereas the IQ levels of middle-income shoppers remained the same.104 “When you 
don’t have enough [money],” said one of the study authors, “it occupies your mind and 
takes away bandwidth [mental capacity] that you could use for other things.”105

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
211
Three Effective Reactions: Deciding to Decide 
In deciding to decide, a man-
ager agrees that he or she must decide what to do about a problem or opportunity and 
take effective decision-making steps. Three ways to help you decide whether to decide 
are to evaluate the following:106
1. Importance—“How High Priority Is This Situation?” You need to deter-
mine how much priority to give the decision situation. If it’s a threat, how extensive 
might prospective losses or damage be? If it’s an opportunity, how beneficial might the 
possible gains be?
2. Credibility—“How Believable Is the Information about the Situa-
tion?” You need to evaluate how much is known about the possible threat or op-
portunity. Is the source of the information trustworthy? Is there credible evidence?
3. Urgency—“How Quickly Must I Act on the Information about the 
Situation?” Is the threat immediate? Will the window of opportunity stay open 
long? Can actions to address the situation be done gradually?
Deciding to Decide: How Should a Paper Maker Reinvent Itself?
“Failure isn’t fatal, but failure to change might be,” legendary 
UCLA basketball coach John Wooden once said.107
In 2000, the paper industry was at its height, with 94 million 
tons of paper and paper-based packaging being produced. 
Then the computer revolution and the vogue phrase “the pa-
perless office” really began to be felt, and the demand for pa-
per plummeted. Paper companies such as 83-year-old 
family-owned Mohawk Fine Papers, located in a Civil War–era 
ax handle factory in Cohoes, New York, saw failure looming as 
companies cut back on paper for brochures, reports, and mar-
keting materials. President Thomas D. O’Connor Jr. faced the 
dilemma of rescuing the firm founded by his grandfather.
Is This High-Priority? The first decision about how to handle the re-
sponse—Should this be considered a high-priority matter?—was 
certainly much in evidence, as revenues slipped and operations at 
Mohawk’s 350,000-square-foot mill shrank from seven days a week 
to five and then to four. Clearly, this was a high-priority concern.
Is the Data Believable? The second decision—How believable 
is the information?—was reinforced in depressing numbers 
throughout the paper industry, with the decline in orders for 
newsprint and writing paper, which accounted for about 85% of 
the decrease in paper sales. The copy-machine paper business 
also shrank. Meanwhile, the U.S. government stepped up its cam-
paign to “go paperless,” creating more government websites and 
permitting taxpayers to file income tax returns online.
How Fast Do We Need to Act? The answer to the final decision—
How quickly should this information be acted on?—was evident in 
the speed of the preceding events. “For the first time in hundreds 
of years,” O’Connor said, “paper had to justify itself.”108 As the 
digital revolution appeared ready to wipe out Mohawk and every 
other paper company, in 2004, reports The Wall Street Journal, 
O’Connor made an extraordinary bet: His company decided to ex-
pand into the fine stationery business, borrowing millions of dollars 
to do so.109 It decided to take advantage of paper’s transformation 
from commodity to keepsake, supplying high-quality, highly profit-
able paper for personalized holiday cards, photo books, and an-
nouncements from Shutterfly, Minted.com, and others.
YOUR CALL
Today Mohawk’s sales, which first began declining in 1996, are 
way up. “We couldn’t just downsize and hope to survive,” 
O’Connor said later. “We knew we had to change our product 
completely.” With this knowledge in hindsight, how would you 
have handled O’Connor’s initial decisions about finding a new 
direction for the company?
EXAMPLE
Nine Common Decision-Making Biases: Rules of 
Thumb, or “Heuristics”
If someone asked you to explain the basis on which you make decisions, could you 
even say? Perhaps, after some thought, you might come up with some “rules of 
thumb.” Scholars call them heuristics (pronounced “hyur-ris-tiks”)—strategies that 
simplify the process of making decisions.

212 
PART 3 
Planning
Despite the fact that people use such rules of thumb all the time, that doesn’t mean 
they’re reliable. Indeed, some are real barriers to high-quality decision making (as we 
saw in the Manager’s Toolbox at the start of this chapter). Among those that tend to 
bias how decision makers process information are (1) availability, (2) representative-
ness, (3) confirmation, (4) sunk cost, (5) anchoring and adjustment, (6) overconfi-
dence, (7) hindsight, (8) framing, and (9) escalation of commitment.110
1. The Availability Bias: Using Only the Information Available 
If you had 
a perfect on-time work attendance record for 9 months but then were late for work 4 
days during the last 2 months because of traffic, shouldn’t your boss take into account 
your entire attendance history when considering you for a raise? Yet managers tend to 
give more weight to more recent behavior. This is because of the availability bias—
managers use information readily available from memory to make judgments.
The bias, of course, is that readily available information may not present a complete 
picture of a situation. The availability bias may be stoked by the news media, which 
tends to favor news that is unusual or dramatic. Thus, for example, because of the ef-
forts of interest groups or celebrities, more news coverage may be given to AIDS or to 
breast cancer than to heart disease, leading people to think the former are the bigger 
killers when in fact the latter is.
2. The Representativeness Bias: Faulty Generalizing from a Small Sam-
ple or a Single Event 
As a form of financial planning, playing state lotteries 
leaves something to be desired. When, for instance, in 2014 the Tennessee Powerball 
jackpot reached $259.8 million, the odds of winning it were put at 1 in 175,223,510.111 
(A person would have a far greater chance of being struck by lightning.) Nevertheless, 
millions of people buy lottery tickets because they read or hear about a handful of fel-
low citizens who have been the fortunate recipients of enormous winnings. This is an 
example of the representativeness bias, the tendency to generalize from a small sam-
ple or a single event.
The bias here is that just because something happens once, that doesn’t mean it is 
representative—that it will happen again or will happen to you. For example, just be-
cause you hired an extraordinary sales representative from a particular university, that 
doesn’t mean that same university will provide an equally qualified candidate next 
time. Yet managers make this kind of hiring decision all the time.
3. The Confirmation Bias: Seeking Information to Support One’s Point 
of View 
The confirmation bias is when people seek information to support their 
point of view and discount data that do not. Though this bias would seem obvious, 
people practice it all the time.
4. The Sunk-Cost Bias: Money Already Spent Seems to Justify Continuing 
The sunk-cost bias, or sunk-cost fallacy, is when managers add up all the money al-
ready spent on a project and conclude it is too costly to simply abandon it.
Most people have an aversion to “wasting” money. Especially if large sums have 
already been spent, they may continue to push on with an iffy-looking project to jus-
tify the money already sunk into it. The sunk-cost bias is sometimes called the “Con-
corde” effect, referring to the fact that the French and British governments continued 
to invest in the Concorde supersonic jetliner even when it was evident there was no 
economic justification for the aircraft.
5. The Anchoring & Adjustment Bias: Being Influenced by an Initial Figure  
Managers will often give their employees a standard percentage raise in salary, basing 
the decision on whatever the workers made the preceding year. They may do this even 
though the raise may be completely out of alignment with what other companies are 
paying for the same skills. This is an instance of the anchoring and adjustment bias, 
the tendency to make decisions based on an initial figure.

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
213
The bias is that the initial figure may be irrelevant to market realities. This phenom-
enon is sometimes seen in real estate sales. Before the 2008 crash in real estate mar-
kets, many homeowners might have been inclined at first to list their houses at an 
extremely high (but perhaps randomly chosen) selling price. These sellers were then 
unwilling later to come down substantially to match the kind of buying offers that re-
flected what the marketplace thought the house was really worth.
6. The Overconfidence Bias: Blind to One’s Own Blindness 
The overcon-
fidence bias is the bias in which people’s subjective confidence in their decision mak-
ing is greater than their objective accuracy. “Overconfidence arises because people are 
often blind to their own blindness,” says behavioral psychologist Daniel Kahneman. 
For instance, with experienced investment advisors whose financial outcomes simply 
depended on luck, he found “the illusion of skill is not only an individual aberration; it 
is deeply ingrained in the culture of the industry.”112 In general, he advises, we should 
not take assertive and confident people at their own evaluation unless we have inde-
pendent reasons to believe they know what they’re talking about.
7. The Hindsight Bias: The I-Knew-It-All-Along Effect 
The hindsight bias is 
the tendency of people to view events as being more predictable than they really are, as 
when at the end of watching a game we decide the outcome was obvious and predict-
able, even though in fact it was not. Sometimes called the “I knew it all along” effect, 
this occurs when we look back on a decision and try to reconstruct why we decided to 
do something.
8. The Framing Bias: Shaping How a Problem Is Presented 
 The framing 
bias is the tendency of decision makers to be influenced by the way a situation or prob-
lem is presented to them. For instance, customers have been found to prefer meat that 
is framed as “85% lean meat” instead of “15% fat,” although of course they are the 
same thing.113 Framing is important because how a problem is presented to us (the 
same idea comes from Democrats? Or Republicans?) may influence us to consider a 
certain solution simply because of the way it was framed.
9. The Escalation of Commitment Bias: Feeling Overly Invested in a Decision 
If you really hate to admit you’re wrong, you need to be aware of the escalation of 
commitment bias, whereby decision makers increase their commitment to a project 
despite negative information about it. History is full of examples of heads of state 
(presidents Lyndon Johnson in Vietnam and George W. Bush in Iraq) who escalated 
their commitment to an original decision in the face of overwhelming evidence that it 
was producing detrimental consequences. A website called Swoopo.com capitalizes 
on this bias by offering a penny auction in which, say, a $1,500 laptop is offered for 
bidding starting at a penny and going up one cent at a time—but it costs bidders 60 
cents to make a bid. “Once people are trapped into playing,” suggests one account 
about this form of bias, “they have a hard time stopping.”114
The bias is that what was originally made as perhaps a rational decision may con-
tinue to be supported for irrational reasons—pride, ego, the spending of enormous sums 
of money, and being “loss averse.” Indeed, scholars have advanced what is known as the 
prospect theory, which suggests that decision makers find the notion of an actual loss 
more painful than giving up the possibility of a gain.115 We see a variant of this in the 
tendency of investors to hold on to their losers but cash in their winners. ●

7.6 
Group Decision Making: How to Work with Others
How do I work with others to make things happen?
THE BIG PICTURE
Group decision making has five potential advantages and four potential disadvantages. There are a number 
of characteristics of groups that a manager should be aware of as group problem-solving techniques.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
The movies celebrate the lone heroes who, like Bruce Willis or Mark Wahlberg, make 
their own moves, call their own shots. Most managers, however, work with groups and 
teams (as we discuss in Chapter 13). Although groups don’t make as high-quality deci-
sions as the best individual acting alone, research suggests that groups make better 
decisions than most individuals acting alone.116 Thus, to be an effective manager, you 
need to learn about decision making in groups.
Advantages & Disadvantages of Group 
Decision Making
Because you may often have a choice as to whether to make a decision by yourself or 
to consult with others, you need to understand the advantages and disadvantages of 
group-aided decision making.
Advantages 
Using a group to make a decision offers five possible advantages.117
For these benefits to happen, however, the group must be made up of diverse partici-
pants, not just people who all think the same way.
■ 
Greater pool of knowledge. When several people are making the decision, 
there is a greater pool of information from which to draw. If one person 
doesn’t have the pertinent knowledge and experience, someone else might.
■ 
Different perspectives. Because different people have different perspectives—
marketing, production, legal, and so on—they see the problem from different 
angles.
■ 
Intellectual stimulation. A group of people can brainstorm or otherwise 
bring greater intellectual stimulation and creativity to the decision-making 
process than is usually possible with one person acting alone.
■ 
Better understanding of decision rationale. If you participate in making a 
decision, you are more apt to understand the reasoning behind the decision, 
including the pros and cons leading up to the final step.
■ 
Deeper commitment to the decision. If you’ve been part of the group that 
has bought into the final decision, you’re more apt to be committed to seeing 
that the course of action is successfully implemented.
Disadvantages 
The disadvantages of group-aided decision making spring from 
problems in how members interact.118
■ 
A few people dominate or intimidate. Sometimes a handful of people will 
talk the longest and the loudest, and the rest of the group will simply give in. 
Or one individual, such as a strong leader, will exert disproportional influ-
ence, sometimes by intimidation. This cuts down on the variety of ideas.
■ 
Groupthink. Groupthink occurs when group members strive to agree for the 
sake of unanimity and thus avoid accurately assessing the decision situation. Here 
the positive team spirit of the group actually works against sound judgment.119
214 
PART 3 
Planning

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
215
Different perspectives or 
groupthink? A diversified team 
can offer differing points of 
view, as well as a greater pool 
of knowledge and intellectual 
stimulation. Or it can offer 
groupthink and satisficing. What 
has been your experience as to 
the value of decision making in 
the groups you’ve been in?
■ 
Satisficing. Because most people would just as soon cut short 
a meeting, the tendency is to seek a decision that is “good 
enough” rather than to push on in pursuit of other possible 
solutions. Satisficing can occur because groups have limited 
time, lack the right kind of information, or are unable to han-
dle large amounts of information.120
■ 
Goal displacement. Although the primary task of the meeting 
may be to solve a particular problem, other considerations 
may rise to the fore, such as rivals trying to win an argument. 
Goal displacement occurs when the primary goal is subsumed 
by a secondary goal.
What Managers Need to Know about 
Groups & Decision Making
If you’re a manager deliberating whether to call a meeting for group 
input, there are four characteristics of groups to be aware of:
1. They Are Less Efficient 
Groups take longer to make decisions. 
Thus, if time is of the essence, you may want to make the decision by 
yourself. Faced with time pressures or the serious effect of a decision, 
groups use less information and fewer communication channels, which 
increases the probability of a bad decision.121
2. Their Size Affects Decision Quality 
The larger the group, the lower the 
quality of the decision.122 Some research says that seven people is the optimal size.123 
Others suggest five is best.124 (An odd number is also considered best, when the group 
uses majority rules.)
3. They May Be Too Confident 
Groups are more confident about their judg-
ments and choices than individuals are. This, of course, can be a liability because it 
can lead to groupthink.
4. Knowledge Counts 
Decision-making accuracy is higher when group mem-
bers know a good deal about the relevant issues. It is also higher when a group 
leader has the ability to weight members’ opinions.125 Depending on whether group 
members know or don’t know one another, the kind of knowledge also counts. For 
example, people who are familiar with one another tend to make better decisions 
when members have a lot of unique information. However, people who aren’t fa-
miliar with one another tend to make better decisions when the members have com-
mon knowledge.126
Remember that individual decisions are not necessarily better than group deci-
sions. As we said, although groups don’t make as high-quality decisions as the 
best individual acting alone, groups generally make better decisions than most in-
dividuals acting alone. Some guidelines to using groups are presented on the next 
page. (See Table 7.3.)
In general, group decision making is more effective when members feel that they 
can freely and safely disagree with each other. This belief is referred to as minority 
dissent, dissent that occurs when a minority in a group publicly opposes the beliefs, 
attitudes, ideas, procedures, or policies assumed by the majority of the group.127 Mi-
nority dissent is associated with increased innovation within groups.128 Do your teams 
at school or work allow minority dissent? If not, what can be done to increase its exis-
tence? Self-Assessment 7.4 (next page) can help answer these questions.

216 
PART 3 
Planning
Toward consensus. Working to 
achieve cooperation in a group 
can tell you a lot about yourself. 
How well do you handle the 
negotiation process? What do 
you do when you’re 
disappointed in a result 
achieved by consensus?
TABLE 7.3
When a Group Can Help in 
Decision Making: Three 
Practical Guidelines
These guidelines may help you 
as a manager decide whether 
to include people in a decision-
making process and, if so, 
which people.
Source: Derived from George P. Huber, Managerial Decision Making (Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman, 1980), p. 149.
 1.  When it can increase quality: If additional information would increase the quality of the decision, 
managers should involve those people who can provide the needed information. Thus, if a type of 
decision occurs frequently, such as deciding on promotions or who qualifes for a loan, groups 
should be used because they tend to produce more consistent decisions than individuals do.
 2.  When it can increase acceptance: If acceptance within the organization is important, managers 
need to involve those individuals whose acceptance and commitment are important.
 3.  When it can increase development: If people can be developed through their participation, 
managers may want to involve those whose development is most important.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 7.4
®
Assessing Participation in Group Decision Making
The following survey measures minority dissent, participation 
in group decision making, and satisfaction with a group. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 7.4. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
What is the level of minority dissent in the group, and to what 
extent are you satisfied with being a member of this group?
2. 
Use the three lowest items that measure minority dissent 
to answer the following question: What can you do to 
increase the level of minority dissent in this group? 
Be specific.
3. 
Why do you think many groups muzzle the level of 
minority dissent?
Group Problem-Solving Techniques: 
Reaching for Consensus
 Using groups to make decisions generally requires that 
they reach a consensus, which occurs when members are 
able to express their opinions and reach agreement to sup-
port the final decision. More specifically, consensus is 
reached “when all members can say they either agree with 
the decision or have had their ‘day in court’ and were un-
able to convince the others of their viewpoint,” says one 
expert in decision making. “In the final analysis, everyone 
agrees to support the outcome.”129 This does not mean, 
however, that group members agree with the decision, 
only that they are willing to work toward its success.
One management expert offers the following dos and don’ts for achieving consensus.130
■    Dos: Use active listening skills. Involve as many members as possible. Seek 
out the reasons behind arguments. Dig for the facts.
■    Don’ts: Avoid log rolling and horse trading (“I’ll support your pet project if 
you’ll support mine”). Avoid making an agreement simply to keep relations 
amicable and not rock the boat. Finally, don’t try to achieve consensus by put-
ting questions to a vote; this will only split the group into winners and losers, 
perhaps creating bad feelings among the latter.
More Group Problem-Solving Techniques
Decision-making experts have developed several group problem-solving techniques to 
aid in problem solving. Three we will discuss here are (1) brainstorming, (2) the Del-
phi technique, and (3) computer-aided decision making.

 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
217
1. Brainstorming: For Increasing Creativity 
Brainstorming is a technique 
used to help groups generate multiple ideas and alternatives for solving problems.131 
Developed by advertising executive A. F. Osborn, the technique consists in having 
members of a group meet and review a problem to be solved. Individual members are 
then asked to silently generate ideas or solutions, which are then collected (preferably 
without identifying their contributors) and written on a board or flip chart. A second 
session is then used to critique and evaluate the alternatives. (Incidentally, taking a 
brief stroll, even around the office, can significantly increase creativity.132)
A modern-day variation is electronic brainstorming, sometimes called brainwriting, 
in which members of a group come together over a computer network to generate ideas 
and alternatives.133 Technology has also turned the smartphone into a device that uses 
various apps to spur the thinking process and unblock creative juices.134
Some rules for brainstorming suggested by IDEO, a product design company, are 
shown below. (See Table 7.4.)
TABLE 7.4 
Seven Rules for Brainstorming
Source: R. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organizational Behavior, 10th ed., 2012, p. 353. These recommendations and descriptions were derived from 
B. Nussbaum, “The Power of Design,” BusinessWeek, May 17, 2004, pp. 86–94. Reprinted with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
 1.  Defer judgment. Don’t criticize during the initial stage of idea generation. Phrases such as “we’ve never done it that way,” “it won’t 
work,” “it’s too expensive,” and “our manager will never agree” should not be used.
 2.  Build on the ideas of others. Encourage participants to extend others’ ideas by avoiding “buts” and using “ands.”
 3.  Encourage wild ideas. Encourage out-of-the-box thinking. The wilder and more outrageous the ideas, the better.
 4.  Go for quantity over quality. Participants should try to generate and write down as many new ideas as possible. Focusing on quantity 
encourages people to think beyond their favorite ideas.
 5.  Be visual. Use different colored pens (for example, red, purple, blue) to write on big sheets of flip-chart paper, whiteboards, or poster 
boards that are put on the wall.
 6. Stay focused on the topic. A facilitator should be used for keeping the discussion on target.
 7.  One conversation at a time. The ground rules are that no one interrupts another person, no dismissing of someone’s ideas, no 
disrespect, and no rudeness.
The benefit of brainstorming is that it is an effective technique for encouraging the 
expression of as many useful new ideas or alternatives as possible. That said, brain-
storming also can waste time generating a lot of unproductive ideas, and it is not ap-
propriate for evaluating alternatives or selecting solutions.135
2. The Delphi Technique: For Consensus of Experts 
The Delphi technique 
was originally designed for technological forecasting but now is used as a multipurpose 
planning tool. The Delphi technique is a group process that uses physically dispersed 
experts who fill out questionnaires to anonymously generate ideas; the judgments are 
combined and in effect averaged to achieve a consensus of expert opinion.
The Delphi technique is useful when face-to-face discussions are impractical. It’s 
also practical when disagreement and conflicts are likely to impair communication, 
when certain individuals might try to dominate group discussions, and when there is a 
high risk of groupthink.136
3. Computer-Aided Decision Making 
As in nearly every other aspect of business 
life, computers have entered the area of decision making, where they are useful not only in 
collecting information more quickly but also in reducing roadblocks to group consensus.

218 
PART 3 
Planning
Traditional group work. This photo shows the kind of traditional arrangement we 
expect of groups—colleagues are seated close together in clusters to better focus 
on their particular projects. Do you think you’d rather work in this type of 
arrangement than in one that is more individually based? Why or why not?
A decision support system, for instance, is a computer-based infor-
mation system that provides a flexible tool for analysis and helps man-
agers focus on the future. This kind of computer-based system aims to 
produce collected information known as business intelligence, gather-
ing data from a wide range of sources in a way that can be interpreted 
by humans and used to support better business decision making. Ex-
ample: American Airlines developed a decision support system called 
the yield management system that helps managers decide how much to 
overbook and how to set prices for each seat so that a plane is filled 
and profits are maximized.137 ●
PRACTICAL ACTION
How Exceptional Managers Make Decisions
“Failure is a great teacher.” That was one of the life lessons 
expressed by one CEO who has had to make thousands of de-
cisions during his career.138 Failure is always a possibility, but 
that possibility can’t stop one from making decisions. And you 
can probably always learn from the result.
“When Should I Make a Decision & When Should I 
Delay?” Often you want to stay open-minded before making a 
decision. But sometimes that can just be a cover for procrastina-
tion. (After all, not making a decision is in itself a kind of decision.) 
How do you know when you’re keeping an open mind or are pro-
crastinating? Here are some questions to consider:139
Understanding: “Do I have a reasonable grasp of the problem?”
Comfort level about outcome: “Would I be satisfied if I chose 
one of the existing alternatives?”
Future possible alternatives: “Would it be unlikely that I could 
come up with a better alternative if I had more time?”
Seizing the opportunity: “Could the best alternatives disappear 
if I wait?”
If you can answer “yes” to those questions, you almost cer-
tainly should decide now, not wait.
“Are There Guidelines for Making Tough Choices?” “On a 
daily and weekly basis we can be faced with making hundreds of 
decisions,” says management consultant Odette Pollar. “Most of 
them are small, but the larger ones where more is at stake can 
be truly painful.” Here are some ways she suggests making de-
cision making easier:140
Decide in a timely fashion: “Rarely does waiting significantly im-
prove the quality of the decision,” says Pollar. In fact, delay can result 
in greater unpleasantness in loss of money, time, and peace of mind.
Don’t agonize over minor decisions: Postponing decisions about 
small problems can mean that they simply turn into large ones later.
Separate outcome from process: Does a bad outcome mean 
you made a bad decision? Not necessarily. The main thing is to go 
through a well-reasoned process of choosing among alternatives, 
which increases the chances of success. But even then you can’t 
be sure there will always be a positive outcome.
Learn when to stop gathering facts: “Gather enough informa-
tion to make a sound decision,” suggests Pollar, “but not all the 
possible information.” Taking extra time may mean you’ll miss a 
window of opportunity.
When overwhelmed, narrow your choices: Sometimes there 
are many good alternatives, and you need to simplify decision 
making by eliminating some options.
YOUR CALL
Some experts suggest that to help make good decisions you 
should “Be visual,” using more pictures and diagrams, and 
“Walk and point” to stimulate areas of the brain that control 
memory, emotion, and problem solving.141 What have you found 
aids you in making decisions?

analytics 203
anchoring and adjustment bias 212
availability bias 212
Big Data 205
Big Data analytics 205
bounded rationality 196
brainstorming 217
confirmation bias 212
consensus 216
deciding to decide 211
decision 190
decision making 190
decision-making style 206
decision support system 218
decision tree 199
defensive avoidance 210
Delphi technique 217
diagnosis 192
electronic brainstorming 217
escalation of commitment bias 213
ethics officer 199
framing bias 213
goal displacement 215
groupthink 214
heuristics 211
hindsight bias 213
intuition 197
minority dissent 215
nonrational models of decision 
making 196
opportunities 192
overconfidence bias 213
panic 210
predictive modeling 204
problems 191
rational model of decision 
making 191
relaxed avoidance 209
relaxed change 210
representativeness bias 212
satisficing model 196
sunk-cost bias 212
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
7.1 Two Kinds of Decision Making: 
Rational & Nonrational
• A decision is a choice made from among 
available alternatives. Decision making is the 
process of identifying and choosing 
alternative courses of action. Two models 
managers follow in making decisions are 
rational and nonrational.
• In the rational model, there are four steps in 
making a decision: Stage 1 is identifying the 
problem or opportunity. A problem is a difficulty 
that inhibits the achievement of goals. An 
opportunity is a situation that presents 
possibilities for exceeding existing goals. This is 
a matter of diagnosis—analyzing the underlying 
causes. Stage 2 is thinking up alternative 
solutions. Stage 3 is evaluating the alternatives 
and selecting a solution. Alternatives should be 
evaluated according to cost, quality, ethics, 
feasibility, and effectiveness. Stage 4 is 
implementing and evaluating the solution 
chosen. The rational model of decision making 
assumes managers will make logical decisions 
that will be the optimum in furthering the 
organization’s best interests. The rational model 
is prescriptive, describing how managers ought 
to make decisions.
• Nonrational models of decision making 
assume that decision making is nearly always 
uncertain and risky, making it difficult for 
managers to make optimum decisions. Two 
nonrational models are satisficing and 
intuition. (1) Satisficing falls under the concept 
of bounded rationality—that is, that the ability 
of decision makers to be rational is limited by 
enormous constraints, such as time and 
money. These constraints force managers to 
make decisions according to the satisficing 
model—that is, managers seek alternatives 
until they find one that is satisfactory, not 
optimal. (2) Intuition is making choices without 
the use of conscious thought or logical 
inference. The sources of intuition are 
expertise and feelings.
7.2 Making Ethical Decisions
• Corporate corruption has made ethics in 
decision making once again important. Many 
companies have an ethics officer to resolve 
ethical dilemmas, and more companies are 
creating values statements to guide 
employees as to desirable business behavior.
• To help make ethical decisions, a decision 
tree—a graph of decisions and their possible 
consequences—may be helpful. Managers 
should ask whether a proposed action is legal 
and, if it is intended to maximize shareholder 
value, whether it is ethical—and whether it would 
be ethical not to take the proposed action.
7.3 Evidence-Based Decision 
Making & Analytics
• Evidence-based management means 
translating principles based on best evidence 
into organizational practice. It is intended to 
bring rationality to the decision-making process.
• Scholars Jeffrey Pfeffer and Robert Sutton 
identify seven implementation principles to 
help companies that are committed to doing 
what it takes to profit from evidence-based 
Key Points
 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
219

management: (1) treat your organization as an 
unfinished prototype; (2) “no brag, just facts”; 
(3) see yourself and your organization as 
outsiders do; (4) have everyone, not just top 
executives, be guided by the responsibility to 
gather and act on quantitative and qualitative 
data; (5) you may need to use vivid stories to 
sell unexciting evidence to others in the 
company; (6) at the very least, you should 
slow the spread of bad practices; and (7) you 
should learn from failure by using the facts to 
make things better.
• Applying the best evidence to your decisions 
is difficult, for seven reasons: (1) There’s too 
much evidence. (2) There’s not enough good 
evidence. (3) The evidence doesn’t quite 
apply. (4) People are trying to mislead you. 
(5) You are trying to mislead you. (6) The side 
effects outweigh the cure. (7) Stories are more 
persuasive, anyway.
• Perhaps the purest application of evidence-
based management is the use of analytics, or 
business analytics, the term used for 
sophisticated forms of business data analysis. 
Analytics competitors have three key 
attributes: (1) They go beyond simple 
descriptive statistics and use data mining and 
predictive modeling to identify potential and 
most profitable customers. (2) They don’t have 
just one principal application but rather use 
analytics in multiple applications. (3) The use 
of analytics is supported by top executives.
• A new concept is that of Big Data, which 
requires handling by very sophisticated 
analysis software and supercomputing-level 
hardware. Big Data includes not only data in 
corporate databases but also web-browsing 
data trails, social network communications, 
sensor data, and surveillance data.
• Big Data analytics is the process of examining 
large amounts of data of a variety of types to 
uncover hidden patterns, unknown 
correlations, and other useful information.
7.4 Four General Decision-Making Styles
• A decision-making style reflects the 
combination of how an individual perceives 
and responds to information.
• Decision-making styles may tend to have a 
value orientation, which reflects the extent to 
which a person focuses on either task or 
technical concerns versus people and social 
concerns when making decisions. 
• Decision-making styles may also reflect a 
person’s tolerance for ambiguity, the extent to 
which a person has a high or low need for 
structure or control in his or her life. 
• When the dimensions of value orientation and 
tolerance for ambiguity are combined, they 
form four styles of decision making: directive 
(action-oriented decision makers who focus 
on facts), analytical (careful decision makers 
who like lots of information and alternative 
choices), conceptual (decision makers who 
rely on intuition and have a long-term 
perspective), and behavioral (the most 
people-oriented decision makers).
7.5 How to Overcome Barriers to 
Decision Making
• When confronted with a challenge in the form 
of a problem or an opportunity, individuals 
may respond in perhaps four ineffective ways 
and three effective ones.
• The ineffective reactions are as follows: (1) In 
relaxed avoidance, a manager decides to take 
no action in the belief that there will be no 
great negative consequences. (2) In relaxed 
change, a manager realizes that complete 
inaction will have negative consequences but 
opts for the first available alternative that 
involves low risk. (3) In defensive avoidance, a 
manager can’t find a good solution and 
follows by procrastinating, passing the buck, 
or denying the risk of any negative 
consequences. (4) In panic, a manager is so 
frantic to get rid of the problem that he or she 
can’t deal with the situation realistically.
• The effective reactions consist of deciding to 
decide—that is, a manager agrees that he or 
she must decide what to do about a problem 
or opportunity and take effective decision-
making steps. Three ways to help a manager 
decide whether to decide are to evaluate 
(1) importance—how high priority the 
situation is; (2) credibility—how believable 
the information about the situation is; and 
(3) urgency—how quickly the manager must 
act on the information about the situation.
• Heuristics are rules of thumb or strategies that 
simplify the process of making decisions. 
Some heuristics or barriers that tend to bias 
how decision makers process information are 
availability, confirmation, representativeness, 
sunk-cost, anchoring and adjustment, and 
escalation of commitment. 
• (1) The availability bias means that managers 
use information readily available from memory 
to make judgments. (2) The confirmation bias 
means people seek information to support 
their own point of view and discount data that 
do not. (3) The representativeness bias is the 
tendency to generalize from a small sample or 
a single event. (4) The sunk-cost bias is when 
managers add up all the money already spent 
on a project and conclude that it is too costly 
to simply abandon it. (5) The anchoring and 
adjustment bias is the tendency to make 
decisions based on an initial figure or number. 
(6) The escalation of commitment bias 
220 
PART 3 
Planning

describes when decision makers increase their 
commitment to a project despite negative 
information about it. An example is the 
prospect theory, which suggests that decision 
makers find the notion of an actual loss more 
painful than giving up the possibility of a gain.
7.6 Group Decision Making: How to 
Work with Others
• Groups make better decisions than most 
individuals acting alone, though not as good 
as the best individual acting alone.
• Using a group to make a decision offers five 
possible advantages: (1) a greater pool of 
knowledge; (2) different perspectives; 
(3) intellectual stimulation; (4) better understanding 
of the reasoning behind the decision; and
(5) deeper commitment to the decision. 
• It also has four disadvantages: (1) a few 
people may dominate or intimidate; (2) it will 
produce groupthink, when group members 
strive for agreement among themselves for the 
sake of unanimity and so avoid accurately 
assessing the decision situation; (3) satisficing; 
and (4) goal displacement, when the primary 
goal is subsumed to a secondary goal.
• Some characteristics of groups to be aware of 
are (1) groups are less efficient, (2) their size 
affects decision quality, (3) they may be too 
confident, and (4) knowledge counts—
decision-making accuracy is higher when 
group members know a lot about the issues.
• Using groups to make decisions generally 
requires that they reach a consensus, which 
occurs when members are able to express 
their opinions and reach agreement to 
support the final decision.
• Three problem-solving techniques aid in 
problem solving. (1) Brainstorming is a 
technique used to help groups generate 
multiple ideas and alternatives for solving 
problems. A variant is electronic brainstorming, 
in which group members use a computer 
network to generate ideas. (2) The Delphi 
technique is a group process that uses 
physically dispersed experts who fill out 
questionnaires to anonymously generate ideas; 
the judgments are combined and in effect 
averaged to achieve a consensus of expert 
opinion. (3) In computer-aided decision making, 
decision support systems provide flexible tools 
for analysis and help managers focus on the 
future. This kind of computer-based system 
aims to produce collected information known 
as business intelligence, gathering data from a 
wide range of sources in a way that can be 
interpreted by humans and used to support 
better business decision making.
 1. What are the steps in rational decision making?
 2. What are two models of nonrational decision making?
 3. What are four ethical questions a manager should 
ask when evaluating a proposed action to make a 
decision?
 4. Competitors using analytics have what three key 
attributes?
 5. What is Big Data?
 6. Describe the four general decision-making styles.
 7. Discuss the four ineffective and three effective ways 
that individuals can respond to a decision situation.
 8. Can you name the nine common decision-making 
biases?
 9. What are the advantages and disadvantages of group 
decision making.
 10. What are three group problem-solving techniques?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
Companies Use Tracking Devices to Help 
Make Decisions
Fan Zhang, the owner of Happy Child, a trendy 
Asian restaurant in downtown Toronto, knows that 
170 of his customers went clubbing in November 
[2013]. He knows that 250 went to the gym that 
month, and that 216 came in from Yorkville, an 
upscale neighborhood. And he gleans this informa-
tion without his customers’ knowledge, or ever ask-
ing them a single question.
Mr. Zhang is a client of Turnstyle Solutions Inc., 
a year-old local company that has placed sensors in 
about 200 businesses within a 0.7 mile radius in 
downtown Toronto to track shoppers as they move 
in the city.
Management in Action
 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
221

The sensors, each about the size of a deck of 
cards, follow signals emitted from Wi-Fi-enabled 
smartphones. That allows them to create portraits of 
roughly 2 million people’s habits as they have gone 
about their daily lives, traveling from yoga studios to 
restaurants, to coffee shops, sports stadiums, hotels, 
and nightclubs.
“Instead of offering a general promotion that may 
or may not hit a nerve, we can promote specifically 
to the customer’s taste,” says Mr. Zhang. He recently 
emblazoned workout tank-tops with his restaurant’s 
logo, based on the data about his customers’ gym 
visits. 
Turnstyle is at the forefront of a movement to track 
consumers who are continuously broadcasting their 
location from phones. Other start-ups, such as San 
Francisco–based Euclid Analytics Inc., use sensors to 
analyze foot-traffic patterns, largely within an individ-
ual retailer’s properties, to glean insight about cus-
tomer behavior.
But Turnstyle is among the few that have begun us-
ing the technology more broadly to follow people 
where they live, work and shop. The company’s dense 
network of sensors can track any phone that has Wi-Fi 
turned on, enabling the company to build profiles of 
consumers’ lifestyles. 
Turnstyle’s weekly reports to clients use aggregate 
numbers and don’t include people’s names. But the 
company does collect the names, ages, genders, and 
social media profiles of some people who log in with 
Facebook to a free Wi-Fi service that Turnstyle runs at 
local restaurants and coffee shops, including Happy 
Child. It uses that information, along with the wider 
foot traffic data, to come up with dozens of lifestyle 
categories, including yoga-goers, people who like the-
ater, and hipsters.
A business that knows which sports team is most 
favored by its clients could offer special promotions on 
game days, says Turnstyle’s 27-year-old founder Chris 
Gilpin. Czehoski, a local restaurant, hired an 80s-
music DJ for Friday nights after learning from 
Turnstyle that more than 60% of the restaurant’s 
Wi-Fi-enabled customers were over 30. 
But as the industry grows in prominence, location 
trackers are bound to ignite privacy concerns. A com-
pany could, for example, track people’s visits to spe-
cialist doctors or hospitals and sell that data to 
marketers.
“Locations have meanings,” says Eloise Gratton, a 
privacy lawyer. Marketers can infer that a person has a 
certain disease from their Internet searches. A geoloca-
tion company can actually see the person visiting the 
doctor, “making the inference that the individual has 
this disease probably even more accurate,” she says. In 
the U.S., companies don’t have to get a consent before 
collecting and sharing most personal information, 
including people’s locations. A bill proposed by 
Minnesota Senator Al Franken would require consent 
before collecting location data. The U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission settled its first location privacy case in 
December, against an app developer that misled 
consumers into believing their location data wouldn’t 
be sold to marketers.
Even as they covet the data, stores and businesses 
recognize it is a touchy subject. “It would probably be 
better not to use this tracking system at all if we had to 
let people know about it,” says Glenna Weddle, the 
owner of Rac Boutique, a women’s clothing store that 
is a Turnstyle client. “It’s not invasive. It might raise 
alarms for no reason.”
Right now, the only way to opt-out of geolocation is 
to either switch off the Wi-Fi on a cellphone or make a 
request through a website of one the data companies 
(like Turnstyle) that has an opt-out option.
As these companies operate mostly behind the 
scenes, the nascent industry is keeping a close 
watch on Google Inc. and Apple. With their 
Android and iOS mobile operating systems, re-
spectively, Google and Apple know the location of 
every customer’s Wi-Fi-enabled phone—far more 
location data than any start-up could access. The 
Silicon Valley giants aren’t allowing access to such 
data by outsiders. Both Google and Apple declined 
to comment.
Places where people didn’t think they were being 
watched are now repositories for collecting informa-
tion, says Ryan Calo, assistant professor at the Univer-
sity of Washington School of Law. “Companies are 
increasingly able to connect between our online and 
offline lives,” he says.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. How do the tracking devices discussed in this case 
aid in making more rational and intuitive decisions? 
Explain.
 2. Which of the seven evidence-based decision-making 
implementation principles is consistent with the use 
of tracking data for making decisions?
 3. Use Figure 7.3 to assess the ethical orientation of 
what is being done by Turnstyle. Is the company be-
having ethically? 
 4. Which of the common decision-making biases are 
likely to be reduced by using location data to make 
product promotion decisions?
 5. What is your overall opinion about companies col-
lecting and selling tracking data without your con-
sent? Explain.
Source: Excerpted from Elizabeth Dwoskin, “What Secrets Your Phone 
Is Sharing about You,” The Wall Street Journal, January 14, 2014, pp. 
B1, B4.
222 
PART 3 
Planning

Would You Agree to Wear a Sensor So Your 
Employer Can Track Your Movements & 
Conversations?
The onset of Big Data and its application has 
prompted companies to ask employees to wear track-
ing sensors. For example, Bank of America Corp. de-
cided to study whether face time among coworkers at 
call centers affected performance. Ninety employees 
were asked to wear sensors “for a few weeks that con-
tained tiny sensors to record their movements and the 
tone of their conversations.”
Results from the study showed that close-knit 
teams talked more together and had higher productiv-
ity. The bank then decided to schedule workers for 
group breaks rather than individual breaks in order to 
foster more social interactions.
“But there’s a fine line between Big Data and Big 
Brother,” says The Wall Street Journal, “at least in 
the eyes of some employees, who might shudder at 
the idea of the boss tracking their every move. Sen-
sor proponents, however, argue that smartphones and 
corporate ID badges already can transmit their own-
er’s location.”
A survey of 50 large- and medium-sized firms that 
have asked employees to wear sensors reveals that 
10% of employees refused to wear the tracking device. 
Because of the backlash this might create for people, 
firms selling these devices have created “dummy 
badges” for people to wear. They are identical to the 
actual technology but don’t record or transmit data.
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
What would you do if your employer asked you to 
wear a tracking device for a few weeks? Choose your 
best response and explain why. Or refer to option 5 if 
the first four options are not satisfactory.
 1. No problem, I would wear it. After all, results from 
the study might be used to improve the work 
 environment.
 2. No way. This violates my privacy.
 3. I would do it only if I was assured that the company 
would only be given group-based data. In this way, 
the company would not have information about spe-
cific individuals.
 4. While I like the idea behind option 3, I don’t trust 
that my employer would not request or force the pro-
vider of the technology to provide individual-level 
data. I wouldn’t do it.
 5. Propose and explain other options.
Source: Excerpted from R. E. Silverman, “Tracking Sensors Invade the 
Workplace,” The Wall Street Journal, March 7, 2013, http://online.wsj.
com/news/articles/SB100014241278873240348045783443034290806
78d (accessed June 14, 2014).
Legal/Ethical Challenge
 
Individual & Group Decision Making 
CHAPTER 7 
223

PART 4 
ORGANIZING
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
8.1 Aligning Strategy, Culture, & Structure
Major Question: Why is it important for managers to align a 
company’s vision and strategies with its organizational culture 
and structure?
8.2 What Kind of Organizational Culture Will You 
Be Operating In?
Major Question: How do I find out about an organization’s 
“social glue,” its normal way of doing business?
8.3 The Process of Culture Change
Major Question: What can be done to an organization’s culture 
to increase its economic performance?
8.4 Organizational Structure
Major Question: How are for-profit, nonprofit, and mutual-benefit 
organizations structured?
8.5 The Major Elements of an Organization
Major Question: When I join an organization, what seven 
elements should I look for?
8.6 Basic Types of Organizational Structures
Major Question: How would one describe the seven 
organizational structures?
8.7 Contingency Design: Factors in Creating 
the Best Structure
Major Question: What factors affect the design of 
an organization’s structure?
Organizational Culture, 
Structure, & Design
Building Blocks of the Organization
8

forecast
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
We consider organizational cultures and organizational structures, and how they should be 
aligned to help coordinate employees in the pursuit of organization’s strategic goals. We 
then consider the three types of organizations and seven basic characteristics of an orga-
nization. We next discuss seven types of organizational structures. Finally, we look at five 
factors that should be considered when one is designing the structure of an organization.
“Once you are in the real world—and it doesn’t make 
any difference if you are 22 or 62, starting your first 
job or your fifth,” say former business columnists 
Jack and Suzy Welch, “the way to look great and get 
ahead is to overdeliver.”1
Overdelivering means doing more than what is 
asked of you—not just doing the report your boss re-
quests, for example, but doing the extra research to 
provide him or her with something truly impressive.
Among things you should do in the first 60 days:2
Be Aware of the Power of First Impressions
Within three minutes of meeting someone new, people 
form an opinion about where the future of the relation-
ship is headed, according to one study.3 “When meet-
ing someone for the first time, concentrate on one 
thing: your energy level,” advises one CEO, who thinks 
that seven seconds is all the time people need to start 
making up their minds about you. Amp it up, he ad-
vises. “If you don’t demonstrate energetic attitude on 
your first day, you’re already screwing up.”4 (However, 
don’t be too upset if you feel you’ve blown it with 
someone on the first meeting. What’s key is to make 
sure you have other chances to meet that person again 
so that you can show different sides of yourself.5)
Come in 30 Minutes Early & Stay a Little Late to 
See How People Behave
“Many aspects of a company’s culture can be subtle 
and easy to overlook,” writes one expert. “Instead, 
observe everything.” Thus, try coming in early and 
staying a little late just to observe how people 
 operate—where they take their lunches, for example.
Get to Know Some People & Listen to What 
They Have to Say
“You’ve got to realize that networking inside a com-
pany is just as important as when you were network-
ing on the outside trying to get in,” says a business 
consultant.6 During the first two weeks, get to know a 
few people and try to have lunch with them. Find out 
how the organization works, how people interact with 
the boss, what the corporate culture encourages and 
discourages. Walk the halls and get to know recep-
tionists, mail room clerks, and office managers, who 
can help you learn the ropes. Your role here is to lis-
ten, rather than to slather on the charm. Realize that 
you have a lot to learn.7
Make It Easy for Others to Give You Feedback
Ask your boss, coworkers, and subordinates to give 
you feedback about how you’re doing. Be prepared 
to take unpleasant news gracefully.8 At the end of 
30 days, have a “How am I doing?” meeting with 
your boss.
Overdeliver
Because performance reviews for new hires generally 
take place at 60 to 90 days, you need to have ac-
complished enough—and preferably something big—
to show your boss your potential. In other words, do 
as the Welches suggest: overdeliver.
For Discussion How does the foregoing advice 
square with your past experiences in starting a new 
job? Are there things you wish you could have done 
differently?
the manager’s toolbox
How to Stand Out in a New Job: Fitting into 
an Organization’s Culture in the First 60 Days

8.1 
Aligning Strategy, Culture, & Structure
Why is it important for managers to align a company’s vision and strategies with its 
organizational culture and structure?
THE BIG PICTURE
The study of organizing, the second of the four functions in the management process, begins with the study 
of organizational culture and structure, which managers must determine so as to implement a particular 
strategy. Organizational culture consists of the set of shared, taken-for-granted implicit assumptions that a 
group holds in the workplace. Organizational structure describes who reports to whom and who does what.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
“What’s your favorite movie?” the job interviewer asks you. “Your favorite website?” 
“What’s the last book you read for fun?” “What makes you uncomfortable?”
These are the four most frequently asked interview questions used by hiring manag-
ers, according to a survey involving 285,000 kinds of interview questions.9 For you as 
a job applicant, these questions might not seem to have much to do with your perfor-
mance in previous jobs. Rather, they are designed to see whether you will fit in with 
the company’s culture, or organizational culture, as we’ll explain.10
What Does It Mean to “Fit”? Anticipating 
a Job Interview
The kind of fit we are concerned with here is what is called person-organization fit, 
which reflects the extent to which your personality and values match the climate and 
culture in an organization.
A good fit of this kind is important because it is associated with more positive work 
attitudes and task performance, lower stress, and fewer expressions of intention to quit 
(“I’m gonna tell em, ‘Take this job and . . .’”).11 How well an applicant will fit in with 
the institution’s organizational culture is considered a high priority by many interview-
ers. Indeed, more than 50% of the evaluators in one study considered “fit” to be the 
most important criterion of the interview process.12
How can you determine how well you might fit in before you go into a job inter-
view? You should write down your strengths, weaknesses, and values—and then do the 
same for the organization you’re interviewing with, by researching it online and talk-
ing with current employees. You can then prepare questions to ask the interviewer 
about how well you might fit.
Example: If being recognized for hard work is important to you, ask the inter-
viewer how the company rewards performance. If the answer doesn’t show a 
strong link between performance and rewards (“Well, we don’t really have a pol-
icy on that”), you’ll probably have a low person-organization fit and won’t be 
happy working there.
How an Organization’s Culture & Structure Are Used 
to Implement Strategy
How employees fit into an organization’s culture is important to the larger picture of 
that organization’s strategy. Strategy, as we saw in Chapter 6, consists of the large-
scale action plans that reflect the organization’s vision and are used to set the direc-
tion for the organization. To implement a particular strategy, managers must determine 
226 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
227
the right kind of (1) organizational culture and (2) organizational structure. Let’s 
consider these terms.
Organizational Culture: The Shared Assumptions That Affect How Work 
Gets Done 
We described the concept of culture in Chapter 4 on global manage-
ment as “the shared set of beliefs, values, knowledge, and patterns of behavior com-
mon to a group of people.” Here we are talking about a specific kind of culture called 
an organizational culture.
According to scholar Edgar Schein, organizational culture, sometimes called 
corporate culture, is defined as the set of shared, taken-for-granted implicit assumptions 
that a group holds and that determines how it perceives, thinks about, and reacts to its 
various environments.13 These are the beliefs and values shared among a group of peo-
ple in the workplace that are passed on to new employees by way of socialization and 
mentoring, which significantly affect work outcomes at all levels.14 This is the “social 
glue” that binds members of the organization together. Just as a human being has a 
personality—fun-loving, warm, uptight, competitive, or whatever—so an organization 
has a “personality,” too, and that is its culture.
The culture helps employees understand why the organization does what it does and 
how it intends to accomplish its long-term goals. 3M sets expectations for innovation, 
for example, by having an internship and co-op program, which provides 30% of the 
company’s new college hires.
Culture can vary considerably, with different organizations having differing empha-
ses on risk taking, treatment of employees, teamwork, rules and regulations, conflict 
and criticism, and rewards. And the elements that drive an organization’s culture also 
vary. They may represent the values of the founder, the industry and business environ-
ment, the national culture, the organization’s vision and strategies, and the behavior of 
leaders. (See Table 8.1.)
We thoroughly discuss organizational culture in Sections 8.2 and 8.3.
Organizational Structure: Who Reports to Whom & Who Does What 
Organizational structure is a formal system of task and reporting relationships that 
coordinates and motivates an organization’s members so that they can work 
together to achieve the organization’s goals. As we describe in Sections 8.4–8.6, 
organizational structure is concerned with who reports to whom and who specializes 
in what work.
Whether an organization is for-profit or nonprofit, the challenge for top managers is 
to align the organization’s vision and strategies with its organizational culture and 
organizational structure, as shown in the two orange boxes in the drawing below. 
(See Figure 8.1.)
TABLE 8.1
What Drives an  
Organizational Culture?
• 
Founder’s values
• 
Industry & business 
environment
• 
National culture
• 
Organization’s vision & 
strategies
• 
Behavior of leaders
Drivers of
culture
Organizational
culture
al
Organizational
structure &
internal
processes
al
Group &
social
processes
Work
attitudes &
behaviors
Overall
performance
FIGURE 8.1 
Drivers and flow of organizational culture
Figure 8.1 shows that the consistency among these elements in turn impacts (see the 
three green boxes) group and social processes (discussed in Chapters 13–15), indi-
vidual work attitudes and behaviors (discussed in Chapters 11–12), and the organiza-
tion’s overall performance. As you can see from the diagram, consistency across 
strategy, culture, and structure leads to higher performance. ●

228 
PART 4 
Organizing
Culture of risk. At Pfizer Inc., 
a Connecticut pharmaceutical 
company, drug discovery is a 
high-risk, costly endeavor in 
which hundreds of scientists 
screen thousands of chemicals 
against specific disease 
targets, but 96% of these 
compounds are ultimately 
found to be unworkable. 
The culture, then, is one 
of managing failure and 
disappointment, of helping 
drug researchers live for 
small victories.
EXAMPLE
How Strategy Affects Culture & Culture Affects Structure: EndoStim, 
a Medical Device Start-up, Operates Virtually
Nowadays a firm can be completely international. An example 
is the medical device start-up EndoStim, nominally based in 
St. Louis but operating everywhere.
The company, reports New York Times columnist Thomas 
Friedman, came together as a result of some chance encoun-
ters:15 Cuban immigrant Raul Perez, a physician, came to 
St. Louis, where he met Dan Burkhardt, a local investor, with 
whom he began making medical investments. Perez also suf-
fered from acid reflux (abnormal heartburn caused by stomach 
acid rising in the esophagus) and went to Arizona for treatment 
by an Indian-American physician, V. K. Sharma. During the visit, 
Sharma proposed an idea for a pacemaker-like device to con-
trol the muscle that would choke off acid reflux.
The Strategy: Creating a New Medical Device. Perez, 
 Burkhardt, and Sharma all agreed they wanted to build such an 
electrical-stimulation device. They joined forces with South 
 Africa–born Bevil Hogg, a founder of Trek Bicycle Corporation, 
who became the CEO of the company they named EndoStim 
and who helped to raise initial development funds. This strat-
egy then began to dictate who they had to work with, which in 
turn influenced the company’s culture and structure.
The Culture: An International “Adhocracy.” To advance their 
strategy of building the device, the four principals recruited two 
Israelis, a medical engineer and a gastroenterologist. The Israelis 
collaborated with a Seattle engineering team to develop the de-
sign. A company in Uruguay specializing in pacemakers was lined 
up to build the EndoStim prototype. It was arranged for the clinical 
trials to be conducted in India and Chile. How much more interna-
tional can you get?
Thus, the culture of the company could be called an 
adhocracy, which (as we’ll describe a little later in the chapter) 
is a risk-taking culture that values flexibility and creativity and 
that is focused on developing innovative products.
The Structure: A Virtual, Boundaryless Company. As a very 
lean start-up operating all over the world, with the principals 
rarely in the same office at the same time, EndoStim is clearly 
very different from, say, the usual top-down organization operat-
ing in one locality. To access the best expertise and high-quality 
materials and obtain low-cost manufacturing anywhere around 
the globe, EndoStim thus was forced to take advantage of all the 
technological tools—teleconferencing, e-mail, the Internet, and 
faxes—to maintain communications.
This EndoStim structure, then, is that of a virtual, boundary-
less organization—virtual, because its members are operating 
geographically apart, connected by electronic means, and 
boundaryless, because the members (whether coworkers or 
suppliers) come together in fluid, flexible ways on an as-needed 
basis. We describe these structures further in another few pages.
YOUR CALL
Are you comfortable enough to work in a virtual, boundaryless 
organization? Many people like the social interaction that 
comes with working in a physical office with other people. Oth-
ers, however, are turned off by the office game playing and 
time-wasting activities that seem to be a necessary concomi-
tant. They welcome the opportunity to do task-oriented work in 
a makeshift home office, occasionally having to cope with 
loneliness and restlessness. Which would you favor?

Want to get ahead in the workplace but hate the idea of “office politics”?
Probably you can’t achieve the first without mastering the second. Although hard 
work and talent can take you a long way, “there is a point in everyone’s career where 
politics becomes more important,” says management professor Kathleen Kelley 
Reardon. You have to know the political climate of the company you work for, says 
 Reardon, who is author of The Secret Handshake and It’s All Politics.16 “Don’t be the 
last person to understand how people get promoted, how they get noticed, how certain 
projects come to attention. Don’t be quick to trust. If you don’t understand the political 
machinations, you’re going to fail much more often.”17
A great part of learning to negotiate the politics—that is, the different behavioral and 
psychological characteristics—of a particular office means learning to understand the or-
ganization’s culture. The culture consists not only of the slightly quirky personalities you 
encounter but also all of an organization’s normal way of doing business, as we’ll explain.
Four Types of Organizational Culture: Clan, 
Adhocracy, Market, & Hierarchy
According to one common methodology known as the competing values framework, 
organizational cultures can be classified into four types: (1) clan, (2) adhocracy, 
(3) market, and (4) hierarchy.18 (See Figure 8.2.)
8.2 
What Kind of Organizational Culture Will You be 
Operating In?
How do I find out about an organization’s “social glue,” its normal way of doing business?
THE BIG PICTURE
Organizational cultures can be classified into four types: clan, adhocracy, market, and hierarchy. Organiza-
tional culture appears as three layers: observable artifacts, espoused values, and basic assumptions. Culture 
is transmitted to employees in symbols, stories, heroes, and rites and rituals.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
229
Flexibility and discretion
Stability and control
Clan
Adhocracy
Hierarchy
Market
Thrust: Collaborate
Means: Cohesion, participation,
communication, empowerment
Ends: Morale, people
development, commitment
Thrust: Create
Means: Adaptability, creativity,
agility
Ends: Innovation, growth,
cutting-edge output
Thrust: Control
Means: Capable processes,
consistency, process control,
measurement
Ends: Efficiency, timeliness,
smooth, functioning
Thrust: Compete
Means: Customer focus, productivity,
enhancing competitiveness
Ends: Market share, profitability, goal
achievement
External focus and
differentiation
Internal focus
and integration
FIGURE 8.2
Competing values 
framework
Adapted from K.S. Cameron, 
R.E. Quinn, J. Degraff, and A.V. 
Thakor, Competing Values 
Leadership (Northampton, MA: 
Edward Elgar, 2006)., p. 32.

230 
PART 4 
Organizing
1. Clan Culture: An Employee-Focused Culture Valuing Flexibility, Not Stability 
A clan culture has an internal focus and values flexibility rather than stability and control. 
Like a family-type organization, it encourages collaboration among employees, striving 
to encourage cohesion through consensus and job satisfaction and to increase commit-
ment through employee involvement. Clan organizations devote considerable resources 
to hiring and developing their employees, and they view customers as partners.
Southwest Airlines is a good example of a company with a clan culture. So is online 
shoe seller Zappos, which encourages managers to spend 10%–20% of their off-work 
hours with employees.19
2. Adhocracy Culture: A Risk-Taking Culture Valuing Flexibility 
An 
adhocracy culture has an external focus and values flexibility. As we saw with 
 EndoStim in the Example box, this type of culture attempts to create innovative prod-
ucts by being adaptable, creative, and quick to respond to changes in the marketplace. 
Employees are encouraged to take risks and experiment with new ways of getting 
things done. Adhocracy cultures are well suited for start-up companies, those in indus-
tries undergoing constant change, and those in mature industries that are in need of 
innovation to enhance growth.
W. L. Gore, maker of Gore-Tex outerwear, is an example of a company with an 
adhocracy culture. So was Google once, but now it has grown and the enterprise is 
struggling to avoid losing its adhocracy “Googliness.” In earlier times, all Google en-
gineers were urged to spend 20% of their time on personal projects. As the company 
grew, however, senior managers concluded that letting thousands of employees work 
on whatever they wanted would lead to disarray, so now newly hired engineers are 
forced to wait a while before beginning their passion pursuits.20
3. Market Culture: A Competitive Culture Valuing Profits over Employee 
Satisfaction 
A market culture has a strong external focus and values stability and 
control. Because market cultures are focused on the external environment and driven 
by competition and a strong desire to deliver results, customers, productivity, and prof-
its take precedence over employee development and satisfaction. Employees are ex-
pected to work hard, react fast, and deliver quality work on time; those who deliver 
results are rewarded.
Kia Motors, which fires executives who don’t meet their sales goals, is an example 
of a company with a very aggressive and competitive market culture.21 Sometimes the 
culture can be stretched too far: For instance, some Wall Street firms, such as Citgroup 
Inc., are reported to have such a strong perform-or-die culture—in which executives 
are pushed to maximize profits and are quickly fired if they fail to deliver—that it is 
difficult to find talent to promote from within when chief executives leave.22
4. Hierarchy Culture: A Structured Culture Valuing Stability & Effectiveness 
A hierarchy culture has an internal focus and values stability and control over flexibility. 
Companies with this kind of culture are apt to have a formalized, structured work 
environment aimed at achieving effectiveness through a variety of control mechanisms that 
measure efficiency, timeliness, and reliability in the creation and delivery of products.
Lots of big organizations, such as General Motors, UPS, and the U.S. Army, have a 
hierarchy culture. A drawback of such cultures is that they can lead to information 
“silos” or “stovepipes,” in which different divisions don’t share information—a key 
cause of GM’s ignition switch scandal. Time magazine described this as “a kind of 
death from a thousand cuts in which multiple divisions had information that could 
have prevented the safety issues, which they didn’t share, and for which no one person 
ultimately took responsibility.”23
Based on the above descriptions, what type of culture provides the best fit for you? 
How might you assess the level of fit between your values and those of a potential 

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
231
employer? If you are interested in answering these questions, take the time to complete 
Self-Assessment 8.1.
Assessing Your Preferred Type of 
Organizational Culture
This survey is designed to assess your preferred type of organiza-
tional culture. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-
Assessment 8.1. When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1.  Do you have a preferred culture type, or is there a 
combination of types best suited for you? Are you 
surprised by the results?
2.  What are three questions you can ask a recruiter to 
determine if a company possesses your preferred 
culture type?
3. 
Have you ever worked in a company that did not possess 
your preferred culture type? In what ways did you feel a 
lack of person-organization fit? Did lack of fit affect your 
job satisfaction or desire to continue working at the 
company? Explain.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 8.1
®
The Corporate Cultures of Pfizer Pharmaceuticals: The Different 
“Personalities” within an Organization
“What makes culture so important is that it’s unique; it’s some-
thing that no one can copy,” says Ian C. Read, chairman and 
CEO of Connecticut-based Pfizer Pharmaceuticals. “Culture can 
become your competitive advantage. Get it wrong and you’ll 
pay dearly for it . . . for years to come.”24
Read became head of Pfizer in December 2010, after mis-
management (“micro micro” management, indecisiveness) by the 
previous CEO failed to lift the company’s fortunes.25 Read has insti-
tuted a commitment to “our OWNIT! culture. I challenged Pfizer’s 
leaders to recognize that they can only own the future if they own 
change and can make change work for us, not against us.”
Pfizer employees, he asserts, “understand that our owner-
ship culture can differentiate us within our industry. They also 
understand it requires a willingness to take prudent risks, be 
accountable for their decisions and results, and understand 
how their work contributes to the company’s performance.” 
The success of the culture especially depends on the efforts of 
first- and second-line managers, who create a climate of trust 
that is “essential to providing the space employees need to 
work, take considered risks, and own the results,” he says. 
Organizational cultures are nearly as varied as human per-
sonalities. What had Pfizer’s culture been like under Read’s 
predecessors? Actually, there was more than one culture within 
the company, as follows. Do you recognize the different types?
$2.3 Billion in Fines. In 2009, Pfizer was fined $2.3 billion for 
improperly marketing drugs to doctors. “The whole culture of 
Pfizer is driven by sales,” said a former sales representative 
whose complaint helped the government’s case, “and if you didn’t 
sell drugs illegally, you were not seen as a team player.”26 Almost 
every major drug company has in recent years been accused of 
giving kickbacks to doctors or shortchanging federal programs.
Free Prescription Drugs to Unemployed. But also in that year, as 
unemployment hovered around 10% in the United States, Pfizer 
launched a program in which it offered to supply 70 of its name-
brand drugs, such as Lipitor and Viagra, free of charge for up to a year 
to customers who had lost their jobs and lacked prescription cover-
age. “We did it because it was the right thing to do,” said Pfizer’s then 
CEO. “But it was motivational for our employees and got a great re-
sponse from customers. In the long run, it will help our business.”27
Ongoing Experimentation. At Pfizer, drug discovery is a high-risk, 
costly endeavor in which hundreds of scientists screen thousands 
of chemicals against specific disease targets, but 96% of these 
compounds are ultimately found to be unworkable. The culture, 
then, is one of managing failure and disappointment, of helping 
drug researchers live for the small victories. Thus, says one ac-
count, “when a researcher publishes a paper, or when a lab gets 
some positive results on a new therapy, it’s trumpeted throughout 
the organization.”28 Another example of experimentation, aimed at 
helping remaining employees to be productive after heavy job cuts, 
is PfizerWorks, in which 4,000 employees pass off tedious and 
time-consuming parts of their jobs, such as creating PowerPoint 
slides and riffling through spreadsheets to outsiders in India.29
YOUR CALL
What cultural types are illustrated in these three examples? 
Does it make more sense that a company would have one 
dominant cultural type or an equal mixture of clan, adhocracy, 
market, and hierarchy? Explain your rationale.
EXAMPLE

232 
PART 4 
Organizing
The Three Levels of Organizational Culture
Organizational culture appears as three layers: (1) observable artifacts, (2) espoused 
values, and (3) basic assumptions.30 Each level varies in terms of outward visibility 
and resistance to change, and each level influences another level.
Level 1: Observable Artifacts—Physical Manifestations of Culture 
At 
the most visible level, organizational culture is expressed in observable artifacts—
physical manifestations such as manner of dress, awards, myths and stories about the 
company, rituals and ceremonies, and decorations, as well as visible behavior exhib-
ited by managers and employees.
Example: In a conference room reserved for sensitive discussions, online travel 
company Kayak has a two-foot-high stuffed elephant named Annabelle—the “elephant 
in the room”—that is an artifact believed to bring forth more honest and constructive 
communications among employees.31 (The expression “elephant in the room” is used 
in business and politics to mean an obvious truth that is either being ignored or going 
unaddressed.)
Level 2: Espoused Values—Explicitly Stated Values & Norms 
Espoused 
values are the explicitly stated values and norms preferred by an organization, as may 
be put forth by the firm’s founder or top managers.
Example: The founders of technology company Hewlett-Packard stressed the “HP 
Way,” a collegial, egalitarian culture that gave as much authority and job security to 
employees as possible. Although managers may hope the values they espouse will 
 directly influence employee behavior, employees don’t always “walk the talk,” 
 frequently being more influenced by enacted values, which represent the values and 
norms actually exhibited in the organization.32
Thus, for example, an international corporation hung signs throughout the hallways 
of its headquarters proclaiming that “trust” was one of its driving principles (espoused 
value), yet had a policy of searching employees’ belongings each time they entered or 
exited the building (enacted value).33
Level 3: Basic Assumptions—Core Values of the Organization 
Basic as-
sumptions, which are not observable, represent the core values of an organization’s 
culture—those that are taken for granted and, as a result, are difficult to change.
Example: At insurance giant AIG, people worked so hard that the joke around the 
offices was “Thank heavens it’s Friday, because that means there are only two more 
working days until Monday.”34
Another example: Many founders of start-ups hate rules and red tape. College 
Hunks Hauling Junk, for instance, was co-founded by Nick Friedman with no for-
mal policies about dress code, vacation, sick days, and other things because he en-
visioned “a real-life Never Never Land where work is always fun, and the culture is 
always stress-free.”35 However, when the enterprise grew from a single cargo van to 
over 50 franchises, the freewheeling spirit made employees lose focus, and client-
service ratings, employee morale, and profitability all declined. The firm had to 
come up with rules and procedures while at the same time trying to “maintain a 
healthy balance of fun company culture with an accountable organization and 
team,” Friedman said.
How Employees Learn Culture: Symbols, Stories, 
Heroes, & Rites & Rituals
Culture is transmitted to employees in several ways, most often through such devices 
as (1) symbols, (2) stories, (3) heroes, and (4) rites and rituals.36
HP founders. David Packard 
(left) and William Hewlett 
created a close-knit 
organizational culture that gave 
a lot of responsibility to 
employees and fostered 
innovation within the company. 
What kind of culture is that?

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
233
1. Symbols 
A symbol is an object, act, quality, or event that conveys meaning to 
others. In an organization, symbols convey its most important values.
Example: One of the most iconic products of IKEA, maker of inexpensive home 
furnishings, whose vision is “to create a better life for the many,” is the LACK table, a 
22-inch by 22-inch side table that sells for only $9.99.37
2. Stories 
A story is a narrative based on true events, which is repeated—and 
sometimes embellished upon—to emphasize a particular value. Stories are oral 
histories that are told and retold by members about incidents in the organization’s 
history.
Example: Marc Benioff is founder of cloud computing business Salesforce.com, 
a San Francisco company known for its great sense of social responsibility and 
generosity (and rated No. 7 on Fortune’s 2014 ”Best Companies to Work For” 
list).38 Its spirit of philanthropy is embodied in a story called the 1-1-1 rule. “When 
we started the company,” Benioff says, “we took 1% of our equity [stock value] and 
1% of our profit and 1% of all our employees’ time, and we put it into a . . . public 
charity. At the time, it was very easy because we had no profit, we had no time, we 
had no equity. But then, it turned out that our company is worth, you know, tens of 
billions of dollars.”39 Salesforce.com also runs 10,000 nonprofits for free, doesn’t 
charge universities for its services, and, says Benioff, delivers “hundreds of thou-
sands of hours of community service.” In its latest philanthropic move, Salesforce
.com’s foundation plans to spend $6 million over three years nationally on job 
training for underemployed adults.40
3. Heroes 
A hero is a person whose accomplishments embody the values of the 
organization. IKEA employees are expected to work hard, inspired by an anecdote 
from their Swedish founder, Invar Kamprad, in his 1976 “A Furniture Dealer’s Testa-
ment.” In that essay he recounts how he was berated by his father for failing repeatedly 
to get out of bed to milk the cows on his family’s farm. Then one day he got an alarm 
clock. “‘Now by jiminy, I’m going to start a new life,’ he determined, setting the alarm 
for twenty to six and removing the ‘off button.’”41
4. Rites & Rituals 
Rites and rituals are the activities and ceremonies, planned 
and unplanned, that celebrate important occasions and accomplishments in the 
 organization’s life. Military units and sports teams have long known the value of 
ceremonies handing out decorations and awards, but many companies have rites 
and rituals as well.
Example: Employees of New Belgium Brewery in Fort Collins, Colorado, which 
makes Fat Tire Ale, are given a cruiser bicycle during their first year. After five years, 
they get a free brewery-hopping trip to Belgium. Ten years of employment is acknowl-
edged with a tree planted in their name in the campus orchard. (The company boasts a 
97% employment retention rate.42)
The Importance of Culture
Culture can powerfully shape an organization’s long-term success by enhancing its 
competitive advantage. For example, a recent study involving 1,100 companies sum-
marized the relationship between three organizational cultures—clan, adhocracy, and 
market—and eight different measures of organizational effectiveness, such as job sat-
isfaction, organizational commitment, and quality of products and services.43 (Hierar-
chy was not included owing to a lack of research in this area.) The results are shown 
on the next page. (See Figure 8.3.)

234 
PART 4 
Organizing
Results reveal that the eight types of organizational outcomes had significant and 
positive relationships with clan, adhocracy, and market cultures. The majority of these 
relationships were of moderate strength, indicating that they are important to today’s 
managers.
Five conclusions emerge from this research:
■ 
An organization’s culture matters. The type of organizational culture can 
be a source of competitive advantage.
■ 
Employees are happier with clan cultures. Employees are more satisfied 
with and committed to organizations with clan cultures, which value flexibil-
ity over stability and control and which are more concerned with satisfying 
the needs of employees than those of shareholders or customers.
■ 
Elements of these cultures can be used to boost innovation and quality. 
Managers can build into their organizations characteristics of some or all of 
these three cultures—clan, adhocracy, and market—to increase innovation 
and improve the quality of their products.
■ 
Changing the organizational culture won’t necessarily boost financial 
performance (but it might). There are no guarantees that making changes in 
a firm’s organizational culture will lead to a jump in revenues and profits, 
 although any changes that improve its competitive advantage may produce 
financial benefits.
■ 
Market cultures tend to produce better results. As the chart shows, market 
cultures tend to lead to better outcomes in employee attitudes, performance, 
and organizational effectiveness, thereby leading to competitive advantage. 
Managers are encouraged, therefore, to consider how they might make their 
cultures more market oriented.
Sometimes culture can be strong enough to take the place of bureaucracy; that is, 
the expectations of the culture replace formal rules and regulations. In these cases, the 
sense of orderliness and predictability that employees look to for guidance are pro-
vided by the culture rather than by a rule book. ●
Adhocracy
Clan
Market
Job satisfaction
Organizational
commitment*
Subjective innovation
Quality of products
and services
Subjective profit
Subjective growth
Objective profit
Objective growth
Not significant
Weak
Moderate
Strength of relationship
Strong
Variables
FIGURE 8.3
What organizational benefits 
are associated with what 
organizational cultures?
*Only two bars are shown here 
because organizational 
commitment was associated with 
only clan and market structures, 
and not adhocracy.
Source: Data from C. A. Hartnell, 
A. Y. Ou, and A. J. Kinicki, 
“Organizational Culture and 
Organizational Effectiveness: A 
Meta-Analytic Investigation of the 
Competing Values Framework’s 
Theoretical Suppositions,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, July 2011, 
pp. 677–694.

8.3 
The Process of Culture Change
What can be done to an organization’s culture to increase its economic performance?
THE BIG PICTURE
There are 12 ways a culture becomes established in an organization.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
A particular culture can become embedded in an organization in many ways, 12 of 
which are described here. (See Table 8.2.)
Changing organizational culture is essentially a teaching process—that is, a process 
in which members instruct each other about the organization’s preferred values, be-
liefs, expectations, and behaviors. The process is accomplished by using one or more 
of the following 12 mechanisms:44
1. Formal Statements
The first way to embed preferred culture is through the use of formal statements of 
organizational philosophy, mission, vision, values, as well as materials used for re-
cruiting, selecting, and socializing employees.
Example: At fashion website Polyvore, CEO Jess Lee wrote down three statements 
she thought represented the company’s distinct culture: (1) “delight the user,” (2) “do 
a few things well,” and (3) “make an impact.”45 Walmart founder Sam Walton stated 
that three basic values represented the core of the retailer’s culture: (1) respect for the 
individual, (2) service to customers, and (3) striving for excellence.46
2. Slogans & Sayings
The desirable corporate culture can be expressed in language, slogans, sayings, and 
acronyms.
Example: David Cote, chairman and CEO of global technology company Honey-
well, has adopted the principle “Your job as a leader is to be right at the end of the 
meeting, not at the beginning of the meeting.” That is, a leader’s job is to flush out all 
the facts and opinions so at the end he or she can make a good decision.47
3. Rites & Rituals
As we mentioned earlier, rites and rituals represent the planned and unplanned activi-
ties and ceremonies that are used to celebrate important events or achievements.
Example: After a day’s meetings with clients, employees at Boston advertising 
agency Arnold Worldwide like to meet at a beer-vending machine in the office (nick-
named “Arnie”), where they sip bottles of home-brewed beer, chitchat, and exchange 
ideas.48 (Of course, employers need to be cautious about encouraging drinking alcohol 
at work, for both health and liability reasons.)
4. Stories, Legends, & Myths
A story is a narrative about an actual event that happened within the organization and 
that helps to symbolize its vision and values to employees.
Example: Until a decade ago, major drug companies treated countries in the 
 developing world as not worth the trouble of marketing to. But Andrew Witty, who 
in 2008 at age 43 became the youngest CEO of GlaxoSmithKline, the world’s 
 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
235
TABLE 8.2
A Dozen Ways to Change 
Organizational Culture
 1. Formal statements
 2. Slogans & sayings
 3. Rites & rituals
 4. Stories, legends, & 
myths
 5. Leader reactions to 
crises
 6. Role modeling, training, 
& coaching
 7. Physical design
 8. Rewards, titles, 
promotions, & bonuses
 9. Organizational goals & 
performance criteria
 10. Measurable & 
controllable activities
 11. Organizational structure
 12. Organizational systems 
& procedures

236 
PART 4 
Organizing
 second-largest pharmaceutical company, is making a name for himself by doing 
more for the poor people of the world than any other big drug company leader. While 
working in poor countries Witty found “just unbelievable energy to self-improve, to 
lift themselves up.” He has promised to keep prices of drugs sold in poor countries to 
no more than 25% of what is charged in rich ones and to donate one-fifth of all profits 
made in such countries toward building their health systems. Now Glaxo is ranked No. 
1 on the Access to Medicine index, which rates pharmaceutical companies on their 
stances toward the poor.49
5. Leader Reactions to Crises
How top managers respond to critical incidents and organizational crises sends a clear 
cultural message.
Example: Cory Booker (now a U.S. senator from New Jersey) was the mayor of fi-
nancially struggling Newark in 2010 when a serious snowstorm hit the city. “Through-
out the storm,” reports The Wall Street Journal, “those in distress hit up Mr. Booker on 
Twitter, one of the mayor’s preferred methods of keeping in touch with residents. After 
they cried out for plows, ambulances, and diapers, he responded, electronically and 
sometimes by driving to the location, shovel in hand. . . . He ordered his driver to pull 
over several times to help shovel out or push cars.”50 His on-the-ground efforts were an 
answer to critics who accused him of being out of touch.
6. Role Modeling, Training, & Coaching
Many companies provide structured training to provide an in-depth introduction to 
their organizational values.
Example: Triage Consulting Group, a health care financial consulting firm in 
 California, places a high value on superior performance at achieving measurable goals. 
New employees are immediately prepared for this culture with a 4-day orientation in 
Triage’s culture and methods, followed by 15 training modules scheduled in 6-week 
intervals. After less than a year, the best performers are ready to begin managing their 
own projects, furthering their career development. Performance evaluations take place 
four times a year, further reinforcing the drive for results.51
7. Physical Design
There is constant experimenting going on as to the best office layout that will encour-
age employee productivity and send a strong message about the culture.
Example: After power producer Dynegy emerged from bankruptcy, the new CEO 
abandoned his private office and moved into a 64-square-foot cubicle—identical to the 
ones used by the 235 other employees—signaling his aim “to transform a business 
previously focused on day-to-day survival into an agile operator poised for growth,” 
according to one report.52
Another example: Pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline has embraced an 
open-space philosophy that abandons individual desks in favor of “hoteling,” where 
everyone is assigned to “neighborhoods,” or areas of workers engaged in related tasks 
(you store your personal belongings in a small locker), on the theory that chance en-
counters among employees will spark conversations and collaboration.53
8. Rewards, Titles, Promotions, & Bonuses 
Rewards and status symbols are one of the strongest ways to embed organizational culture.
Example: At Triage Consulting Group, employees at the same level of their career 
earn the same pay, but employees are eligible for merit bonuses, again reinforcing 
the culture of achievement. The awarding of merit bonuses is partly based on 

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
237
The wow culture. The “wow” 
factor that encourages Zappos’s 
clan-based culture is partly 
created by encouraging 
employees to have fun at work, 
as in playing Nerf basketball. Is 
this a place you could stick with?
coworkers’ votes for who contributed most to the company’s success, and the em-
ployees who received the most votes are recognized each year at the company’s 
“State of Triage” meeting.54
9. Organizational Goals & Performance Criteria
Many organizations establish organizational goals and criteria for recruiting, selecting, 
developing, promoting, dismissing, and retiring people, all of which reinforce the 
desired organizational culture.
Example: Las Vegas–based Zappos, the 
online shoe retailer (No. 38 on Fortune’s 
2014 “Best Places to Work For” list), 
spends a great deal of time analyzing ap-
plicants to see if they will fit into its clan-
based culture. “We spend seven to 10 hours 
[with potential recruits] over four occa-
sions at happy hours, team building events, 
or other things outside the office,” says the 
company’s human resources director. “We 
can see them, and they can us.”55 The result 
of this careful selection process was a low 
turnover rate of only 20% in 2009, a re-
markable statistic for call centers. Employ-
ees want to stay not only because Zappos 
pays full employee benefits but also be-
cause of the “wow factor”—part of which 
is encouraging them to have fun at work.
10. Measurable & Controllable Activities
An organization’s leaders can pay attention to, measure, and control a number of ac-
tivities, processes, or outcomes that can foster a certain culture.
Example: Adam Nash, the CEO of Wealthfront, an online financial management 
firm, believes that how you keep score on employee progress is important. “If you 
don’t give people metrics [methods of measurement],” he says, “smart people will 
make up their own,” and “you’ll get incessant fighting and arguments.”56
11. Organizational Structure
The hierarchical structure found in most traditional organizations is more likely to re-
inforce a culture oriented toward control and authority compared with the flatter orga-
nization that eliminates management layers in favor of giving employees more power.
Example: The hierarchical structure of a railroad provides a much different culture 
from that of the “spaghetti organization” formerly employed by Danish hearing-aid 
maker Oticon, in which employees worked at mobile desks on wheels and were al-
ways subject to reorganization.
12. Organizational Systems & Procedures
Companies are increasingly using electronic networks to increase collaboration among 
employees, to increase innovation, quality, and efficiency.
Example: Molson Coors CEO Peter Swinburn, in knitting together employees of sev-
eral former companies, made sure they had better tools to interact with each other. One 
technology he introduced was Yammer, a website for short messages similar to Twitter, 
on which some 2,000 employees now provide updates and collaborate on projects.57 ●

Who sells the electricity? 
About 80% of U.S. drivers drive 
40 miles or less a day—and 
38 miles is what the hybrid 
Chevrolet Volt will drive on a 
single electric charge. (A small 
combustion engine cuts in to 
charge the battery, so the car is 
always running on the electric 
motor.) The Volt is made by 
General Motors, a for-profit 
organization. What kind of 
organizations might sell the 
electricity and the charging 
stations—for-profit, nonprofit, 
or mutual-benefit?
8.4 
Organizational Structure
How are for-profit, nonprofit, and mutual-benefit organizations structured?
THE BIG PICTURE
The organizational structure of the three types of organizations—for-profit, nonprofit, and mutual-benefit—
may be expressed vertically or horizontally on an organization chart.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Once an organization’s vision and strategy have been determined, as we stated at the 
beginning of this chapter, the challenge for top managers is, first, to create a culture 
that will motivate its members to work together and, second, a structure that will coor-
dinate their actions to achieve the organization’s strategic goals. Here let us begin to 
consider the second part—an organization’s structure.
In Chapter 1, we defined an organization as a group of people who work together to 
achieve some specific purpose. According to Chester I. Barnard’s classic definition, 
an organization is a system of consciously coordinated activities or forces of two or 
more people.58 By this wording, a crew of two coordinating their activities to operate 
a commercial tuna fishing boat is just as much an organization as the entire StarKist 
Tuna Co.
The Organization: Three Types
As we stated in Chapter 1, there are three types of organizations classified according 
to the three different purposes for which they are formed:59
■ 
For-profit organizations. These are formed to make money, or profits, by 
offering products or services.
■ 
Nonprofit organizations. These are formed to offer services to some clients, 
not to make a profit (examples: hospitals, colleges).
■ 
Mutual-benefit organizations. These are voluntary collectives whose pur-
pose is to advance members’ interests (examples: unions, trade associations).
238 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
239
Clearly, you might have an occupation (such as auditor or police officer) that is 
equally employable in any one of these three sectors. As a manager, however, you 
would be principally required to focus on different goals—making profits, delivering 
public services, or satisfying member needs—depending on the type of organization.
The Organization Chart
Whatever the size or type of organization, it can be represented in an organization 
chart. An organization chart is a box-and-lines illustration showing the formal lines of 
authority and the organization’s official positions or work specializations. This is the 
family-tree-like pattern of boxes and lines posted on workplace walls and given to new 
hires, such as the following for a hospital. (See Figure 8.4.)
Director of
Nutrition
& Food
Services
Director of
X-Ray &
Laboratory
Services
Director of
Admissions
Director of
Pharmacy
Director of
Personnel
Chief
Physician
Director of
Surgery
Director of
Accounting
Director of
Patient &
Public
Relations
Executive
Administrative
Director
Executive
Medical
Director
Board of
Directors
Legal
Counsel
Strategic Planning
Advisor
President
Cost-Containment
Staff
Chief Executive
Officer
Director of
Outpatient
Services
FIGURE 8.4
Organization chart
Example for a hospital.
Two kinds of information that organization charts reveal about organizational struc-
ture are (1) the vertical hierarchy of authority—who reports to whom, and (2) the 
horizontal specialization—who specializes in what work.
The Vertical Hierarchy of Authority: Who Reports to Whom 
A glance up 
and down an organization chart shows the vertical hierarchy, the chain of command. A 
formal vertical hierarchy also shows the official communication network—who talks to 
whom. In a simple two-person organization, the owner might communicate with just a 
secretary or an assistant. In a complex organization, the president talks principally to 
the vice presidents, who in turn talk to the assistant vice presidents, and so on.

240 
PART 4 
Organizing
Managing. Being a manager 
requires a lot of interaction with 
others—as in “town meetings” 
with staffers. Do you think you’ll 
need to resist a tendency 
toward isolation?
The Horizontal Specialization: Who Specializes in What Work 
A glance 
to the left and right on the line of an organization chart shows the horizontal special-
ization, the different jobs or work specialization. The husband-and-wife partners in a 
two-person desktop-publishing firm might agree that one is the “outside person,” han-
dling sales, client relations, and finances, and the other is the “inside person,” handling 
production and research. A large firm might have vice presidents for each task—
marketing, finance, and so on. ●
PRACTICAL ACTION
Transition Problems on Your Way Up: How to Avoid the Pitfalls
Although corporations and managements may make noises 
about training and support, newly promoted managers may 
not see any of this and may simply be expected to know what 
to do. And, as managers move up the ladder, they may en-
counter other problems that they have not anticipated. How 
can you avoid some pitfalls as you make your ascent? Some 
suggestions:60
Have Realistic Expectations & Think about the Kind of 
Manager You Want to Be New managers often focus on the 
rights and privileges of their new jobs and underestimate the du-
ties and obligations. Make a list of all your previous bosses and 
their good and bad attributes. This may produce a list of dos and 
don’ts that can serve you well.
Don’t Forget to Manage Upward & Sideways as Well as 
Downward You not only need to manage your subordinates but 
also the perceptions of your peers and your own managers above 
you. In addition, you need to have good relationships with manag-
ers in other departments—and be perceptive about their needs 
and priorities—since they have resources you need to get your 
job done. Don’t make the mistake of thinking your own depart-
ment is the center of the universe.
Get Guidance from Other Managers You may not get ad-
vice on how to manage from your own manager, who may have 
promoted you to help reduce his or her workload, not add to it 
by expecting some coaching. If this is the case, don’t be shy 
about consulting other managers as well as people in profes-
sional organizations.
Resist Isolation If you’re promoted beyond supervisor of a 
small team and you have to manage hundreds rather than doz-
ens, or thousands rather than hundreds, you may find the biggest 
surprise is isolation. The way to stay in touch is to talk daily with 
your senior managers, perhaps have “town meetings” with staff-
ers several times a year, and employ “management by wandering 
around”—bringing teams together to talk.
YOUR CALL
How would you try to manage the perceptions not only of sub-
ordinates but of your peers?

8.5 
The Major Elements of an Organization
When I join an organization, what seven elements should I look for?
THE BIG PICTURE
Seven basic elements or features of an organization are described in this section.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
241
Whether for-profit, nonprofit, or mutual-benefit, organizations have a number of ele-
ments in common. We discuss four proposed by an organizational psychologist, and 
then describe three others that most authorities agree on.
Common Elements of Organizations: Four Proposed 
by Edgar Schein
Organizational psychologist Edgar Schein proposed the four common elements of 
(1) common purpose, (2) coordinated effort, (3) division of labor, and (4) hierarchy of 
authority.61 Let’s consider these.
1. Common Purpose: The Means for Unifying Members 
An organization 
without purpose soon begins to drift and become disorganized. The common purpose
unifies employees or members and gives everyone an understanding of the organiza-
tion’s reason for being.
2. Coordinated Effort: Working Together for Common Purpose 
The com-
mon purpose is realized through coordinated effort, the coordination of individual ef-
forts into a group or organizationwide effort. Although it’s true that individuals can 
make a difference, they cannot do everything by themselves.
3. Division of Labor: Work Specialization for Greater Efficiency 
Division 
of labor, also known as work specialization, is the arrangement of having discrete parts 
of a task done by different people. Even a two-person crew operating a fishing boat 
probably has some work specialization—one steers the boat, the other works the nets. 
With division of labor, an organization can parcel out the entire complex work effort to 
be performed by specialists, resulting in greater efficiency.
4. Hierarchy of Authority: The Chain of Command 
The hierarchy of authority, 
or chain of command, is a control mechanism for making sure the right people do the 
right things at the right time. If coordinated effort is to be achieved, some people—
namely, managers—need to have more authority, or the right to direct the work of 
others. Even in member-owned organizations, some people have more authority than 
others, although their peers may have granted it to them.
In addition, authority is most effective when arranged in a hierarchy. Without tiers or 
ranks of authority, a lone manager would have to confer with everyone in his or her 
domain, making it difficult to get things done. Even in newer organizations that flatten 
the hierarchy, there still exists more than one level of management.62 A flat organization 
is defined as one with an organizational structure with few or no levels of middle man-
agement between top managers and those reporting to them.
Finally, a principle stressed by early management scholars was that of unity of com-
mand, in which an employee should report to no more than one manager in order to 
avoid conflicting priorities and demands. Today, however, with advances in computer 

242 
PART 4 
Organizing
technology and networks, there are circumstances in which it makes sense for a person 
to communicate with more than one manager (as is true, for instance, with the organi-
zational structure known as the matrix structure, as we’ll describe).
Common Elements of Organizations: Three More 
That Most Authorities Agree On
To Schein’s four common elements we may add three others that most authorities 
agree on: (5) span of control, (6) authority, responsibility, and delegation, and (7) cen-
tralization versus decentralization of authority.
5. Span of Control: Narrow (or Tall) versus Wide (or Flat) 
The span of 
control, or span of management, refers to the number of people reporting directly to 
a given manager.63 There are two kinds of spans of control, narrow (or tall) and wide 
(or flat).
Narrow Span of Control This means a manager has a limited number of people 
reporting—three vice presidents reporting to a president, for example, instead of nine 
vice presidents. An organization is said to be tall when there are many levels with nar-
row spans of control.
Wide Span of Control This means a manager has several people reporting—a 
first-line supervisor may have 40 or more subordinates, if little hands-on supervision 
is required, as is the case in some assembly-line workplaces. An organization is said to 
be flat when there are only a few levels with wide spans of control.
Historically, spans of about 7 to 10 subordinates were considered best, but there is 
no consensus as to what is ideal. In general, when managers must be closely involved 
with their subordinates, as when the management duties are complex, they are advised 
to have a narrow span of control. This is why presidents tend to have only a handful of 
vice presidents reporting to them. By contrast, first-line supervisors directing subordi-
nates with similar work tasks may have a wide span of control.
Today’s emphasis on lean management staffs and more efficiency means that spans 
of control need to be as wide as possible while still providing adequate supervision. 
Wider spans also fit in with the trend toward allowing workers greater autonomy in 
decision making. Research suggests that, when aided by technology to communicate 
and monitor, a manager can oversee 30 employees or more.64
6. Authority, Responsibility, & Delegation: Line versus Staff Positions 
Male sea lions have to battle other males to attain authority over the herd. In human 
organizations, however, authority is related to the management authority in the organi-
zation; it has nothing to do with the manager’s fighting ability or personal characteristics. 
With authority goes accountability, responsibility, and the ability to delegate one’s 
authority.
Accountability 
Authority refers to the rights inherent in a managerial position 
to make decisions, give orders, and utilize resources. (Authority is distinguished 
from power, which, as we discuss in Chapter 14, is the extent to which a person is 
able to influence others so they respond to orders.) In the military, of course, or-
ders are given with the expectation that they will be obeyed, disobedience making 
one liable to a dishonorable discharge or imprisonment. In civilian organizations, 
disobeying orders may lead to less dire consequences (demotion or firing), but 
subordinates are still expected to accept that a higher-level manager has a legiti-
mate right to issue orders.

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
243
Authority means accountability—managers must report and justify work results to 
the managers above them. Being accountable means you have the responsibility for 
performing assigned tasks.
Responsibility With more authority comes more responsibility. Responsibility is 
the obligation you have to perform the tasks assigned to you. A car assembly-line 
worker has little authority but also little responsibility: just install those windshields 
over and over. A manager, however, has greater responsibilities.
It is a sign of faulty job design when managers are given too much authority and not 
enough responsibility, in which case they may become abusive to subordinates and 
capricious in exerting authority.65 Conversely, managers may not be given enough au-
thority, so the job becomes difficult.
Delegation 
Delegation is the process of assigning managerial authority and re-
sponsibility to managers and employees lower in the hierarchy. To be more efficient, 
most managers are expected to delegate as much of their work as possible. However, a 
business entrepreneur may fall into the common trap of perfection, believing, as one 
writer puts it, that “you are the only person who can handle a given situation, work 
with a special client, design a program.”66 But a surprising number of managers fail to 
realize that delegation is an important part of their job.
PRACTICAL ACTION
When Should You Delegate & When Not? How Managers 
Get More Done
All managers must learn how to delegate—to assign manage-
ment authority and responsibilities to people lower in the com-
pany hierarchy. But failure to delegate can happen even with 
high-powered executives, including those you might least 
 suspect—such as the president of Harvard University. Dr. Neil L. 
Rudenstine, who became president of Harvard in 1991, initially 
became so exhausted from overwork that he had to stay home 
for two weeks to recover. The incident sent a message that his 
future survival would depend on his ability to set priorities and 
delegate responsibility.67
“To do more in a day, you must do less—not do everything 
faster,” says Oakland, California, productivity expert Odette 
 Pollar.68 If as a manager you find yourself often behind, always 
taking work home, doing your subordinates’ work for them, and 
constantly having employees seeking your approval before they 
can act, you’re clearly not delegating well. How do you decide 
when to delegate and when not to? Here are some guidelines:69
Delegate Routine & Technical Matters Always try to delegate 
routine tasks and routine paperwork. When there are technical 
matters, let the experts handle them.
Delegate Tasks That Help Your Subordinates Grow Let 
your employees solve their own problems whenever possible. Let 
them try new things so they will grow in their jobs.
Don’t Delegate Confidential & Personnel Matters Any tasks 
that are confidential or that involve the evaluation, discipline, or 
counseling of subordinates should never be handed off to some-
one else.
Don’t Delegate Emergencies By definition, an emergency is a 
crisis for which there is little time for solution, and you should 
handle this yourself.
Don’t Delegate Special Tasks That Your Boss Asked You to 
Do—Unless You Have His or Her Permission If your supervi-
sor entrusts you with a special assignment, such as attending a 
particular meeting, don’t delegate it unless you have permission 
to do so.
Match the Tasks Delegated to Your Subordinates’ Skills & 
Abilities While recognizing that delegation involves some risk, 
make your assignments appropriate to the training, talent, skills, 
and motivation of your employees.
YOUR CALL
Managers fail to delegate for many reasons.70 An excessive 
need for perfection. A belief that only they should handle “spe-
cial,” “difficult,” or “unusual” problems or clients. A wish to 
keep the parts of a job that are fun. A fear that others will think 
them lazy. A reluctance to let employees lower down in the hi-
erarchy take risks. A worry that subordinates won’t deliver. A 
concern that the subordinates will do a better job and show 
them up. Are any of these reasons why you might not be very 
good at delegating? What are some others?

244 
PART 4 
Organizing
Regarding authority and responsibility, the organization chart distinguishes be-
tween two positions, line and staff. (See Figure 8.5.)
Executive
Administrative
Director
Executive
Medical
Director
Board of
Directors
Legal
Counsel
Strategic Planning
Advisor
President
Cost-Containment
Staff
Chief Executive
Officer
FIGURE 8.5
Line and staff
Line responsibilities are 
indicated by solid lines, staff 
responsibilities by dotted lines.
Line Position 
Line managers have authority to make decisions and usually have 
people reporting to them. Examples: the president, the vice presidents, the director of 
personnel, and the head of accounting. Line positions are indicated on the organization 
chart by a solid line (usually a vertical line).
Staff Position 
Staff personnel have authority functions; they provide advice, recom-
mendations, and research to line managers (examples: specialists such as legal counsels 
and special advisers for mergers and acquisitions or strategic planning). Staff positions 
are indicated on the organization chart by a dotted line (usually a horizontal line).
7. Centralization versus Decentralization of Authority 
Who makes the im-
portant decisions in an organization? That is what the question of centralization versus 
decentralization of authority is concerned with.
Centralized Authority 
With centralized authority, important decisions are made by 
higher-level managers. Very small companies tend to be the most centralized, although 
nearly all organizations have at least some authority concentrated at the top of the hierar-
chy. Kmart and McDonald’s are examples of companies using this kind of authority.
An advantage in using centralized authority is that there is less duplication of work, 
because fewer employees perform the same task; rather, the task is often performed by 
a department of specialists. Another advantage of centralization is that procedures are 
uniform and thus easier to control; all purchasing, for example, may have to be put out 
to competitive bids.
Decentralized Authority 
With decentralized authority, important decisions are 
made by middle-level and supervisory-level managers. Here, obviously, power has 
been delegated throughout the organization. Among the companies using decentral-
ized authority are General Motors and Harley-Davidson.
An advantage in having decentralized authority is that managers are encouraged to solve 
their own problems rather than to buck the decision to a higher level. In addition, decisions 
are made more quickly, which increases the organization’s flexibility and efficiency. ●

Small firm. What type of 
organizational structure is best 
suited to a local floral shop? 
Should the number of employees 
influence the decision?
Culture and structure, we’ve said, are quite often inter-
twined. When Google co-founder (with Sergey Brin) and 
CEO Larry Page was asked in 2011 about the biggest threat 
to his company, Page answered in a single word: “Google.”
Now 17 years old, Google started out as a freewheel-
ing company in which, as we mentioned, engineers 
were given time to experiment on their own projects, 
producing the famed Google’s culture of innovation. 
The problem, however, was that the company grew so 
quickly (it’s now 40,000 people) that decision making 
had become molasses-like. For instance, the two co-
founders, who had been trained as engineers, had hired 
a professional manager, Eric Schmidt, to be CEO, but 
the three of them “had to agree before anything could be 
done,” says one report. “The unwieldy management and 
glacial pace of decision making were particularly noticeable in [Silicon Valley], where 
start-ups overtake behemoths in months.”71 Since then, Schmidt was promoted to 
chairman and Page took over as CEO, streamlining the company’s structure and deci-
sion-making processes.
Organizational design is concerned with designing the optimal structures of 
 accountability and responsibility that an organization uses to execute its strategies. We 
may categorize organizational designs as three types: (1) traditional designs, (2) hori-
zontal designs, and (3) designs that open boundaries between organizations.72
1. Traditional Designs: Simple, Functional, Divisional, 
& Matrix Structures
Traditional organizational designs tend to favor structures that rely on a vertical manage-
ment hierarchy, with clear departmental boundaries and reporting arrangements, as follows.
The Simple Structure: For the Small Firm 
The first organizational form is the 
simple structure. This is the form often found in a firm’s very early, entrepreneurial 
stages, when the organization is apt to reflect the desires and personality of the owner or 
founder. An organization with a simple structure has authority centralized in a single per-
son, a flat hierarchy, few rules, and low work specialization. (See Figure 8.6, right.)
Hundreds of thousands of organizations are arranged according to a simple structure—
for instance, small mom-and-pop firms running landscaping, construction, insurance 
sales, and similar businesses. Examples: Both Hewlett-Packard and Apple Computer 
began as two-man garage start-ups that later became large.
The Functional Structure: Grouping by Similar Work Specialties 
The second 
organizational form is the functional structure. In a functional structure, people with similar 
occupational specialties are put together in formal groups. This is a quite commonplace 
structure, seen in all kinds of organizations, for-profit and nonprofit. (See Figure 8.7.)
8.6 
Basic Types of Organizational Structures
How would one describe the seven organizational structures?
THE BIG PICTURE
Seven types of organizational structures are simple, functional, divisional, matrix, team-based, 
network, and modular.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
245
Administrative
Assistant
Owner
FIGURE 8.6
Simple structure: an example
There is only one hierarchical 
level of management beneath 
the owner.

246 
PART 4 
Organizing
Examples: A manufacturing firm will often group people with similar work skills in 
a Marketing Department, others in a Production Department, others in Finance, and so 
on. A nonprofit educational institution might group employees according to work spe-
cialty under Faculty, Admissions, Maintenance, and so forth.
The Divisional Structure: Grouping by Similarity of Purpose 
The third or-
ganizational form is the divisional structure. In a divisional structure, people with 
diverse occupational specialties are put together in formal groups by similar products 
or services, customers or clients, or geographic regions. (See Figure 8.8, next page.)
Product Divisions: Grouping by Similar Products or Services 
Product di-
visions group activities around similar products or services. Examples: The media giant 
Time Warner has different divisions for magazines, movies, recordings, cable television, 
and so on. The Warner Bros. part of the empire alone has divisions spanning movies and 
television, a broadcast network, retail stores, theaters, amusement parks, and music.
Customer Divisions: Grouping by Common Customers or Clients 
Customer divisions tend to group activities around common customers or clients. Exam-
ples: Ford Motor Co. has separate divisions for passenger-car dealers, for large trucking 
customers, and for farm products customers. A savings and loan might be structured with 
divisions for making consumer loans, mortgage loans, business loans, and agricultural loans.
Geographic Divisions: Grouping by Regional Location 
Geographic divisions 
group activities around defined regional locations. Example: This arrangement is frequently 
used by government agencies. The Federal Reserve Bank, for instance, has 12 separate 
districts around the United States. The Internal Revenue Service also has several districts.
The Matrix Structure: A Grid of Functional & Divisional for Two Chains of 
Command 
The fourth organizational form is the matrix structure. In a matrix 
structure, an organization combines functional and divisional chains of command in a 
grid so that there are two command structures—vertical and horizontal. The functional 
Vice
President,
Human
Resources
Vice
President,
Production
Vice
President,
Marketing
Structure for
a business
Structure for
a hospital
Vice
President,
Finance
President
Director of
Nutrition
& Food
Services
Director of
Outpatient
Services
Chief of
Medical
Services
Director of
Administrative
Services
Chief
Administrator
FIGURE 8.7
Functional structure: 
two examples
This shows the functional 
structure for a business 
and for a hospital

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
247
structure usually doesn’t change—it is the organization’s normal departments or divi-
sions, such as Finance, Marketing, Production, and Research & Development. The 
divisional structure may vary—as by product, brand, customer, or geographic region. 
(See Figure 8.9, next page.)
A hypothetical example, using Ford Motor Co.: The functional structure might be 
the departments of Engineering, Finance, Production, and Marketing, each headed by 
a vice president. Thus, the reporting arrangement is vertical. The divisional structure 
might be by product (the new models of Taurus, Mustang, Explorer, and Expedition, 
for example), each headed by a project manager. This reporting arrangement is hori-
zontal. Thus, a marketing person, say, would report to both the Vice President of Mar-
keting and to the Project Manager for the Ford Mustang. Indeed, Ford Motor Co. used 
the matrix approach to create the Taurus and a newer version of the Mustang.
2. The Horizontal Design: Eliminating Functional 
Barriers to Solve Problems
The second organizational design is the horizontal design. In a horizontal design, also 
called a team-based design, teams or workgroups, either temporary or permanent, are 
Internet
Products
Division
Magazine
& Book
Division
Motion
Pictures &
Television
Division
Customer
divisional
structure
Product
divisional
structure
Geographic
divisional
structure
Music
Division
Agricultural
Loans
Business
Loans
Consumer
Loans
Mortgage
Loans
President
Eastern
Region
Southern
Region
Western
Region
Northern
Region
President
President
FIGURE 8.8
Divisional structure: three 
examples
This shows product, customer, 
and geographic divisions.

248 
PART 4 
Organizing
used to improve collaboration and work on shared tasks by breaking down internal 
boundaries. For instance, when managers from different functional divisions are 
brought together in teams—known as cross-functional teams—to solve particular 
problems, the barriers between the divisions break down. The focus on narrow divi-
sional interests yields to a common interest in solving the problems that brought them 
together. Yet team members still have their full-time functional work responsibilities 
and often still formally report to their own managers above them in the functional- 
division hierarchy. (See Figure 8.10, opposite page.)
Vice
President,
Marketing
Vice
President,
Production
Vice
President,
Engineering
Project
Manager,
Taurus
Project
structure
Functional
structure
Vice
President,
Finance
President
Project
Manager,
Mustang
Project
Manager,
Explorer
Project
Manager,
Expedition
Subordinate
reports to
both Vice
President of
Marketing
(above) AND
to Project
Manager for
Mustang (left)
FIGURE 8.9
Matrix structure
An example of an arrangement 
that Ford might use.
EXAMPLE
Use of a Horizontal Design: Whole Foods Market
Upscale natural and organic-food grocery Whole Foods Market 
started out in 1980 as one store in Austin, Texas, and today has 
revenues of $12.9 billion and 375 stores in North America and 
the United Kingdom.73 It was rated No. 20 in 2014 on Fortune 
magazine’s annual “World’s Most Admired Companies” list.74 It 
has also been chosen as one of Fortune’s “100 Best Compa-
nies to Work For” every year for 17 years (No. 44 in 2014).75 
But, as one writer observed, if its values are “soft-hearted,” 
emphasizing Whole Food, Whole People, Whole Planet, “its 
competitive logic is hard-headed.”76 That’s because its man-
agement strategy is based not on hierarchy but on autonomous 
profit centers of self-managed teams.
“Radical Decentralizing”: Empowering Small Teams. One 
of Whole Foods’s core operating principles is that all work is 
teamwork. Thus, each store is organized into roughly eight 
self-managed teams, each with a designated team leader. The 
leaders in each store also operate as a team, as do the store 
leaders in each region. Additionally, the directors of the com-
pany’s 11 regions operate as a team.

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
249
Functional 
structure
Project teams
Project
team
members
Vice
President,
Marketing
Vice
President,
Engineering
Vice
President,
Research &
Development
Vice
President,
Design
Product Team
Manager,
Manufacturing,
Light Trucks
Product Team
Manager,
Manufacturing,
Sedans
Product Team
Manager,
Manufacturing,
Sports Cars
President
FIGURE 8.10 
Horizontal design
This shows a mix of functional (vertical) and project-team (horizontal) arrangements.
At most retail companies, employees are hired by supervi-
sors (not fellow employees), decisions about what products to 
order are made by someone high up at central headquarters, 
and the amounts of people’s paychecks are kept secret. Whole 
Foods, however, believes in “radical decentralizing,” in the 
words of influential management professor Gary Hamel.77
At the individual-store level, compensation is tied to team 
rather than individual performance, and performance measure-
ments and individual pay schedules are open to all. Each team 
has the mission of improving the food for which it is responsi-
ble; is given wide flexibility in how it manages its responsibili-
ties, hires and fires its members, and stocks its shelves; and is 
given a lot of power in how it responds to the changing tastes 
of local consumers.
A Steady Diet of Growth. Whole Foods employees are given 
both the freedom to do the right thing for customers and the 
incentive to do the right thing for profits. The financial results 
of this business model are that Whole Foods is the most prof-
itable food retailer in the United Sates, when measured by 
profit per square foot. Although its stock price was down 
somewhat in 2014, it still was up 12-fold since its 2008 
 recession-era low.78
YOUR CALL
In designing new products, such as cell phones, the horizon-
tal design team approach, known as concurrent engineering
or integrated product development, has been found to 
speed up design because all the specialists meet at once, 
instead of separately doing their own thing, then handing off 
the result to the next group of specialists. Why do you think 
a horizontal design would be better in a retail business such 
as groceries?

250 
PART 4 
Organizing
3. Designs That Open Boundaries between 
Organizations: Hollow, Modular, & Virtual Structures
The opposite of a bureaucracy, with its numerous barriers and divisions, a boundary-
less organization is a fluid, highly adaptive organization whose members, linked by 
information technology, come together to collaborate on common tasks. The collabora-
tors may include not only coworkers but also suppliers, customers, and even competi-
tors. This means that the form of the business is ever-changing, and business 
relationships are informal.79
Three types of structures in this class of organizational design are hollow, modular, 
and virtual structures.
The Hollow Structure: Operating with a Central Core & Outsourcing 
Functions to Outside Vendors 
In the hollow structure, often called the network 
structure, the organization has a central core of key functions and outsources other 
functions to vendors who can do them cheaper or faster. (See Figure 8.11.) A company 
with a hollow structure might retain such important core processes as design or mar-
keting and outsource most other processes, such as human resources, warehousing, or 
distribution, thereby seeming to “hollow out” the organization.80
FIGURE 8.11
Hollow structure
This is an example of a personal 
computer company that 
outsources noncore processes 
to vendors.
Design
studio
Sweden
Components
assembly
Mexico, Asia
Accounting
& finance
USA
Core of
personal
computer
company
USA
Engineering
company
Japan
Distribution
company
Canada
A firm with a hollow structure might operate with extensive, even worldwide op-
erations, yet its basic core could remain small, thus keeping payrolls and overhead 
down. The glue that holds everything together is information technology, along with 
strategic alliances and contractual arrangements with supplier companies. An example 
of a hollow structure is EndoStim, the medical device start-up we described earlier.
The Modular Structure: Outsourcing Pieces of a Product to Outside 
Firms 
The modular structure differs from the hollow structure in that it is oriented 
around outsourcing certain pieces of a product rather than outsourcing certain pro-
cesses (such as human resources or warehousing) of an organization. In a modular 
structure, a firm assembles product chunks, or modules, provided by outside contrac-
tors. One article compares this form of organization to “a collection of Lego bricks 
that can snap together.”

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
251
Modular structure. The center 
section of Bombardier’s 
eight-passenger Continental 
business jet is built in Ireland 
and is shipped to Wichita, 
Kansas, where it is assembled 
with 12 other major components 
in just four days.
For example, Bombardier (pronounced “bom-bar-dee-ay”), of Wichita, Kansas, 
makes an eight-passenger business jet, the Continental, that is designed in a dozen 
large modules that are built in various places around the world. The cockpit and for-
ward fuselage are built by Bombardier Montreal. The center section is built in Belfast, 
the wing by Mitsubishi in Japan, the stabilizers and rear fuselage by Aerospace Indus-
trial Development in Taiwan, the landing gear by Messier-Dowty in Canada, and the 
tailcone by Hawker de Havilland in Australia. The engines are provided by General 
Electric and the avionics gear by Rockwell Collins, both companies in the United 
States. The 12 modules are shipped to Wichita, where the parts are snapped together in 
just four days.81
The Virtual Structure: An Internet-Connected Partner for a Temporary 
Project 
“Strip away the highfalutin’ talk,” says one industry observer, “and at bot-
tom the Internet is a tool that dramatically lowers the cost of communication. That 
means it can radically alter any industry or activity that depends heavily on the flow of 
information.”82 One consequence of this is the virtual organization, an organization 
whose members are geographically apart, usually working with e-mail, collaborative 
computing, and other computer connections, while often appearing to customers and 
others to be a single, unified organization with a real physical location.83
The virtual organization allows the form of boundaryless structure known as the 
virtual structure, a company outside a company that is created “specifically to respond 
to an exceptional market opportunity that is often temporary,” according to one defini-
tion.84 The structure, in which members meet and communicate with each other by 
 e-mail and videoconferencing instead of face to face, is valuable for organizations that 
want to grow through partnerships with other companies.85 For instance, Finnish 
phone-maker Nokia, which had trouble gaining market share in the United States, 
changed its strategy to develop phones in partnership with U.S. carriers, as by assign-
ing product developers to AT&T and Verizon. ●

Could anyone do this? Hotel 
housekeepers, following the 
model of a mechanistic 
organization, are supposed to 
be able to make beds in no 
more than 3 minutes and ready 
an entire room within 
24 minutes. The tasks are 
physically demanding, and the 
staff must be taught how to 
bend properly to make the work 
easier on the body. If you had 
this job, what would you do to 
vary the routine to avoid 
monotony—or would that 
sacrifice speed?
8.7 
Contingency Design: Factors in Creating 
the Best Structure
What factors affect the design of an organization’s structure?
THE BIG PICTURE
Three factors that should be considered when determining the best organizational culture involve whether 
an organization’s environment is mechanistic or organic, whether its environment stresses differentiation or 
integration, and how its strategy can affect its structure.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
What is the optimal size for an organization? How big is too big?
Medical records company gloStream, which sells software to doctors’ offices, was 
founded in 2005 as a virtual organization, and for four years the approach worked 
well, with costs kept low and salespeople having no choice but to be out in the field. 
But in 2009, CEO Mike Sappington  decided it was time to “take the company physi-
cal.” “We’ve gotten too big to be a virtual company,” he told Inc. magazine. By the 
following year, gloStream planned to have 100 employees in the United States and 
another 100 in India. “Setting up a conference call or arranging everyone’s schedules 
for a meeting,” he said, “started to take an enormous amount of time.”86
Three Factors to Be Considered in Designing an 
Organization’s Structure
When managers are considering what organizational arrangements to choose from, 
such factors as stage of development are among the factors, or contingencies, they 
must consider. Recall from Chapter 2 that the contingency approach to management 
emphasizes that a manager’s approach should vary according to—that is, be contin-
gent on—the individual and environmental situation. Thus, the manager following the 
contingency approach simply asks, “What method is the best to use under these par-
ticular circumstances?” The process of fitting the organization to its environment is 
called contingency design.
Managers taking a contingency approach must consider the following factors 
in designing the best kind of structure for their particular organization at that 
particular time:
 1. Environment—mechanistic versus organic
 2. Environment—differentiation versus integration
 3. Link between strategy, culture, and structure
1. The Environment: Mechanistic versus 
Organic Organizations—the Burns 
& Stalker Model
Making beds—how hard could it be?
Actually, a hotel housecleaner may be expected to whip not just beds 
but entire rooms, 16–30 of them, into spick-and-span shape during an 
eight-hour shift. Here every job is broken down into the smallest of steps, 
with vacuuming, dusting, mopping, making beds, and so on, expected to 
take about 20–24 minutes per room, according to time-motion studies. 
Making a neatly tucked bed should take no more than 3 minutes.87
252 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
253
Much of this kind of mundane hotel work exemplifies what British behavioral sci-
entists Tom Burns and G. M. Stalker call a mechanistic organization, as opposed to 
an organic organization.88 (See Table 8.3.)
Mechanistic Organizations: When Rigidity & Uniformity Work Best 
In a 
mechanistic organization, authority is centralized, tasks and rules are clearly specified, 
and employees are closely supervised. Mechanistic organizations, then, are bureau-
cratic, with rigid rules and top-down communication. This kind of structure is effective 
in certain aspects of hotel work because the market demands uniform product quality 
and cleanliness.
In general, mechanistic design works best when an organization is operating in a 
stable environment. Yet new companies that have gone through a rough-and-tumble 
start-up period may decide to change their structures so that they are more mechanis-
tic, with clear lines of authority.
Organic Organizations: When Looseness & Flexibility Work Best 
In an 
organic organization, authority is decentralized, there are fewer rules and procedures, 
and networks of employees are encouraged to cooperate and respond quickly to unex-
pected tasks. Tom Peters and Robert Waterman called this kind of organization a 
“loose” structure.89
Organic organizations are sometimes termed “adhocracies” because they operate on 
an ad hoc basis, improvising as they go along. As you might expect, information-
technology companies favor the organic arrangement because they constantly have to 
adjust to technological change. New York–based Dark Arts Consulting, a technology 
consulting firm, has used the practice of co-working—sharing office space with other 
businesses—to expand into territories in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, enabling it to 
hire salespeople and engineers without having the added expense of an underutilized 
office.90 Companies that need to respond to fast-changing consumer tastes also favor 
organic arrangements.
No doubt you would be more comfortable in some organizational structures than 
others. If you value autonomy and the chance to make decisions, you probably pre-
fer a hollow or virtual structure as opposed to one that is more structured. What type 
of structure do you think would bring out the best in you? Find out by taking Self-
Assessment 8.2.
TABLE 8.3
Mechanistic versus 
Organic Organizations
MECHANISTIC ORGANIZATIONS 
ORGANIC ORGANIZATIONS
Centralized hierarchy of authority 
Decentralized hierarchy of authority
Many rules and procedures 
Few rules and procedures
Specialized tasks 
Shared tasks
Formalized communication 
Informal communication
Few teams or task forces 
Many teams or task forces
Narrow span of control, taller structures 
Wider span of control, flatter structures

254 
PART 4 
Organizing
2. The Environment: Differentiation versus 
Integration—the Lawrence & Lorsch Model
Burns and Stalker’s ideas were extended in the United States by Harvard University re-
searchers Paul R. Lawrence and Jay W. Lorsch.91 Instead of a mechanistic-organic 
dimension, however, they proposed a differentiation-integration dimension—forces that 
impelled the parts of an organization to move apart or to come together. The stability of 
the environment confronting the parts of the organization, according to Lawrence and 
Lorsch, determines the degree of differentiation or integration that is appropriate.
Differentiation: When Forces Push the Organization Apart 
Differentiation 
is the tendency of the parts of an organization to disperse and fragment. The more 
subunits into which an organization breaks down, the more highly differentiated it is.
This impulse toward dispersal arises because of technical specialization and division 
of labor. As a result, specialists behave in specific, delimited ways, without coordinating 
with other parts of the organization. For example, a company producing dental floss, 
deodorants, and other personal-care products might have different product divisions, 
each with its own production facility and sales staff—a quite differentiated organization.
Integration: When Forces Pull the Organization Together 
Integration is the 
tendency of the parts of an organization to draw together to achieve a common pur-
pose. In a highly integrated organization, the specialists work together to achieve a 
common goal. The means for achieving this are a formal chain of command, standard-
ization of rules and procedures, and use of cross-functional teams and computer net-
works so that there is frequent communication and coordination of the parts.
3. Linking Strategy, Culture, & Structure
We began this chapter by discussing why it makes sense that a company’s organizational 
culture and organizational structure should be aligned with its vision and strategies. Thus, 
if the managers of an organization change its strategy, as gloStream did when it decided to 
add lots more people and put them under one roof instead of in a virtual network, they 
need to change the organization’s culture and structure to support that strategy. Indeed, 
companies often begin by offering a single product or product line that requires only a 
simple structure, but as they grow and their strategies become more ambitious and elabo-
rate, so the culture and structure need to change to support those strategies.92
All the organizational cultures and structures described in this chapter are used today 
because all of them have advantages that make them appropriate for some cases and disad-
vantages that make them not useful for others. For example, the clear roles and strict hierar-
chy of an extremely mechanistic organization are clearly suitable in a system valuing careful 
routines and checks and balances, such as a nuclear power plant. A fast-moving start-up 
drawing on sources of expertise throughout the world may benefit from a more flexible 
culture and organic structure that lowers boundaries between functions and organizations. ●
Assessing Your Organizational Structure 
Preference
This survey is designed to assess your preferred type of orga-
nizational structure. Go to connect.mheducation.com and 
take Self-Assessment 8.2. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
Do you prefer a more mechanistic or organic structure? 
What do you think is the cause for this preference?
2. 
If you were interviewing for a job, what questions might 
you ask to determine if the company is more mechanistic 
or organic?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 8.2
®

accountability 243
adhocracy culture 230
authority 242
boundaryless organization 250
centralized authority 244
clan culture 230
common purpose 241
contingency design 252
coordinated effort 241
corporate culture 227
customer divisions 246
decentralized authority 244
delegation 243
differentiation 254
division of labor 241
divisional structure 246
enacted values 232
espoused values 232
flat organization 241
functional structure 245
geographic divisions 246
hero 233
hierarchy culture 230
hierarchy of authority 241
hollow structure 250
horizontal design 247
integration 254
line managers 244
market culture 230
matrix structure 246
mechanistic organization 253
modular structure 250
network structure 250
organic organization 253
organization 238
organization chart 239
organizational culture 227
organizational design 245
organizational structure 227
person-organization fit 226
product divisions 246
responsibility 243
rites and rituals 233
simple structure 245
span of control (management) 242
staff personnel 244
story 233
symbol 233
team-based design 247
unity of command 241
virtual organization 251
virtual structure 251
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
8.1 Aligning Strategy, Culture, 
& Structure
• Person-organization fit reflects the extent to 
which your personality and values match the 
climate and culture in an organization. A good 
fit is associated with more positive work 
attitudes and task performance, lower stress, 
and fewer intentions to quit.
• The challenge for top managers is to align 
the organization’s vision and strategies with 
its organizational culture and organizational 
structure.
• Organizational culture is defined as the set of 
shared, taken-for-granted implicit 
assumptions that a group holds and that 
determines how it perceives, thinks about, 
and reacts to its various environments. The 
culture helps employees understand why the 
organization does what it does and how it 
intends to accomplish its long-term goals.
• Organizational structure is a formal system of 
task and reporting relationships that 
coordinates and motivates an organization’s 
members so that they can work together to 
achieve the organization’s goals.
8.2 What Kind of Organizational Culture 
Will You Be Operating In?
• According to one common methodology 
known as the competing values framework, 
organizational cultures can be classified into 
four types: clan, which has an internal focus 
and values flexibility; (2) adhocracy, which 
has an external focus and values flexibility; 
(3) market, which has a strong external 
focus and values stability and control; 
and (4) hierarchy, which has an internal 
focus and values stability and control.
• Organizational culture appears as three 
layers. Level 1 is observable artifacts, the 
physical manifestations of culture. Level 2 
is espoused values, explicitly stated values 
and norms preferred by an organization, 
although employees are frequently influenced 
by enacted values, which represent the values 
and norms actually exhibited in the organization. 
Level 3 consists of basic assumptions, the core 
values of the organization. Culture is transmitted 
to employees in symbols, stories, heroes, 
and rites and rituals. A symbol is an object, 
act, quality, or event that conveys meaning 
to others. A story is a narrative based on 
true events, which is repeated—and 
sometimes embellished on—to emphasize 
a particular value. A hero is a person whose 
accomplishments embody the values of 
the organization. Rites and rituals are the 
activities and ceremonies, planned and 
unplanned, that celebrate important 
occasions and accomplishments in the 
organization’s life.
Key Points
 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
255

8.3 The Process of Culture Change
• Among the 12 mechanisms managers use to 
embed a culture in an organization are: 
(1) formal statements; (2) slogans and sayings; 
(3) rites and rituals; (4) stories, legends, and 
myths; (5) leader reactions to crises; (6) role 
modeling, training, and coaching; (7) physical 
design; (8) rewards, titles, promotions, and 
bonuses; (9) organizational goals and 
performance criteria; (10) measurable and 
controllable activities; (11) organizational 
structure; and (12) organizational systems 
and procedures.
8.4 Organizational Structure
• An organization is a system of consciously 
coordinated activities or forces of two or 
more people.
• There are three types of organizations 
classified according to the three different 
purposes for which they are formed: for-profit, 
nonprofit, and mutual-benefit.
• Whatever the size of organization, it can 
be represented in an organization chart, a 
boxes-and-lines illustration showing the 
formal lines of authority and the organization’s 
official positions or division of labor.
• Two kinds of information that organizations 
reveal about organizational structure are 
(1) the vertical hierarchy of authority—who 
reports to whom, and (2) the horizontal 
specialization—who specializes in what work.
8.5 The Major Elements of an 
Organization
• Organizations have seven elements. Four 
proposed by Edgar Schein are (1) common 
purpose, which unifies employees or members 
and gives everyone an understanding of the 
organization’s reason for being; (2) coordinated 
effort, the coordination of individual efforts into 
a group or organization-wide effort; (3) division 
of labor, having discrete parts of a task done 
by different people; and (4) hierarchy of 
authority, a control mechanism for making 
sure the right people do the right things at the 
right time.
• Other common elements are (5) span of 
control, which refers to the number of people 
reporting directly to a given manager; and 
(6) authority and accountability, responsibility, 
and delegation.
• Authority refers to the rights inherent in a 
managerial position to make decisions, give 
orders, and utilize resources. Accountability 
means that managers must report and justify 
work results to the managers above them. 
Responsibility is the obligation you have to 
perform the tasks assigned to you. Delegation 
is the process of assigning managerial 
authority and responsibility to managers and 
employees lower in the hierarchy.
• Regarding authority and responsibility, the 
organization chart distinguishes between two 
positions, line and staff. Line managers have 
authority to make decisions and usually have 
people reporting to them. Staff personnel 
have advisory functions; they provide advice, 
recommendations, and research to line 
managers.
• The final common element of organizations is 
(7) centralization versus decentralization of 
authority. With centralized authority, important 
decisions are made by higher-level managers. 
With decentralized authority, important 
decisions are made by middle-level and 
supervisory-level managers.
8.6 Basic Types of Organizational 
Structures
• Organizations may be arranged into seven 
types of structures. (1) In a simple structure, 
authority is centralized in a single person; 
this structure has a flat hierarchy, few rules, 
and low work specialization. (2) In a functional 
structure, people with similar occupational 
specialties are put together in formal groups. 
(3) In a divisional structure, people with diverse 
occupational specialties are put together 
in formal groups by similar products or 
services, customers or clients, or geographic 
regions. (4) In a matrix structure, an 
organization combines functional and 
divisional chains of command in grids so 
that there are two command structures—
vertical and horizontal.
• (5) In a horizontal design or team-based 
design, teams or workgroups are used to 
improve horizontal relations and solve 
problems throughout the organization. (6) In 
a network structure, the organization has 
a central core that is linked to outside 
independent firms by computer connections, 
which are used to operate as if all were a 
single organization. (7) In a modular structure, 
a firm assembles product chunks, or modules, 
provided by outside contractors.
8.7 Contingency Design: Factors in 
Creating the Best Structure
• The process of fitting the organization to its 
environment is called contingency design. 
Managers taking a contingency approach 
must consider at least three factors in 
designing the best kind of structure for their 
organization at that particular time.
• The first is that an organization may be either 
mechanistic or organic. In a mechanistic 
organization, authority is centralized, tasks 
and rules are clearly specified, and employees 
256 
PART 4 
Organizing

are closely supervised. In an organic 
organization, authority is decentralized, there 
are fewer rules and procedures, and networks 
of employees are encouraged to cooperate 
and respond quickly to unexpected tasks.
• The second is that an organization may also 
be characterized by differentiation or 
integration. Differentiation is the tendency of 
the parts of an organization to disperse and 
fragment. Integration is the tendency of the 
parts of an organization to draw together to 
achieve a common purpose.
• The third is the link between strategy, culture, 
and structure. If the managers of an 
organization change its strategy, they need to 
change the organization’s culture and 
structure to support that strategy. Indeed, 
companies often begin by offering a single 
product or product line that requires only a 
simple structure, but as they grow and their 
strategies become more ambitious and 
elaborate, so the culture and structure need 
to change to support those strategies.
 1. To implement an organization’s strategy, what are 
the two kinds of important areas that managers must 
determine?
 2. How would you describe the four kinds of 
organizational cultures, according to the competing 
values framework?
 3. Describe and explain the three levels of 
organizational culture.
 4. What are four ways in which culture is transmitted 
to employees?
 5. Name 12 mechanisms by which an organization’s 
members teach each other preferred values, beliefs, 
expectations, and behaviors.
 6. What are seven common elements of organizations?
 7. Describe the four types of traditional organizational 
designs.
 8. Explain what is meant by horizontal organizational 
designs.
 9. What are three designs that open boundaries 
between organizations?
 10. What are three factors to consider in designing 
an organization’s structure?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
IDEO’s Culture Reinforces Helping Behavior
IDEO is a company that has won many awards for its 
“human-centered, design-based approach to helping 
organizations” improve and grow. They have helped 
hundreds of companies in many industries to innovate 
and improve customer satisfaction and profitability. 
Tim Brown, president and CEO, describes design 
thinking as “a human-centered approach to innova-
tion that draws from the designer’s toolkit to integrate 
the needs of people, the possibilities of technology, and 
the requirements for business success.”93 IDEO’s suc-
cess is built on a culture that values, reinforces, and 
supports helping behavior.
Helping behavior must be actively nurtured because 
it is discretionary. At IDEO helping others and collab-
orating for the good of a client is the norm. This case is 
based on results from a study of IDEO’s culture and 
design process. The investigators identified four keys 
to achieving helping behavior and collaboration.
Leadership Conviction
Not every large company’s leader would, if asked 
about organizational priorities, bring up the topic of 
encouraging collaborative help in the ranks. But 
IDEO’s leadership is explicitly focused on it. For Tim 
Brown, the CEO, that’s not only because the problems 
IDEO is asked to solve require extreme creativity; it’s 
also because they have become more complicated. 
Brown says, “I believe that the more complex the 
problem, the more help you need. And that’s the kind 
of stuff we’re getting asked to tackle, so we need to 
figure out how to have a culture where help is much, 
much more embedded.” Essentially, this is a convic-
tion that many minds make bright work.
Leaders at IDEO prove their conviction by giving 
and seeking help themselves. For example, we observed 
Management in Action
 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
257

a particularly successful event (in terms of new ideas 
generated) when a C-suite-level [senior executives] 
helper joined a team for an hour-long brainstorming 
session. The team’s project hadn’t even formally 
kicked off yet, so it was not a situation in which help 
was desperately needed. Nor was this leader the only 
one qualified to provide it. His arrival in the room sig-
naled strongly that helping is an expected behavior in 
the culture and that everyone is part of the helping 
network.
The Two Sides of the Helping Coin
Because most cultures have norms of reciprocity, getting 
help from others can put you in their debt. Even if you are 
unfazed by the prospect of a future request, you might 
worry about seeming weak or incompetent if you ask for 
assistance, especially from someone of higher status. 
IDEO makes a conscious effort to sweep that hesitation 
away. From the beginning of every project, designers are 
encouraged to assume that they’ll need help. A project 
team with a demanding client learns that it would be ir-
responsible not to ask a colleague who had a lot of expe-
rience with that client to review its work. The team 
members might ask for that colleague’s input throughout 
the project, in sessions lasting anywhere from 15 minutes 
to half a day. At IDEO there is no shame in asking for 
help, and this psychological safety shows up on many 
levels: For example, people cheerfully accept frequent 
all-office e-mail blasts along the lines of “Does anyone 
have experience with Spanish-language radio?” or 
“Who’s tried the new quick-loss diet?”
Processes & Roles
How pervasive is helping at IDEO? Our network 
mapping revealed an extraordinary fact: In the of-
fice we studied, nearly every person was named as a 
helper by at least one other person. Even more 
amazing, an overwhelming majority of employees 
(about 89%) showed up on at least one other em-
ployee’s list of top five helpers. Clearly, effective 
helping isn’t a rare skill. Most people at IDEO learn 
to do it as they become steeped in the culture of the 
organization, participate in its regular activities, and 
develop networks within the firm. It would be hard, 
we think, to achieve this simply by communicating 
the desired culture. And indeed, IDEO goes much 
further, building the value of help into formal pro-
cesses and explicit roles.
Help is embedded in the entire design process, from 
IDEO’s famous brainstorming sessions, through for-
mal design reviews, to the many forms of support and 
encouragement for project teams seeking feedback on 
ideas. In this way IDEO builds essential habits of 
mind. In fact, Brown told us, when help is not seen as 
an integral part of the process, “teams will rush 
through their project and get quite close to the end 
before they realize ‘Wow, we completely missed 
something—which we wouldn’t have missed if we had 
stopped and asked for help.’”
Most IDEO project teams have one or more senior 
designers assigned as helpers. These people have exper-
tise in a given domain, deep experience with the team’s 
client, or simply a reputation for being particularly good 
helpers. They are generally available to the team and 
check in with it periodically throughout the project.
Slack in the Organization
Remember that helping is a discretionary behavior. 
That’s true even for a formally assigned helper at IDEO: 
The role is only a small part of anyone’s overall job. A 
potential helper may or may not be able (or willing) to 
respond to any given request. Because IDEO wants 
helping to occur, it must avoid overloading people with 
tasks of their own. Notice the implication: Time that 
might be spent on billable client work is made available 
to facilitate ad hoc assistance. This strongly reinforces 
messages exhorting people to help their colleagues.
The Surprising Omissions
These keys to collaborative help at IDEO may seem 
uncontroversial. But note what isn’t part of the equa-
tion: some of corporate leadership’s favorite talent-
management levers. The firm seems not to rely on 
fancy collaborative software tools or other technolo-
gies (although e-mail and videoconferencing are 
used frequently). Most pointedly, financial incen-
tives don’t play a prominent role in promoting the 
culture of help.
To be sure, executives have help in mind when eval-
uating job candidates. Brown wrote about this re-
cently: “During job interviews, I listen for a couple 
things. When people repeatedly say ‘I,’ not ‘we,’ when 
recounting their accomplishments, I get suspicious. 
But if they’re generous with giving credit and talk 
about how someone else was instrumental in their 
progress, I know that they give help as well as receive 
it.” Helpfulness is considered in promotions as well. It 
is a value that everyone in a senior position at IDEO is 
expected to model. But on a daily basis, the incentive 
to help comes from the simple gratitude it produces 
and the recognition of its worth.
This apparent joy in collaborative helping speaks 
to a larger reality of IDEO’s culture: It is not about 
cutthroat competition. Many organizations discourage 
helping, at least implicitly, because it is seen as in-
compatible with individual responsibility for produc-
tivity. Some have cultures that actually promote 
competition among peers, so aiding a colleague seems 
self-defeating. IDEO’s message is that the thing to 
beat is the best work you could have done without 
help—and that when the firm produces the best work 
possible for clients, all its employees do better.
258 
PART 4 
Organizing

FOR DISCUSSION
 1. Using the competing values framework as a point of 
reference, how would you describe the current orga-
nizational culture at IDEO? Provide examples to 
support your conclusions.
 2. What type of culture is desired by Tim Brown to 
meet his goals? Does the company have this type of 
culture? Discuss.
 3. Which of the 12 ways to embed organizational cul-
ture has IDEO used to create its current culture? Pro-
vide examples to support your conclusions.
 4. Does Tim Brown want to create more of a mechanis-
tic or organic organization? Explain the rationale for 
his preference.
 5. What is the most important lesson from this case? 
Discuss.
Source: Excerpted from T. Amabile, C. M. Fisher, and J. Pillemer, 
“IDEO’s Culture of Helping,” Harvard Business Review, January–
February 2014, pp. 55–61.
Is Apple’s Culture Going Too Far?
Stealing, better known as shortage (or shrinkage) in 
the retail industry, is a big problem for this economic 
sector. While people steal from their employers for 
many reasons, this challenge involves a practice that 
Apple has used to reduce theft.
Two former Apple retail store employees sued the 
company claiming that “they were owed up to $1,500 
in annual overtime, waiting each workday to have a 
manager check their personal bags for pilfered store 
merchandise.” Would you like to spend extra, nonpaid 
time at work having your bags checked? This is the 
crux of the suit. The former employees claim that the 
practice “was mandatory and performed after they 
had clocked out for meal breaks and at the end of their 
work day.” The searches are conducted every time a 
sales rep leaves the store, including meal breaks. 
Seven additional people have agreed to join this law-
suit against Apple.
Apple denies all claims and allegations. The com-
pany argues that it did not willfully fail to pay any 
wages. Apple claims the searches are optional and 
they would not take place if employees would not 
bring bags to work or use iPhones or other Apple 
products. In other words, if an employee would not 
bring anything to work, then there is nothing to 
search. The company recently petitioned the court to 
toss the case, and a federal judge, William Alsup, re-
jected the request.
The judge concluded that avoiding searches is not 
so straightforward because employees “may need to 
bring a bag to work for reasons they cannot control, 
such as the need for medication, feminine hygiene 
products, or disability accommodations.”
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
What would you do if you were an executive at Apple?
 1. Continue to fight the lawsuit because it is a class ac-
tion suit that could cost a lot of money.
 2. Fight this lawsuit, but change the policy in the fu-
ture. I want the company to be more clannish and 
adhocracy, and this policy is contrary to these cul-
tural types.
 3. Settle the lawsuit. Yes, it will cost money, but the 
company is sitting on a stockpile of cash. This action 
will also show goodwill while reinforcing aspects of 
Apple’s clan culture.
 4. Invent other options.
Source: This case was based on material in G. Allen, “Apple’s 
Attorneys Respond to Lawsuit over Bag Check Overtime,” Forbes, 
August 17, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/garydallen/2013/08/17/
apples-attorneys-respond-to-lawsuit-over-bag-check-overtime; 
and J. J. Roberts, “Apple Store Workers’ Lawsuit over Bag and 
Gadget Searches Can Go to Trial, Judge Rules,” Buy iMac, June 2, 
2014, www.buyimac.com/apple-store-workers%e2%80%99-lawsuit-
over-bag-and-gadget-searches-can-go-to-trial-judge-rules.html (both 
accessed June 26, 2014).
Legal/Ethical Challenge
 
Organizational Culture, Structure, & Design 
CHAPTER 8 
259

Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
9.1 Strategic Human Resource Management
Major Question: How do effective managers view the role of 
people in their organization’s success?
9.2 Recruitment & Selection: Putting the Right People into 
the Right Jobs
Major Question: How can I reduce mistakes in hiring and find 
great people who might work for me?
9.3 Managing an Effective Workforce: Compensation & 
Benefits
Major Question: What are the various forms of compensation?
9.4 Orientation, Training, & Development
Major Question: Once people are hired, what’s the best way to 
see that they do what they’re supposed to do?
9.5 Performance Appraisal
Major Question: How can I assess employees’ performance 
more accurately and give more effective feedback?
9.6 Managing Promotions, Transfers, Disciplining, 
& Dismissals
Major Question: What are some guidelines for handling 
promotions, transfers, disciplining, and dismissals?
9.7 The Legal Requirements of Human Resource 
Management
Major Question: To avoid exposure to legal liabilities, what areas 
of the law do I need to be aware of?
9.8 Labor-Management Issues
Major Question: What are the principal processes and issues 
involved in organizing labor unions?
Human Resource 
Management
Getting the Right People for 
Managerial Success
9

forecast
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
This chapter considers human resource (HR) management—planning for, attracting, devel-
oping, and retaining an effective workforce. We consider how this subject fits in with the 
overall company strategy, how to evaluate current and future employee needs, and how to 
recruit and select qualified people. We describe orientation, training, and development and 
how to assess employee performance and give feedback. We discuss how to manage 
compensation and benefits, promotions and discipline, and workplace performance prob-
lems. We go over basic legal requirements. Finally, we consider the role of labor unions.
Didn’t get hired? Maybe you’re lacking in the right 
soft skills: appearance, manners, punctuality, ability 
to communicate well—in other words, professional 
behavior. It’s what employers complain they can’t find 
in many job applicants, especially among Millennials.1
Dress for Success
 If you dress casually on campus, rethink your ward-
robe before showing up for a job interview (or a career 
fair). No sandals or flip-flops, torn jeans, tank tops, 
short skirts, or revealing dresses. Wear simple ear-
rings (men not at all), cover tattoos, and don’t try to 
look sexy. Employers are “looking for people who can 
assume the role of a business professional,” says one 
recruitment manager.2 For men, this could mean 
wearing a suit and tie and leather shoes with dress 
socks. For women, it could be a blazer and a blouse 
with a skirt or slacks, along with low heels and ho-
siery. Do the same the first day at work on a new job.3
Going Forward with Fork & Knife
If you’re asked to lunch, be aware that observing ap-
plicants’ dining etiquette has become an informal part 
of the selection process. (To sharpen their competitive 
advantage, Chinese executives are now trained in 
Western table manners and social graces before trips 
abroad.)4 Keep your fingers clean (don’t order greasy 
sandwiches, pasta, or sushi), so you can deal with any 
paperwork and shake hands when you leave. Break 
bread or rolls into bite-size pieces, butter them, and 
eat them one at a time. Scoop the spoon away from 
(not toward) you when consuming soup. Don’t chew 
the ice cubes from your drink. Put your napkin on your 
chair (not the table) if you have to leave the table in 
mid-meal. Above all, chew with your mouth closed. 
And don’t talk until you’ve swallowed your food.5
Avoiding Bad Tech Habits
Sixty percent of U.S. smartphone users in one survey 
said they couldn’t go an hour without looking at their 
devices.6 In research involving human resource man-
agers, 76% of respondents said breaches of tech eti-
quette hurt work life.7 The most annoying smartphone 
behaviors at work: having loud private conversations 
(65%), not silencing the phone (59%), checking the 
phone during conversation (52%), and checking the 
phone in a meeting (38%).8 We hope you’re not one 
of those who doesn’t participate in meal conversa-
tions (or meetings) because you’re texting or gaming 
or Facebooking. Or who sets the ringtone at full vol-
ume. Or who talks or texts in public restrooms.9
Watching What You Do on Social Media—Today
Having good manners starts even before you meet any 
company recruiters. If you tweet obscenities, show a 
lack of spelling skills on Google+, post sexy photos of 
yourself on Instagram, or talk about alcohol, drugs, or 
guns on Facebook, you may already have blown a 
good job opportunity, since human resource depart-
ments regularly check applicants out on social media.10
For Discussion Which of the activities described 
above do you need to work on? How will you go 
about doing it?
the manager’s toolbox
Soft Skills & Social Graces: Boosting Your 
Advantage in the Hiring World

9.1 
Strategic Human Resource Management
How do effective managers view the role of people in their organization’s success?
THE BIG PICTURE
Human resource management consists of the activities managers perform to plan for, attract, develop, and 
retain an effective workforce. Planning the human resources needed consists of understanding current em-
ployee needs and predicting future employee needs.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
How do you get hired by one of the companies on Fortune magazine’s annual “100 
Best Companies to Work For” list—companies such as Google, SAS Institute, Boston 
Consulting Group, Edward Jones, and Quicken Loans, which are on the 2014 list?11
You try to get to know someone in the company, you play up volunteer work on your 
resume, you get ready to interview and interview and interview, and you do extensive 
research on the company (as by talking to customers).12
And what kinds of things does an employee of a Fortune “Best” company get? At 
Google, the Mountain View, California, search engine company (ranked number 1 in 
2007–2008 and 2012–2014 and number 4 in 2009–2011), you’re entitled to eat in 1 of 
11 free gourmet cafeterias, as well as to visit free snack rooms that contain various cere-
als, candy, nuts, fresh fruit, and other snacks. You can bring your dog to work, get hair-
cuts on-site, work out at the gym, attend subsidized exercise classes, study Mandarin or 
other languages, have your laundry done free, or consult five on-site doctors for a 
checkup, free of charge. The company has also launched numerous compensation in-
centives, special bonuses, and founders’ awards that can run into millions of dollars.13
The reason for this exceptional treatment? “Happy people are more productive,” 
says former CEO Eric Schmidt.14 That productivity has made Google an earnings 
powerhouse; in 2013, for example, it reported a 22% growth in revenue and 28% prof-
its.15 Google has discovered, in other words, that its biggest competitive advantage lies 
in its human resources—its people.
Human Resource Management: Managing an 
Organization’s Most Important Resource
Human resource (HR) management consists of the activities managers perform to plan 
for, attract, develop, and retain an effective workforce. Whether it’s McKenzie looking 
for entry-level business consultants, the U.S. Navy trying to fill its ranks, or churches 
trying to recruit priests and ministers, all organizations must deal with staffing.
The fact that the old personnel department is now called the human resources depart-
ment is not just a cosmetic change. It is intended to suggest the importance of staffing 
to a company’s success. Although talking about people as “resources” might seem to 
downgrade them to the same level as financial resources and material resources, in fact, 
people are an organization’s most important resource. Indeed, companies ranked num-
ber 1 on Fortune magazine’s Best Companies list in the past—which, besides Google, 
include software developer SAS (2011 and 2010), data storage company NetApp 
(2009), biotechnology firm Genentech (2006), supermarket chain Wegmans Food Mar-
kets (2005), jam maker J. M. Smucker (2004), stockbroker Edward Jones (2003 and 
2002), and box retailer The Container Store (2001 and 2000)—have discovered that 
putting employees first has been the foundation for their success. “If you’re not thinking 
all the time about making every person valuable, you don’t have a chance,” says former 
General Electric head Jack Welch. “What’s the alternative? Wasted minds? Uninvolved 
people? A labor force that’s angry or bored? That doesn’t make sense!”16
How would you rate the quality of the human resource practices at your current or 
a past employer? You can find out by taking Self-Assessment 9.1.
262 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
263
Assessing the Quality of HR Practices
 This survey is designed to assess the quality of HR practices at 
your current place of employment. If you are not currently work-
ing, consider a previous job when completing the survey. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 9.1. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
How did you rate the quality of the company’s 
HR practices?
2. 
Based on your responses, what advice would you give 
the senior HR leader about how to improve its HR 
practices? Be specific. What are the consequences 
of having poor-quality HR practices? Explain.
 SELF-ASSESSMENT 9.1
®
Human Resources as Part of Strategic Planning 
Some companies—those 
with flat management structures, for instance—have done away with HR departments 
entirely, letting the regular line managers handle these tasks. But most workers say 
they feel the absence of an in-house HR staff, especially when it comes to resolving 
pay problems and mediating employee disputes.17 So what should organizations do in 
regard to investing in human resources? Based on research findings, we come down on 
the side that people are an organization’s most important asset and it’s important to 
invest in human resources. All told, studies show that companies have higher levels of 
employee satisfaction, financial performance, and service performance when the com-
pany has high-quality human resource practices and programs.18 At many companies, 
human resources has become part of the strategic planning process. Thus, HR depart-
ments deal not only with employee paperwork and legal accountability—a very important 
area, as we describe in Section 9.7—but also with helping to support the organization’s 
overall strategy.
Example: Is it important, as Wegmans’s owners think, to have loyal, innovative, 
smart, passionate employees who will give their best to promote customer satisfaction 
(the grocery chain’s mission)? Who, then, should be recruited? How should they be 
trained? What’s the best way to evaluate and reward their performance? The answers 
to these questions should be consistent with the firm’s strategic mission.
The purpose of the strategic human resource process, then—shown in the yellow-
orange shaded boxes  at right—is to get the optimal work performance that will help 
the company’s mission and goals.19 (See Figure 9.1.)
Three concepts important in this view of human resource management are human 
capital, knowledge workers, and social capital.
Human Capital: Potential of Employee Knowledge & Actions 
“We are liv-
ing in a time,” says one team of human resource management authors, “when a new 
economic paradigm—characterized by speed, innovation, short cycle times, quality, 
and customer satisfaction—is highlighting the importance of intangible assets, such as 
brand recognition, knowledge, innovation, and particularly human capital.”20 Human 
capital is the economic or productive potential of employee knowledge, experience, 
and actions.21
Thinking about people as human capital has an obvious basis: “Attracting, retain-
ing, and developing great people is sometimes the only way our organizations can keep 
up with the competition across the street or around the globe,” says Susan Meisinger, 
president and CEO of the Society for Human Resource Management. “Research has 
shown that highly educated, knowledgeable workers—the most in demand—are the 
hardest to find and easiest to lose.”22
Knowledge Workers: Potential of Brain Workers 
A knowledge worker is 
someone whose occupation is principally concerned with generating or interpreting in-
formation, as opposed to manual labor. Knowledge workers add value to the organization 
Establish the
mission & the vision
Purpose:
Get optimal work
performance to help
realize company’s
mission & vision
Establish the
grand strategy
Formulate the
strategic plans
Plan human
resources needed
Recruit & select
people
Perform appraisals
of people
Orient, train, &
develop
FIGURE 9.1
The strategic human resource 
management process

264 
PART 4 
Organizing
by using their brains rather than their muscle and sweat, and as such they are the most 
common type of worker in 21st-century organizations. Because of globalization and 
information technology, the United States no longer has an advantage in knowledge 
workers. Indeed, because of the advancement of China, India, Russia, and Brazil; the 
offshoring of sophisticated jobs; the decrease in math and science skills among today’s 
younger Americans; and other factors, the United States may be in danger of slipping 
behind.23
Social Capital: Potential of Strong & Cooperative Relationships 
Social 
capital is the economic or productive potential of strong, trusting, and cooperative 
relationships. Among aspects of social capital are goodwill, mutual respect, coopera-
tion, trust, and teamwork. Relationships within a company are important: In one 
survey, 77% of the women and 63% of the men rated “good relationship with boss” 
extremely important, outranking such matters as good equipment, easy commute, 
and flexible hours.24
That relationships matter is shown by the brothers running family-owned J. M. 
Smucker, who follow a simple code of conduct set forth by their father: “Listen with 
your full attention, look for the good in others, have a sense of humor, and say thank 
you for a job well done.”25 (The company’s voluntary employee turnover rate is a 
mere 5.5%.)
Planning the Human Resources Needed
When a building contractor, looking to hire someone for a few hours to dig ditches, 
drives by a group of idle day laborers standing on a street corner, is that a form of 
HR planning? Certainly it shows the contractor’s awareness that a pool of laborers 
usually can be found in that spot. But what if the builder needs a lot of people with 
specialized training—to give him or her the competitive advantage that the strategic 
planning process demands?
Here we are concerned with something more than simply hiring people on an “as 
needed” basis. Strategic human resource planning consists of developing a system-
atic, comprehensive strategy for (a) understanding current employee needs and 
(b) predicting future employee needs. Let’s consider these two parts.
Understanding Current Employee Needs 
To plan for the future, you must 
understand the present—what today’s staffing picture looks like. This requires that you 
(or a trained specialist) first do a job analysis and from that write a job description and 
a job specification.26
■ 
Job analysis. The purpose of job analysis is to determine, by observation and 
analysis, the basic elements of a job. Specialists who do this interview job oc-
cupants about what they do, observe the flow of work, and learn how results 
are accomplished. For example, FedEx has specialists who ride with the cou-
riers and time how long it takes to deliver a load of packages and note what 
problems are encountered (traffic jams, vicious dogs, recipients not home, 
and so on).
■ 
Job description and job specification. Once the fundamentals of a job are 
understood, then you can write a job description, which summarizes what the 
holder of the job does and how and why he or she does it. Next you can write 
a job specification, which describes the minimum qualifications a person must 
have to perform the job successfully.
This process can produce some surprises. Jobs that might seem to require a college 
degree, for example, might not after all. Thus, the process of writing job analyses, 

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
265
What kind of job is this? A 
FedEx driver’s problems of 
driving in a big city—traffic, 
double parking, addressees not 
at home—are different from 
those of driving in rural areas, 
where there may be long 
stretches of boredom. 
Specialists in job analysis can 
interview drivers about their 
problems in order to write job 
descriptions that allow for 
varying circumstances.
descriptions, and specifications can help you 
avoid hiring people who are overqualified 
(and presumably more expensive) or under-
qualified (and thus not as productive) for a 
particular job.
In addition, by entering a job description 
and specification with their attendant charac-
teristics into a database, an organization can do 
computer searching for candidates by match-
ing keywords (nouns) on their resumes with 
the keywords describing the job. A position in 
desktop publishing, for instance, might be de-
scribed by the kinds of software programs with 
which applicants should be familiar: Adobe 
PageMaker, Adobe InDesign, QuarkXPress, 
Adobe FrameMaker, and Corel Ventura.
Predicting Future Employee Needs 
Job descriptions change, of course: Auto 
mechanics, for instance, now have to know how computer chips work in cars. (Current 
7-Series BMWs and S-class Mercedes have about 100 processors apiece.) And new 
jobs are created: Who could have visualized the position of “e-commerce accountant” 
10 years ago, for example?
As you might expect, predicting future employee needs means you have to become 
knowledgeable about the staffing the organization might need and the likely sources 
for that staffing:
■ 
The staffing the organization might need. You could assume your organiza-
tion won’t change much. In that case, you can fairly easily predict that jobs 
will periodically become unoccupied (because of retirement, resignations, 
and so on) and that you’ll need to pay the same salaries and meet the same 
criteria about minority hiring to fill them.
Better, however, to assume the organization will change. Thus, you need to 
understand the organization’s vision and strategic plan so that the proper peo-
ple can be hired to meet the future strategies and work. We discussed strategic 
plans in Chapter 6.
■ 
The likely sources for staffing. You can recruit employees from ei-
ther inside or outside the organization. In looking at those inside, you 
need to consider which employees are motivated, trainable, and pro-
motable and what kind of training your organization might have to do. 
A device for organizing this kind of information is a human resource 
inventory, a report listing your organization’s employees by name, 
education, training, languages, and other important information.
In looking outside, you need to consider the availability of 
talent in your industry’s and geographical area’s labor pool, the 
training of people graduating from various schools, and such 
factors as what kind of people are moving into your area. The U.S. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics and the U.S. Census Bureau issue reports 
on such matters. ●
One way to attract potential employees. One of the first places companies are apt to look for 
potential employees is online, such as the social networking sites Facebook, LinkedIn, and Glassdoor, 
as well as Twitter (although sometimes searches can lead to discrimination against some candidates). 
Creative users also post unusual digital resumes featuring eye-catching graphics, YouTube videos, and 
PowerPoint slides on Pinterest, the popular online pin board for photos. As for job seekers, they can find 
useful job-hunting apps on Monster.com. Are you up to speed on these job-hunting advantages?

9.2 
Recruitment & Selection: Putting the Right People 
into the Right Jobs
How can I reduce mistakes in hiring and find great people who might work for me?
THE BIG PICTURE
Qualified applicants for jobs may be recruited from inside or outside the organization. The task of choosing 
the best person is enhanced by such tools as reviewing candidates’ application forms, resumes, and refer-
ences; doing interviews, either structured or unstructured; and screening with ability, personality, perfor-
mance, and other kinds of employment tests.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
“Hiring great people is brutally hard,” write Jack (former General Electric CEO) and 
Suzy Welch. “New managers are lucky to get it right half the time. And even execu-
tives with decades of experience will tell you that they make the right calls 75% of the 
time at best.”27
However difficult it may be, it’s important to try to get hiring right. “We’re essen-
tially in an innovation economy where good people come up with really good ideas,” 
says one CEO. “Companies want to hit home runs with the next greatest product, and 
the imperative is making sure you have great people to do that.”28
Recruitment: How to Attract Qualified Applicants
At some time nearly every organization has to think about how to find the right kind of 
people. Recruiting is the process of locating and attracting qualified applicants for jobs 
open in the organization. The word qualified is important: You want to find people 
whose skills, abilities, and characteristics are best suited to your organization. Recruit-
ing is of two types: internal and external.
1. Internal Recruiting: Hiring from the Inside 
Internal recruiting means mak-
ing people already employed by the organization aware of job openings. Indeed, most 
vacant positions in organizations are filled through internal recruitment, mainly 
through job posting, placing information about job vacancies and qualifications on bul-
letin boards, in newsletters, and on the organization’s intranet. (Companies looking to 
make strategic changes do better hiring CEOs from within the ranks rather than from 
outside, according to a recent study.29)
2. External Recruiting: Hiring from the Outside 
External recruiting means 
attracting job applicants from outside the organization. In years past, notices of job 
vacancies were placed through newspapers, employment agencies, executive recruit-
ing firms, union hiring halls, college job-placement offices, and word of mouth. Today 
more and more companies are using social media to recruit.30 For example, experts 
estimate that 89% of U.S. organizations use social networks to recruit. LinkedIn, a 
social network with more than 259 million members in over 200 countries, accounts 
for 94% of the people hired via social media, followed by Facebook and Twitter.31 In 
one survey of 3,500 U.S. college students, 80% said they use smartphones for job 
hunting or see themselves doing so in the future.32
Both methods have advantages and disadvantages. (See Table 9.1, next page.)
Which External Recruiting Methods Work Best? 
 In general, the most effec-
tive sources are employee referrals, say human resource professionals, because, to 
protect their own reputations, employees are fairly careful about whom they recom-
mend, and they know the qualifications of both the job and the prospective employee.33
266 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
267
Other effective ways of finding good job candidates are e-recruitment tools, such as 
“dot-jobs” websites; membership directories for associations and trade groups; social 
networking sites; and industry-specific blogs, forums, and newsgroups.34 Netflix 
makes a point of “hiring, rewarding, and tolerating only fully formed adults”—people 
who will put the company’s interests first.35
How do you feel about the job you are in now, if you have one, or the last job you 
had? Do you feel like you are a “good fit” for the job? That is, do you like the work 
and does the work match your skills? Research shows that we are happier and more 
productive when our needs and skills fit the job requirements. If you would like to see 
whether or not you fit with your current (or last) job, complete Self-Assessment 9.2. 
You may find the results very interesting.
TABLE 9.1 
Internal & External Recruiting: Advantages & Disadvantages
INTERNAL RECRUITING
ADVANTAGES 
DISADVANTAGES
 1. Employees tend to be inspired to greater effort and 
1. Internal recruitment restricts the competition for 
loyalty. Morale is enhanced because they realize that  
 positions and limits the pool of fresh talent and fresh 
working hard and staying put can result in more opportunities.  
 viewpoints.
 2. The whole process of advertising, interviewing, and so 
2. It may encourage employees to assume that longevity 
on is cheaper.  
 and seniority will automatically result in promotion.
 3. There are fewer risks. Internal candidates are already 
3. Whenever a job is filled, it creates a vacancy elsewhere in 
known and are familiar with the organization.  
 the organization.
EXTERNAL RECRUITING
ADVANTAGES 
DISADVANTAGES
 1. Applicants may have specialized knowledge and 
1. The recruitment process is more expensive and takes
experience. 
 longer.
 2. Applicants may have fresh viewpoints. 
2. The risks are higher because the persons hired are 
 
 less well known.
Assessing Your Person-Job Fit
This survey is designed to assess your job fit. If you are not cur-
rently working, consider a previous job when completing the survey. 
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 9.2. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
What is your level of fit?
2. 
Whether you have high or low fit, what are the main 
causes for your level of fit? Explain.
3. 
What questions might you ask a future recruiter to ensure 
a higher level of person-job fit? Be specific.
 SELF-ASSESSMENT 9.2
®
Realistic Job Previews 
A realistic job preview (RJP) gives a candidate a picture 
of both positive and negative features of the job and the organization before he or she 
is hired. This recruiting technique is very effective at reducing turnover within 30–90 
days of employment. Many organizations, such as AT&T, Hilton, the Idaho State 
Police, and Assess Systems, reduced turnover and enhanced employee satisfaction by 
using RJPs.

268 
PART 4 
Organizing
Selection: How to Choose the Best Person 
for the Job
Whether the recruitment process turns up a handful of job applicants or thousands, 
now you turn to the selection process, the screening of job applicants to hire the best 
candidate. Essentially this becomes an exercise in prediction: How well will the can-
didate perform the job and how long will he or she stay?
Three types of selection tools are background information, interviewing, and 
employment tests.
1. Background Information: Application Forms, Resumes, & Reference 
Checks 
Application forms and resumes provide basic background information 
about job applicants, such as citizenship, education, work history, and certifications.
Unfortunately, a lot of resume information consists of mild puffery and even outra-
geous fairy tales—as many as 35% of resumes, by one estimate.36 InfoLink Screening 
Services, which does background checks, reported that 14% of the tens of thousands 
of applicants it had screened had lied about their education.37 Vermont-based 
ResumeDoctor.com, a resume-writing service, surveyed 1,133 resumes that had been 
uploaded to its site and found that nearly 42.7% had at least one inaccuracy and 12.6% 
had two or more factual errors.38 And Background Information Services, a preemploy-
ment screening company in Cleveland, found 56% of resumes contained falsehoods of 
some kind.39 It is risky to lie about your background information because it can be 
used as a reason for terminating your employment.
PRACTICAL ACTION
Would You Lie Like This on Your Resume?
What kind of lies do people put on their resumes? Consider the 
following examples.
Lying about Education. Lying about education is the most 
prevalent distortion (such as pretending to hold a degree or an 
advanced degree). A few years ago, RadioShack CEO David 
Edmondson achieved some notoriety and had to resign after a 
newspaper discovered he had falsely claimed on his resume to 
hold degrees in psychology and theology.40 In 2012, Yahoo CEO 
Scott Thompson was revealed to not have earned a college de-
gree in computer science, as claimed on his resume and on the 
company’s website.41 Automatic Data Processing of Roseland, 
New Jersey, which has studied employee background verifica-
tion, reported that 41% of education records showed a difference 
between the information provided by an applicant and that pro-
vided by the educational institution.42
Lying about Employment Histories, Ages, Salaries, & Job 
Titles. Another common fabrication includes creative attempts 
to cover gaps in employment history (although there are straight-
forward ways an applicant can deal with this, such as highlighting 
length of service instead of employment dates).43 People also lie 
about their ages for fear of seeming to be too experienced (hence 
expensive) or too old.44 As you might expect, people also embel-
lish their salary histories, job titles, and achievements on projects.
Lying about Criminal Background or Immigration Status. 
In 2007, it came out that the foundation that runs online encyclo-
pedia Wikipedia had neglected to do a basic background check 
before hiring Carolyn Doran as its chief operating officer; she had 
been convicted of drunken driving and fleeing the scene of a car 
accident.45 Now, more and more job seekers are seeking to 
legally clear their criminal records—to have their arrests or 
convictions expunged, when possible.46
In addition, as the number of illegal (undocumented) work-
ers has risen, it has become incumbent on human resource 
officers to verify U.S. citizenship.47 Use of E-Verify, the federal 
program that allows employers to quickly check the legal sta-
tus of potential employees, has taken a big jump.48 Still, per-
haps half of illegal workers slip by the system.49
YOUR CALL
What past events are you most worried potential employers will 
find out about you? What can you do to put them in a better light?
Many companies are finding conventional resumes not all that useful (because they don’t 
quantify an applicant’s accomplishments or are too full of fluff descriptors such as “out-
standing” or “energetic”) and are increasingly relying on social networks such as LinkedIn, 

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
269
video profiles, or online quizzes to assess candidates.50 Other firms are so inundated with 
resumes that they now have to use resume-filtering software, causing applicants to learn to 
game the system by loading their resumes with keywords from the job description.51 Some 
applicants try “stunt resumes,” such as those delivered by a stuffed carrier pigeon.52
References are also a problem. Many employers don’t give honest assessments of 
former employees, for two reasons: (1) They fear that if they say anything negative, they 
can be sued by the former employee. (2) They fear if they say anything positive, and the 
job candidate doesn’t pan out, they can be sued by the new employer.53 Despite liability 
worries, HR recruiters know that if they get a former supervisor on the phone, they can 
find out a lot—such as the way he or she answers the question, “Can you enthusiastically 
recommend this person?” or “What were this person’s strengths and weaknesses?”54
Many employers also like to check applicants’ credit references, although there is 
no evidence that people with weak credit scores are apt to be unqualified or dishonest 
employees.55 (Note: Prospective employers need to get written consent to run credit 
checks on job applicants.56)
PRACTICAL ACTION
Applying for a Job? Here Are Some Mistakes to Avoid
There are several mistakes that job candidates often make in 
initial interviews. Here are some tips.57
Be Prepared—Very Prepared. Can you pronounce the name 
of the company with whom you’re interviewing? Of the person or 
people interviewing you? Do you understand the company and 
the position you’re interviewing for? Do you know the company’s 
competition? What new products or services are being offered? 
How about your own job strengths? Your weaknesses? What do 
you need to improve on to move ahead?
Go online and read the company’s website. Search for any 
news articles written about the firm. Call the company and ask 
about pronunciation. Determine how your strengths fit directly into 
the context of what the prospective employer does. Also, when 
asked about your weaknesses, state how you recognized a weak-
ness, overcame a dilemma, and were improved by it. Take time to 
practice questions and answers so you’ll sound confident.58
Dress Right & Pay Attention to Your Attitude. Is the company 
dress code “business casual”? That doesn’t mean you should dress 
that way (or the way you dress on campus) for the interview.
Dress professionally for the interview. Be aware of your at-
titude as soon as you enter the building. Be on time. (Time your 
commute by doing a test run a day or so before the interview, 
and make sure you know the exact location of the interview.) If 
unforeseeable circumstances arise and cause you to be late, 
call to inform your interviewer. Be polite to the receptionist, and 
greet everyone who greets you. Turn off your cell phone ringer.
Don’t Get Too Personal with the Interviewer. Don’t be over-
friendly and share too much, especially in the initial interview. Al-
though the interviewer will try to make you feel comfortable, you 
should focus on the position. Rehearse questions to ask the inter-
viewer, such as the challenges for the position in the future. Don’t 
make negative comments about your old company or boss. Rather, 
figure out the positives and convey what you learned and gained 
from your experience. If asked an inappropriate question (about 
age, marital status, whether you have children or plan to), politely 
state you don’t believe the question is relevant to your qualifica-
tions. Be enthusiastic; enthusiasm is contagious. Incidentally, be 
sure to mention any organizational citizenship behavior, which 
scores well with interviewers.59 After the interview, within 24 hours, 
send an e-mail thanking the interviewer. If you think you messed up 
part of the interview, use the e-mail to smooth over your mistakes.60
Be Aware That Your Background Will Be Checked—
Including Your Social Networks. Because it seems to be 
getting harder to distinguish honest job applicants from dishon-
est ones, companies now routinely check resumes or hire com-
panies that do so.61 Ninety-six percent of employers conduct 
background checks, according to one study.62 Some may even 
ask for your SAT scores.63 Some have been known to scrutinize 
checking accounts.64
As mentioned earlier, if you are a Facebook, YouTube, or Twitter 
user, be aware that employers now frequently use search engines 
to do continuous and stealthy background checks on prospective 
employees to see if they’ve posted any racy content. “Many job 
hunters,” says one report, “are . . . continuing to overlook the dan-
gers of posting provocative photos and other dubious content on 
social-media sites.”65 Checking your Facebook page is also a way 
employers can make an end run around discrimination laws.66 In-
deed, you may be asked in the interview for your Facebook user 
name and password so the interviewer can access your private 
settings—a practice whose legality is questionable but neverthe-
less being done by more companies.67 (More and more people are 
getting savvy about privacy and pruning their friend lists and re-
moving unwanted comments on their social networks.68)
YOUR CALL
What kind of advice do you see here that you wished you’d 
followed in the past?

270 
PART 4 
Organizing
2. Interviewing: Unstructured, Situational, & Behavioral-Description 
The interview, which is the most commonly used employee-selection technique, may 
take place face to face, by videoconference, or—as is increasingly the case—via the 
Internet. (In-depth phone interviews of an hour or more may be on the rise, perhaps for 
cost reasons.69 However, face-to-face interviews have been perceived as being more 
fair and leading to higher job acceptance intentions than videoconferencing and tele-
phone interviews.70) To help eliminate bias, interviews can be designed, conducted, 
and evaluated by a committee of three or more people. The most commonly used 
 employee-selection technique, interviewing, takes three forms: unstructured interviews 
and two types of structured interviews.71
Unstructured Interview Like an ordinary conversation, an unstructured 
interview involves asking probing questions to find out what the applicant is like. There 
is no fixed set of questions asked of all applicants and no systematic scoring proce-
dure. As a result, the unstructured interview has been criticized as being overly subjec-
tive and apt to be influenced by the biases of the interviewer. Equally important, it is 
susceptible to legal attack because some questions may infringe on non-job-related 
matters such as privacy, diversity, or disability.72 However, compared with the struc-
tured interview method, the unstructured interview has been found to provide a more 
accurate assessment of an applicant’s job-related personality traits.73
Structured Interview Type 1: The Situational Interview 
The structured 
interview involves asking each applicant the same questions and comparing their re-
sponses to a standardized set of answers.
In one type of structured interview, the situational interview, the interviewer fo-
cuses on hypothetical situations. Example: “What would you do if you saw two of 
your people arguing loudly in the work area?” The idea here is to find out if the ap-
plicant can handle difficult situations that may arise on the job.
Structured Interview Type 2: The Behavioral-Description Interview In 
the second type of structured interview, the behavioral-description interview, the inter-
viewer explores what applicants have actually done in the past. Example: “What was 
the best idea you ever sold to a supervisor, teacher, peer, or subordinate?” This ques-
tion (asked by the U.S. Army of college students applying for its officer training pro-
gram) is designed to assess the applicant’s ability to influence others.
PRACTICAL ACTION
The Right Way to Conduct an Interview
Because hiring people who later have to be let go is such an 
expensive proposition, companies are now putting a great 
deal of emphasis on effective interviewing. Although this is a 
subject worth exploring further, following are some minimal 
suggestions for you as a manager.74
Before the Interview: Define Your Needs & Review 
Applicant’s Resume
Write out what skills, traits, and qualities the job requires. 
“Looking to hire somebody is like going to the supermarket,” 
says one HR manager. “You need to have a list and know what 
you need.”75
Look at the applicant’s resume or application form to deter-
mine relevant experience, gaps, and discrepancies.
Write Out Interview Questions
You should ask each candidate the same set of questions, so 
that you can compare their answers. (This helps keep you out 
of legal trouble, too.) In general, the questions should be de-
signed to elicit the following types of information.
• Does the applicant have the knowledge to do the job? 
Examples: “Give an example where you came up with a 
creative solution.” “How would you distinguish our product 
from competitors’?”
• Can the applicant handle difficult situations? Examples: 
“Tell me about a time when you dealt with an irate cus-
tomer. How did you handle the situation and what was the 
outcome?”

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
271
3. Employment Tests: Ability, Personality, Performance, Integrity, & 
Others 
It used to be that employment selection tests consisted of paper-and-
pencil, performance, and physical-ability tests. Now, however, employment tests 
are legally considered to consist of any procedure used in the employment selection 
decision process, even application forms, interviews, and educational require-
ments.77 Indeed, today applicants should expect just about anything, such as 
spending hours on simulated work tasks, performing role-playing exercises, or 
tackling a business case study.78
Probably the most common employment tests are the following.
Ability Tests Ability tests measure physical abilities, strength and stamina, me-
chanical ability, mental abilities, and clerical abilities. Telephone operators, for in-
stance, need to be tested for hearing, and assembly-line workers for manual dexterity. 
Intelligence tests are also catching on as ways to predict future executive perfor-
mance.79 The military tests for physical qualifications, along with behavioral and edu-
cational abilities (71% of 17- to 24-year-olds don’t qualify for military service, a 
surprisingly high figure).80 Corporate-event company Windy City Fieldhouse uses a 
test that measures attention to detail, asking takers to do such things as “do a count of 
the letter ‘l’ in a three-sentence paragraph to measure how carefully a respondent 
works,” according to one account.81
Performance Tests Performance tests or skills tests measure performance on 
actual job tasks—so-called job tryouts—as when computer programmers take a 
test on a particular programming language such as C++ or middle managers work 
on a small project.82 Some companies have an assessment center, in which man-
agement candidates participate in activities for a few days while being assessed by 
evaluators.83
• Is the applicant willing to cope with the job’s de-
mands? Examples: “How do you feel about making 
unpopular decisions?” “Are you willing to travel 30% 
of the time?”
• Will the applicant fit in with the organization’s culture? 
Examples: “How would your last supervisor describe you?” 
“How much leeway did they give you in your previous job 
in charging travel expenses?”
Follow a Three-Scene Interview Scenario
The interview itself may follow a three-scene script.
• Scene 1: The first three minutes—small talk and 
“compatibility” test. The first scene is really a “compati-
bility test.” It takes about three minutes and consists of 
exchanging small talk, giving you a chance to establish 
rapport and judge how well the candidate makes a first 
impression.
 
 
Note: As many as four out of five hiring decisions are 
made within the first 10 minutes of an interview, according 
to some research. Thus, be aware that if you are immedi-
ately impressed with a candidate, you may spend more time 
talking than listening—perhaps trying to sell the candidate 
on the job rather than screen his or her qualifications.76
• Scene 2: The next 15–60 minutes—asking questions 
and listening to the applicant’s “story.” In the next 
scene, you ask the questions you wrote out (and answer 
those the candidate directs to you). Allow the interviewee 
to do 70%–80% of the talking.
 
 
Take notes to remember important points. Don’t ignore 
your “gut feelings.” Intuition plays a role in hiring decisions. 
(But be careful you don’t react to people as stereotypes.)
• Scene 3: The final two minutes—closing the interview 
and setting up the next steps. In the final minutes, you 
listen to see whether the candidate expresses interest 
in taking the job.
After the Interview
Write a short report making some sort of quantitative score of 
the candidate’s qualifications. Indicate your reasons for your 
decision.
Check the applicant’s references before inviting him or her 
to a second interview.
YOUR CALL
What additional questions would you like to ask a job applicant 
so as to get the best candidate?

272 
PART 4 
Organizing
Personality Tests Personality tests measure such personality traits as adjustment, 
energy, sociability, independence, and need for achievement. Career-assessment tests 
that help workers identify suitable jobs tend to be of this type.84 One of the most fa-
mous personality tests, in existence for 65-plus years, is the 93-question Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator, with about 2.5 million tests given each year throughout the world. 
Myers-Briggs endures, observers say, “because it does a good job of pointing up dif-
ferences between people, offers individuals a revealing glimpse of themselves, and is 
a valuable asset in team-building, improving communication, and resolving personality-
conflict.”85 However, this and other personality tests need to be interpreted with 
caution because of the difficulty of measuring personality characteristics and of 
making a legal defense if the results are challenged.86
EXAMPLE
Personality Tests: How a Sporting-Goods Chain Screens 
Job Applicants Online
More than 80% of midsize and large companies use personal-
ity and ability assessments for entry and mid-level jobs these 
days, according to one executive at a global human resources 
consulting firm.87
Southwest Airlines, for instance, has found the Myers-
Briggs test helps build trust in developing teams.88 Hewlett-
Packard uses a personality test to see if employees are 
temperamentally suited to working alone at home—that is, 
telecommuting—and can handle limited supervision.89 At Chil-
dren’s Healthcare of Atlanta, personality tests are used to find 
employees who will be “nice people”—those with “the quali-
ties of being nurturing, kind, and warm-hearted,” in the words 
of a human resources vice president.90
Online Personality Tests. At Finish Line, a nationwide chain of 
sporting-goods stores, store managers use the results of web-
based personality tests developed by Unicru, of Beaverton, Oregon, 
to screen applicants for jobs as retail sales clerks. Candidates 
may apply through Unicru’s kiosks or computer phones, which 
are installed in the stores. One Finish Line store in Chicago 
screens as many as 70 applicants a week during the store’s pre-
holiday season.
Unicru’s computer scores test takers according to how 
strongly they agree or disagree (on a four-point scale) with 
statements such as “You do not fake being polite” and “You 
love to listen to people talk about themselves.” High scores on 
attributes such as sociability and initiative reward applicants 
with a “green” rating that allows them to move on to an inter-
view with a human manager. Scores in the middle earn a “yel-
low,” and a lesser chance of landing a job; low-scoring “reds” 
are not considered.
Measurable Results. “The kinds of people who do well,” says 
Unicru psychologist David Scarborough, “obviously have to have 
good self-control. They have to be patient. They have to enjoy help-
ing people. All those characteristics are quite measurable.”91 Fin-
ish Line says that Unicru’s system has reduced turnover by 24%.
YOUR CALL
There are, by some estimates, around 2,500 cognitive and per-
sonality employment tests on the market, and it’s important 
that employers match the right test for the right purpose.92
Moreover, tests aren’t supposed to have a disparate impact on 
a protected class of people, such as certain racial or ethnic 
groups.93 What questions would you want to ask about a per-
sonality test before you submitted yourself to it? (Note: Don’t 
try to psych the test. You might wind up being miserable in a 
job that doesn’t suit you.)
Integrity Tests Integrity tests assess attitudes and experiences related to a per-
son’s honesty, dependability, trustworthiness, reliability, and prosocial behavior.94
The tests are designed to identify people likely to engage in inappropriate, antiso-
cial, or dishonest workplace behavior. Typically, integrity tests ask direct questions 
about past experiences related to ethics and integrity. You might be asked, for ex-
ample, “What is the most you have ever stolen? (a) $0; (b) $1–$200; (c) $201–
$500; (d) more than $500.” Or interviewers may ask questions about preferences 
and interests from which inferences may be drawn about future behavior—so-called 
covert tests, where the answers give a sense of the person’s conscientiousness, emo-
tional maturity, and so on.95

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
273
Other Tests 
The list of employment testing techniques has grown to include—in 
appropriate cases—drug testing, polygraph (lie detectors), genetic screening, and even 
(a questionable technique) handwriting analysis.96 Human resource professionals need 
to be aware, incidentally, that there are a variety of products available on the Internet 
to help employees beat many kinds of drug tests.97 Recently, however, the hair test (of 
hair follicles) has begun to find favor, since it’s said to be able to detect a pattern of 
repetitive drug use over a period of up to 90 days.98
Reliability & Validity: Are the Tests Worth It? 
With any kind of test, an 
important legal consideration is the test’s reliability—the degree to which a test measures 
the same thing consistently—so that an individual’s score remains about the same over 
time, assuming the characteristics being measured also remain the same.
Another legal consideration is the test’s validity—the test measures what it purports 
to measure and is free of bias. If a test is supposed to predict performance, then the 
individual’s actual performance should reflect his or her score on the test. Using an 
invalid test to hire people can lead to poor selection decisions. It can also create legal 
problems if the test is ever challenged in a court of law. ●
Lie detector? Defense contractors and other security-minded companies are apt to require polygraph testing for job 
applicants. Calling the machine a “lie detector” may make us think it can detect lies, but all it does is measure nervous 
excitement—which can happen to both liars and truth tellers. This is one reason polygraph tests are inadmissible in 
court. Would you object to taking such a test?

Stock options. Companies like to offer favored employees 
stock options rather than higher salaries as benefits. Not 
only do employees place a high value on options, but 
companies can issue as many as they want without hurting 
corporate profits because, under present accounting rules, 
they don’t have to count the options’ value as an expense. 
However, some critics believe that making stock options 
a big part of CEO compensation does not spur better 
performance. When the stock is up, the CEO benefits. When 
the stock is down, he or she doesn’t really lose money but 
rather just makes less money.
9.3 
Managing an Effective Workforce: Compensation 
& Benefits
What are the various forms of compensation?
THE BIG PICTURE
Managers must manage for compensation—which includes wages or salaries, incentives, and benefits.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Do we work only for a paycheck? Many people do, of course. But money is only one 
form of compensation.
Compensation has three parts: (1) wages or salaries, (2) incentives, and (3) benefits.
In different organizations one part may take on more importance than another. For in-
stance, in some nonprofit organizations (education, government), salaries may not be 
large, but health and retirement benefits may outweigh that fact. In a high-technology 
start-up, the salary and benefits may actually be somewhat humble, but the promise of 
a large payoff in incentives, such as stock options or bonuses, may be quite attractive. 
Let’s consider these three parts briefly. (We expand on them in Chapter 12 when we 
discuss ways to motivate employees.)
Wages or Salaries
Base pay consists of the basic wage or salary paid employees in exchange for doing 
their jobs. The basic compensation is determined by all kinds of economic factors: the 
prevailing pay levels in a particular industry and location, what competitors are pay-
ing, whether the jobs are unionized, if the jobs are hazardous, what the individual’s 
level is in the organization, and how much experience he or she has.
Incentives
To induce employees to be more productive or to attract and retain top performers, 
many organizations offer incentives, such as commissions, bonuses, profit-sharing 
plans, and stock options. We discuss these in detail in Chapter 12.
274 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
275
Communication is everything. 
The questions human resource 
managers need to keep in 
mind are: What good does it 
do a company to have attractive 
incentive plans if employees 
don’t understand them? Will 
an employee exert the extra 
effort in pursuit of rewards if 
he or she doesn’t know what 
the rewards are?
PRACTICAL ACTION
Why Rewards May Fail to Motivate
There are many incentive compensation plans, ranging from 
cash awards and gifts to profit sharing and stock ownership, as 
we discuss in detail in Chapter 12. Why, despite the huge in-
vestments of time and money, do they often not achieve the 
results? Here are eight possible reasons:99
• “I don’t work just for the money.” Sometimes there is 
too much emphasis on monetary rewards.
• “They don’t care what I do.” There may be the absence 
of an “appreciation effect.”
• “It’s no more than what I deserve.” The benefits may be 
extensive, but employees feel they are entitled to them just 
as part of the job.
• “Let’s see how little work we can get away with.” The 
rewards may have the unintended consequence of produc-
ing nonproductive, even counterproductive, work behavior. 
(Example: Albuquerque, New Mexico, city officials decided 
to pay trash truck crews for eight hours regardless of time 
spent, so as to encourage quick completion of the work 
and lower overtime costs. However, the policy only led 
crews to work fast and cut corners, missing pickups, 
speeding and causing accidents, and generating extra 
dump fees for overloading vehicles.100)
• “Why bother, it takes forever to get paid.” There is too 
long a delay between performance and rewards.
• “Another $25 gift card? Who needs it?” There are too 
many one-size-fits-all rewards.
• “A half day off on Friday—so what.” Managers use 
one-shot rewards with a short-lived motivational impact.
• “There they go again. . .” Management continues to use 
demotivating practices such as layoffs, across-the-board 
pay cuts, and giving executives but not workers excessive 
compensation.
Five keys to a successful incentive-pay plan are the following:101
 1. Simplicity. Does the plan pass the simplicity test? Can 
you explain it on an elevator ride?
 2. Clear goals. Are the goals clear? Are the goals fully 
supported by management?
 3. Realistic goals. Are the goals realistic—that is, neither 
too difficult nor too easy to achieve?
 4. Consistency with present goals. Is the plan in line with 
the organization’s present goals? Company goals change. 
Few organizations have the same business objective for 
more than five to seven years.
 5. Regular communication. Do managers regularly 
communicate with employees about the plan? People 
want a scorecard.
Benefits
Benefits, or fringe benefits, are additional nonmonetary forms of compen-
sation designed to enrich the lives of all employees in the organization, 
which are paid all or in part by the organization. We discuss benefits in 
more detail in Chapter 12, but examples are many: health insurance, dental 
insurance, life insurance, disability protection, retirement plans, holidays 
off, accumulated sick days and vacation days, recreation options, country 
club or health club memberships, family leave, discounts on company mer-
chandise, counseling, credit unions, legal advice, and education reimburse-
ment. For top executives, there may be “golden parachutes,” generous 
severance pay for those who might be let go in the event the company is 
taken over by another company.
Benefits are no small part of an organization’s costs. In March 2014, private industry 
spent an average of $31.93 per hour worked in employment compensation, of which 
wages and salaries accounted for 69.9% and benefits for the remaining 30.1%.102 ●

Group training. In large 
companies, orientation and 
ongoing training are often 
conducted in group sessions 
led by a presenter while the 
employees follow along. Do 
you see any problems with 
this approach?
9.4 
Orientation, Training, & Development
Once people are hired, what’s the best way to see that they do what they’re supposed to do?
THE BIG PICTURE
Three ways newcomers are helped to perform their jobs are through orientation, to fit them into the job and 
organization; training, to upgrade the skills of technical and operational employees; and development, to 
upgrade the skills of professionals and managers.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
In muckraker Upton Sinclair’s 1906 novel The Jungle, “employers barely paused when 
a worker swooned from overwork or fell into a rendering tank,” writes columnist Sue 
Shellenbarger. “They just got another warm body to replace him.”103
That’s hardly the case anymore. Today when a hire is made, companies often resort 
to what is known as “onboarding,” rolling out a welcome by assigning “buddies,” pro-
viding detailed orientations, even sending goody baskets, so as to bring rookies up to 
speed quickly and give them a fast introduction to company culture.104
This is because, as we said, the emphasis is on “human capital.” Only a third to half 
of most companies’ stock-market value is accounted for by hard assets such as prop-
erty, plant, and equipment, according to a Brookings Institution report. Most of a 
firm’s value is in such attributes as patents, processes, and—important to this discussion—
276 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
277
employee or customer satisfaction.105 The means for helping employees perform their 
jobs are orientation, training, and development.
Orientation: Helping Newcomers Learn the Ropes
The finalist candidate is offered the job, has accepted it, and has started work. 
Now he or she must begin, in that old sailor’s phrase, to “learn the ropes.” This 
is the start of orientation, helping the newcomer fit smoothly into the job and the 
organization.
Helping New Employees Get Comfortable: The First Six Months 
 “How 
well will I get along with other employees?” “What if I screw up on a project?” Com-
ing into a new job can produce a lot of uncertainty and anxiety. In part this is because, 
depending on the job, a new hire can accomplish only 60% as much in the first three 
months as an experienced worker, according to MCI Communications.106
The first six months on a job can be critical to how one performs over the long 
haul, because that’s when the psychological patterns are established. Thus, employ-
ers have discovered that it’s far better to give newcomers a helping hand than to let 
them learn possibly inappropriate behavior that will be hard to undo later.107
The Desirable Characteristics of Orientation 
Like orientation week for new 
college students, the initial socialization period is designed to give new employees the 
information they need to be effective. In a large organization, orientation may be a 
formal, established process. In a small organization, it may be so informal that em-
ployees find themselves having to make most of the effort themselves.
Following orientation, the employee should emerge with information about three 
matters (much of which he or she may have acquired during the job-application 
process):
■ 
The job routine. At minimum, the new employee needs to have learned what 
is required in the job for which he or she was hired, how the work will be 
evaluated, and who the immediate coworkers and managers are. This is basic.
■ 
The organization’s mission and operations. Certainly all managers need to 
know what the organization is about—its purpose, products or services, 
operations, and history. And it’s now understood that low-level employees 
perform better if they, too, have this knowledge.
■ 
The organization’s work rules and employee benefits. A public utility’s 
HR department may have a brochure explaining formalized work rules, over-
time requirements, grievance procedures, and elaborate employee benefits. A 
technology start-up may be so fluid that many of these matters will have not 
been established yet. Even so, there are matters of law (such as those pertain-
ing to sexual harassment) affecting work operations that every employee 
should be made aware of.
Training & Development: Helping People 
Perform Better
How does employee engagement pay off financially? According to one global 
study, companies with low traditional engagement had an average operating margin 
(profit) of just under 10%, those with high traditional engagement just over 14%, 
and those with high sustainable engagement over 27%—three times higher. One 
important key to high engagement is workforce planning—ensuring there is a match 

278 
PART 4 
Organizing
HR professionals distinguish between training and development.
■ 
Training—upgrading skills of technical and operational employees. 
Electronics technicians, data processors, computer network administrators, 
and X-ray technicians, among many others, need to be schooled in new 
knowledge as the requirements of their fields change. Training, then, refers to 
educating technical and operational employees in how to better do their cur-
rent jobs.
■ 
Development—upgrading skills of professionals and managers. Accoun-
tants, nurses, lawyers, and managers of all levels need to be continually edu-
cated in how to do their jobs better not just today but also tomorrow. 
Development refers to educating professionals and managers in the skills they 
need to do their jobs in the future.
Typical areas for which employee training and development are given are customer 
service, safety, leadership, computer skills, quality initiatives, communications, human 
relations, ethics, diversity, and sexual harassment.109
The Different Types of Training or Development 
There are all kinds of train-
ing and development methods, and their effectiveness depends on whether what is 
being taught are facts or skills. If people are to learn facts—such as work rules or legal 
matters—lectures, videotapes, and workbooks are effective. If people are to learn 
skills—such as improving interpersonal relations or using new tools—then techniques 
such as discussion, role-playing, and practice work better.
Another way to categorize training methods is to distinguish on-the-job from off-
the-job methods.
■ 
On-the-job training. This training takes place in the work setting while em-
ployees are performing job-related tasks. Four major training methods are 
coaching, training positions, job rotation, and planned work activities.
■ 
Off-the-job training. This training consists of classroom programs, 
videotapes, workbooks, and the like. Lots of off-the-job training consists of 
computer-assisted instruction (CAI), in which computers are used to provide 
additional help or to reduce instructional time.
4. Implementation
How should training
be effected?
3. Selection
Which training
methods should be
used?
5. Evaluation
Is the training
working?
2. Objectives
What should
training achieve?
1. Assessment
Is training needed?
FIGURE 9.2 
Five steps in the training process
between the required work and employees’ skills and experience.108 Of course, in 
hiring, you always try to get people whose qualifications match the requirements of 
the job. Quite often, however, there are gaps in what new employees need to know. 
These gaps are filled by training. The training process involves five steps, as shown 
below. (See Figure 9.2.)

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
279
Is a Career in HR Right for You?
This survey is designed to assess your skills and interests and 
determine if a career in human resources is right for you. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 9.3. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Are you suited for a career in human resources? Which 
specific aspect of human resources do you prefer?
2. 
Look at the top two areas of HR for which you tested as 
being best suited. Look over the descriptions of these 
fields and then identify what skills you need to have to 
be successful.
3. 
Even if you do not pursue a career in HR, which skills do 
you feel you should continue to develop? Explain.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 9.3
®
Off-the-Job Training: Getting Ahead through E-Learning
College students, of course, have already discovered e-learn-
ing (electronic learning). Several million other people are also 
taking short-term, practical courses related to their careers, 
mostly at business schools and continuing-education institu-
tions around the country.
The Surge in Virtual Learning. Outside of education, in other 
U.S. organizations, e-learning has also become a well-established 
fact. Although instructor-led classrooms 
are still the dominant training method, at 
44% of total student hours, online self-
study e-learning and virtual classrooms 
make up about 29%.110 The benefits of 
e-learning, of course, are that no trans-
portation is needed and you can follow a 
flexible schedule and often work at your 
own pace.
However, there are some drawbacks. 
“The one thing e-learning boosters don’t 
want to talk about is the simple fact that 
very few people ever actually finish an 
e-learning course when it involves a 
technically complex or lengthy subject such as software training 
or programming,” says corporate trainer Roland Van Liew. “Peo-
ple perform the complex process of assimilating information best 
in socially interactive environments.”111
What about Student-Teacher Interaction? Because of the lack 
of classroom interaction between students and teachers in online 
education, both must assume more responsibility. “If students do 
not receive adequate teacher feedback 
and reinforcement,” points out one writer, 
“they will not always know whether 
they possess an accurate knowledge 
of the subject matter.”112
YOUR CALL
Neuroscientists are finding out that the 
human brain is a “social animal” that 
needs interaction with others.113 How do 
you think this fact relates to e-learning? 
Do you think you learn better in a 
classroom rather than online?
EXAMPLE
What If No One Shows Up? 
Many employers offer employee training, whether 
internal or external, or funding to attend seminars. But research has shown that a sur-
prisingly high percentage of employees simply don’t know about it. For instance, 
while 92% of employers in one survey offered funding to attend seminars and trade 
shows, only 28% of employees were aware the funding existed.114 Clearly, then, 
employers need to find out whether the training offered fits with the majority of em-
ployee development goals.
Are you suited for a career in human resources? You now have learned about the 
different HR programs and practices, such as recruiting, training, and compensation. 
Not everyone is suited for HR work, but does it interest you? The following self-
assessment will help you decide. ●
Off-the-job training. How does receiving feedback 
from an instructor affect your retention of knowledge?

9.5 
Performance Appraisal
How can I assess employees’ performance more accurately and give more effective 
feedback?
THE BIG PICTURE
Performance appraisal, assessing employee performance and providing them feedback, may be objective or 
subjective. Appraisals may be by peers, subordinates, customers, or oneself. Feedback may be formal or informal.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
If you’re a member of the Millennial Generation, you tend to want “frequent and can-
did performance feedback,” according to one survey, and having your managers pro-
vide “detailed guidance in daily work” is very important to you.115 Feedback about 
how you’re doing at work is part of performance management.
Performance Management in Human Resources
No doubt you’ve had the experience at some point of having a sit-down with a superior, 
a boss or a teacher, who told you how well or poorly you were doing—a performance 
appraisal. A performance appraisal is a single event, as we discuss later in this section. 
Performance management, by contrast, is a powerful ongoing activity that has produced 
such spectacular results as 40% higher employee commitment, 50% less turnover, 
10%–30% higher customer satisfaction—and double a firm’s net profits.116
Performance management is defined as a set of processes and managerial behav-
iors that involve defining, monitoring, measuring, evaluating, and providing conse-
quences for performance expectations.117 It consists of four steps: (1) define 
performance, (2) monitor and evaluate performance, (3) review performance, and 
(4) provide consequences. (See Figure 9.3.)
280 
PART 4 
Organizing
FIGURE 9.3
Performance management: 
four steps
Source: Adapted from A. J. 
Kinicki, K. J. L. Jacobson, S. J. 
Peterson, and G. E. Prussia, 
“Development and Validation 
of the Performance Management 
Behavior Questionnaire,” 
Personnel Psychology, Vol. 66 
(2013), pp. 1–45.
Step 1: Define Performance
Set goals and communicate
performance expectations.
Step 3: Review Performance
Deliver feedback and
coaching.
Step 4: Provide Consequences
Administer valued rewards and
appropriate punishment.
Step 2: Monitor & Evaluate
Performance
Measure and evaluate progress
and outcomes.
Performance management, which is often exerted through an organization’s manag-
ers and human resources policies and practices, is a powerful means for improving 
individual, group, and organizational effectiveness.118

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
281
Performance Management: How Domino’s Pizza Built a Billion-Dollar Business
The founder of Domino’s Pizza, Tom Monaghan, grew the busi-
ness, which he later sold for $1 billion, by using performance 
management, as follows:119
1. Define Performance. In order to meet Domino’s promise of 
delivering customers a pizza within 30 minutes or no payment 
required, Monaghan made clear to his employees in his perfor-
mance expectations the importance of speed, even showing em-
ployees how to run out the door.
2. Monitor & Evaluate Performance. Domino’s employees 
filled out a form showing they understood what was expected 
of them, then every one of them met with their manager and 
listed goals for the month and action plans for achieving them. 
Employees also described what the manager was supposed to 
do for them to support their efforts.
3. Review Performance. Employees met with their managers 
every three months to review their performance, and managers 
met with their own superiors once a month to do the same.
4. Provide Consequences. Monaghan is a big believer in 
rewarding performance and retaining talent. Thus, Domi-
no’s store managers received not only salaries but also 
30% of profits. To retain talent, Monaghan rewarded fran-
chisees (individual store owners who had purchased the 
right to use the Domino’s trademark and business model) 
by encouraging them to develop their managers into store 
owners themselves, for which the original franchisees 
were rewarded with a percentage of the earnings from the 
new store.
YOUR CALL
In your current job—being a student—how effective do you 
think Domino’s approach to performance management could 
be in helping you excel at college? Who would you designate 
as your “manager,” how often would you meet, and what kind 
of goals and action plans would you set?
EXAMPLE
Two Kinds of Performance Appraisal: 
Objective & Subjective
A performance appraisal, or performance review, consists of (1) assessing an employ-
ee’s performance and (2) providing him or her with feedback. Unlike performance man-
agement, which is an ongoing, interactive process between managers and employees, 
a performance appraisal is often dictated by a date on the calendar rather than need and 
is a “one-sided, boss-dominated” assessment that comes down to whether your supe-
rior “likes” you, according to some critics.120
No wonder, then, that so many performance reviews are worthless, in the opinion of 
UCLA management professor Samuel Culbert, coauthor of Get Rid of the Performance 
Review!121 A recent worldwide survey of 1,300 workers also revealed that 7 in 10 people 
believed that their managers did not remain calm and constructive when discussing per-
formance. This is why 20% of the respondents dreaded having difficult conversations 
with their boss.122 Management expert W. Edwards Deming (see  Chapter 2) felt that 
such reviews were actually harmful because people remember only the negative parts.123
“The best kind of performance review is no performance review,” says psychologist 
Aubrey Daniels, who coined the term “performance management.”124 It thus is no surprise 
that some firms (about 1%) have scrapped the practice altogether.125 Nevertheless, let us 
take a look at performance appraisals since they are still used frequently.
Two Kinds of Performance Appraisal: 
Objective & Subjective
There are two ways to evaluate an employee’s performance—objectively and subjectively.
1. Objective Appraisals 
Objective appraisals, also called results appraisals, are 
based on facts and are often numerical. In these kinds of appraisals, you would keep 

282 
PART 4 
Organizing
track of such matters as the numbers of products the employee sold in a month, 
customer complaints filed against an employee, miles of freight hauled, and the like.
There are two good reasons for having objective appraisals:
■ 
They measure results. It doesn’t matter if two appliance salespeople have 
completely different personal traits (one is formal, reserved, and patient; the 
other informal, gregarious, and impatient) if each sells the same number of 
washers and dryers. Human resource professionals point out that, just as in 
business we measure sales, profits, shareholder value, and other so-called 
metrics, it is likewise important to measure employee performance, benefit 
costs, and the like as an aid to strategy.126
■ 
They are harder to challenge legally. Not being as subject to personal bias, 
objective appraisals are harder for employees to challenge on legal grounds, 
such as for age, gender, or racial discrimination.
We discussed an objective approach in Chapter 5 under management by objectives, 
which can encourage employees to feel empowered to adopt behavior that will produce 
specific results. MBO, you’ll recall, is a four-step process in which (1) managers and 
employees jointly set objectives for the employee, (2) managers develop action plans, 
(3) managers and employees periodically review the employee’s performance, and (4) the 
manager makes a performance appraisal and rewards the employee according to results. 
For example, an objective for a copier service technician might be to 
increase the number of service calls 15% during the next three months.
2. Subjective Appraisals 
Few employees can be adequately 
measured just by objective appraisals—hence the need for subjective 
appraisals, which are based on a manager’s perceptions of an employ-
ee’s (1) traits or (2) behaviors.
■    Trait appraisals. Trait appraisals are ratings of such subjec-
tive attributes as “attitude,” “initiative,” and “leadership.” 
Trait evaluations may be easy to create and use, but their va-
lidity is questionable because the evaluator’s personal bias 
can affect the ratings.
■    Behavioral appraisals. Behavioral appraisals measure spe-
cific, observable aspects of performance—being on time for 
work, for instance—although making the evaluation is still 
somewhat subjective. An example is the behaviorally 
anchored rating scale (BARS), which rates employee grada-
tions in performance according to scales of specific behav-
iors. For example, a five-point BARS rating scale about 
attendance might go from “Always early for work and has 
equipment ready to fully assume duties” to “Frequently late 
and often does not have equipment ready for going to work,” 
with gradations in between.
Who Should Make Performance Appraisals?
If one of your employees was putting on a good show of solving problems that, it 
turned out, she had actually created herself so that she could be an “office hero” and 
look good, how would you know about it? (This phenomenon has been dubbed 
“Munchausen—pronounced mun-chow-zen—at work” because it resembles the rare 
psychological disorder in which sufferers seek attention by making up an illness.127) 
Most performance appraisals are done by managers; however, to add different perspec-
tives, sometimes appraisal information is provided by other people knowledgeable 
about particular employees.
“Here’s the deal . . .” One of the 
most important tasks of being a 
manager is giving employees 
accurate information about their 
work performance. Which would 
you be more comfortable 
giving—objective appraisals or 
subjective appraisals?

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
283
Peers, Subordinates, Customers, & Self 
Among additional sources of infor-
mation are coworkers and subordinates, customers and clients, and the employees 
themselves.
■ 
Peers and subordinates. Coworkers, colleagues, and subordinates may well 
see different aspects of your performance. Such information can be useful for 
development, although it probably shouldn’t be used for evaluation. (Many 
managers will resist soliciting such information about themselves, of course, 
fearing negative appraisals.)
■ 
Customers and clients. Some organizations, such as restaurants and hotels, 
ask customers and clients for their appraisals of employees. Publishers ask 
authors to judge how well they are doing in handling the editing, production, 
and marketing of their books. Automobile dealerships may send follow-up 
questionnaires to car buyers.
■ 
Self-appraisals. How would you rate your own performance in a job, know-
ing that it would go into your personnel file? Probably the bias would be to-
ward the favorable. Nevertheless, self-appraisals help employees become 
involved in the whole evaluation process and may make them more receptive 
to feedback about areas needing improvement.
360-Degree Assessment: Appraisal by Everybody 
We said that perfor-
mance appraisals may be done by peers, subordinates, customers, and oneself. Some-
times all these may be used in a technique called 360-degree assessment.
In a “theater in the round,” the actors in a dramatic play are watched by an audience 
on all sides of them—360 degrees. Similarly, as a worker, you have many people 
watching you from all sides. Thus has arisen the idea of the 360-degree assessment, 
or 360-degree feedback appraisal, in which employees are appraised not only by their 
managerial superiors but also by peers, subordinates, and sometimes clients, thus pro-
viding several perspectives.
Typically, an employee chooses between 6 and 12 other people to make evaluations, 
who then fill out anonymous forms, the results of which are tabulated by computer. Or, 
using a Facebook-style program such as Performance Multiplier or Twitter-like soft-
ware called Rypple, employees can solicit evaluations through social networking–style 
systems.128 The employee then goes over the results with his or her manager and to-
gether they put into place a long-term plan for performance goals.
Incorporating 360-degree feedback into the performance appraisal process has ad-
vantages and disadvantages. Recent research found that “improvement is most likely to 
occur when feedback indicates that change is necessary, recipients have a positive feed-
back orientation, perceive a need to change their behavior, react positively to feedback, 
believe change is feasible, set appropriate goals to regulate their behavior, and take ac-
tions that lead to skill and performance improvement.”129 At the heart of the process is 
the matter of trust. “Trust determines how much an individual is willing to contribute 
for an employer,” says one expert. “Using 360 confidentially, for developmental pur-
poses, builds trust; using it to trigger pay and personnel decisions puts trust at risk.”130
Forced Ranking: Grading on a Curve 
To increase performance, an estimated 
60% of Fortune 500 companies (such as General Electric, Ford, Cisco, and Intel) have 
some variant of performance review systems known as forced ranking (or “rank and 
yank”) systems.131 In forced ranking performance review systems, all employees 
within a business unit are ranked against one another and grades are distributed along 
some sort of bell curve—just like students being graded in a college course. Top per-
formers (such as the top 20%) are rewarded with bonuses and promotions, the worst 
performers (such as the bottom 20%) are rehabilitated or dismissed. For instance, 
every year 10% of GE’s managers are assigned the bottom grade, and if they don’t 
improve, they are asked to leave the company.

284 
PART 4 
Organizing
Proponents of forced ranking say it encourages managers to identify and remove 
poor performers and also structures a predetermined compensation curve, which en-
ables them to reward top performers. If, however, the system is imposed on an organi-
zation overnight without preparation, by pitting employees against one another, it can 
produce shocks to morale, productivity, and loyalty. There may also be legal ramifica-
tions, as when employees file class-action lawsuits alleging that the forced ranking 
methods had a disparate effect on particular groups of employees.132 
One recent study found that only 14% of all companies surveyed used a forced 
ranking system, down from 42% in 2009.133 Microsoft recently ended a forced-ranking 
system because employees complained it discouraged teamwork.134 (However, former 
GE CEO Jack Welch takes issue with this criticism, saying that if a company wants 
teamwork, it should identify it as a value, then evaluate and reward it accordingly.135)
Effective Performance Feedback
The whole point of performance appraisal, of course, is to stimulate better job perfor-
mance. But, says Lawrence Bossidy, former CEO of AlliedSignal, the typical appraisal 
is often three pages long and filled with vague, uncommunicative language and is use-
less to ensure that improvement happens.136 Bossidy recommends an appraisal take up 
half a page and cover just three topics: what the boss likes about your performance, 
what you can improve, and how you and your boss are going to make sure that im-
provement happens.
To help increase employee performance, a manager can use two kinds of 
appraisals—formal and informal.
1. Formal Appraisals 
Formal appraisals are conducted at specific times through-
out the year and are based on performance measures that have been established in 
advance. An emergency medical technician might be evaluated twice a year by his or 
her manager, using objective performance measures such as work attendance time 
sheets and more subjective measures such as a behaviorally anchored rating scales 
(BARS) to indicate the employee’s willingness to follow emergency procedures and 
doctors’ and nurses’ orders.
As part of the appraisal, the manager should give the employee feedback, describ-
ing how he or she is performing well and not so well and giving examples. Managers 
are sometimes advised to keep diaries about specific incidents so they won’t have to 
rely on their memories (and so that their evaluations will be more lawsuit-resistant). 
Facts should always be used rather than impressions.
2. Informal Appraisals 
Formal appraisals are the equivalent of a student receiv-
ing a grade on a midterm test and a grade on a final test—weeks may go by during 
which you are unaware of how well you’re doing in the course. Informal appraisals are 
the equivalent of occasional unscheduled pop quizzes and short papers or drop-in vis-
its to the professor’s office to talk about your work—you have more frequent feedback 
about your performance. Informal appraisals are conducted on an unscheduled basis 
and consist of less rigorous indications of employee performance.
As a manager, you may not feel comfortable about critiquing your employees’ perfor-
mance, especially when you have to convey criticism rather than praise. Nevertheless, 
giving performance feedback is one of the most important parts of the manager’s job.
Some suggestions for improvement appear in the table at left. (See Table 9.2.) ●
TABLE 9.2
How to Give Performance 
Feedback to Employees
Think of yourself as a coach, as 
though you were managing a 
team of athletes.
• 
Take a problem-solving 
approach, avoid criticism, 
and treat employees with 
respect. Recall the worst 
boss for whom you ever 
worked. How did you react 
to his or her method of 
giving feedback? Avoid 
criticism that might be 
taken personally.
 
 Example: Don’t say, 
“You’re picking up that 
bag of cement wrong” 
(which criticizes by using 
the word wrong). Say, 
“Instead of bending at the 
waist, a good way to pick 
up something heavy is to 
bend your knees. That’ll 
help save your back.”
• 
Be specific in describing 
the employee’s present 
performance and in the 
improvement you desire. 
Describe your subordinate’s 
current performance in 
specific terms and 
concentrate on outcomes 
that are within his or her 
ability to improve.
 
 Example: Don’t say, 
“You’re always late turning 
in your sales reports.” Say, 
“Instead of making calls on 
Thursday afternoon, why 
don’t you take some of the 
time to do your sales 
reports so they’ll be ready 
on Friday along with those 
of the other sales reps.”
• 
Get the employee’s input. 
In determining causes for 
a problem, listen to the 
employee and get his or 
her help in crafting a 
solution.
 
 Example: Don’t say, 
“You’ve got to learn to get 
here by 9:00 a.m. every 
day.” Say, “What changes 
do you think could be 
made so that your station 
is covered when people 
start calling at 9:00?”

9.6 
Managing Promotions, Transfers, Disciplining, 
& Dismissals
What are some guidelines for handling promotions, transfers, disciplining, 
and dismissals?
THE BIG PICTURE
As a manager, you’ll have to manage employee replacement actions, as by promoting, transferring, 
demoting, laying off, or firing.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
285
“The unemployment rate is an abstraction, an aggregation of bodiless data,” writes 
journalist/novelist Walter Kirn, “but losing a job is a lived experience, written on the 
nerves. . . . Some blame themselves and some blame everybody. Still others, not know-
ing whom to blame, explode.”137
Among the major—and most difficult—decisions you will make as a manager are 
those about employee movement within an organization: Whom should you let go? 
promote? transfer? discipline? All these matters go under the heading of employee re-
placement. And, incidentally, any time you need to deal with replacing an employee in 
a job, that’s a time to reconsider the job description to see how it might be made more 
effective for the next person to occupy it.
You’ll have to deal with replacement whenever an employee quits, retires, becomes 
seriously ill, or dies. Or you may initiate the replacement action by promoting, trans-
ferring, demoting, laying off, or firing.138
Promotion: Moving Upward
Promotion—moving an employee to a higher-level position—is the most obvious way 
to recognize that person’s superior performance (apart from giving raises and bo-
nuses). Three concerns are these:
Fairness 
It’s important that promotion be fair. The step upward must be deserved. 
It shouldn’t be for reasons of nepotism, cronyism, or other kind of favoritism.
Nondiscrimination 
The promotion cannot discriminate on the basis of race, eth-
nicity, gender, age, or physical ability.
Others’ Resentments 
If someone is promoted, someone else may be resentful 
about being passed over. As a manager, you may need to counsel the people left behind 
about their performance and their opportunities in the future. In fact, if you are passed 
over yourself, it is important not to let your anger build. Instead, you should gather 
your thoughts, then go in and talk to your boss and find out what qualities were lack-
ing, suggests one report. You should also create a career action plan and look for ways 
to improve your knowledge, skills, and abilities.139
Transfer: Moving Sideways
Transfer is movement of an employee to a different job with similar responsibility. It 
may or may not mean a change in geographical location (which might be part of a 
promotion as well).

Employees might be transferred for four principal reasons: (1) to solve organiza-
tional problems by using their skills at another location; (2) to broaden their experi-
ence in being assigned to a different position; (3) to retain their interest and motivation 
by being presented with a new challenge; or (4) to solve some employee problems, 
such as personal differences with their bosses.
Disciplining & Demotion: The Threat of Moving 
Downward
Poorly performing employees may be given a warning or a reprimand and then 
disciplined. That is, they may be temporarily removed from their jobs, as when a 
police officer is placed on suspension or administrative leave—removed from his 
or her regular job in the field and perhaps given a paperwork job or told to stay 
away from work.
Alternatively, an employee may be demoted—that is, have his or her current re-
sponsibilities, pay, and perquisites taken away, as when a middle manager is demoted 
to a first-line manager. (Sometimes this may occur when a company is downsized, re-
sulting in fewer higher level management positions.)
Dismissal: Moving Out of the Organization
Dismissals are of three sorts:
Layoffs 
The phrase being laid off tends to suggest that a person has been dis-
missed temporarily—as when a carmaker doesn’t have enough orders to justify 
keeping its production employees—and may be recalled later when economic condi-
tions improve.
Downsizings 
A downsizing is a permanent dismissal; there is no rehiring later. An 
automaker discontinuing a line of cars or on the path to bankruptcy might permanently 
let go of its production employees.
Firings 
The phrase being fired, with all its euphemisms and synonyms—being “ter-
minated,” “separated,” “let go,” “canned”—tends to mean that a person was dismissed 
permanently “for cause”: absenteeism, sloppy work habits, failure to perform satisfac-
torily, breaking the law, and the like.
It used to be that managers could use their discretion about dismissals. Today, 
however, because of the changing legal climate, steps must be taken to avoid employ-
ees suing for “wrongful termination.” That is, an employer has to carefully document 
the reasons for dismissals. You also need to take into account the fact that survivors in 
the company can suffer just as much as, if not more than, their colleagues who were 
let go.140
Incidentally, in terms of your own career, be aware that dismissals rarely come as a 
surprise. Most bosses are conflict-averse, and you may see the handwriting on the wall 
when your own manager begins to interact with you less.141
The Practical Action box on the next page offers some suggestions for handling 
dismissals. ●
286 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
287
PRACTICAL ACTION
The Right Way to Handle a Dismissal
“Employment at will” is the governing principle of employment 
in the great majority of states, which means that anyone can 
be dismissed at any time for any reason at all—or for no rea-
son. Exceptions are whistle-blowers and people with employ-
ment contracts. Civil-rights laws also prohibit organizations’ 
dismissing people for their gender, skin color, or physical or 
mental disability.142
Four suggestions for handling a dismissal follow.
Give the Employee a Chance First
If you’re dealing with someone who has a problem with absen-
teeism, alcohol/drug dependency, or the like, articulate to that 
employee what’s wrong with his or her performance, then set 
up a plan for improvement (which might include counseling). Or 
if you’re dealing with an employee who has a bad cultural or 
personality fit with the company—a buttoned-down, by-the-
book style, say, that’s at odds with your flexible, fast-moving 
organization—have a conversation and give the employee time 
to find a job elsewhere.143
Don’t Delay the Dismissal, & Make Sure It’s 
Completely Defensible
If improvements aren’t forthcoming, don’t carry the employee 
along because you feel sorry for him or her. Your first duty is to 
the performance of the organization. Make sure, however, that 
you’ve documented all the steps taken in advance of the dis-
missal. Also be sure that the steps taken follow the law and all 
important organizational policies.144
Be Aware How Devastating a Dismissal Can 
Be—Both to the Individual & to Those Remaining
To the person being let go, the event can be as much of a blow 
as a divorce or a death in the family. Dismissals can also ad-
versely affect those remaining with the company. This is what 
psychiatrist Manfred Kets de Vries calls layoff survivor sick-
ness, which is characterized by anger, depression, fear, guilt, 
risk aversion, distrust, vulnerability, powerlessness, and loss 
of motivation. Indeed, a five-year study by Cigna and the 
American Management Association found an enormous 
increase in medical claims, particularly for stress-related 
illnesses, not only among those dismissed but among continuing 
employees as well.145
Offer Assistance in Finding Another Job
Dismissing a long-standing employee with only a few weeks of 
severance pay hurts not only the person let go but also the 
organization itself, as word gets back to the employees who 
remain, as well as to outsiders who might be prospective 
employees. Knowledgeable employers offer assistance in finding 
another job.
“The best demonstration that a company’s values are 
real,” says management scholar Rosabeth Moss Kanter, “is 
to act on them today even for people who will not be around 
tomorrow. A company, like a society, can be judged by how 
it treats its most vulnerable. . . . Bad treatment of departing 
employees can destroy the commitment of those who 
stay.”146
Fired. Being fired can be one of the most stressful events 
of one’s life—more than the death of a close friend, 
separation from one’s spouse over marital problems, or 
an injury requiring hospitalization. Some people who 
have been let go from their jobs suffer major health 
consequences. If you as a manager ever had to fire 
someone, what would you do to try to soften the blow?

9.7 
The Legal Requirements of Human Resource 
Management
To avoid exposure to legal liabilities, what areas of the law do I need to be aware of?
THE BIG PICTURE
Four areas of human resource law any manager needs to be aware of are labor relations, compensation and 
benefits, health and safety, and equal employment opportunity.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Whatever your organization’s human resource strategy, in the United States (and in 
U.S. divisions overseas) it has to operate within the environment of American law. 
Four areas you need to be aware of are as follows. Some important laws are summa-
rized in the table opposite. (See Table 9.3.)
1. Labor Relations
The earliest laws affecting employee welfare had to do with unions, and they can still 
have important effects. Legislation passed in 1935 (the Wagner Act) resulted in the 
National Labor Relations Board, which enforces procedures whereby employees may 
vote to have a union and for collective bargaining. Collective bargaining consists of 
negotiations between management and employees about disputes over compensation, 
benefits, working conditions, and job security.
A 1947 law (the Taft-Hartley Act) allows the president of the United States to pre-
vent or end a strike that threatens national security. (We discuss labor-management 
issues further in  Section 9.8.)
2. Compensation & Benefits
The Social Security Act in 1935 established the U.S. retirement system. The passage 
of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 established minimum living standards for 
workers engaged in interstate commerce, including provision of a federal minimum 
wage (currently $7.25 an hour; several states have higher minimums) and a maximum 
workweek (now 40 hours, after which overtime must be paid), along with banning 
products from child labor.147 Salaried executive, administrative, and professional em-
ployees are exempt from overtime rules.
3. Health & Safety
From miners risking tunnel cave-ins to cotton mill workers breathing lint, industry has 
always had dirty, dangerous jobs. Beginning with the Occupational Safety and Health 
Act (OSHA) of 1970, a body of law has grown that requires organizations to provide 
employees with nonhazardous working conditions. Later laws extended health cover-
age, including 2010 health care reform legislation, which requires companies with 
more than 50 employees to provide health insurance.148
4. Equal Employment Opportunity
The effort to reduce discrimination in employment based on racial, ethnic, and reli-
gious bigotry and gender stereotypes began with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964. This established the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Commission, whose 
job it is to enforce antidiscrimination and other employment-related laws. Title VII ap-
plies to all organizations or their agents engaged in an industry affecting interstate 
288 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
289
TABLE 9.3 
Some Important Recent U.S. Federal Laws & Regulations Protecting Employees
YEAR 
LAW OR REGULATION 
PROVISIONS
Labor relations
1974 
Privacy Act 
Gives employees legal right to examine letters of reference concerning
 
 
them
1986 
Immigration Reform & Control 
Requires employers to verify the eligibility for employment of all their
 
Act  
new hires (including U.S. citizens)
2003 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
Prohibits employers from demoting or firing employees who raise
 
 
accusations of fraud to a federal agency
Compensation and benefits
1974 
Employee Retirement Income 
Sets rules for managing pension plans; provides federal insurance to
 
Security Act (ERISA)  
cover bankrupt plans
1993 
Family & Medical Leave Act 
Requires employers to provide 12 weeks of unpaid leave for medical
 
 
and family reasons, including for childbirth, adoption, or family
 
 
emergency
1996 
Health Insurance Portability  
Allows employees to switch health insurance plans when changing jobs
 
& Accountability Act (HIPPA) 
and receive new coverage regardless of preexisting health
 
 
conditions; prohibits group plans from dropping ill employees
2007 
Fair Minimum Wage Act 
Increased federal minimum wage to $7.25 per hour on July 24, 2009
Health and safety
1970 
Occupational Safety & Health 
Establishes minimum health and safety standards in organizations
 
Act (OSHA)
1985 
Consolidated Omnibus Budget 
Requires an extension of health insurance benefits after termination
 
Reconciliation Act (COBRA)
2010 
Patient Protection &  
Employers with more than 50 employees must provide health insurance
 
Affordable Care Act
Equal employment opportunity
1963 
Equal Pay Act 
Requires men and women be paid equally for performing equal work
1964, amended 1972 
Civil Rights Act, Title VII 
Prohibits discrimination on basis of race, color, religion, national origin, or sex
1967, amended 
Age Discrimination in  
Prohibits discrimination in employees over 40 years old; restricts
1978 and 1986  
Employment Act (ADEA) 
mandatory retirement
1990 
Americans with Disabilities Act 
Prohibits discrimination against essentially qualified employees with 
 
(ADA)  
physical or mental disabilities or chronic illness; requires “reasonable 
 
 
accommodation” be provided so they can perform duties
1991 
Civil Rights Act 
Amends and clarifies Title VII, ADA, and other laws; permits suits against 
 
 
employers for punitive damages in cases of intentional discrimination

290 
PART 4 
Organizing
commerce that employs 15 or more employees. Contractors who wish to do business 
with the U.S. government (such as most colleges and universities, which receive fed-
eral funds) must be in compliance with various executive orders issued by the presi-
dent covering antidiscrimination. Later laws prevented discrimination against older 
workers and people with physical and mental disabilities.149
Workplace Discrimination, Affirmative Action, Sexual 
Harassment, & Bullying
Three important concepts covered by EEO laws are workplace discrimination, affir-
mative action, and sexual harassment, which we discuss below. We also consider bul-
lying, which is not covered by EEO laws but, as one report says, “could well become 
the next major battleground in employment law as a growing number of states con-
sider legislation that would let workers sue for harassment that causes physical or 
emotional harm.”150
Workplace Discrimination 
A large gap exists in perceptions between the sexes 
as to whether men or women have more opportunities for advancement. In a survey of 
1,834 business professionals worldwide, 66% of men said opportunities to move to top 
management were gender neutral, compared with 30% of women who stated that.151 
(In actuality, only 4.9% of CEOs are women at the 1,000 biggest U.S. companies, and 
of the 200 highest-paid chief executives in the United States, only 11—just 5.5%—are 
women.152)
Workplace discrimination occurs when people are hired or promoted—or denied hir-
ing or promotion—for reasons not relevant to the job, such as skin color or eye shape, 
gender, religion, national origin, and the like. Two fine points to be made here are that 
(1) although the law prohibits discrimination in all aspects of employment, it does not 
require an employer to extend preferential treatment because of race, color, religion, and 
so on; and (2) employment decisions must be made on the basis of job-related criteria.
There are two types of workplace discrimination:
■ 
Adverse impact: Adverse impact occurs when an organization uses an em-
ployment practice or procedure that results in unfavorable outcomes to a pro-
tected class (such as Hispanics) over another group of people (such as 
non-Hispanic whites). For example, requiring workers to have a college degree 
can inadvertently create adverse impact against Hispanics because fewer His-
panics graduate from college than whites. This example would not be a prob-
lem, however, if a college degree was required to perform the job.
■ 
Disparate treatment: Disparate treatment results when employees from pro-
tected groups (such as disabled individuals) are intentionally treated differently. 
An example would be making a decision to give all international assignments 
to people with no disabilities because of the assumption that they won’t need 
any special accommodations related to travel.
When an organization is found to have been practicing discrimination, the people 
discriminated against may sue for back pay and punitive damages. In 2013, such com-
plaints to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) declined by 5.7% 
over the previous year. The most frequently cited basis for charges of discrimination 
was retaliation (41%), followed by race discrimination (35%); sex discrimination, in-
cluding sexual harassment and pregnancy discrimination (29%); and discrimination 
based on disability (27%).153
In recent years, pay discrepancies between women and men improved slightly, but 
as of 2012 women overall still earned only 77 cents to every $1 for a man, according 
to the U.S. Census Bureau. For men and women who have a 40-hour workweek, the 
gap narrows to 88 cents for women. (In some occupations, such as financial special-
ists, women earn as little as 66 cents to a man’s dollar, but among dental hygienists, 

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
291
Sexual harassment. If this 
woman is unaware of the men 
ogling her legs, does that make 
their behavior acceptable? Or 
does it still contribute to an 
offensive work environment?
HR specialists, and advertising sales agents, the pay is 
equal between men and women. In other words, the gap 
widens in higher-paying occupations such as business, 
medicine, and law.154)
Affirmative Action 
Affirmative action focuses on 
achieving equality of opportunity within an organization. 
It tries to make up for past discrimination in employment 
by actively finding, hiring, and developing the talents of 
people from groups traditionally discriminated against. 
Steps include active recruitment, elimination of prejudi-
cial questions in interviews, and establishment of minor-
ity hiring goals. It’s important to note that EEO laws do 
not allow use of hiring quotas.155
Affirmative action has created tremendous opportunities for women and minorities, 
but it has been resisted more by some white males who see it as working against their 
interests.156 Affirmative action plans are more successful when employees view them 
as being fair and equitable and when whites are not prejudiced against people of 
color.157 In addition, research shows that women and minorities hired on the basis of 
affirmative action felt stigmatized as unqualified and incompetent and experienced 
lower job satisfaction and more stress than employees supposedly selected on the basis 
of merit.158
Sexual Harassment 
Sexual harassment consists of unwanted sexual attention 
that creates an adverse work environment. This means obscene gestures, sex-
stereotyped jokes, sexually oriented posters and graffiti, suggestive remarks, unwanted 
dating pressure, physical nonsexual contact, unwanted touching, sexual propositions, 
threatening punishment unless sexual favors are given, obscene phone calls, and simi-
lar verbal or physical actions of a sexual nature.159 The harassment may be by a mem-
ber of the opposite sex or a member of the same sex, by a manager, by a coworker, or 
by an outsider.160 If the harasser is a manager or an agent of the organization, the orga-
nization itself can be sued, even if it had no knowledge of the situation.161
Two Types of Sexual Harassment There are two types of sexual harassment, 
both of which violate Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. In the quid pro quo harass-
ment type, the person to whom the unwanted sexual attention is directed is put in the posi-
tion of jeopardizing being hired for a job or obtaining job benefits or opportunities unless 
he or she implicitly or explicitly acquiesces. More typical is the hostile environment type, 
in which the person being sexually harassed doesn’t risk economic harm but experiences 
an offensive or intimidating work environment. According to one survey, 38% of women 
said they heard sexual innuendo, wisecracks, or taunts at the office.162
Silicon Valley, Sexual Harassment, & the “Brogrammer” Culture
Women start 1,288 companies every day, and women-owned 
businesses have risen 68% since 1997, compared to 47% for all 
companies.163 Moreover, venture capital firms that invested in 
women-led companies during the decade 2000–2010 outper-
formed those that didn’t.164 Despite such achievements, women 
are significantly underrepresented among the tech companies of 
Silicon Valley, long a male stronghold. (Google’s global staff is 
only 30% female, Facebook’s 31%, and Yahoo’s 37%.165)
Frat-Boy Behavior. Lack of gender diversity doesn’t necessarily 
result in a culture of sexism and sexual harassment. But some-
times it is exceedingly so. Sexist attitudes start in computer sci-
ence classes, women say, and are reinforced by the tech 
industry’s “brogrammer” (“bro” + “programmer”) fraternity-
house attitudes and behavior of some male software engineers 
and executives.166 (“Bro culture” also is said to lock many mi-
norities out.167) In the case of Los Angeles-based Tinder, which 
EXAMPLE

292 
PART 4 
Organizing
produces a popular mobile dating app, former marketing vice 
president Whitney Wolfe alleges in a lawsuit that such attitudes 
led to her being sexually harassed and discriminated against be-
fore being forced out.
A Joke? Wolfe’s suit says that she briefly dated Justin Mateen, 
Tinder’s chief marketing officer, but after they broke up he called 
her a “desperate loser,” a “joke,” a “gold digger,” a “disease,” and 
worse. He also allegedly stripped her of her “co-founder” title (be-
cause she was a “young female”), even though Mateen himself 
was hired after Wolfe’s marketing trips had begun to make Tinder 
take off.168 Tinder’s CEO, Sean Rad, who hired Mateen, denies 
that Wolfe was discriminated against and adds “We take gender 
equality very seriously.”169
YOUR CALL
Do you see sexist and demeaning behavior in the culture of 
your campus that you worry you might encounter later in a fu-
ture workplace?
The table at left presents some guidelines for preventing sexual harassment. (See 
Table 9.4.)
What Managers Can Do To help prevent harassment from occurring, managers 
can make sure their companies have an effective sexual harassment policy in place. 
The policy should be shown to all current and new employees, who should be made to 
understand that sexual harassment will not be tolerated under any circumstances. A 
formal complaint procedure should be established, which should explain how charges 
will be investigated and resolved. Supervisors should be trained in Title VII require-
ments and the proper procedures to follow when charges occur. If charges occur, they 
should be investigated promptly and objectively, and if substantiated, the offender 
should be disciplined at once—no matter what his or her rank in the company.170
Bullying 
If college professors can be bullied, can’t anyone?
For years, mathematics professor Bill Lepowsky experienced abusive behavior at 
the San Francisco Bay Area community college where he taught. It began with a group 
of managers spreading rumors and false accusations that threatened his job—for in-
stance, saying he was holding class in the wrong classroom and not attending meetings 
he wasn’t supposed to attend. It was emotionally draining—like “being a soldier in a 
foxhole with shells exploding,” he said—and took time and focus away from his job. It 
didn’t end until his tormentors left the college.171
The Meaning of Mean 
Bullying is repeated mistreatment of one or more persons 
by one or more perpetrators; it is abusive physical, psychological, verbal, or nonverbal 
behavior that is threatening, humiliating, or intimidating. “People have only thought 
about bullying related to children,” says one expert, “but the fact is that right now adult 
bullying is rampant.”172 Indeed, bullying on the job is experienced by 37% of employ-
ees, according to one survey, and 51%, according to another.173
Bullies can be male or female, although the majority (about 60%) are men and most 
are bosses. Women tend to be bullied more than men. Bullying can occur between col-
leagues, managers, and employees. Bullying on the job may be physically aggressive, 
such as pushing, pinching, or cornering someone. However, it is more apt to be verbal, 
including shouting, swearing, and name calling. Or it may be relational, including 
malicious gossip, rumors, and lies that may cause someone to feel isolated or cut off. 
Bullying through technology (cyberbullying), such as Facebook, twitter, or e-mail, 
accounts for about one in five incidents.174
The Effects of Bullying Unfortunately, many workplace bullies are quite charming 
and manipulative and so receive positive evaluations from their supervisors and achieve 
high levels of career success, according to one dispiriting study.175 “If people are politically 
skilled, they can do bad things really well,” says one of the study authors.176 Of course, that 
doesn’t make this behavior right. Indeed, bullying can devastate a workplace.177
TABLE 9.4
Preventing Sexual 
Harassment
• 
Don’t suggest sexual 
favors for rewards 
related to work or 
promotion.
• 
Don’t do uninvited 
touching, patting, or 
hugging of others’ 
bodies—especially 
if they wince, frown, 
or pull away.
• 
Don’t make sexually 
suggestive jokes, 
demeaning remarks, 
slurs, or obscene 
gestures or sounds.
• 
Don’t display sexual 
pictures in your 
workplace or write 
notes of a sexual 
nature.
• 
Don’t laugh at others’ 
sexually harassing 
words or behaviors.

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
293
Bullying, says Gary Namie, director of the Workplace Bullying Institute, can be 
especially damaging in work sites where the bullied may be trapped in close proximity 
to their bully.178 Bullied employees are less satisfied at work, more likely to spend time 
gossiping and not putting in their full effort, and more likely to quit.179 Victims also 
tend to experience stress-related health problems, such as anxiety, panic attacks, 
depression—even suicide.180
The table below presents some guidelines for combating bullying. (See Table 9.5.) ●
TABLE 9.5
Beating Back the Bully
Sources: A. Brujzzese, “Workplace Becomes New Schoolyard for Bullies,” USA Today, August 24, 2011, 
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/jobcent/workplace/bruzzese/story/2011/08/workplace-becomes-new—
choolyard-for-bulliets/50081460/1 (accessed July 3, 2014); K. V. Brown, “Far Beyond School Playground, Bullying 
Common in Workplace,” San Francisco Chronicle, November 6, 2011, pp. A1, A10; and R. Sherwood, “Solutions 
for Bullying in the Workplace,” Yahoo-Voices, May 17, 2012, http://voices.yahoo.com/solutions-bullying-
workplace-11361976.html (accessed July 3, 2014).
• 
Recognize the mistreatment as bullying: Don’t blame yourself.
• 
Get others on your side: Don’t become socially isolated.
• 
Don’t strike back: It might get you fired. Ask to be treated with fairness and respect.
• 
Stay calm and confident: Don’t feed the bully’s sense of power by showing fear.
• 
Avoid being alone with the bully: Make sure someone can hear your interactions. Or record them 
on your smartphone.
• 
Document the events—and be truthful: When reporting bullying to supervisors, give them the 
FACTS, not just the emotional effects. Save examples of online bullying, notes, and other physical 
evidence. Remember, the bully will probably deny your accusations.
Bullying. A surprisingly common 
activity, bullying is apt to be verbal, 
involving shouting and name calling, 
or relational, including spreading 
malicious rumors and lies. In some 
cases, however, it can be physically 
aggressive, involving pinching or 
pushing. Perhaps as many as half of 
all employees have experienced 
some sort of bullying on the job. Have 
you? What did you do about it?

9.8 
Labor-Management Issues
What are the principal processes and issues involved in organizing labor unions?
THE BIG PICTURE
We describe the process by which workers get a labor union to represent them and how unions and man-
agement negotiate a contract. This section also discusses the types of union and nonunion workplaces and 
right-to-work laws. It covers issues unions and management negotiate, such as compensation, cost-of-living 
adjustments, two-tier wage systems, and givebacks. It concludes by describing mediation and arbitration.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Starting in 1943, James Smith worked his way up from washing dishes in the galley of 
a passenger train’s dining car to waiter, earning tips on top of his wages of 36 cents an 
hour. The union job with the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, the first African 
American union, enabled him to go to college, and when he left the railroad he was 
hired as a civil engineer for the city of Los Angeles. “His story,” says one report, “is 
emblematic of the role the railroads and a railroad union played in building a founda-
tion for America’s black middle class.”181 Unions also helped to grow the American 
(and European) middle classes in general, bringing benefits to all, organized or not.
Labor unions are organizations of employees formed to protect and advance their 
members’ interests by bargaining with management over job-related issues. The union 
movement is far less the powerhouse that it was in the 1950s—indeed, its present 
membership is the lowest since 1916—but it is still a force in many sectors of the 
economy.182 (See Table 9.6, left.)
How Workers Organize
When workers in a particular organization decide to form a union, they first must get 
each worker to sign an authorization card, which designates a certain union as the work-
ers’ bargaining agent. When at least 30% of workers have signed cards, the union may 
ask the employer for official recognition. Usually the employer refuses, at which point 
the union can petition the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to decide which 
union should become the bargaining unit that represents the workers, such as the Team-
sters Union, United Auto Workers, the American Federation of Teachers, or the Service 
Employees International Union, as appropriate. (Some workers, however, are repre-
sented by unions you would never guess: Zookeepers, for instance, are represented by 
the Teamsters, which mainly organizes transportation workers. University of California, 
Berkeley, graduate student instructors are represented by the United Auto Workers.) An 
election is then held by the NLRB, and if 50% or more of the votes cast agree to union-
ization, the NLRB certifies the union as the workers’ exclusive representative. One of the 
newest and most unusual unions to be certified is the College Athletes Players Associa-
tion, which represents scholarship football players at Northwestern University.183
How Unions & Management Negotiate a Contract
Once a union is recognized as an official bargaining unit, its representatives can then 
meet with management’s representatives to do collective bargaining—to negotiate pay 
and benefits and other work terms.
When agreement is reached with management, the union representatives take the 
collective bargaining results back to the members for ratification—they vote to accept 
or reject the contract negotiated by their leaders. If they vote yes, the union and man-
agement representatives sign a negotiated labor-management contract, which sets the 
general tone and terms under which labor and management agree to work together 
during the contract period.
TABLE 9.6
Snapshot of Today’s U.S. 
Union Movement
Who’s in a union (2013)?
• 
11.3% of full-time U.S. 
workers—down from 
35.5% in 1945.
• 
6.7% of private-sector 
workers (7.3 million).
• 
35.3% of public-sector 
workers (7.2 million).
• 
Most members: National 
Education Association; 
Service Employees 
International; State, 
County, & Municipal 
Employees; American 
Federation of Teachers; 
Food & Commercial 
Workers; Teamsters; 
Electrical Workers; 
Machinists & 
Aerospace Workers.
Source: Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, “Union Members 
Summary,” Economic News 
Release, January 24, 2014; www
.bls.gov/news.release/union2.nr0
.htm (accessed July 5, 2014).
294 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
295
The Issues Unions & Management Negotiate About
The key issues that labor and management negotiate are compensation, employee ben-
efits, job security, work rules, hours, and safety matters. However, the first issue is 
usually union security and management rights.
Union Security & Types of Workplaces 
A key issue is: Who controls hiring 
policies and work assignments—labor or management? This involves the following 
matters:
■ 
The union security clause. The basic underpinning of union security is the 
union security clause, the part of the labor-management agreement that states 
that employees who receive union benefits must join the union, or at least pay 
dues to it. In times past, a union would try to solidify the union security clause 
by getting management to agree to a closed shop agreement—which is illegal 
today—in which a company agreed it would hire only current union members 
for a given job.
■ 
Types of unionized and nonunionized workplaces. The four basic kinds of 
workplaces are: closed shop, union shop, agency shop, and open shop. (See 
Table 9.7.)
TABLE 9.7 
Four Kinds of Workplace Labor Agreements
WORKPLACE 
DEFINITION 
STATUS
Closed shop 
Employer may hire only workers for a  
Illegal
 
job who are already in the union 
Union shop 
Workers aren’t required to be union  
Not allowed in 22 states
 
members when hired for a job but must  
(right-to-work states)
 
join the union within a specified time
Agency shop 
Workers must pay equivalent of union  
Applies to public-sector
 
dues, but aren’t required to join the 
teachers in some states, 
 
union 
prohibited in others
Open shop 
Workers may choose to join or not join  
Applies in 22 states (right-
 
a union 
to-work states)
■ 
Right-to-work laws. Individual states are allowed (under the 1947 
Taft-Hartley Act) to pass legislation outlawing union and agency shops. 
As a result, 22 states have passed right-to-work laws, statutes that pro-
hibit employees from being required to join a union as a condition of 
employment.
Business interests supporting such laws argue that forcing workers to join a 
union violates their rights and makes a state less attractive to businesses consider-
ing moving there. Union supporters say that states with such laws have overall 
lower wages and that all workers benefit from union gains, so everyone should be 
compelled to join.
 The 22 work-to-right states are shown in the map on the next page. (See Figure 9.4.)

296 
PART 4 
Organizing
Compensation: Wage Rates, COLA Clauses, & Givebacks 
Unions strive to 
negotiate the highest wage rates possible, or to trade off higher wages for something else, 
such as better fringe benefits. Some issues involved with compensation are as follows:
■ 
Wage rates—same pay or different rates? Wage rates subject to negotiation 
include overtime pay, different wages for different shifts, and bonuses. In the 
past, unions tried to negotiate similar wage rates for unionized employees 
working in similar jobs for similar companies or similar industries. However, 
the pressure of competition abroad and deregulation at home has forced many 
unions to negotiate two-tier wage contracts, in which new employees are paid 
less or receive lesser benefits than veteran employees have.
Example: In 2011, when automakers began to create new jobs, new union 
hires were offered about half the pay ($14 an hour) that autoworkers were get-
ting before ($28). Such two-tier wage systems can be attractive to employers, 
who are able to hire new workers at reduced wages, but it also benefits vet-
eran union members, who experience no wage reduction. However, some 
companies have been trying to make this wage concession permanent—a big 
setback for labor.184
■ 
Cost-of-living adjustment. Because the cost of living is always going up (at 
least so far), unions often try to negotiate a cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) 
clause, which during the period of the contract ties future wage increases to 
increases in the cost of living, as measured by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics’ consumer price index (CPI). (An alternative is the wage reopener clause, 
which allows wage rates to be renegotiated at certain stated times during the 
life of the contract. Thus, a 10-year contract might be subject to renegotiation 
every two years.)
■ 
Givebacks. During tough economic times, when a company (or, in the case of 
public employee unions, a municipality) is fighting for its very survival, man-
agement and labor may negotiate givebacks, in which the union agrees to give 
up previous wage or benefit gains in return for something else. Usually the 
union seeks job security, as in a no-layoff policy.
FIGURE 9.4
States with right-to-
work laws
What kind of state do you live 
in? (Alaska and Hawaii are 
non–right-to-work states.)
Right-to-work states
Non–right-to-work states

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
297
Settling Labor-Management Disputes
Even when a collective-bargaining agreement and contract has been accepted by both 
sides, there may likely be ongoing differences that must be resolved. Sometimes dif-
ferences lead to walkouts and strikes, or management may lock out employees. How-
ever, conflicts can be resolved through grievance procedures and mediation or 
arbitration.
Grievance Procedures 
A grievance is a complaint by an employee that manage-
ment has violated the terms of the labor-management agreement. Example: An em-
ployee may feel he or she is being asked to work too much overtime, is not getting his 
or her fair share of overtime, or is being unfairly passed over for promotion. 
Grievance procedures are often handled initially by the union’s shop steward, an 
official elected by the union membership who works at the company and represents 
the interests of unionized employees on a daily basis to the employees’ immediate 
supervisors. If this process is not successful, the grievance may be carried to the 
union’s chief shop steward and then to the union’s grievance committee, who deal with 
their counterparts higher up in management.
If the grievance procedure is not successful, the two sides may decide to try to re-
solve their differences by one of two ways—mediation or arbitration.
Mediation 
Mediation is the process in which a neutral third party, a mediator, lis-
tens to both sides in a dispute, makes suggestions, and encourages them to agree on a 
solution. Mediators may be lawyers or retired judges or specialists in various fields, 
such as conflict resolution or labor matters.
Arbitration 
Arbitration is the process in which a neutral third party, an arbitrator, 
listens to both parties in a dispute and makes a decision that the parties have agreed 
will be binding on them. Arbitrators are often retired judges.
Leo Kanne, head of Local 440 for the United Food & Commercial Workers Interna-
tional Union in Denison, Iowa, home of a Smithfield meat processing plant, says plant 
workers earn enough to take their children to Pizza Ranch or maybe Dairy Queen 
every week and go on vacation once a year. “That’s all these people want,” he says. 
“Nobody is getting rich working in these plants.” Word that a Chinese company had 
acquired Smithfield has everyone worried. Will they cut costs and not honor past labor 
agreements?185 Considering these kinds of concerns, what is your feeling about labor 
unions? Self-Assessment 9.4 enables you to answer this question by assessing your 
general attitudes toward unions. ●
Assessing Your Attitudes toward Unions186
This survey is designed to assess your attitude toward unions. 
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 9.4. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Where do you stand on your attitude toward unions? 
Positive, neutral, or negative?
2. 
What experiences or events in your life have led to your 
attitude toward unions? Describe. What do you think lies 
in the future for labor unions?
3. 
Why has there been growing dislike for unions in the 
U.S.?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 9.4
®

Key Terms Used in This Chapter
360-degree assessment 283
adverse impact 290
affirmative action 291
arbitration 297
assessment center 271
base pay 274
behavioral-description 
interview 270
behaviorally anchored rating scale 
(BARS) 282
benefits 275
bullying 292
collective bargaining 288
compensation 274
computer-assisted instruction 
(CAI) 278
cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) 
clause 296
development 278
disparate treatment 290
employment tests 271
Equal Employment Opportunity 
(EEO) Commission 288
external recruiting 266
Fair Labor Standards Act 288
forced ranking performance review 
systems 283
formal appraisals 284
givebacks 296
grievance 297
human capital 263
human resource inventory 265
human resource (HR) 
management 262
informal appraisals 284
internal recruiting 266
job analysis 264
job description 264
job posting 266
job specification 264
knowledge worker 263
labor unions 294
mediation 297
National Labor Relations Board 288
objective appraisals 281
orientation 277
performance appraisal 281
performance management 280
realistic job preview 267
recruiting 266
reliability  273
right-to-work laws 295
selection process 268
sexual harassment 291
situational interview 270
social capital 264
strategic human resource 
planning 264
structured interview 270
subjective appraisals 282
training 278
two-tier wage contracts 296
union security clause 295
unstructured interview 270
validity 273
workplace discrimination 290
Key Points
9.1 Strategic Human Resource 
Management
• Human resource (HR) management consists 
of the activities managers perform to plan 
for, attract, develop, and retain an effective 
workforce. The purpose of the strategic 
human resource management process is 
to get the optimal work performance that 
will help realize the company’s mission 
and vision.
• Three concepts important to human resource 
management are (1) human capital, the 
economic or productive potential of employee 
knowledge; (2) knowledge workers, people 
whose occupations are principally concerned 
with generating or interpreting information, as 
opposed to manual labor; and (3) social 
capital, the economic or productive potential 
of strong, trusting, and cooperative 
relationships.
• Strategic human resource planning consists 
of developing a systematic, comprehensive 
strategy for (a) understanding current 
employee needs and (b) predicting future 
employee needs.
• Understanding current employee needs 
requires first doing a job analysis to determine, 
by observation and analysis, the basic elements 
of a job. Then a job description can be written, 
which summarizes what the holder of the job 
does and how and why he or she does it. Next 
comes the job specification, which describes 
the minimum qualifications a person must have 
to perform the job successfully.
• Predicting employee needs means a manager 
needs to become knowledgeable about the 
staffing an organization might need and the 
likely sources of staffing, perhaps using a 
human resource inventory to organize this 
information.
9.2 Recruitment & Selection: Putting the 
Right People into the Right Jobs
• Recruiting is the process of locating and 
attracting qualified applicants for jobs open in 
the organization. Recruiting is of two types: 
internal and external.
• Internal recruiting means making people 
already employed by the organization aware 
of job openings, as through job postings.
298 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
299
• External recruiting means attracting job 
applicants from outside the organization. A 
useful approach is the realistic job preview, 
which gives a candidate a picture of both 
positive and negative features of the job and 
organization before he or she is hired.
• The selection process is the screening of 
job applicants to hire the best candidates. 
Three types of selection tools are background 
information, interviewing, and employment 
tests.
• Background information is ascertained 
through application forms, resumes, and 
reference checks.
• Interviewing takes three forms. (a) The 
unstructured interview involves asking 
probing questions to find out what the 
applicant is like. (b) The structured interview 
involves asking each applicant the same 
questions and comparing his or her 
responses to a standardized set of answers. 
The first type of structured interview is the 
situational interview, in which the interview 
focuses on hypothetical situations. (c) The 
second type of structured interview is the 
behavioral-description interview, in which the 
interviewer explores what applicants have 
actually done in the past.
• Employment tests are legally considered to 
consist of any procedure used in the 
employment selection decision process, but 
the most common tests are ability tests, 
personality tests, performance tests, and 
integrity tests. Some companies have 
assessment centers, in which management 
candidates participate in activities for a few 
days while being assessed in performance 
tests by evaluators.
• Other tests include drug testing, polygraphs, 
and genetic screening. With any kind of test, 
an important legal consideration is the test’s 
reliability, the degree to which a test measures 
the same thing consistently, and validity, 
whether the test measures what it purports to 
measure and is free of bias.
9.3 Managing an Effective Workforce: 
Compensation & Benefits
• Compensation has three parts: wages or 
salaries, incentives, and benefits.
• In the category of wages or salaries, the 
concept of base pay consists of the basic 
wage or salary paid employees in exchange 
for doing their jobs.
• Incentives include commissions, bonuses, 
profit-sharing plans, and stock options.
• Benefits are additional nonmonetary forms of 
compensation, such as health insurance, 
retirement plans, and family leave.
9.4 Orientation, Training, & Development
• Three ways in which newcomers are helped to 
perform their jobs are through orientation, 
training, and development.
• Orientation consists of helping the newcomer 
fit smoothly into the job and organization. 
Following orientation, the employee should 
emerge with information about the job routine, 
the organization’s mission and operations, 
and the organization’s work rules and 
employee benefits.
• Training must be distinguished from 
development. Training refers to educating 
technical and operational employees in how 
to do their current jobs better.
• Development is the term describing educating 
professionals and managers in the skills they 
need to do their jobs in the future. Both 
training and development may be effected 
through on-the-job training methods and off-
the-job training methods.
9.5 Performance Appraisal
• Performance management is defined as a set 
of processes and managerial behaviors that 
involve defining, monitoring, measuring, 
evaluating, and providing consequences for 
performance expectations.186 It consists of 
four steps: (1) define performance, (2) monitor 
and evaluate performance, (3) review 
performance, and (4) provide consequences.
• Performance appraisal consists of assessing 
an employee’s performance and providing 
him or her with feedback. Appraisals are of 
two general types—objective and subjective.
• Two good reasons for having objective 
appraisals are that they measure results and 
they are harder to challenge legally. Objective 
appraisals are based on facts and are often 
numerical. An example is management 
by objectives.
• Subjective appraisals are based on a 
manager’s perceptions of an employee’s 
traits or behaviors. Trait appraisals are 
ratings of subjective attributes such as 
attitude and leadership. Behavioral 
appraisals measure specific, observable 
aspects of performance. Most performance 
appraisals are made by managers, but they 
may also be made by coworkers and 
subordinates, customers and clients, and 
employees themselves (self-appraisals). 
Sometimes all of these may be used, in a 
technique called the 360-degree 
assessment, in which employees are 
appraised not only by their managerial 
superiors but also by their peers, 
subordinates, and sometimes clients.
• In another evaluation technique, forced 
ranking performance review systems, all 

300 
PART 4 
Organizing
employees within a business unit are ranked 
against one another, and grades are 
distributed along some sort of bell curve.
• Performance feedback can be effected in two 
ways: (1) Formal appraisals are conducted at 
specific times throughout the year and are 
based on performance measures that have 
been established in advance. (2) Informal 
appraisals are conducted on an unscheduled 
basis and consist of less rigorous indications 
of employee performance.
9.6 Managing Promotions, Transfers, 
Disciplining, & Dismissals
• Managers must manage promotions, 
transfers, disciplining, and dismissals.
• In considering promotions, managers must be 
concerned about fairness, nondiscrimination, 
and other employees’ resentment.
• Transfers, or moving employees to a different 
job with similar responsibility, may take place 
in order to solve organizational problems, 
broaden managers’ experience, retain 
managers’ interest and motivation, and solve 
some employee problems.
• Poor-performing employees may need to be 
disciplined or demoted.
• Dismissals may consist of layoffs, 
downsizings, or firings.
9.7 The Legal Requirements of Human 
Resource Management
• Four areas of human resource law that any 
manager needs to be aware of are labor 
relations, compensation and benefits, health 
and safety, and equal employment 
opportunity.
• Labor relations are dictated in part by the 
National Labor Relations Board, which 
enforces procedures whereby employees may 
vote to have a union and for collective 
bargaining. Collective bargaining consists of 
negotiations between management and 
employees about disputes over 
compensation, benefits, working conditions, 
and job security.
• Compensation and benefits are covered by 
the Social Security Act of 1935 and the Fair 
Labor Standards Act, which established 
minimum wage and overtime pay regulations.
• Health and safety are covered by the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 
among other laws.
• Equal employment opportunity is covered 
by the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) 
Commission, whose job it is to enforce 
antidiscrimination and other employment-
related laws.
• Three important concepts covered by EEO 
are (a) discrimination, which occurs when 
people are hired or promoted—or denied 
hiring or promotion—for reasons not 
relevant to the job, such as skin color or 
national origin; (b) affirmative action, which 
focuses on achieving equality of opportunity 
within an organization; and (c) sexual 
harassment, which consists of unwanted 
sexual attention that creates an adverse work 
environment and which may be of two 
types—the quid pro quo type, which may 
cause direct economic injury, and the 
hostile environment type, in which the 
person being harassed experiences an 
offensive work environment.
• Another area of concern, though not covered 
by EEO laws, is bullying, repeated 
mistreatment by one or more perpetrators. 
Bullying is abusive physical, psychological, 
verbal, or nonverbal behavior that is 
threatening, humiliating, or intimidating.
9.8 Labor-Management Issues
• Labor unions are organizations of employees 
formed to protect and advance their 
members’ interests by bargaining with 
management over job-related issues.
• Workers organize by signing authorization 
cards designating a certain union as their 
bargaining agent, and if enough cards are 
signed, the National Labor Relations Board 
will recognize the union as the bargaining 
unit. If 50% of workers agree, the NLRB 
certifies the union as the workers’ exclusive 
representative. In negotiating a contract in 
collective bargaining, workers in the union 
must ratify the contract, after which union 
and management sign a negotiated labor-
management contract.
• Among the issues unions negotiate are the 
union security clause, which states that 
workers must join the union or at least pay 
benefits to it.
• The four types of workplaces are closed shop 
(now illegal), union shop, agency shop, and 
open shop. Twenty-two states have right-to-
work laws that prohibit employees from being 
required to join a union as a condition of 
employment.
• Unions also negotiate wage rates, including 
two-tier wage contracts, with newer 
employees being paid less, and cost-of-living 
(COLA) adjustments giving wages that 
increase with the cost of living. Sometimes 
unions must negotiate givebacks, in which 
employees give up previous wage or benefit 
gains in return for something else.
• To avoid strikes, labor-management 
disputes may be resolved through 
grievance procedures or through mediation 
or arbitration.

 
Human Resource Management 
CHAPTER 9 
301
 1. What is human resource management and its 
purpose, and what are the three concepts important 
to it?
 2. What is performance management, and what are the 
four steps in it?
 3. Explain the two steps in strategic human resource 
planning.
 4. What are the two types of recruiting and how do the 
three types of selection tools work?
 5. Differentiate among the three types of compensation.
 6. Describe orientation, training, and development.
 7. Explain the difference between objective and 
subjective performance appraisals and describe 
360-degree assessment, forced ranking, and formal 
versus informal performance feedback.
 8. What are the four areas of human resource law a 
manager needs to be aware of?
 9. Explain the concepts of discrimination, affirmative 
action, sexual harassment, and bullying.
 10. What are the principal labor-management issues?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
More Companies Rely on Proactive Human 
Resource Practices to Reduce Employee 
Turnover
U.S. Security Associates, Inc., which has a turnover 
rate of 22.84%, begins its effort to build a long-term 
workforce even before employees are hired. “A 
strong hiring process is a pivotal strategy in reducing 
key turnover liabilities. For our branch and district 
manager force, we implemented a variety of pre-
employment measures and tools to minimize our risk 
and loss considerably while also adding strong per-
formers to our organization,” says Manager of Orga-
nizational Development Jonathan Jones. “We use a 
combination of screening measurements and assess-
ments as part of the hiring process and map those 
results to our organization’s specific performance 
measures. In this way, we are obtaining useful infor-
mation as far as general performance indicators are 
concerned, as well as more specific performance in-
dicators that are linked to the competencies that 
drive our business.”
Once they are hired, U.S. Security Associates works 
to keep employees motivated to keep up the good 
work—and stay on its payroll. “In tandem with our 
rigorous hiring strategies, we tie strong incentives 
to performance. Our compensation is a ‘pay-for-
performance’ model in which actual performance dictates 
the majority of the total compensation,” says Jones. 
“This methodology internally ‘top-grades,’ or replaces 
low-performing managers with individuals more ca-
pable of achieving greater results, and assists in de-
creasing our turnover rate as we hire well and maintain 
our performers. The turnover we do have in this group 
is often favorable as it works to increase the caliber of 
our employees through this system.”
Special Attention Needed 
Immediately After Hiring
It is important to work to retain employees throughout 
their career, but never more so than in the first months 
after they are hired. These new employees you worked 
so hard to recruit have not yet committed to your 
company in those first days of employment. Aegis 
Media knows this and takes care to hold onto its new-
est employees in their earliest days with the organiza-
tion. “We have a program that engages new hires for 
the first 90 days to ensure they are navigating the or-
ganization efficiently and to ensure they have an expe-
rienced member of the team they can reach out to who 
is not their direct manager, but rather a peer,” says Ex-
ecutive Vice President and Chief Talent Officer Rose 
Zory. “This has proven to drive much better engage-
ment early on with the organization, and those who 
participate have a longer tenure with the company.”
The initial high level of attention Aegis Media gives its 
new employees is followed up with ongoing check-ins to 
make sure employees are getting what they need. “Under-
stand engagement with employees at all levels. We have 
been committed to surveying all employees annually to 
ensure we are listening to what is working and what needs 
attention,” says Zory. “We do a post-hiring survey after 
90 days and an exit survey with all voluntary leavers, as 
well. Understanding the reasons for people leaving the or-
ganization is key to managing your turnover proactively.”
Compete to Keep Star Employees
Vi, which owns, operates, and manages upscale senior 
living facilities across the United States, knows top tal-
ent in the nursing profession is in high demand. Never-
theless, the company has managed to sustain a turnover 
rate that continues to improve. “In 2012, Vi’s turnover 
Management in Action

302 
PART 4 
Organizing
was 21.8%, down from 24% in 2011. The average 
turnover in our industry ranges from 33% to as high as 
65 to 70%,” says Vice President of Human Resources 
and Learning Judy Whitcomb. “Vi is proud that our 
average employee tenure is 5.5 years.”
Whitcomb says Vi has a strategic retention plan that 
includes a variety of employee development plans that 
contribute to Vi’s high retention rate. “The nursing field 
in general is very competitive. Vi has put several pro-
grams in place to attract, retain, and engage the very 
best in nursing,” Whitcomb explains. “Besides a custom 
online university portal called E-Campus, designed with 
specific courses, resources, and tools for nurses, Vi of-
fers more than 500 free continuing education courses. In 
addition, Vi has created a comprehensive one-year nurse 
leadership development program for new and emerging 
nurse leaders. For employees early in their career, Vi of-
fers an annual Management Development Program.”
Balance Long- & Short-Term 
Retention Efforts
Jiffy Lube International also takes long-term develop-
ment seriously. The company offers certifications that 
prepare employees for a long career. The company has 
an online learning portal that is available to employees 
as early as their first day on the job. It offers a develop-
ment path for the next few years of employment should 
the worker decide to stick with the company. “The 10 
certifications in Jiffy Lube University have been re-
viewed by the American Council on Education (ACE) 
and determined to be worth seven hours of college 
credits,” says Manager of Learning and Development 
Ken Barber.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. What specific human resource practices are U.S. Se-
curity Associates, Aegis Media, Vi, and Jiffy Lube 
using to recruit and retain high-quality employees?
 2. Why do you think the practices and programs used at 
these companies are helping to reduce turnover? Ex-
plain your logic.
 3. To what extent does the size of a company influence 
the ability to implement the type of practices being 
used by these five companies? Explain.
 4. Based on what you learned in this chapter, can you 
think of any additional HR practices that might be 
used to reduce turnover? Discuss.
 5. What is your key takeaway from this case?
Source: Excerpted from Margery Weinstein, “No More Revolving 
Door,” Training, July/August 2013, pp. 50–53.
How Would You Accommodate a Pregnant 
Employee?
This challenge is based on an actual case involving 
Anycia Grady, a social worker in the area of Cleve-
land, Ohio. After becoming pregnant, she worried that 
the stress of her 12-hours-a-day job might negatively 
impact her baby. She decided to consult her doctor.
Her doctor advised her to cut her workload to 
eight hours a day: The doctor wrote a note to her employer 
to confirm this conclusion. The doctor was concerned 
because research shows that “maternal stress in the 
early months of pregnancy can affect fetal brain de-
velopment and can lead to low birth weight and pre-
term labor,” according to a research report.
Anycia told her manager, “I am so overwhelmed 
and have so much anxiety over the health of my baby.” 
He told her that it would be very difficult for her to 
cover her case load in eight hours. Anycia concluded 
“I had two choices: keep my current pay and put my 
baby at risk, or do what I need to do to protect my 
baby and take the pay cut.”
The situation got worse after the first ultrasound. 
Her baby was not growing according to expectations, 
and was not moving. Ms. Grady was forced into a 
choice of losing income or doing what was best for her 
baby. She decided to see her manager and take control 
of the situation. She told her boss, “I am cutting my 
hours, and you can tell me later if it affects my pay.”
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
What would you do if you were Anycia Grady’s manager?
 1. I would allow her to work eight hours a day, and I 
would not cut her salary. I then would reallocate 
some of her cases to other social workers.
 2. I would allow her to work eight hours a day, but I 
would cut her salary accordingly. She should only 
get paid for the hours she works.
 3. I would try to find another less stressful job that she 
could perform. If none were available, then I would 
give her two choices: (1) cut your hours and pay to 
whatever you desire or (2) take a leave of absence.
 4. Invent other options. Explain.
Source: This case is based on A. Fox, “Great Expectations,” HR 
Magazine, February 2014, pp. 23–28.
Legal/Ethical Challenge


Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
10.1 The Nature of Change in Organizations
Major Question: Since change is always with us, what should 
I understand about it?
10.2 Types & Models of Change
Major Question: What are three types of change, and how are 
Lewin’s and Kotter’s approaches designed to handle change?
10.3 Organizational Development: What It Is, What 
It Can Do
Major Question: What are the uses of OD, and how effective 
is it?
10.4 Promoting Innovation within the Organization
Major Question: What do I need to know to encourage 
innovation?
10.5 The Threat of Change: Managing Employee Fear 
& Resistance
Major Question: How are employees threatened by change, 
and how can I help them adjust?
Organizational Change 
& Innovation
Lifelong Challenges for the 
Exceptional Manager
10

We live in what Tom Peters calls Discontinuous Times, or 
“a brawl with no rules,” where dealing with change is an 
ongoing challenge for every manager.1 “The one con-
stant factor in business today is we live in a perpetual 
hurricane season,” says Mellon Bank Corp. vice chair-
man Martin McGuinn. “A leader’s job is less about get-
ting through the current storm and more about enabling 
people to navigate the ongoing series of storms.”2
For instance, speed is emerging as the ultimate 
competitive weapon. “Some of the world’s most suc-
cessful companies,” says one writer, “are proving to 
be expert at spotting new opportunities, marshaling 
their forces, and bringing to market new products or 
services in a flash.”3 Speed is being driven by a new 
innovation imperative. “Competition is more intense 
than ever,” he continues, “because of the rise of the 
Asian powerhouses and the spread of disruptive new 
Internet technologies and business models.”
Managing for innovation and change takes a care-
ful hand. “Even when their jobs depend on adopting 
and inventing new maneuvers,” says columnist Carol 
Hymowitz, “most workers hold fast to old ones.”4
Four ways to deal with change and innovation:5
Allow Room for Failure
“If somebody has an idea, don’t stomp on it,” says 
a psychologist and developer of ideas at Intuit, the soft-
ware company famous for TurboTax and QuickBooks. 
“It’s more important to get the stupidest idea out there 
and build on it than not to have it in the first place.”6
Give One Consistent Explanation for the Change
When a company is undergoing change, myriad ru-
mors will fly, so you and your managers need to give 
one consistent explanation. In McGuinn’s case, the 
explanation for overhauling Mellon Bank’s retail 
division was “We want to be the best retailer in 
financial services.”
Look for Opportunities in Unconventional Ways
Most “new” products and services are really knock-
offs or marginal variations of the things already on 
the market and hence are doomed to failure, says 
Robert Cooper, professor of marketing at Ontario’s 
McMaster University. 
This doesn’t mean, of course, that there isn’t room 
for leveraging existing products with utterly unoriginal 
ideas. But most people are blinded by the limits of con-
ventional wisdom and their own experience and fail to 
see huge potential markets in unconventional concepts. 
Try this advice from a Yale entrepreneurship instruc-
tor: Write down every hassle you encounter during the 
day. “At the end of the month, you will have 20 business 
ideas,” he says, “and some of them will work.”7
Have the Courage to Follow Your Ideas
This may be the hardest job of all—trying to con-
vince others that your ideas for change are feasible, 
especially if the ideas are radical. This may mean 
working to gain allies within the organization, 
standing up to intimidating competitors inside and 
out, and perhaps being prepared to follow a lonely 
course for a long time.8
For Discussion If you were going to instill a culture 
of innovation in a company you worked for, what 
kinds of things would you do?
the manager’s toolbox
Managing for Innovation & Change Takes a Careful Hand
forecast
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
In this chapter, we consider the nature of change in organizations, including the two 
types of change—reactive and proactive—and the forces for change originating outside 
and inside the organization. Next we explore types and models of change. We then dis-
cuss organizational development, a set of techniques for implementing planned change. 
We describe how to promote innovation within an organization. Finally, we discuss how 
you can manage employee fear and resistance.

10.1 
The Nature of Change in Organizations
Since change is always with us, what should I understand about it?
THE BIG PICTURE
Two types of change are reactive and proactive. Forces for change may consist of forces outside the 
organization—demographic characteristics; technological advancements; shareholder, customer and 
market changes; and social and political pressures. Or they may be forces inside the organization—
human resources concerns and managers’ behavior.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
People are generally uncomfortable about change, even change in apparently minor 
matters. Philosopher Eric Hoffer told how as a younger man he spent a good part of 
one year as an agricultural worker picking peas, starting in Southern California in 
January and working his way northward. He picked the last of the peas in June, then 
moved to another area where, for the first time, he was required to pick string beans.
“I still remember,” he wrote, “how hesitant I was that first morning as I was about 
to address myself to the string bean vines. Would I be able to pick string beans? Even 
the change from peas to string beans had in it elements of fear.”9
If small changes can cause uneasiness, large changes can cause considerable 
stress—but they are often necessary for a company’s survival.
Fundamental Change: What Will You Be Called 
on to Deal With?
“It is hard to predict, especially the future,” physicist Niels Bohr is supposed to 
have quipped.
But it is possible to identify and prepare for the future that has already happened, in 
the words of management theorist Peter Drucker, by looking at some of the fundamental 
changes that are happening now.10 
Declining population in developed countries. More diversity in the workforce. 
China becoming the second-largest economic power. The ascent of knowledge work. 
Increased globalization. Awareness of climate change and need for sustainability. The 
rise of business-to-business (B2B) technology. Cloud storage, Big Data, and data 
analytics. New collaborative technologies. On-demand media. Capturing of customer-
specific information. Customization of mass goods. Instant-gratification shopping. 
Sales in the form of auctions instead of fixed prices.11
Beyond these overarching trends there are also some supertrends shaping the future of 
business: (1) the marketplace is becoming more segmented; (2) competitors offering spe-
cialized solutions require we get our products to market faster; (3) some companies are 
unable to survive disruptive innovation; (4) offshore suppliers are changing the way we 
work; and (5) knowledge, not information, is becoming the new competitive advantage.
1. The Marketplace Is Becoming More Segmented & Moving toward 
More Niche Products 
In the recent past, managers could think in terms of mass 
markets—mass communication, mass behavior, and mass values. Now we have “de-
massification,” with customer groups becoming segmented into smaller and more spe-
cialized groups responding to more narrowly targeted commercial messages.
“Our culture and economy are increasingly shifting away from a focus on a rela-
tively small number of hits (mainstream products and markets) . . . and moving toward 
a huge number of niches,” says Chris Anderson in The Long Tail. “In an era without 
the constraints of physical shelf space and other bottlenecks of distribution, narrowly 
targeted goods and services can be as economically attractive as mainstream fare.”12
Or, as the book’s subtitle states, “the future of business is selling less of more.”
306 
PART 4 
Organizing

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
307
Virgin train. A brainchild of 
British multiple entrepreneur 
Richard Branson, Virgin Trains 
was launched in 1997 to 
provide long-distance 
passenger services in the 
United Kingdom. Among 
Branson’s many companies, 
400 derivatives in all: Virgin 
Records, Virgin Mobile, Virgin 
Cola, Virgin Vodka, and Virgin 
Galactic (for space tourism). 
Branson’s entrepreneurial 
approach: “Think, what’s the 
most amazing way to do it?” 
What’s your motto?
Example: In the Internet Age, retailers like Amazon and Apple are 
not constrained by physical shelf space and can offer consumers a 
much wider variety of products, yet small sales, one or two rather than 
millions of items at a time, can produce big profits.
2. More Competitors Are Offering Targeted Products, Re-
quiring Faster Speed-to-Market 
Companies offering a broad 
range of products or services are now experiencing intense pressure 
from competitors offering specialized solutions—and beating them to 
the punch by devising novel speed-to-market strategies.
Example: Virgin Group Ltd., headed by Sir Richard Branson, is 
known mainly for its music and airline businesses, but it has entered 
several new businesses one after the other—mobile phones, credit cards, hotels, games, 
trains, even space travel—and very quickly. Virgin Comics, aimed at India’s multibillion-
dollar comics market, went from idea to public announcement in less than 11 months.
3. Some Traditional Companies May Not Survive Radical Change 
In The 
Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail, Clayton M. 
Christensen, a Harvard Business School professor, argues that when successful com-
panies are confronted with a giant technological leap that transforms their markets, all 
choices are bad ones.
Indeed, he thinks, it’s very difficult for an existing successful company to take full 
advantage of a technological breakthrough such as digitalization—what he calls 
disruptive innovation, a process by which a product or service takes root initially in 
simple applications at the bottom of a market and then relentlessly moves up mar-
ket, eventually displacing established competitors.13
Lower-level managers are rarely rewarded for telling powerful senior executives 
that a competitive advantage is fading away, adds Columbia Business School professor 
Rita Gunther McGrath. “Better to shore up an existing advantage for as long as possible, 
until the pain becomes so obvious there is no choice. That’s what happened at . . . 
Nokia, Kodak, and a host of other firms that got themselves into terrible trouble.”14
Radical Change: The Fall of the BlackBerry
In 2009, Finnish phone maker Nokia’s BlackBerry held first 
place in world market share for cell phones—so popular it was 
nicknamed the CrackBerry. Four years later, it had gone from 
dominance to also-ran, falling far behind Apple and Samsung.15
“BlackBerry had a huge installed base,” says one knowledge-
able observer, “and they were afraid to walk away from it.”16
Nokia Refocuses. In 2014 the company sold its phone handset 
business to Microsoft and announced it was focusing on three 
areas: (1) its core mobile telecommunications infrastructure busi-
ness, which accounts for 90% of Nokia’s revenue; (2) its digital 
mapping business, with which it hopes to map the world digitally; 
and (3) its research and intellectual property teams.17
YOUR CALL
Nokia’s mobile telecom business faces competition from large 
carriers that are upgrading to high-speed cell-phone equipment 
and its mapping business will be competing with similar efforts 
from Apple and Google; it is unclear how the research and in-
tellectual unit will use its expertise in the future. Do you think 
the new strategy will work?
EXAMPLE
4. China, India, & Other Offshore Suppliers Are Changing the Way 
We Work 
As we said in Chapter 2, globalization and outsourcing are trans-
forming whole industries and changing the way we work. China, India, Mexico, the 
Philippines, and other countries offer workers and even professionals willing to 
work twice as hard for half the pay, giving American businesses substantial 
labor savings. While unquestionably some American jobs are lost, others become 

308 
PART 4 
Organizing
more productive, with some engineers and salespeople, for example, being liber-
ated from routine tasks so that they can spend more time innovating and dealing 
with customers.
Example: Querétaro is not a place students would probably go for spring break, 
but it has become known for something not normally associated with Mexico: air-
craft construction. American aircraft makers from Bombardier to Cessna Aircraft to 
Hawker Beechcraft have various kinds of subassembly work here, where wages are 
lower but skill levels are not.18 
But if some manufacturing jobs have moved cross-border, dozens of foreign man-
ufacturers in aerospace, chemicals, and other industries are bringing jobs to the 
United States. British-based Rolls-Royce, for instance, makes engine parts in Vir-
ginia. Siemens, a German company, makes power-plant turbines in North Carolina.19
Overseas firms also now look to the United States for talented workers in technol-
ogy, finance, and research.20
5. Knowledge, Not Information, Is Becoming the New Competitive 
Advantage 
“Information is rapidly becoming a profitless commodity, and 
knowledge is becoming the new competitive advantage,” says San Diego manage-
ment consultant Karl Albrecht.21 
That is, as information technology does more of the work formerly done by 
humans, even in high-tech areas (such as sorting data for relevance), many low-
level employees previously thought of as knowledge workers are now being recog-
nized as “data workers,” who contribute very little added value to the processing 
of information. Unlike routine information handling, knowledge work is analytic 
and involves problem solving and abstract reasoning—exactly the kind of thing 
required of skillful managers, professionals, salespeople, and financial analysts. 
As futurists Alvin and Heidi Toffler suggest, knowledge work drives the future and 
creates wealth.22
Example: Many back-office systems and functions—those the customer does not 
see, such as inventory management and accounts payable—are rapidly being out-
sourced. Indeed, even some tasks of software engineers and other technical experts are 
also being sent overseas.
Two Types of Change: Reactive versus Proactive
Most CEOs, general managers, and senior public-sector leaders agree that incremental 
changes are no longer sufficient in a world that is operating in fundamentally different 
ways. Life in general, they say, is becoming more complex and the firms that are able 
to manage that complexity are the ones that will survive in the long term.23 Clearly, we 
are all in for an interesting ride.
As a manager, you will typically have to deal with two types of change: reactive 
and proactive.
1. Reactive Change: Responding to Unanticipated Problems & Opportunities 
When managers talk about “putting out fires,” they are talking about reactive 
change, making changes in response to problems or opportunities as they arise. 
A good example is how grocers and government officials responded in 2012 to so-
cial media’s depiction of “pink slime,” a beef additive. Although the product had been 
safely used for years as a way to make ground beef leaner, social media frenzy caused 
people to fear its use in our food. This in turn led some grocers to stop using the prod-
uct and a loss of jobs for people producing it. The U.S. Department of Agriculture and 
governors from five states responded by starting a public relations campaign to dis-
credit the erroneous information being promoted to the public.24

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
309
Reactive Change: The BP Gulf of Mexico Blowout
Proactive Change: Disney World Gets Out Front with Its MagicBand
Crises can happen quickly and without warning, and many 
companies have shown they don’t deal with them well, as hap-
pened with Toyota’s and GM’s slow reactions in recalling de-
fective vehicles. But for oil giant BP (formerly British Petroleum), 
the crisis was catastrophic—both for itself and most certainly 
for the United States.25
Crisis in the Gulf of Mexico. In April 2010, an explosion on the 
BP drilling platform Deepwater Horizon in the Gulf of Mexico 
led to sinking of the rig, loss of 11 lives, and the largest oil spill 
ever to happen in U.S. waters. Oil wells have emergency shut-
off valves called blowout preventers, which can be triggered 
from the rig. The Deepwater Horizon, which floated 5,000 feet 
above the ocean floor, was equipped with this device, which 
nearly always works when wells surge out of control. However, 
it failed to operate on the day of the Gulf accident.
And what the rig did not have was a backup shutoff switch, 
a remote-control device that carries an acoustic signal through 
the water that can be activated as a last resort. Such acoustic 
backup triggers, which cost about $500,000, are not mandated 
by U.S. regulators, but they also haven’t been tested under 
real-world conditions, because major offshore oil-well blow-
 Even big companies in the constantly changing landscape of 
California’s Silicon Valley are nervous. “Everyone is trying to 
position themselves for the new style of information technol-
ogy,” says Hewlett-Packard CEO Meg Whitman. “The fittest will 
survive.”29
The Game Changer. Across the country in Orlando, Florida, 
however, the Walt Disney Company is taking a giant proac-
tive stride: investing $1 billion into a wearable technology 
that it hopes will revolutionize the way visitors spend money 
at Walt Disney World. It begins with the MyMagic+ vacation-
planning system, which features a website (“My Disney Ex-
perience”) and data-collecting wristbands (“MagicBands”) 
that interact with scanners throughout the 40-square-mile 
theme park.
“Because it is a reservation system, it is a game changer,” 
says a professor who teaches theme-park management. “Now 
outs are so rare. (Even so, Norway and Brazil require them, and 
some major oil companies, such as Royal Dutch Shell, carry 
them even when not mandated.)
BP Reacts. As 2.5 million gallons of oil a day leaked from the 
open wellhead, the question was asked: Why wasn’t BP pre-
pared for such an accident? Eventually they capped the leak, 
but in the aftermath BP pled guilty to federal felony charges 
and environmental-law violations and was forced to sell almost 
$40 billion in assets to meet its liabilities, a move that cut its 
number of wells and platforms in half.26 Four years later, it was 
still trying to settle with thousands of gulf victims, from shrimp-
ers to hotel owners—and deal with many dubious claims of 
businesses hundreds of miles from the Gulf, including a Florida 
escort service.27
YOUR CALL
The BP blowout happened 21 years after the tanker Exxon 
Valdez’s catastrophic 1989 oil spill in the Gulf of Alaska, the 
effects of which are still being felt. Wasn’t that enough time for 
oil companies to plan for major accidents? What should BP 
have done?
you can plan your vacation and your ride sequence well ahead 
of your trip.”30 For instance, you can “prebook front-of-the-line 
access to three rides, parades, or [Disney cartoon] character 
meet-and-greets,” says writer Brooks Barnes. To buy food and 
merchandise, you just stand at the register and swipe your 
wristband. The MagicBand also functions as a hotel room key, 
parking claim, and VIP access (so that Disney employees will 
greet you by name). Says Barnes, “Disney thinks people will 
spend more money and time at the [park] if they find it easier 
to navigate.”31
Creeped Out? During testing of the system, Disney found it 
could accommodate 3,000 additional daily guests and that use 
of the FastPass reservation system had increased 40%, freeing 
people from standing in line and increasing their number of 
experiences. Of course, data security will be paramount to the 
system’s success. “The MagicBands run the risk of alienating 
EXAMPLE
EXAMPLE
2. Proactive Change: Managing Anticipated Problems & Opportunities 
In contrast to reactive change, proactive change, or planned change, involves making 
carefully thought-out changes in anticipation of possible or expected problems or 
opportunities.28

310 
PART 4 
Organizing
As we’ve stated, change can be hard, and the tools for survival are flexibility and 
adaptability. We also know that organizations like to hire people who are flexible and 
willing to accept change. How well do you think you fare in this regard? You can find 
out by taking Self-Assessment 10.1.
guests by creeping them out,” says one writer. “Some people 
have likened the MyMagic+ program to spying.”32
YOUR CALL
Disney hopes that the technology will give people the flexibility 
to visit multiple Disney parks in a single day and keep them 
from going to competing Central Florida parks, such as Univer-
sal Orlando Resort. 
Do you think Disney is on to something? Could the technology 
be applied to zoos, Las Vegas resorts, and other venues, as the 
company hopes? How?
Assessing Your Attitudes toward Change at Work
The following survey was designed to assess your attitudes 
toward change at work. Go to connect.mheducation.com and 
take Self-Assessment 10.1. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
Where do you stand when it comes to your attitude 
toward change? Are you surprised by the results?
2. 
Based on your three lowest scoring survey items, 
how might you foster a more positive attitude toward 
change? Be specific.
3. 
What type of questions might a recruiter ask you 
during an interview to assess your attitude toward 
change? What would be your response to these 
questions?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 10.1
®
The Forces for Change: Outside & Inside 
the Organization
How do managers know when their organizations need to change? The answers aren’t 
clear-cut, but you can get clues by monitoring the forces for change—both outside and 
inside the organization. (See Figure 10.1, opposite page.)
Forces Originating Outside the Organization 
External forces consist of four 
types, as follows.
1. Demographic Characteristics Earlier we discussed the demographic changes 
occurring among U.S. workers, with the labor force becoming more diverse. Example: 
So-called Millennials (those born after 1980) are vastly different from their parents in 
their views on everything from technology to politics to marriage to tattoos.33
2. Technological Advancements 
Technology is not just computer technology; 
it is any machine or process that enables an organization to gain a competitive advan-
tage in changing materials used to produce a finished product. Technology may be one 
of the greatest forces for productivity in our lifetime, as when social media (LinkedIn, 
Facebook), used by 98% of recruiters, makes finding employees more efficient.34 
But technology can also create real headaches, as when illegal copycats overseas 
use it to make pirated versions of American products, such as U.S. movies still in the-
aters.35 Another example: Plastic corks and screw tops for wine bottles are severely 
affecting Portugal, which produces some 52% of the world’s natural cork.36

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
311
Demographic characteristics
• 
Age
• 
Education
• 
Skill level
• 
Gender
• 
Immigration
Technological advancements
• 
Manufacturing automation
• 
Information technology
Shareholder, customer, & market changes
• 
Changing customer preferences
• 
Domestic & international competition
• 
Mergers & acquisitions
Social & political pressures
• 
War
• 
Values
• 
Leadership
Outside Forces
Human resources concerns
• 
Unmet needs
• 
Job dissatisfaction
• 
Absenteeism & turnover
• 
Productivity
• 
Participation/suggestions
Managers’ behavior
• 
Conflict
• 
Leadership
• 
Reward systems
• 
Structural reorganization
Inside Forces
THE NEED FOR CHANGE
FIGURE 10.1
Forces for change outside 
and inside the organization
Technology Creates the Sharing Economy: Airbnb, Uber, & . . . DogVacay?
The sharing economy, also known as collaborative or peer-to-
peer marketplaces, is a technological variation on past behav-
ior in which people who knew each other, such as kin and 
neighbors within communities, offered goods and services to 
one another. What is different about today’s sharing economy is 
that ordinary people can now share, with the help of the Inter-
net and wide use of credit cards, their residences (which 
Airbnb effectively turns into hotel rooms), their personal cars 
(which Uber turns into taxis), or their skills (such as pet care, 
through DogVacay, with strangers boarding pets for a fee).37
Home Hotels. In San Francisco in 2007, jobless industrial design-
ers Brian Chesky and Joe Gebbia, wondering how to make the 
rent, realized that a major design conference was about to be 
held in the city and that hotel rooms would be scarce. Gebbia had 
three air mattresses and suggested turning their apartment into 
an “air bed and breakfast.” Within three days they had a quicky 
website up and had booked three guests, each paying about $70 
for several nights.38 
Thus was born Airbnb, which today is valued at $10 bil-
lion—more than Hyatt Hotels or Wyndham Worldwide—and 
earns 12% fees on 60,000 bookings a night around the globe. 
Accommodations range from an $18 shared downtown living 
room to castles in Europe.39
Sharing Closets, Food, & More. In New York City, where closets 
are scarce, Jennifer Lee founded ClosetDash for swapping clothes. 
DogVacay in Los Angeles matches pet owners with pet sitters. 
HiGear is a luxury car-sharing venture that offers users a chance to 
drive around in a Mercedes or Alfa Romeo. Mealku is an online 
cooperative of homemade food, founded by Ted D’Cruz-Young, in 
which members paying $10 a month share food they prepare.40
YOUR CALL
The heart of the sharing economy is trust and quality con-
trol—made possible mainly by online reviews or reputation 
systems, mechanisms that establish ratings and feedback 
to help potential buyers choose reputable providers. “We’re 
removing bad actors from industry after industry,” says 
D’Cruz-Young. 
What do you think will be the effect of these collaborative 
marketplaces on established industries?
EXAMPLE

312 
PART 4 
Organizing
A world changer? Before it was rolled out in 2001, tech world pundits predicted that the 
Segway, the battery-powered two-wheeled scooter, would revolutionize society. Although it 
has not lived up to such high expectations, it has found success in law enforcement, private 
security, helping disabled vets—and transporting tourists, such as Lina Nilson, shown here 
in Cannes, France. Can you think of other forms of technology that did not realize the high 
hopes predicted for them?
3. Shareholder, Customer, & Market Changes Shareholders have begun to 
be more active in pressing for organizational change. Insurance company Aflac, for 
example, became the first U.S. company to allow shareholders to have a say on execu-
tive pay.41
Customers are also becoming more demanding, being more inclined to take their 
business elsewhere if they do not get what they want from a given company, so that 
now firms such as General Motors and McDonald’s actively collect information about 
customer preferences and try to address them in their new products.
The global economy has forced U.S. companies to change the way they do busi-
ness, with Walmart, for example, stepping up its expansion into overseas markets.42 
The Great Recession also drastically affected many organizations.
Example: Second-hand shops suffered from a recession-induced decline in thrift 
store donations, even as consumer demand for used goods went through the roof.43
4. Social & Political Pressures Social events can create great pressures. 
Example: Poor lifestyle choices have led to nearly 70% of U.S. adults being over-
weight or obese, which in turn has produced an increase in several types of cancer that 
are weight related. These health-related problems and their associated costs have 
prompted organizations to find ways of helping employees adopt more healthy lifestyles.
Forces Originating Inside the Organization 
Internal forces affecting organi-
zations may be subtle, such as low job satisfaction, or more dramatic, such as constant 
labor-management conflict. Internal forces may be of the two following types: human 
resources concerns and managers’ behavior.
1. Human Resources Concerns Is there a gap between the employees’ needs 
and desires and the organization’s needs and desires? Job dissatisfaction—as expressed 
through high absenteeism and turnover—can be a major signal of the need for change. 
Organizations may respond by addressing job design, reducing employees’ role con-
flicts, and dealing with work overload, to mention a few matters.
Example: As the recent deep recession lingered on, employees in many organiza-
tions became stressed out from months of dealing with layoff concerns, wage cuts, or 
scaled-back hours, requiring managers to hold meetings and change 
hiring practices to alleviate their worries.44
2. Managers’ Behavior Excessive conflict between managers 
and employees is another indicator that change is needed. Perhaps 
there is a personality conflict, so that an employee transfer may be 
needed. Or perhaps some interpersonal training is required. There 
may also be conflict between managers and their superiors, as be-
tween a CEO and his or her board of directors.
Example: “New managers tend to struggle when dealing with 
regular, day-to-day issues, like people on the team who don’t meet 
deadlines,” says Vicki Foley, a director of a career consulting firm.45 
One solution is to become a “servant leader” (discussed in Chapter 14), 
seeing yourself as someone who helps others do their jobs, fixing 
problems and giving employees the tools they need. ●

10.2 Types & Models of Change
What are three types of change, and how are Lewin’s and Kotter’s approaches 
designed to handle change?
THE BIG PICTURE
This section discusses the three types of change, from least threatening to most threatening: adaptive, 
innovative, and radically innovative. It also describes Lewin’s three-stage change model: unfreezing, 
changing, and refreezing. Finally, it describes Kotter’s eight steps for leading organizational change, 
which can be linked to Lewin’s three stages.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
313
As we mentioned in Section 10.1, change may be forced upon an organization—
reactive change, requiring you to make adjustments in response to problems or oppor-
tunities as they arise. Or an organization may try to get out in front of changes—proactive 
change, or planned change, which involves making carefully thought-out changes in 
anticipation of possible problems or opportunities.
As a manager, particularly one working for an American organization, you may be pres-
sured to provide short-term, quick-fix solutions. But when applied to organizational prob-
lems, this approach usually doesn’t work: Quick-fix solutions have little staying power.
What, then, do we need to understand in order to effectively manage organizational 
change? In this section, we discuss the following:
■ 
Three kinds of change.
■ 
Lewin’s change model.
■ 
Kotter’s eight steps for leading organizational change.
Three Kinds of Change: From Least 
Threatening to Most Threatening
Whether organizational change is administrative or technological, it can be adaptive, 
innovative, or radically innovative, depending on (1) the degree of complexity, cost, 
and uncertainty and (2) its potential for generating employee resistance.46
Least Threatening: Adaptive Change—“We’ve Seen Stuff Like This Before” 
Adaptive change is reintroduction of a familiar practice—the implementation of a kind 
of change that has already been experienced within the same organization. This form 
of change is lowest in complexity, cost, and uncertainty. Because it is familiar, it is the 
least threatening to employees and thus will create the least resistance.
For example, during annual inventory week, a department store may ask its employ-
ees to work 12 hours a day instead of the usual 8. During tax-preparation time, the 
store’s accounting department may imitate this same change in work hours. Although 
accounting employees are in a different department from stockroom and sales employ-
ees, it’s expected they wouldn’t be terribly upset by the temporary change in hours 
since they’ve seen it in effect elsewhere in the store.
Somewhat Threatening: Innovative Change—“This Is Something New for 
This Company” 
Innovative change is the introduction of a practice that is new to 
the organization. This form of change involves moderate complexity, cost, and uncer-
tainty. It is therefore apt to trigger some fear and resistance among employees.
For example, should a department store decide to adopt a new practice of competi-
tors by staying open 24 hours a day, requiring employees to work flexible schedules, 
it may be felt as moderately threatening.

314 
PART 4 
Organizing
Very Threatening: Radically Innovative Change—“This Is a Brand-New 
Thing in Our Industry” 
Radically innovative change involves introducing a prac-
tice that is new to the industry. Because it is the most complex, costly, and uncertain, it 
will be felt as extremely threatening to managers’ confidence and employees’ job se-
curity and may well tear at the fabric of the organization.47
For example, a department store closing some of its brick-and-mortar operations 
and converting them to e-commerce—selling its goods on the Internet—may encoun-
ter great anxiety among its staff, especially those fearing being left behind.
Lewin’s Change Model: Unfreezing, 
Changing, & Refreezing
Most theories of organizational change originated with the landmark work of social 
psychologist Kurt Lewin. Lewin developed a model with three stages—unfreezing, 
changing, and refreezing—to explain how to initiate, manage, and stabilize planned 
change.48 (See Figure 10.2.)
Changing
New information,
models, &
procedures
New information,
models, &
procedures
Refreezing
Support &
reinforce the
change
Unfreezing
Create the
motivation
to change
FIGURE 10.2
Lewin’s model of change
1. “Unfreezing”: Creating the Motivation to Change 
In the unfreezing stage, 
managers try to instill in employees the motivation to change, encouraging them to let 
go of attitudes and behaviors that are resistant to innovation. For this “unfreezing” to 
take place, employees need to become dissatisfied with the old way of doing things. 
Managers also need to reduce the barriers to change during this stage.
Example: Wireless handheld computers—personal digital assistants (PDAs)—are 
becoming established tools for health professionals, who use them to access patient 
records in hospital information systems. How well have they been accepted? Studies 
exploring nurses’ perceptions about using PDAs in their daily patient practice found 
initial resistance, with some nurses concerned about the cost and short technological 
life cycle of these devices—the unfreezing stage.49
2. “Changing”: Learning New Ways of Doing Things 
In the changing 
stage, employees need to be given the tools for change: new information, new per-
spectives, new models of behavior. Managers can help here by providing bench-
marking results, role models, mentors, experts, and training. It’s advisable, experts 
say, to convey the idea that change is a continuous learning process, not just a 
one-time event.50
Example: In the changing stage, nurses learning PDAs were allowed to con-
tinue their manual patient-charting systems while learning the PDA-accessible 
versions, but only for a limited time to avoid adding to their already heavy work-
loads. They were assisted with educational programs to help them learn and imple-
ment the new technology, programs that also stressed the need to protect 
confidential patient records.

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
315
3. “Refreezing”: Making the New Ways Normal 
In the refreezing stage, em-
ployees need to be helped to integrate the changed attitudes and behavior into their 
normal ways of doing things. Managers can assist by encouraging employees to ex-
hibit the new change and then, through additional coaching and modeling, by reinforc-
ing the employees in the desired change, as we’ll discuss in Section 10.5.
Example: In the refreezing stage, as hospitals eliminated barriers that precluded the 
use of wireless networks, nurses learned to appreciate the usefulness of having a 
widely pervasive and portable technology, with its easier access to drug and diagnostic/
laboratory reference applications and improved communications.
Kotter’s Eight Steps for Leading 
Organizational Change
An expert in leadership and change management, John Kotter believes that, to be suc-
cessful, organizational change needs to follow eight steps to avoid the eight common 
errors senior management usually commits.51 These steps, shown below, correspond 
with Lewin’s unfreezing-changing-refreezing steps. (See Table 10.1.)
TABLE 10.1 
Steps to Leading Organizational Change
Source: Reprinted by permission of Harvard Business School Publishing. From Leading Change by J. P. Kotter, 1996. Copyright 1996 by the Harvard 
Business School Publishing Corporation; all rights reserved.
STEP 
DESCRIPTION
 1. Establish a sense of 
Unfreeze the organization by creating a compelling reason for why change is needed.
urgency.
 2. Create the guiding 
Create a cross-functional, cross-level group of people with enough power to lead the change.
coalition.
 3. Develop a vision and 
Create a vision and a strategic plan to guide the change process.
a strategy.
 4. Communicate the 
Create and implement a communication strategy that consistently communicates the new 
change vision.  
vision and strategic plan.
 5. Empower broad-based 
Eliminate barriers to change, and use target elements of change to transform the organization. 
action.  
Encourage risk taking and creative problem solving.
 6. Generate short-term 
Plan for and create short-term “wins” or improvements. Recognize and reward people who 
wins.  
contribute to the wins.
 7. Consolidate gains and 
The guiding coalition uses credibility from short-term wins to create more change. Additional 
produce more change.  
people are brought into the change process as change cascades throughout the organization. 
 
Attempts are made to reinvigorate the change process.
 8. Anchor new approaches 
Reinforce the changes by highlighting connections between new behaviors and processes and 
in the culture.  
organizational success. Develop methods to ensure leadership development and succession.
Steps 1–4 represent unfreezing: establish a sense of urgency, create the guiding 
coalition, develop a vision and strategy, and communicate the change vision.
Steps 5–7 represent the changing stage: empower broad-based action, generate 
short-term wins, and consolidate gains and produce more change.
Step 8, corresponding to refreezing, is to anchor new approaches in the organiza-
tion’s culture.

316 
PART 4 
Organizing
The value of Kotter’s steps is that they provide specific recommendations about 
behaviors that managers need to exhibit to successfully lead organizational change. It 
is important to remember that Kotter’s research reveals that it is ineffective to skip 
steps and that successful organizational change is 70%–90% leadership and only 
10%–30% management. Senior managers are thus advised to focus on leading rather 
than on managing change.52 ●
EXAMPLE
Kotter’s Steps in Organizational Change: Implementing an Electronic 
Health Record System
What if a health care manager is interested not in just getting 
nurses accustomed to using a PDA (personal digital assistant, a 
small electronic device for storing and organizing information) 
but getting an entire hospital staff converted to a changeover to 
an electronic health record (EHR) system? Robert James 
Campbell of East Carolina University proposes the following 
model, following Kotter’s eight-step approach.53
1. Establish a Sense of Urgency. How do you energize your 
medical colleagues to realize there’s a problem? One way, sug-
gests Campbell, “is to create a video presentation showing an 
angry parent whose daughter has died at the hospital because of 
a medical error that could have been prevented if the patient’s 
information was stored electronically rather than on paper.”
2. Create the Guiding Coalition. Individuals who would guide the 
change management project would be selected from physicians 
and other hospital staff members with relevant knowledge about 
health care industry challenges (including EHR implementation), 
credibility with peers, knowledge of their department’s opera-
tions, and the ability to communicate a vision and motivate others 
to achieve it (leadership).
3. Develop a Vision & a Strategy. The health care manager and 
team next need to frame a good vision statement with six or 
seven visions of the future, such as “What does it mean to be a 
paperless health care organization?” The vision and strategy 
should focus on how the change would improve service to pa-
tients and families and raise the urgency among staff members to 
motivate them to make the proposed changes a reality.
4. Communicate the Change Vision. A way to communicate the 
vision, says Campbell, is to create a “short, inexpensive video pre-
sentation showing an interview done with a patient injured by a 
medical error” to show how an EHR would reduce errors. Web-
casts could also be used to demonstrate to staff members how 
the EHR would improve patient care.
5. Empower Broad-Based Action. Using Kotter’s “see-feel-
change” method of altering organizational behavior, the change 
team can show reluctant staffers how an EHR chart can beat a 
paper chart in providing a patient’s history. Bonuses, raises, 
and promotions can also be given to individuals who embrace 
the change effort.
6. Generate Short-Term Wins. Empowered individuals need to 
clearly show that the change management project is succeeding 
by showing “short-term wins,” as in showing how quickly an order 
is fulfilled.
7. Consolidate Gains & Produce More Change. Once the new 
system “goes live” (is fully implemented), it’s up to the guiding 
coalition to resolve difficulties that arise among users through the 
creation of a special team called “red coats,” who are immedi-
ately dispatched to solve problems (as when a belligerent physi-
cian claims that the system is too difficult to use or is 
“malfunctioning again”).
8. Anchor New Approaches in the Culture. To make 
changes stick and embed the new technology within the orga-
nizational culture, the change team created a practice called 
“Focused Rounds,” in which an expert was sent on hospital 
rounds with a physician “to help physicians make more effi-
cient use of the system.”
YOUR CALL
Kotter’s eight steps don’t seem mysterious; however, depend-
ing on the size of the project or organization, they may require 
considerable effort. Could you apply them to something on your 
campus? For instance, in recent times, reducing concussions 
among athletes (such as football players) has been much in the 
news.54 If you were to start a campaign to reduce them in a 
particular sport on your campus, how would you apply Kotter’s 
methodology?

10.3 Organizational Development: What It Is, 
What It Can Do
What are the uses of OD, and how effective is it?
THE BIG PICTURE
Organizational development (OD) is a set of techniques for implementing change, such as managing conflict, 
revitalizing organizations, and adapting to mergers. OD has three steps: diagnosis, intervention, and evalua-
tion. Four factors have been found to make OD programs effective.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Organizational development (OD) is a set of techniques for implementing planned 
change to make people and organizations more effective. Note the inclusion of people 
in this definition. OD focuses specifically on people in the change process. Often OD 
is put into practice by a person known as a change agent, a consultant with a back-
ground in behavioral sciences who can be a catalyst in helping organizations deal with 
old problems in new ways.
What Can OD Be Used For?
OD can be used to address the following three matters:
1. Managing Conflict 
Conflict is inherent in most organizations. Sometimes an 
OD expert in the guise of an executive coach will be brought in to help advise an ex-
ecutive on how to improve relationships with others in the organization.
Example: The two co-founders of Network Appliance, a data-storage firm in Sunny-
vale, California, were feuding with each other because one founder couldn’t stick to his 
decisions, which drove the other founder crazy. An organizational behavior specialist 
began working with the warring executives in separate sessions to solve the problem.
2. Revitalizing Organizations 
Information technology is wreaking such change 
that nearly all organizations these days are placed in the position of having to adopt 
new behaviors in order to resist decline. OD can help by opening communication, fos-
tering innovation, and dealing with stress.
Example: Family doctors (primary care physicians) are paid relatively modestly 
compared with other physicians and also do a lot of work outside office visits—making 
phone calls, writing prescriptions, reading lab reports—for which they are not 
compensated. They will be affected even more heavily by the preventive-medicine 
orientation of the Affordable Care Act. By getting expert help in adopting electronic 
records and trying out pilot projects that compensate them for preventive and disease-
management work (not just office visits), such physicians can reduce their costs and 
increase their revenue significantly.55
3. Adapting to Mergers 
Mergers and acquisitions are associated with increased 
anxiety, stress, absenteeism, turnover, and decreased productivity.56 What is the orga-
nizational fit between two disparate organizations, such as American Airlines and US 
Airways, which merged in 2014? OD experts can help integrate two firms with vary-
ing cultures, products, and procedures.
How OD Works
Like physicians, OD managers and consultants follow a medical-like model. (Or, to use 
our more current formulation, they follow the rules of evidence-based management.) 
 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
317

318 
PART 4 
Organizing
They approach the organization as if it were a sick patient, using diagnosis, interven-
tion, and evaluation—“diagnosing” its ills, “prescribing” treatment or intervention, 
and “monitoring” or evaluating progress. If the evaluation shows that the procedure is 
not working effectively, the conclusions drawn are then applied (see feedback loop) to 
refining the diagnosis, and the process starts again. (See Figure 10.3.)
1. Diagnosis
What is the
problem?
2. Intervention
What shall we do
about it?
3. Evaluation
How well has
the intervention
worked?
worked?
Feedback
How can the 
diagnosis be
further refined?
FIGURE 10.3
The OD process
Sources: Adapted from W.L. 
French and C.H. Bell Jr., 
Organization Development: 
Behavioral Interventions for 
Organizational Improvement 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall. 1978); and E. G Huse and 
T. G. Cummings, Organizational 
Development and Change, 3rd ed. 
(St. Paul: West, 1985).
1. Diagnosis: What Is the Problem? 
To carry out the diagnosis, OD consul-
tants or managers use some combination of questionnaires, surveys, interviews, 
meetings, records, and direct observation to ascertain people’s attitudes and to identify 
problem areas.
2. Intervention: What Shall We Do about It? 
“Treatment” or intervention is 
the attempt to correct the diagnosed problems. Often this is done using the services of 
an OD consultant who works in conjunction with management teams. Some OD ac-
tivities for implementing planned change are communicating survey results to employ-
ees to engage them in constructive problem solving, observing employee 
communication patterns and teaching them skills to improve them, helping group 
members learn to function as a team, stimulating better cohesiveness among several 
work groups, and improving work technology or organizational design.
3. Evaluation: How Well Has the Intervention Worked? 
An OD program 
needs objective evaluation to see if it has done any good. Answers may lie in hard data 
about absenteeism, turnover, grievances, and profitability, which should be compared 
with earlier statistics. The change agent can use questionnaires, surveys, interviews, 
and the like to assess changes in employee attitudes.
EXAMPLE
Organizational Development: Using OD to Make Money 
in the Restaurant Business
“Restaurants are so focused on the day-to-day business,” says 
Eli Chait, “that they don’t have time to grow the business.”57
If you own or manage a restaurant, how can you improve 
your chances? You could hire a change agent such as Chait, 
now 26, who co-founded San Francisco–based Copilot Labs, 
a restaurant marketing analytics company, not long after 
graduating from the University of California, Berkeley.
Diagnosis: “What Is the Problem?” Organizational develop-
ment is often focused on “big wins” (such as merging two 

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
319
The Effectiveness of OD
Among organizations that have practiced organizational development are American 
Airlines, B.F. Goodrich, General Electric, Honeywell, ITT, Procter & Gamble, 
Prudential, Texas Instruments, and Westinghouse Canada—companies covering a 
variety of industries.
Research has found that OD is most apt to be successful under the following 
circumstances.
1. Multiple Interventions 
OD success stories tend to use multiple interventions. 
Goal setting, feedback, recognition and rewards, training, participation, and challeng-
ing job design have had good results in improving performance and 
satisfaction.62 Combined interventions have been found to work better 
than single interventions.63
2. Management Support 
OD is more likely to succeed when top 
managers give the OD program their support and are truly committed to 
the change process and the desired goals of the change program.64 Also, 
the expectations for change were not unrealistic.65
3. Goals Geared to Both Short- & Long-Term Results 
Change 
programs are more successful when they are oriented toward achieving 
both short-term and long-term results. Managers should not engage in or-
ganizational change for the sake of change. Change efforts should produce 
positive results.66
4. OD Is Affected by Culture 
OD effectiveness is affected by cross-
cultural considerations. Thus, an OD intervention that worked in one country 
should not be blindly applied to a similar situation in another country.67 ●
companies), but it can also be used in a small business like a 
restaurant where small or incremental wins are important. 
Thus, an owner might want to know: “Which is more effective—
promoting our happy hours or promoting our daily deals?” (A 
“happy hour” is a period, such as 5 to 7 p.m., when drinks are 
served at reduced prices or with free snacks. “Daily deals” are 
meals served at discounted prices, such as two meals for the 
price of one for a particular menu item; such deals are fre-
quently promoted by Groupon and similar marketing services.)
Intervention: “What Shall We Do about It?” Analyzing sales 
data over 19 months for one restaurant, Copilot found that, in 
Chait’s words, “happy hour contributes specifically to the hours of 
the day that are otherwise the slowest, driving critical off-peak 
[customer] traffic that is so important to restaurants. The deal 
traffic, however, is distributed across several periods of time, 
many of which are already busy,” making it less effective.58
Evaluation: “How Well Has the Intervention Worked?” The 
outcome would seem to be foreshadowed by Copilot’s re-
search, but it would be up to the change agent to evaluate an 
activity’s success when put into practice. There are all kinds 
of factors, after all, that can affect restaurant traffic. For in-
stance, more data doesn’t always translate into better cus-
tomer service.59 Some days are busier than others (Valentine’s 
Day—busy; Super Bowl Sunday—not busy; Mother’s Day—
depends on the restaurant), when a promotion wouldn’t be 
effective.60
YOUR CALL
One of the latest trends in business is “hyperlocal marketing”—
building a large, dedicated, loyal base of local customers.61
Do you think an organizational development approach can be 
helpful to this effort?
Team building. One technique 
for implementing change is 
team building. Teams are often 
diverse in gender, age, ethnicity, 
and educational background 
and experience. Would you 
prefer to work with a highly 
diverse team of people?

10.4 Promoting Innovation within the Organization
What do I need to know to encourage innovation?
THE BIG PICTURE
Innovation may be a product innovation or a process innovation, a core (incremental) innovation or a trans-
formational (radical) innovation. Two myths about innovation are that it happens in a “Eureka!” moment 
and that it can be systematized. Ways to encourage innovation are by providing the organizational culture, 
the people, the resources, and the reward system. To make innovation happen, you need to recognize 
problems and opportunities, gain allies, overcome employee resistance, and execute well.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
If invention is creating or making up something new and creativity is the act of devel-
oping new and imaginative ideas into reality, innovation is something else. Innovation,
as we’ve said earlier in the book, is the activity of creating new ideas and converting 
them into useful applications—specifically new goods and services.
“You need creativity and invention,” says Procter & Gamble CEO A. G. Lafley, “but 
until you can connect the creativity to the customer in the form of a product or service 
that meaningfully changes their lives, I would argue you don’t have innovation.”68 The 
spirit of innovation is essential to keeping an organization vital and in maintaining a 
competitive advantage. Otherwise, the innovation will come from your competitors, 
forcing you to scramble to catch up—if you can.
Innovation is more likely to occur when organizations have the proper culture, re-
sources, and reward systems to support it. We now take a closer look into innovation 
and how it can be encouraged within organizations.
How Does Failure Impede Innovation?
“You learn more from failure than you do from success,” says Lafley, “but the key is to 
fail early, fail cheaply, and don’t make the same mistake twice.”69 Lafley, who doubled 
sales and quadrupled profits for P&G, admits to having had “my fair share of failure. 
But you have to get past the disappointment and blame and really understand what 
happened and why it happened.”70
Lafley is comfortable with the idea of learning from failure, but many people are not. 
They’re reluctant to experiment, they blame others, they refuse to recognize that not all 
failures are of equal seriousness. All of these can detract from an organization’s ability to 
learn from its mistakes, as the table at left indicates. (See Table 10.2.)
Two Myths about Innovation
Two myths about innovation that need to be dispelled are the following:
Myth No. 1: Innovation Happens in a “Eureka!” Moment 
Many people think 
that innovation often happens like a bolt from the blue. In this view, innovation happens 
as a “Eureka!” or “Aha!” moment of discovery, like the instant revelation about the law 
of gravity supposedly experienced by Sir Isaac Newton under a tree when an apple fell 
on his head. Most of the time, however, innovation is the product of hard work and dedi-
cation, “forged by a mixed bag of coworkers from up, down, and across an organization, 
sitting and wrangling it out in the trenches,” in the words of Jack and Suzy Welch.71
Myth No. 2: Innovation Can Be Systematized 
Lots of people also believe 
that innovation can be systematized—made a codified and standardized process that 
can be designed to always yield fruitful results. Obviously, if this could be done, many 
320 
PART 4 
Organizing
Source: Adapted from A. C. 
Edmondson, “Strategies for 
Learning from Failure,” Harvard 
Business Review, April 2011, 
pp. 151–176. 
TABLE 10.2
Factors That Reduce an 
Organization’s Ability to 
Learn from Failure
EMPLOYEES . . .
 1. Play the “blame game,” 
blaming an individual 
when failures are due 
to internal or external 
matters
 2. Suffer “self-serving 
bias”
 3. Don’t recognize failures 
are not created equal; 
some may be 
preventable, some 
uncontrollable
 4. Are afraid to discuss 
failures and take risks; 
the company isn’t a 
learning organization
 5. Are reluctant to 
experiment

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
321
companies would be doing it. The problem with innovation, however, is that there are 
too many challenges associated with it, which makes success unpredictable, although 
it’s possible to establish cultural and other conditions (as discussed next) that increase 
the likelihood of a payoff.
The Seeds of Innovation: Starting Point 
for Experimentation & Inventiveness
Former Microsoft employee Scott Berkun, author of The Myths of Innovation, has 
identified six seeds of innovation, the starting point for organizational innovation. They 
are as follows:72
 1. Hard work in a specific direction.  Most innovations come from dedicated 
people diligently working to solve a well-defined problem, hard work that can 
span many years.
 2. Hard work with direction change.  Innovations frequently occur when people 
change their approach to solving a problem. In other words, hard work closes 
some doors and opens others.
 3. Curiosity.  Innovations can begin when people are curious about something of 
interest to them, which leads to experimentation and inventiveness.
 4. Wealth and money. Innovations frequently occur because an organization or 
an individual simply wants to make money. Being near bankruptcy, for in-
stance, drove Fiat, the Italian auto company, to look for innovative ways to 
cut costs and grow its market share in the United States. This is why Fiat 
took a stake in Chrysler in return for imparting its knowledge of small-car 
technology.73
 5. Necessity.  Many innovations grow from the desire to achieve something or to 
complete a task that is needed to accomplish a broader goal. For example, 
Xerox Corporation hired a pair of researchers as “innovation managers” to 
hunt for inventions and products from start-ups in India that Xerox might 
adapt for uses in North America.74
 6. Combination of seeds.  Many innovations occur as a result of multiple factors.
Types of Innovation: Product or Process, 
Core or Transformational
Innovations may be of the following two types.
Product versus Process Innovations 
As a manager, you may need to improve 
your organization’s product or service itself; this is generally a technological innova-
tion. Or you may need to improve the process by which the product or service is cre-
ated, manufactured, or distributed; this is generally a managerial innovation.
More formally, a product innovation is a change in the appearance or the perfor-
mance of a product or a service or the creation of a new one. A process innovation is 
a change in the way a product or service is conceived, manufactured, or disseminated.
Today, says an article about the world’s most innovative companies, “innovation is 
about much more than new products. It is about reinventing business processes and 
building entirely new markets that meet untapped customer needs.”75
Core versus Transformational Innovations 
An innovation may be small or 
large, incremental or radical. The difference is in modifying versus replacing existing 
products or services. That is, you might have core innovations—the optimizing of 
products or services for existing customers, as when Procter & Gamble modified a 

322 
PART 4 
Organizing
liquid detergent to make it available as a concentrated powder in a pouch. Or you 
might have transformational innovations—the invention of breakthrough products or 
services that don’t exist yet and that are aimed at creating brand new markets and cus-
tomers, as when Keurig created a new category of coffee/tea preparation by offering 
cup-at-a-time pod-style brewing. Transformational innovations produce faster growth 
and higher valuations than do core innovations, according to some research.76
PRACTICAL ACTION
What Makes a Successful Start-up?
According to the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, which 
works to further understanding of entrepreneurship, the vast 
majority of entrepreneurs (called replicative entrepreneurs) are 
those with small businesses that replicate or duplicate prod-
ucts and services already in existence, such as restaurants and 
dry cleaners. Less common are those entrepreneurs (innova-
tive entrepreneurs) who pioneer never-seen-before products 
and services or production methods, such as eBay.77
Entrepreneurship: Exploiting Niche Opportunities. Some 
replicative entrepreneurs, however, simply do things better and 
faster. Economist Amar V. Bhidé (pronounced “Beh-dee”), author 
of The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses, suggests that 
many successful entrepreneurs start out not by having radical 
ideas but by making “a small modification in what somebody 
else is doing.”78 Examples would be a doctor offering a drive-
through component for flu shots or a lawyer offering the same 
for legal services (a feature already available for banks and fast 
food, of course).
That is, they see a small niche opportunity—one in which 
the company they are currently working for is already in-
volved, or a supplier or customer is involved. “And the per-
son jumps in [to a new business] with very little preparation 
and analysis,” says Bhidé, “but with direct firsthand knowl-
edge of the profitability of that opportunity—and pretty 
much does what somebody else is already doing, but does it 
better and faster.”
And “better and faster” seems to be the main difference. 
Usually, such entrepreneurs don’t have anything in the way of 
technology or concept that differentiates them from other 
businesses. “They just work harder, hustle for customers, and 
know that the opportunity may not last for more than six or 
eight months,” says Bhidé. “But they expect to make a rea-
sonable return on those six to eight months. And along the 
way they’ll figure out something else that will keep the busi-
ness going.”
Tolerance for Ambiguity. Another quality of entrepreneurs is 
“a tolerance for ambiguity,” Bhidé says. They are willing to jump 
into things when it’s hard to even imagine what the possible out-
comes will be, going ahead in the absence of information, very 
much capital—or even a very novel idea.
An example of a start-up that fit these criteria was Build-a-
Bear Workshop, which offers mall customers a make-your-
own stuffed animal experience, choosing from models of 
teddy bears, bunnies, dogs, and the like, then adding “a 
unique personality” from hundreds of teddy bear–sized outfits 
and accessories.
The idea came to Maxine Clark, a former department store 
executive, in 1997, when she was shopping with a friend who 
collected Ty Beanie Babies. When they couldn’t find anything 
new, the friend said “we could make one.” Says Clark, “Her 
words gave me the idea to create a company that would allow 
people to create their own customized stuffed animals. . . . 
Build-a-Bear Workshop would be like a theme park factory in 
a mall.”
There were no formal focus groups, but from the beginning 
she relied on children for advice. “Kids have insights and offer 
inspiration by looking at the world differently,” says Clark.79
The Illusions of Entrepreneurship. Think you’d like to 
create a start-up yourself and make yourself rich? Case 
Western professor Scott Shane says that the average new 
venture will fail within 5 years and that even successful 
founders earn less than they would as employees—35% less 
over 10 years.80 The biggest myth, he says, is that entrepre-
neurs believe “the growth and performance of their start-ups 
depends more on their entrepreneurial talent than on the 
businesses they choose.”
Over a 20-year period, he found, about 4% of all the start-
ups in the computer and office equipment industry made Inc. 
magazine’s Inc. 500 list of America’s fastest-growing compa-
nies. But only about 0.005% of start-ups in the hotel and mo-
tel industries made that list, and 0.007% of start-ups in 
eating and drinking establishments. “So that means the odds 
that you make the Inc. 500,” Shane says, “are 840 times 
higher if you start a computer company than if you start a 
hotel or motel.”81
YOUR CALL
Suppose you want to be your own boss. What “better and 
faster” niche opportunity do you see? Assuming it’s not a com-
puter company that you’re starting, what do you think your 
chances are of being successful?

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
323
Celebrating Failure: Cultural & Other 
Factors Encouraging Innovation
Innovation doesn’t happen as a matter of course. Organizations have to develop ways 
to make it happen—over and over. Four ways to do so are by providing (1) the right 
organizational culture, (2) the right people, or human capital; (3) the appropriate re-
sources, and (4) the correct reward system.
1. Culture: Is Innovation Viewed as a Benefit or a Boondoggle? 
Unlike 
most Europeans, who abhor “precariousness,” or the absence of security, Americans as 
a whole seem to be more comfortable with taking risks. As one writer puts it, “Risk, 
movement, and personal ambition are fundamental. . . . The United States is about the 
endless possibility of self-invention through hard work. It is inseparable from change.”82
An organizational culture, as we said in Chapter 8, is defined as the set of shared, 
taken-for-granted implicit assumptions that a group holds and that determines how it 
perceives, thinks about, and reacts to its various environments. An organizational 
culture that doesn’t just allow but celebrates failure is vital toward fostering innovation. 
Most new ideas will fail. Only a few will be successful. But if an organization doesn’t 
encourage this kind of risk taking—if people tend to view experimentation as a 
boondoggle—that organization won’t become a superstar in innovation. The top 
15 superstars for 2014 designated by Fast Company magazine are shown in the table 
at right.83 (See Table 10.3.)
2. Human Capital: Are the Right Kind of People Available? 
What is the 
economic or productive potential of a company’s employees’ knowledge, experience, 
and actions, the definition of human capital (Chapter 9)? Characteristics that can help 
organizations innovate are creativity, self-efficacy for innovation, and quality of the 
relationship between managers and employees.
3. Resources: Do Managers Put Money Where Their Mouths Are? 
An 
organization’s managers may say they encourage innovation, but if they balk at the 
expense, they aren’t putting their money where their mouths are. Innovation doesn’t 
come cheap. Its costs can be measured in all kinds of ways: dollars, time, energy, and 
focus. For instance, an organization’s research and development (R&D) department 
may need to hire top scientists, whose salaries may be high.
Of course, because there is always competition within an organization for resources, 
innovation may simply be given short shrift because other concerns seem so urgent—
even within a company with a culture encouraging experimentation. But the risk of 
downgrading innovation in favor of more immediate concerns is that a company may 
“miss the next wave”—the next big trend, whatever that is.
4. Rewards: Is Experimentation Reinforced in Ways That Matter? 
Top-
performing salespeople are often rewarded with all kinds of incentives, such as com-
missions, bonuses, and perks. Are R&D people rewarded the same way? For instance, 
every year agrochemical and agricultural biotechnology multinational Monsanto Corp. 
presents a $50,000 award to the scientist or scientists who developed the largest com-
mercial breakthrough.
The converse is also important: People should not be punished when their attempts 
to innovate don’t work out, or else they won’t attempt new things in the future. By the 
nature of experimentation, the end result can’t be foreseen. Top managers at 3M, for 
instance, recognize that three-fifths of the new ideas suggested each year fail in the 
marketplace. Only when people attempting an innovation are acting halfheartedly, 
sloppily, or otherwise incompetently should sanctions such as the withholding of 
raises and promotions be used.
TABLE 10.3
Top Companies in 2014 
Whose Cultures Strongly 
Encourage Innovation
Source: Data from “The World’s 
Most Innovative Companies 
2014,” Fast Company, February 
20, 2014.
Google
Bloomberg Philanthropies
Xiaomi (electronics, China)
Dropbox
Netflix
Airbnb
Nike
ZipDial (marketing, India)
DonorsChoose.org 
(crowdfunding)
Yelp
Dodge
SXSW (conferences)
Twitter
Apple
Michael Kors (fashion)

324 
PART 4 
Organizing
EXAMPLE
Achieving Success by Celebrating Failure: 3M’s On-Again Off-Again 
On-Again Culture of Innovation
Who are the greatest innovators? For three years, it was Apple, 
Google, and 3M atop Booz & Co.’s 1,000 global “Most Innovative 
Companies” list. Then in 2013, 3M dropped from third to fifth 
place, and Samsung and Amazon rose to claim the new third 
and fourth spots.84 Does this mean that information technology 
companies are pushing new ways of doing things—that indus-
trial companies like 3M are faltering? Actually, the computing 
and electronics sectors are the biggest spenders on R&D, and 
software and Internet companies had the biggest spending in-
crease. But 3M is no slouch, spending $1.6 billion on R&D in 
2013. The following year it received its 100,000th patent.85
No Failure, No Success. The year 2014 marked the 34th an-
niversary of the Post-it Note, invented by 3M employee Art Fry 
when he found an experimental adhesive helped him hold bits 
of paper as bookmarks in his church Sunday services hymn-
book.86 3M is famous for having a culture of innovation that 
celebrates taking chances—which means achieving success 
by celebrating failure.
Only with 20-20 hindsight can people see that a policy of 
celebrating failure can lead to success. No one can know, when 
setting out on a new course, whether the effort will yield posi-
tive results, and usually, in fact, most such experiments are
failures. But the attempts must be encouraged, or innovation 
will never happen.
Building the Right Culture. For many years, 3M built innovation 
into its culture. Mistakes were allowed, destructive criticism was 
forbidden, experimentation was encouraged, and divisions and 
individuals were allowed to operate with a good deal of autonomy. 
3M set goals decreeing that 25%–30% of annual sales must 
come from products that were only 5 years old or less. Invest-
ment in research and development was almost double the rate of 
that of the average American company.
In addition, 3M employees were permitted to spend 15% of 
their time pursuing personal research interests that were not 
related to current company projects, knowing that if their ideas 
weren’t successful, they would be encouraged to pursue other 
paths. The result was a culture that produced a string of hit 
products: masking tape, Scotchgard, optical films for coating 
liquid-crystal display screens.87
The Culture Change. That culture changed when a former Gen-
eral Electric executive, James McNerney, took over in 2001 as 
3M’s CEO and instituted a system known as Six Sigma (discussed 
in Chapter 16). “Efficiency programs such as Six Sigma are 
designed to identify problems in work processes—and then use 
rigorous measurement to reduce variation and eliminate defects,” 
says one account. “When these types of initiatives become 
ingrained in a company’s culture, as they did at 3M, creativity can 
easily get squelched. After all, a breakthrough innovation is some-
thing that challenges existing procedures and norms.”88
Back to Innovating. By 2007, McNerney was gone, and his succes-
sor, George Buckley, was struggling to balance efficiency with inno-
vation, which had declined. During the recent Great Recession, 
Buckley asked employees to improve products with “tweaks and 
snips” rather than with a few grandiose inventions.89 By 2010–2014, 
3M was back on top (positions 17, 15, 18, 21, and 23, respectively, 
for those years) on Fortune’s “Most Admired Companies” list.
YOUR CALL
Stanford University organizational behavior scholar Jerker 
Denrell believes that there is too much study of successes and 
not enough of failures, although it’s very likely that firms pursuing 
risky strategies tend to achieve either a very high or very low 
performance whereas firms pursuing conservative strategies 
always achieve an average performance.90
But while risk taking can lead to either spectacular success 
or disastrous failure, looking only at successes will show a 
positive correlation between success and risk taking. Do you 
think this is true?
How You Can Foster Innovation: Four Steps
If you’re going to not just survive but prevail as a manager, you need to know how to 
make innovation happen within an organization. Here we offer four steps for doing so. 
(See Figure 10.4, page opposite.)
1. Recognize Problems & Opportunities & Devise Solutions 
Change may 
be needed because you recognize a problem or recognize an opportunity.
■ 
Recognizing a problem—find a “better way.” Problems, whether competi-
tive threat, employee turnover, or whatever, tend to seize our attention—and 
sometimes these problems suggest solutions, such as new business ideas.

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
325
Innovation. Sendapackage.
com was inspired by Chris 
Barrett’s failed attempts to 
send a package to his brother 
in a New York prison. Have you 
ever encountered a problem in 
your life for which you thought 
you had a better solution? This 
is how innovation happens.
4. Execute well by
effectively manag-
ing people, groups,
& organizational
processes &
systems in the
pursuit of inno-
vation.
1. Recognize
problems & 
opportunities & 
devise solutions.
2. Gain allies by
communicating 
your vision.
3. Overcome 
employee 
resistance, & 
empower & 
reward them to 
achieve progress.
Example: In 2008, Chris Barrett’s package of salami and deodorant to his 
brother in a New York prison was rejected because the items were made with 
alcohol, which is forbidden in prison. From this incident, Barrett got the idea 
for Sendapackage.com, a sort of prisoners’ version of Amazon.com. The com-
pany helps outsiders effectively ship to incarcerated loved ones packages that 
meet the 20 pages of rules drawn up by the state’s department of corrections: 
no food with poppy seeds, emery boards that are “nonmetallic,” boxer shorts 
and briefs that are solid color only, and so on.91
■ 
Recognizing an opportunity. Recognition of opportunities may come 
from long-term employees who regularly expose themselves to new ideas 
(“technological gate-keepers” in one phrase). Ideas originating at the grassroots 
level of an organization may be a particularly fruitful source of innovation.
2. Gain Allies by Communicating Your Vision 
Once you’ve decided how 
you’re going to handle the problem or opportunity, you need to start developing and 
communicating your vision. You need to create a picture of the future and paint in 
broad strokes how your innovation will be of benefit. That is, you need to start per-
suading others inside—and perhaps outside—the organization to support you. Having 
hard data helps. Others will be more persuaded, for example, if you can demonstrate 
that a similar idea has been successful in another industry. Or if you can take current 
trends (such as sales or demographics) and project them into the future.
Source: Adapted from eight steps in K. M. Bartol and D. C. Martin, Management, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 1998, 
pp. 360–363. Reprinted with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
FIGURE 10.4 
Four steps for fostering innovation

326 
PART 4 
Organizing
Among the details you’ll need to communicate to gain support are the following:
■ 
Showing how the product or service will be made. You must figure out how 
to profitably make the new product or deliver the new service.
■ 
Showing how potential customers will be reached. Innovations may fail 
because a company can’t figure out how to get its new product or service into 
customers’ hands. Thus, you might consider breaking down the task of what 
the customer wants into discrete steps (a task called job mapping), to deter-
mine the points at which customers might need help.92
■ 
Demonstrating how you’ll beat your competitors. Other companies may be 
pursuing the same breakthroughs. Thus, it’s better to focus on a smaller num-
ber of innovations.
■ 
Explaining when the innovation will take place. Timing is important. You’ll 
need to think about when employees will be prepared to make the product and 
customers primed to buy it.
3. Overcome Employee Resistance, & Empower & Reward Them to Achieve 
Progress 
Once you’ve persuaded and gotten the blessing of your managerial superi-
ors, then you need to do the same with the people reporting to you. It’s possible, of course, 
that the idea for innovation came from them and that you already have their support.
Alternatively, you may have to overcome their resistance (a topic we discuss fur-
ther in Section 10.5). Then you’ll need to remove obstacles that limit them in execut-
ing the vision, such as having to get management to sign off on all aspects of a 
project. Finally, you’ll need to hand out periodic rewards—recognition, celebrations, 
bonuses—for tasks accomplished. And the rewards should not be withheld until the 
end of the project, which may be many months away, but given out for the successful 
accomplishment of short-term phases in order to provide constant encouragement. 
(See Table 10.4, left.)
4. Execute Well 
What finally will make or break an organization’s attempts at 
bringing new products and services to market is execution—the process, as we stated 
back in Chapter 6 (Section 6.6), of discussing hows and whats, of using questioning, 
analysis, and follow-through to achieve the results promised and ensure accountability.93 
Execution requires organizations to effectively manage people, groups, and organiza-
tional processes and systems in the pursuit of innovation.
In the end, then, the innovation process must be managed. This is precisely what is 
done at Apple, Google, and other top innovative companies.
Research tells us that companies are unlikely to innovate unless the culture and 
climate support it. How would you know if a potential employer had an innovative 
culture? You can find out by completing Self-Assessment 10.2. ●
How Innovative Is the Organizational Climate?
The following survey was designed to assess the innovation cli-
mate of your organization. Go to connect.mheducation.com 
and take Self-Assessment 10.2. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
To what extent does the company have an innovative 
climate?  
2. 
Based on your survey scores, what advice would you give 
to management if they wanted to increase innovation? Be 
specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 10.2
®
Source: Adapted from J. P. Kotter 
and L. A. Schlesinger, “Choosing 
Strategies for Change,” Harvard 
Business Review, March–April 
1979, pp. 106–114.
TABLE 10.4
Six Methods for Managing 
Employee Resistance 
to Change
 1. Education and 
communication
 2. Participation and 
involvement
 3. Facilitation and support
 4. Negotiation and 
rewards
 5. Manipulation and 
cooptation
 6. Explicit and implicit 
coercion

10.5 The Threat of Change: Managing Employee 
Fear & Resistance
How are employees threatened by change, and how can I help them adjust?
THE BIG PICTURE
This section discusses the causes of resistance to change and the reasons employees fear change.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
As we mentioned in Section 10.1, change may be forced upon an organization—reactive 
change, requiring you to make changes in response to problems or opportunities as they 
arise. Or an organization may try to get out in front of changes—proactive change, or 
planned change, which involves making carefully thought-out changes in anticipation of 
possible problems or opportunities.
What happens to an organization that fails to deal with change when it’s needed—or before 
it’s needed? Jim Collins, researcher of enduring great companies, says the results can be dire.
 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
327
Recognizing the Need for Change: Collins’s Five Stages of Decline
Collins has found that there are five stages of institutional de-
cline.94 The stages, which are largely self-inflicted, are as follows:
Stage 1: Hubris Born of Success. This stage begins when a 
company develops arrogance (hubris) and its employees begin 
attributing the company’s success to their own superior qualities, 
forgetting about the underlying factors that created that success.
Stage 2: Undisciplined Pursuit of More. Growing out of the hu-
bris of Stage 1, Stage 2 is the pursuit of more—more of whatever 
is defined as success, such as more growth—and companies be-
gin overreaching, making undisciplined leaps into areas where 
they cannot be great, leading them to ignore their core business.
Stage 3: Denial of Risk & Peril. In this stage, internal warning 
signs begin to increase, but managers explain them away, dis-
counting negative data, amplifying positive data, and putting a 
positive spin on ambiguous data.
Stage 4: Grasping for Salvation. At this stage, the difficulties of 
the previous stage reach the point of throwing the company into 
sharp decline, at which point managers begin making desperate 
leaps (Grasping for Salvation): trying bold but untested strate-
gies, looking for a blockbuster product, trying to put together a 
game-changing acquisition, and similar attempts at silver-bullet 
solutions.
Stage 5: Capitulation to Irrelevance or Death. The longer an 
organization stays in Stage 4, the more apt it is to slip downward 
into Stage 5—at which point the company may be sold, allowed 
to go bankrupt, or left to shrivel into insignificance.
YOUR CALL
Have you ever experienced any one or more of these stages in 
a company? What was it? What would you have done to try to 
change it?
EXAMPLE
As a manager, particularly one working for an American organization, you may be 
pressured to provide short-term, quick-fix solutions. But when applied to organiza-
tional problems, this approach usually doesn’t work. Quick-fix solutions have little 
staying power.
What, then, are effective ways to manage organizational change and employees’ 
fear and resistance to it? In this section, we discuss the following:
■ 
The causes of resistance to change.
■ 
Why employees resist change.
The Causes of Resistance to Change95
Resistance to change is an emotional/behavioral response to real or imagined threats 
to an established work routine. Resistance can be as subtle as passive resignation and 
as overt as deliberate sabotage.

328 
PART 4 
Organizing
Resistance can be considered to be the interaction of three causes: (1) employee char-
acteristics, (2) change agent characteristics, and (3) the change agent–employee rela-
tionship. (See Figure 10.5.) For example, an employee’s resistance is partly based on his 
or her perception of change, which is influenced by the attitudes and behaviors exhibited 
by the change agent and the level of trust between change agent and the employee.
Let us consider these three sources.
Change agent 
characteristics
Employee 
characteristics
Resistance to 
change
Change 
agent–employee 
relationship
FIGURE 10.5
A model of resistance 
to change
Source: Adapted from R. Kreitner 
and A. Kinicki. Organizational 
Behavior, 9th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2010), p. 549. 
Reprinted with permission of The 
McGraw-Hill Companies.
1. Employee Characteristics 
The characteristics of a given employee consist 
of his or her individual differences (discussed in Chapter 11), actions and inactions, 
and perceptions of change. Your level of adaptability is one key characteristic that 
 affects resistance to change. How adaptable are you? You can find out by taking Self-
Assessment 10.3. 
How Adaptable Are You?
The following survey was designed to assess your level 
of adaptability. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take 
Self-Assessment 10.3. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions: 
1. 
What is your level of adaptability? Are you surprised by 
the results?
2. 
Based on your scores, identify three things you can do to 
increase your level of adaptability? Explain.
3. 
Why would recruiters prefer to hire adaptable people?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 10.3
®
2. Change Agent Characteristics 
The characteristics of the change agent—
the individual who is a catalyst in helping organizations change—also consist of his 
or her individual differences, actions and inactions, and perceptions of change. 
Such characteristics that might contribute to employee resistance to change might 
include leadership style, personality, tactfulness, sense of timing, awareness of cul-
tural traditions or group relationships, and ability to empathize with the employee’s 
perspective.
3. Change Agent–Employee Relationship 
As you might expect, resistance to 
change is reduced when change agents and employees have a trusting relationship—
faith in each other’s intentions. Mistrust, on the other hand, encourages secrecy, which 
begets deeper mistrust, and can doom an otherwise well-conceived change.

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
329
Ten Reasons Employees Resist Change
Whether changes are adaptive, innovative, or radically innovative, employees may re-
sist change for all kinds of reasons. Ten of the leading reasons for not accepting change 
are as follows.96
1. Individual’s Predisposition toward Change 
How people react to change de-
pends a lot on how they learned to handle change and ambiguity as children. One person’s 
parents may have been patient, flexible, and understanding, and from the time the child 
was weaned she may have learned there were positive compensations for the loss of im-
mediate gratification. Thus, she will associate making changes with love and approval. 
Another person’s parents may have been unreasonable and unyielding, forcing him to do 
things (piano lessons, for example) that he didn’t want to do. Thus, he will be distrustful 
of making changes because he will associate them with demands for compliance.97
2. Surprise & Fear of the Unknown 
When radically different changes are in-
troduced without warning—for example, without any official announcements—the of-
fice rumor mill will go into high gear, and affected employees will become fearful of 
the implications of the changes. Harvard business scholar Rosabeth Moss Kanter rec-
ommends that in such cases a transition manager should be appointed who is charged 
with keeping all relevant parties adequately informed.98
3. Climate of Mistrust 
Trust involves reciprocal faith in others’ intentions and be-
havior. Mistrust encourages secrecy, which causes deeper mistrust, putting even well-
conceived changes at risk of failure. Managers who trust their employees make the 
change process an open, honest, and participative affair. Employees who trust their man-
agers are more apt to expend extra effort and take chances with something different.
4. Fear of Failure 
Intimidating changes on the job can cause employees to doubt 
their capabilities. Self-doubt erodes self-confidence and cripples personal growth and 
development.
5. Loss of Status or Job Security 
Administrative and technological changes that 
threaten to alter power bases or eliminate jobs—as often happens during corporate re-
structurings that threaten middle-management jobs—generally trigger strong resistance.
6. Peer Pressure 
Even people who are not themselves directly affected by impending 
changes may actively resist in order to protect the interests of their friends and coworkers.
7. Disruption of Cultural Traditions or Group Relationships 
Whenever in-
dividuals are transferred, promoted, or reassigned, it can disrupt existing cultural and 
group relationships.
Example: Traditionally Sony Corp. promoted insiders to new positions. When an 
outsider, Howard Stringer, was named as the next chairman and CEO and six corpo-
rate officers were asked to resign, creating a majority board of foreigners, the former 
CEO, Nobuyuki Idei, worried the moves might engender strong employee resistance.99
8. Personality Conflicts 
Just as a friend can get away with telling us something 
we would resent hearing from an adversary, the personalities of change agents can 
breed resistance.
9. Lack of Tact or Poor Timing 
Introducing changes in an insensitive manner or 
at an awkward time can create employee resistance. Employees are more apt to accept 
changes when managers effectively explain their value, as, for example, in demonstrat-
ing their strategic purpose to the organization.

330 
PART 4 
Organizing
10. Nonreinforcing Reward Systems 
Employees are likely to resist when they 
can’t see any positive rewards from proposed changes, as, for example, when one is 
asked to work longer hours without additional compensation.
Where do you stand on change? Do you tend to accept and embrace change, or do 
you have tendencies to resist it? The following self-assessment will provide feedback 
on your attitudes toward change. If your scores indicate resistance, you should con-
sider what can be done to move your attitudes in a more positive direction. ●
SELF-ASSESSMENT 10.4
®
Assessing Your Resistance to Change
The following survey was designed to assess your resistance 
to change. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-
Assessment 10.4. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
Are you more or less willing to accept change? Discuss.
2. 
Based on your scores, identify three things you can do to 
lower your resistance to change. These changes may 
involve new thoughts or beliefs or the display of new 
behaviors.
3. 
What questions might a recruiter ask during an interview 
to determine whether or not you tend to resist change? 
What would be your answers?
Change is hard. Lots of people 
don’t like change. Among the 
reasons: one’s individual 
predisposition toward change, 
surprise and fear of the unknown, 
mistrust, loss of status or job 
security, and poor timing. Do some 
of these reasons seem particularly 
to apply to you? When was the last 
time you had to wrestle with 
momentous changes?

adaptive change 313
change agent 317
core innovations 321
creativity 320
disruptive innovation 307
innovative change 313
intervention 318
invention 320
organizational development 
(OD) 317
proactive change 309
process innovation 321
product innovation 321
radically innovative change 314
reactive change 308
resistance to change 327
seeds of innovation 321
technology 310
transformational innovations 322
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
10.1 The Nature of Change in 
Organizations
• Among supertrends shaping the future of 
business: (1) The marketplace is becoming 
more segmented and moving toward more 
niche products. (2) More competitors offering 
targeted products, requiring faster speed-to-
market. (3) Some traditional companies may 
not survive radical change. (4) China, India, 
and other offshore suppliers are changing the 
way we work. (5) Knowledge, not information, 
is becoming the new competitive advantage.
• Two types of change are reactive and 
proactive. Reactive change is making 
changes in response to problems or 
opportunities as they arise. Proactive change 
involves making carefully thought-out 
changes in anticipation of possible or 
expected problems or opportunities.
• Forces for change may consist of forces 
outside the organization or inside it. 
(1) External forces consist of four types: 
demographic characteristics; technological 
advancements; shareholder, customer, and 
market changes; and social and political 
pressures. (2) Internal forces may be of two 
types: human resources concerns and 
managers’ behavior.
10.2 Types & Models of Change
• Whether organizational change is 
administrative or technological, it can be 
adaptive, innovative, or radically innovative, 
depending on (1) the degree of complexity, 
cost, and uncertainty and (2) its potential for 
generating employee resistance.
• Adaptive change, the least threatening, is 
reintroduction of a familiar practice. 
Innovative change is the introduction of a 
practice that is new to the organization. 
Radically innovative change, the most 
threatening, involves introducing a practice 
that is new to the industry.
• Kurt Lewin’s change model has three 
stages—unfreezing, changing, and 
refreezing—to explain how to initiate, 
manage, and stabilize planned change. (1) In 
the unfreezing stage, managers try to instill in 
employees the motivation to change. (2) In 
the changing stage, employees need to be 
given the tools for change, such as new 
information. (3) In the refreezing stage, 
employees need to be helped to integrate 
the changed attitudes and behavior into their 
normal behavior.
• In a model corresponding with Lewin’s, John 
Kotter’s suggests an organization needs to 
follow eight steps to avoid the eight common 
errors senior management usually commits. 
The first four represent unfreezing: establish 
a sense of urgency, create the guiding 
coalition, develop a vision and strategy, and 
communicate the change vision. The next 
three steps represent the changing stage: 
empower broad-based action, generate 
short-term wins, and consolidate gains and 
produce more change. The last step, 
corresponding to refreezing, is to anchor new 
approaches in the organization’s culture.
10.3 Organizational Development: What 
It Is, What It Can Do
• Organizational development (OD) is a set of 
techniques for implementing planned 
change to make people and organizations 
more effective. Often OD is put into 
practice by a change agent, a consultant 
with a background in behavioral sciences 
who can be a catalyst in helping 
organizations deal with old problems in 
new ways. OD can be used to manage 
conflict, revitalize organizations, and adapt 
to mergers.
• The OD process follows a three-step 
process: (1) Diagnosis attempts to ascertain 
the problem. (2) Intervention is the attempt to 
correct the diagnosed problems. (3) Evaluation 
Key Points
 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
331

332 
PART 4 
Organizing
attempts to find out how well the intervention 
worked.
• Four factors that make OD work successfully 
are (1) multiple interventions are used; (2) top 
managers give the OD program their support; 
(3) goals are geared to both short- and long-
term results; and (4) OD is affected by culture.
10.4 Promoting Innovation within the 
Organization
• Invention is creating or making up something 
new. Creativity is the act of developing new or 
imaginative ideas into reality. Innovation, by 
contrast, is the activity of creating new ideas 
and converting them into useful applications—
specifically new goods and services.
• Two myths about innovation are 
(1) innovation happens in a “Eureka!” moment 
and (2) innovation can be systematized.
• The starting point for organizational innovation 
involves the six seeds of innovation: 
(1) innovation comes from dedicated people 
working to solve a well-defined problem; 
(2) innovations often occur when people 
change their approach to solving a problem; 
(3) innovations can begin when people are 
curious about something of interest to them; 
(4) innovation happens because an 
organization wants to make money; (5) many 
innovations grow from the desire to achieve 
something; and (6) many innovations occur as 
a result of multiple factors.
• Innovations may be a product innovation or a 
process innovation. A product innovation is a 
change in the appearance or performance of 
a product or service or the creation of a new 
one. A process innovation is a change in the 
way a product or service is conceived, 
manufactured, or disseminated.
• Innovations may also be core innovations, 
the optimizing of products or services for 
existing customers, or transformational 
innovations, the invention of breakthrough 
products or services that don’t exist yet and 
that are aimed at creating brand new 
markets and customers. Innovation doesn’t 
happen as a matter of course. Four ways to 
encourage it are as follows: (1) Provide the 
right organizational culture, so that it is 
viewed as a benefit rather than as a 
boondoggle. (2) Provide the human capital; 
make the right kind of people available. 
(3) Provide the resources. (4) Provide the 
rewards, so that experimentation is 
reinforced in ways that matter.
• Four steps for fostering innovation are as 
follows. (1) Recognize problems and 
opportunities and devise solutions. (2) Gain 
allies by communicating your vision. 
(3) Overcome employee resistance and 
empower and reward them to achieve progress. 
(4) Execute well by effectively managing people, 
groups, and organizational processes and 
systems in the pursuit of innovation.
10.5 The Threat of Change: Managing 
Employee Fear & Resistance
• Resistance to change is an emotional/
behavioral response to real or imagined 
threats to an established work routine. 
Resistance can be considered to be the 
interaction of three causes: (1) employee 
characteristics, (2) change-agent 
characteristics, and (3) the change agent–
employee relationship
• Ten reasons employees resist change are as 
follows: (1) individuals’ predisposition toward 
change; (2) surprise and fear of the unknown; 
(3) climate of mistrust; (4) fear of failure; 
(5) loss of status or job security; (6) peer 
pressure; (7) disruption of cultural traditions 
or group relationships; (8) personality 
conflicts; (9) lack of tact or poor timing; and 
(10) nonreinforcing reward systems.
 1. What are the two principal types of change?
 2. Describe the four kinds of external forces of changes 
and two kinds of internal forces of change.
 3. Organizational change ranges along a continuum of 
what three levels of threat?
 4. How does Kurt Lewin’s model of change work?
 5. What is the organizational development process?
 6. What’s the difference between a product innovation 
and a process innovation?
 7. Explain four ways to encourage innovation to happen.
 8. What are four steps for fostering innovation?
 9. Employee resistance can be considered to be the 
interaction of what three causes?
 10. There are 10 reasons employees resist change. What 
are some of them?
 11. What are the principal labor-management issues?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?

 
Organizational Change & Innovation 
CHAPTER 10 
333
Hewlett-Packard Is Counting on Organizational 
Change to Boost Revenue Growth
Meg Whitman became CEO of Hewlett-Packard Co. in 
2011. Since the time H-P’s revenue peaked in 2011 at 
$127 billion, it has dropped every subsequent year. On 
the positive side, the company had two consecutive 
quarters of growth in 2014. H-P also is trying to right-
size and reduce costs by planning to lay off 16,000 em-
ployees. H-P earlier decided to lay off 34,000 people, 
resulting in a total reduction of 50,000 employees.100
Whitman described the job cuts “as an opportunity to 
streamline the company further and make it more nim-
ble. An expected $1 billion in cost savings in fiscal 2016 
would allow H-P to invest in new technologies and 
skills to revive growth.” Others, like UBS analyst Ste-
ven Milunovich, believe that these job cuts will erode 
employee morale and may lead to increased turnover.101
“But fixing the world’s biggest tech company—with 
$120 billion in annual revenues and 330,000 employees—
is a herculean task. Bloated by more than 70 acquisi-
tions in the past 15 years, HP isn’t just sprawling and 
stalled out; it may actually be running in reverse.”102
Whitman decided to change the organizational 
structure to fuel growth. She created two clusters of 
businesses. One focuses on corporate technology cus-
tomers. This group, which sells servers, storage, and 
networking, delivered 43% of the company’s overall 
operating profits according to Forbes. Unfortunately, 
the software and services that accompany all this hard-
ware have not been as successful. H-P tried to build the 
software side of the business via acquisitions, which 
according to Forbes have not been very successful. The 
magazine noted that “when it comes to software acqui-
sitions, Autonomy [H-P’s enterprise software com-
pany] was merely the most high-profit misstep. All 
told, over the past decade HP squandered nearly 
$19 billion to buy myriad outfits that contribute only 
7% to overall profit. The services unit, which staffs 
other companies’ tech projects, is barely at breakeven.”103 
H-P is currently “looking for small to midsize acquisi-
tion candidates in cloud computing, security, and ana-
lytics software.”104
The second structural cluster sells printers, PCs, 
laptops, and mobile devices to people worldwide. This 
segment of the business contributed 29% of operating 
profits in 2013. The problem here is that the lucrative 
printer business is shrinking. Technology is simply 
moving more toward ink-free photo and document 
sharing, which benefits companies like Google, Face-
book, and Dropbox.
Strategically, H-P also is trying to get back into the 
fast-growing tablet market. The company attempted to 
gain entry in this market in 2011 with the TouchPad 
model, but it was a failure. Since February 2013, the 
company has introduced new models, and they are being 
well received in the market. In a similar vein, H-P has 
created an overall vice president for design. This was 
done to create a strategic focus on product development.
H-P didn’t stop at just a reorganization or a new tab-
let strategy, according to Forbes. A survey of the com-
pany’s 20,000 salespeople revealed that employees 
rated the internal sales tools a mere “7” on a scale of 1 
to 100. For example, it took HP as much as three weeks 
to prepare a sales quote, when competitors could do it in 
a matter of days. The company decided to upgrade its 
sales process by using new tools from Salesforce.com.
Whitman also took to the road to reassure custom-
ers that H-P was doing the “right things.” In the last 
year, she conducted “305 one-on-one meetings with 
customers or sales-channel partners, aides say, as well 
as another 42 roundtable chats with small groups” 
around the world.
It did not take Whitman long to realize that the or-
ganizational culture also needed to be changed to fos-
ter consistency between the company’s strategies and 
culture. According to Forbes, she eliminated the 
barbed wire fence and locked gates that separated 
parking lots for the executives and the general em-
ployee population. “We should enter the building the 
same way everyone else does,” she said. She also de-
cided to work from a cubicle, like most employees, 
instead of from a larger, more private location. She 
keeps a picture of her mother in her office. She also 
role models when she travels by staying at more mod-
estly priced hotels.105
While H-P is positive about the changes taking 
place, some analysts are more skeptical. Bill Shope, an 
analyst from Goldman Sachs, concluded that “serial 
restructuring cannot solve H-P’s secular challenges, 
particularly following years of underinvestment.” He 
forecasts that H-P’s revenue might fall to $107 billion 
in fiscal 2015.106
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. Which of the supertrends are driving H-P to change?
 2. Which of the forces for change are causing H-P to 
undertake major organizational change? Explain.
 3. How might Meg Whitman have used Lewin’s and 
Kotter’s models of change to increase the probability 
of achieving positive organizational change? Provide 
specific recommendations.
 4. To what extent is H-P following the four steps for 
fostering innovation? Explain.
 5. What advice would you give Whitman based on 
what you learned in this chapter? Be specific.
Management in Action

334 
PART 4 
Organizing
Should CEOs Fire Employees Based on the 
Opinions of U.S. Senators?
This case involves the controversy surrounding Gen-
eral Motors and its response, or lack of response, to 
the need to recall 1.6 million vehicles that could have 
faulty ignition switches.
GM’s CEO Mary Barra has now testified before 
several congressional committees on why it took so 
long to recall the vehicles with potential ignition 
problems.107 Barra has apologized for the problem 
and admitted that something was wrong with their in-
ternal processes. The company has also established a 
fund to compensate victims. Distribution of payments 
is being managed by Kenneth Feinberg.
In a July 2014 congressional meeting, members 
questioned Barra about her decision to retain Michael 
Millikin on her staff. Millikin, who has been with GM 
since 1977, is the company’s top lawyer. While under 
oath, he stated that he “didn’t know until February 
about an ignition-switch defect now linked to at least 
13 deaths in Chevrolet Cobalts and similar cars built 
in the last decade.”
According to The Wall Street Journal, an internal 
report commissioned by GM found that members of 
Millikin’s staff were warned repeatedly starting in 
2010 that GM could face costly, punitive damage 
awards over its failure to address safety problems re-
lated to the ignition defect. Millikin claims that he 
did not know about these cases because company law-
yers settled the cases for amounts that did not require 
review by Millikin himself.
The congressional committee is not buying this 
explanation and some members want Barra to fire 
Millikin. For example, Senator Claire McCaskill 
(D., Missouri) said, “How in the world, in the aftermath 
of this report, did Michael Millikin keep his job? This 
is either gross negligence or gross incompetence.” 
Senator Richard Blumenthal (D., Connecticut) 
accused Millikin “of overseeing a staff that engaged 
in deceit and potential fraud.” Both Millikin and Barra 
deny these charges. Barra believes that the company 
needs a person with Millikin’s experience and integ-
rity to help the company work through this crisis.108
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
What would you do about firing Michael Millikin if 
you were Mary Barra?
 1. Nothing. Congress does not have the power to force 
Barra to fire an employee and it does not know what 
it takes to run a large company. Termination deci-
sions should be left to the company.
 2. Continue to investigate the situation and do not fire 
him if you believe he is exonerated by the internal 
report.
 3. Terminate him even though the internal report sug-
gests that Millikin did not know about the issue. He 
should have known, and his lack of oversight is one 
cause of this terrible problem.
 4. Invent other options.
Source: This case is based on J. Bennett and S. Hughes, “Panel Prods 
GM for Actions,” The Wall Street Journal, July 18, 2014, p. B3.
Legal/Ethical Challenge


PART 5 
LEADING
Managing Individual 
Differences & Behavior
Supervising People as People
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
11.1 Personality & Individual Behavior
Major Question: In the hiring process, do employers care about 
one’s personality and individual traits?
11.2 Values, Attitudes, & Behavior
Major Question: How do the hidden aspects of individuals—
their values and attitudes—affect employee behavior?
11.3 Perception & Individual Behavior
Major Question: What are the distortions in perception that can 
cloud one’s judgment?
11.4 Work-Related Attitudes & Behaviors Managers Need 
to Deal With
Major Question: Is it important for managers to pay attention 
to employee attitudes?
11.5 The New Diversified Workforce
Major Question: What trends in workplace diversity should 
managers be aware of?
11.6 Understanding Stress & Individual Behavior
Major Question: What causes workplace stress, and how can 
it be reduced?
11

forecast
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
This first of five chapters on leadership discusses how to manage for individual differ-
ences and behaviors. We describe personality and individual behavior; values, attitudes, 
and behavior; and specific work-related attitudes and behaviors managers need to be 
aware of. We next discuss distortions in perception, which can affect managerial judg-
ment. Finally, we consider what stress does to individuals.
Are the 75 million so-called Millennials, born between 
1977 and 1994, really so different from earlier genera-
tions (the 78 million Baby Boomers, born 1946–1964, 
and 49 million Gen Xers, 1965–1976)? Do they need 
to be managed in different ways? The answer to both 
questions is yes.1
Independent, Tech-Savvy, Diverse, 
Educated—& Anxious
Some major characteristics of Millennials: (1) They 
are extremely independent, because many were 
raised as day care or latchkey kids. (2) They are tech-
savvy, used to smartphones and the Internet, and ac-
customed to a faster pace of life. (3) They are racially 
and ethnically diverse. (4) They are probably the most 
educated in American history. (5) They are anxious 
they can’t meet their financial needs.
How Millennials Want to Be Managed
In the workplace, these translate into a skepticism 
about rules, policies, and procedures; a requirement 
for more autonomy; and a need for constant stimula-
tion. Millennials not only want a good income and 
good relationships with bosses and coworkers but 
also challenging daily work, the opportunity for 
growth, the chance to show off skills and be recog-
nized for their accomplishments, casual dress envi-
ronment, and flexible schedules for social and 
personal time. Some tips for managing this group:
•  Allow them independent decision making and 
expression. Millennials are impatient, skeptical, 
and blunt and expressive, but they are used to 
adapting and making decisions. Show 
appreciation for their individuality and let them 
participate in decision making.
•  Train them and mentor them. Millennials are 
strongly attracted to education and training, the 
best kind not being classroom training but forms 
of independent learning. At the same time, they 
should be given the chance to create long-term 
bonds with mentors.
•  Give them constant feedback and recognition. 
Millennials need to know they are making an 
impact and need to be recognized for their 
workplace contributions. Thus, supervisors 
should show them how their work contributes to 
the bottom line. This generation revels in, even 
craves, constant praise, so managers should 
provide rewards in the form of praise, flextime, 
and extra responsibility.
•  Provide them with access to technology. 
To attract and retain Millennial employees, 
companies need to provide the newest and best 
technology.
•  Create customized career paths. Millennials 
would most like to be self-employed, but few are 
able to do it because of high start-up costs. 
Employers can reinforce the sense of control that 
this generation desires by providing them with a 
realistic account of their progress and their future 
within the organization.
For Discussion As a worker, you might hope to be 
led by someone who would follow the preceding sug-
gestions. But suppose your boss is of the old “tough 
guy” school and doesn’t manage this way. In a diffi-
cult job market, would you stick it out? How would 
you try to let your supervisor know how you would 
prefer to be managed?
the manager’s toolbox
Managing the Millennials: What’s Different about 
Today’s Generation of Younger Workers
A

Sociable and assertive. Does 
it take a certain kind of 
personality to be a good 
salesperson? Have you ever 
known people who were quiet, 
unassuming, even shy but who 
were nevertheless very 
persistent and persuasive—
that is, good salespeople?
In this and the next four chapters we discuss the third management function (after 
planning and organizing)—namely, leading. Leading, as we said in Chapter 1, is de-
fined as motivating, directing, and otherwise influencing people to work hard to 
achieve the organization’s goals.
How would you describe yourself? Are you outgoing? aggressive? sociable? tense? 
passive? lazy? quiet? Whatever the combination of traits, which result from the interac-
tion of your genes and your environment, they constitute your personality. More for-
mally, personality consists of the stable psychological traits and behavioral attributes 
that give a person his or her identity.2 As a manager, you need to understand personality 
attributes because they affect how people perceive and act within the organization.3
The Big Five Personality Dimensions
In recent years, the many personality dimensions have been distilled into a list of 
factors known as the Big Five.4 The Big Five personality dimensions are (1) extroversion, 
(2) agreeableness, (3) conscientiousness, (4) emotional stability, and (5) openness 
to experience.
■ 
Extroversion. How outgoing, talkative, sociable, and assertive a person is.
■ 
Agreeableness. How trusting, good-natured, cooperative, and soft-hearted 
one is.
■ 
Conscientiousness. How dependable, responsible, achievement-oriented, and 
persistent one is.
■ 
Emotional stability. How relaxed, secure, and unworried one is.
■ 
Openness to experience. How intellectual, imaginative, curious, and broad-
minded one is.
Standardized personality tests are used 
to score people on each dimension to draw 
a person’s personality profile that is sup-
posedly as unique as his or her fingerprints. 
For example, if you scored low on the first 
trait, extroversion, you would presumably 
be prone to shy and withdrawn behavior. If 
you scored low on emotional stability, you 
supposedly would be nervous, tense, an-
gry, and worried. (An example of a person-
ality test is the Myers-Briggs, discussed in 
Chapter 9; to take a replica of this test for 
free, go to www.personalitypathways.com/
type_inventory.html.)
Where do you think you stand in terms 
of the big five? Are you curious? If yes, 
take Self-Assessment 11.1.
11.1 
Personality & Individual Behavior
In the hiring process, do employers care about one’s personality and individual traits?
THE BIG PICTURE
Personality consists of stable psychological and behavioral attributes that give you your identity. We describe 
five personality dimensions and five personality traits that managers need to be aware of to understand 
workplace behavior.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
338 
PART 5 
Leading

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
339
Do Personality Tests Work for the Workplace? 
As a manager, you would 
want to know if the Big Five model in particular and personality testing in general can 
help predict behavior in the workplace. Is a personality test helpful in predicting a 
match between personality and job performance? Two findings:
■ 
Extroversion—the outgoing personality. As might be expected, extrover-
sion (an outgoing personality) has been associated with success for manag-
ers and salespeople. Also, extroversion is a stronger predictor of job 
performance than agreeableness, across all professions, according to re-
searchers. “It appears that being courteous, trusting, straightforward, and 
soft-hearted [that is, agreeableness] has a smaller impact on job perfor-
mance,” conclude the researchers, “than being talkative, active, and asser-
tive [that is, extroversion].”5
■ 
Conscientiousness—the dependable personality. Conscientiousness 
(strong work ethic) has been found to have the strongest positive correla-
tion with job performance and training performance. According to re-
searchers, “those individuals who exhibit traits associated with a strong 
sense of purpose, obligation, and persistence generally perform better 
than those who do not.”6
The table below presents tips to help managers avoid abuses and discrimination 
lawsuits when using personality and psychological testing for employment decisions.7 
(See Table 11.1.)
Where Do You Stand on the Big Five 
Dimensions of Personality?
This survey is designed to assess your personality, using the 
Big Five index. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take 
Self-Assessment 11.1. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
What is your personality profile according to the Big Five?
2. 
Which of the Big Five is most likely going to help you 
achieve good grades in your classes and to gain 
employment after graduation?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 11.1
®
TABLE 11.1
Cautions about Using 
Personality Tests in the 
Workplace
• 
Use professionals. Rely on reputable, licensed psychologists for selecting and overseeing the 
administration, scoring, and interpretation of personality and psychological tests. This is particularly 
important, since not every psychologist is expert at these kinds of tests.
• 
Don’t hire on the basis of personality test results alone. Supplement any personality test data with 
information from reference checks, personal interviews, ability tests, and job performance records. 
Also avoid hiring people on the basis of specified personality profiles. As a case in point, there is no 
distinct “managerial personality.”
• 
Be alert for gender, racial, and ethnic bias. Regularly assess any possible adverse impact of personality 
tests on the hiring of women and minorities. This is truly a matter of great importance, since you don’t 
want to find your company (or yourself) embroiled in a lawsuit at some point downstream.
• 
Graphology tests don’t work, but integrity tests do. Personality traits and aptitudes cannot be 
inferred from samples of people’s penmanship, as proponents of graphology tests claim. However, 
dishonest job applicants can often be screened by integrity tests, since dishonest people are 
reportedly unable to fake conscientiousness, even on a paper-and-pencil test.

340 
PART 5 
Leading
Self-efficacy. Erik Weihenmayer, 
blind since age 13, is a self-
described “unrealistic optimist.” 
He became the first blind climber 
to scale Mt. Everest. Do you have 
a personal belief that you can 
succeed at great things?
The Proactive Personality 
A person who scores well on the Big Five dimension 
of conscientiousness is probably a good worker. He or she may also be a proactive 
personality, someone who is more apt to take initiative and persevere to influence the 
environment. Research reveals that proactive people tend to be more satisfied with 
their jobs, committed to their employer, and produce more work than nonproactive 
individuals.7
Core Self-Evaluations
A core self-evaluation represents a broad personality trait comprising four positive in-
dividual traits: (1) self-efficacy, (2) self-esteem, (3) locus of control, and (4) emotional 
stability. Managers need to be aware of these personality traits so as to understand 
workplace behavior.
1. Self-Efficacy: “I Can/Can’t Do This Task” 
Self-efficacy is the belief in one’s 
personal ability to do a task. This is about your personal belief that you have what it 
takes to succeed.
Have you noticed that those who are confident about their ability tend to succeed, 
whereas those preoccupied with failure tend not to? Indeed, high expectations of self-
efficacy have been linked with all kinds of positives: not only success in varied physi-
cal and mental tasks but also reduced anxiety and increased tolerance for pain.8 One 
study found that the sales performance of life-insurance agents was much better among 
those with high self-efficacy.9 A meta-analysis involving 21,616 people also found 
significant positive correlation between self-efficacy and job performance.10 Low self-
efficacy is associated with learned helplessness, the debilitating lack of faith in one’s 
ability to control one’s environment.11

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
341
Among the implications for managers:
■ 
Assign jobs accordingly. Complex, challenging, and autonomous jobs tend 
to enhance people’s perceptions of their self-efficacy. Boring, tedious jobs 
generally do the opposite.
■ 
Develop self-efficacy. Self-efficacy is a quality that can be nurtured. Employ-
ees with low self-efficacy need lots of constructive pointers and positive feed-
back.12 Goal difficulty needs to match individuals’ perceived self-efficacy, but 
goals can be made more challenging as performance improves.13 Small suc-
cesses need to be rewarded. Employees’ expectations can be improved 
through guided experiences, mentoring, and role modeling.14
2. Self-Esteem: “I Like/Dislike Myself” 
 How worthwhile, capable, and ac-
ceptable do you think you are? The answer to this question is an indicator of your self-
esteem, the extent to which people like or dislike themselves, their overall 
self-evaluation.15 Research offers some interesting insights about how high or low self-
esteem can affect people and organizations.
■ 
People with high self-esteem. Compared with people with low self-esteem, 
people with high self-esteem are more apt to handle failure better, to empha-
size the positive, to take more risks, and to choose more unconventional 
jobs.16 However, when faced with pressure situations, high-self-esteem people 
have been found to become egotistical and boastful.17 Some have even been 
associated with aggressive and violent behavior.
■ 
People with low self-esteem. Conversely, low-self-esteem people confronted 
with failure have been found to have focused on their weaknesses and to have 
had primarily negative thoughts.18 Moreover, they are more dependent on oth-
ers and are more apt to be influenced by them and to be less likely to take in-
dependent positions. 
Can self-esteem be improved? According to one study, “low self-esteem can be 
raised more by having the person think of desirable characteristics possessed rather 
than of undesirable characteristics from which he or she is free.”19 Some ways in 
which managers can build employee self-esteem are shown below. (See Table 11.2.)
3. Locus of Control: “I Am/Am Not the Captain of My Fate” 
 As we dis-
cussed briefly in Chapter 1, locus of control indicates how much people believe they 
control their fate through their own efforts. If you have an internal locus of control, you 
believe you control your own destiny. If you have an external locus of control, you 
believe external forces control you.
Research shows internals and externals have important workplace differences. In-
ternals exhibit less anxiety, greater work motivation, and stronger expectations that 
effort leads to performance. They also obtain higher salaries.20
TABLE 11.2
Some Ways that Managers 
Can Boost Employee 
Self-Esteem
• 
Reinforce employees’ positive attributes and skills.
• 
Provide positive feedback whenever possible.
• 
Break larger projects into smaller tasks and projects.
• 
Express confidence in employees’ abilities to complete their tasks.
• 
Provide coaching whenever employees are seen to be struggling to complete tasks.

342 
PART 5 
Leading
These findings have two important implications for managers:
■ 
Expect different degrees of structure and compliance for each type. Employ-
ees with internal locus of control will probably resist close managerial supervi-
sion. Hence, they should probably be placed in jobs requiring high initiative and 
lower compliance. By contrast, employees with external locus of control might 
do better in highly structured jobs requiring greater compliance.
■ 
Employ different reward systems for each type. Since internals seem to 
have a greater belief that their actions have a direct effect on the consequences 
of that action, internals likely would prefer and respond more productively to 
incentives such as merit pay or sales commissions. (We discuss incentive 
compensation systems in Chapter 12.)
4. Emotional Stability: “I’m Fairly Secure/Insecure When Working Under 
Pressure” 
Emotional stability is the extent to which people feel secure and unwor-
ried and how likely they are to experience negative emotions under pressure. People 
with low levels of emotional stability are prone to anxiety and tend to view the world 
negatively, whereas people with high levels tend to show better job performance.
Emotional Intelligence: Understanding Your Emotions 
& the Emotions of Others
Emotional intelligence (EI or EQ) has been defined as “the ability to carry out accurate 
reasoning about emotions and the ability to use emotions and emotional knowledge to 
enhance thought.”21 Said another way, emotional intelligence is the ability to monitor 
your and others’ feelings and to use this information to guide your thinking and actions. 
The trait of emotional intelligence was first introduced in 1909. Since that time much 
research has examined the components of EI and its consequences.22
Why High EI Is Important 
Recent research underscores the importance of devel-
oping higher EI. It was associated with (1) better social relations for children and 
adults, (2) better family and intimate relationships, (3) being perceived more positively 
by others, (4) better academic achievement, and (5) better psychological well-being. 
Daniel Goleman, a psychologist who popularized the trait of EI, concluded that EI is 
composed of four key components: self-awareness, self-management, social aware-
ness, and relationship management.23 (See Table 11.3.)
TABLE 11.3
The Traits of Emotional 
Intelligence
 1. Self-awareness. The most essential trait. This is the ability to read your own emotions and gauge your 
moods accurately, so you know how you’re affecting others.
 2. Self-management. This is the ability to control your emotions and act with honesty and integrity in 
reliable and adaptable ways. You can leave occasional bad moods outside the office.
 3. Social awareness. This includes empathy, allowing you to show others that you care, and 
organizational intuition, so you keenly understand how your emotions and actions affect others.
 4. Relationship management. This is the ability to communicate clearly and convincingly, disarm 
conflicts, and build strong personal bonds.
Sources: Adapted from D. Goleman, R. Boyatzis, and A. McKee, “Primal Leadership: The Hidden Driver of Great 
Performance,” Harvard Business Review, December 2001, p. 49; and Primal Leadership: Realizing the Power of 
Emotional Intelligence (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002), p. 39. 
Can You Raise Your EI? 
Is there any way to raise your own emotional intelli-
gence, to sharpen your social skills? Although parts of EI represent stable traits that 

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
343
are not readily changed, other aspects, such as using empathy, can be developed.24 Two 
suggestions for improvement are as follows:
■ 
Develop awareness of your EI level. Becoming aware of your level of emo-
tional intelligence is the first step. The self-assessment below can be used for 
this purpose. (Some companies use the Personal Profile Analysis during the 
hiring process to provide insights into a person’s EI.25)
■ 
Learn about areas needing improvement. The next step is to learn more 
about those EI aspects in which improvement is needed. For example, to im-
prove your skills at using empathy, find articles on the topic and try to imple-
ment their recommendations. One such article suggests that empathy in 
communications is enhanced by trying to (1) understand how others feel 
about what they are communicating and (2) gaining appreciation of what peo-
ple want from an exchange.26
Emotional Intelligence: Self-Understanding Should Include 
“the Good, the Bad, & the Ugly”
Charlotte Beers is a former chairwoman and CEO of advertising 
agency Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide, but in her early 30s she 
was a management supervisor and “thought I was really doing 
well.” Then she heard from a friend that a colleague described 
her management style as “menacing.” That surprised her be-
cause Beers regarded herself as “a friendly, gentle Southern 
belle,” and the criticism was the exact opposite of the way she 
thought of herself.27
Learning to Self-Correct. She goes on: “I began to watch 
myself—something I think we all have to do—and I realized I did 
end meetings on a threatening note. I created urgency when there 
was none. I was taking on the persona of ‘I really mean business’ 
that I had learned from an earlier boss.” After that she learned to 
watch herself more and to self-correct about talking too much 
and interrupting other people.
YOUR CALL
The comment about her coming off as menacing, though dev-
astating at first to her, was important because “nothing is more 
helpful than finding out how others see you,” says Beers. “[You 
need to learn to] keep your own scorecard, and it has to include 
the good, the bad, and the ugly.” Do you agree? Could you con-
duct this kind of research about yourself in an impersonal way 
to find out how others see you?
EXAMPLE
Both research and our experience suggest that your emotional intelligence can help 
or hurt your career. Would you like to know where you stand and what you might do to 
improve your level of emotional intelligence? If yes, take Self-Assessment 11.2. ●
What Is Your Level of Emotional Intelligence?
The following survey is designed to assess your emotional 
intelligence. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-
Assessment 11.2. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
How do you stand on the five dimensions of emotional 
intelligence?
2. 
Use the scores from the items to identify your strengths 
and liabilities.
3. 
Identify two things you might focus on to enhance your 
emotional intelligence.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 11.2
®

Formal
Goals
Policies
Hierarchy
Structure
The
Organization
Informal
Values
Attitudes
Personalities
Perceptions
Conflicts
Culture
11.2 
Values, Attitudes, & Behavior
How do the hidden aspects of individuals—their values and attitudes—affect 
employee behavior?
THE BIG PICTURE
Organizational behavior (OB) considers how to better understand and manage people at work. In this section, 
we discuss individual values and attitudes and how they affect people’s actions and judgments.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
344 
PART 5 
Leading
FIGURE 11.1
Formal and informal aspects 
of an organization
If you look at a company’s annual report or at a brochure from its corporate communi-
cations department, you are apt to be given a picture of its formal aspects: Goals. 
Policies. Hierarchy. Structure.
Could you exert effective leadership if the formal aspects were all you knew about 
the company? What about the informal aspects? Values. Attitudes. Personalities. Per-
ceptions. Conflicts. Culture. Clearly, you need to know about these hidden, “messy” 
characteristics as well. (See Figure 11.1, left.)
Organizational Behavior: Trying to Explain & Predict 
Workplace Behavior
The informal aspects are the focus of the interdisciplinary field known as organiza-
tional behavior (OB), which is dedicated to better understanding and management of 
people at work. In particular, OB tries to help managers not only explain workplace 
behavior but also to predict it, so that they can better lead and motivate their employ-
ees to perform productively. OB looks at two areas:
■ 
Individual behavior. This is the subject of this chapter. We discuss such 
individual attributes as values, attitudes, personality, perception, and 
learning.
■ 
Group behavior. This is the subject of later chapters, particularly Chapter 13, 
where we discuss norms, roles, and teams.
Let’s begin by considering individual values, attitudes, and behavior.
Values: What Are Your Consistent Beliefs 
& Feelings about All Things?
Values are abstract ideals that guide one’s thinking and behavior across all situa-
tions.28 Lifelong behavior patterns are dictated by values that are fairly well set 
by the time people are in their early teens. After that, however, one’s values can 
be reshaped by significant life-altering events, such as having a child, undergo-
ing a business failure, or surviving the death of a loved one, a war, or a serious 
health threat.
From a manager’s point of view, it’s helpful to know that values are those con-
cepts, principles, things, people, or activities for which a person is willing to work 
hard—even make sacrifices for. Compensation, recognition, and status are common 
values in the workplace.29 However, according to numerous surveys, employees are 
more interested in striking a balance between work and family life rather than just 
earning a paycheck.30 For instance, 86% of 550 employees responding to one sur-
vey said flexibility to balance their work and personal life was an important aspect 
of job satisfaction.

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
345
Attitudes: What Are Your Consistent Beliefs & 
Feelings about Specific Things?
Values are abstract ideals—global beliefs and feelings—that are directed toward all objects, 
people, or events. Values tend to be consistent both over time and over related situations.
By contrast, attitudes are beliefs and feelings that are directed toward specific ob-
jects, people, or events. More formally, an attitude is defined as a learned predisposi-
tion toward a given object.31 It is important for you to understand the components of 
attitudes because attitudes directly influence our behavior.32
Example: If you dislike your present job, will you be happier if you change to a 
different job? Not necessarily. It depends on your attitude. In one study, researchers 
found that the attitudes of 5,000 middle-aged male employees toward their jobs 
were very stable over a 5-year period. Men with positive attitudes tended to stay 
positive, those with negative attitudes tended to stay negative. More revealingly, 
even those who changed jobs or occupations generally expressed the same attitudes 
they had previously.33
The Three Components of Attitudes: Affective, Cognitive, & Behavioral 
Attitudes have three components—affective, cognitive, and behavioral.34
■ 
The affective component—“I feel.” The affective component of an attitude 
consists of the feelings or emotions one has about a situation. How do you 
feel about people who talk loudly on cell-phones in restaurants? If you feel 
annoyed or angry, you’re expressing negative emotions or affect. (If you’re 
indifferent, your attitude is neutral.)
■ 
The cognitive component—“I believe.” The cognitive component of an at-
titude consists of the beliefs and knowledge one has about a situation. What do 
you think about people in restaurants talking on cell-phones? Is what they’re 
doing inconsiderate, acceptable, even admirable (because it shows they’re pro-
ductive)? Your answer reflects your beliefs or ideas about the situation.
■ 
The behavioral component—“I intend.” The behavioral component of an 
attitude, also known as the intentional component, refers to how one intends 
or expects to behave toward a situation. What would you intend to do if a 
person talked loudly on a cell-phone at the table next to you? Your action 
may reflect your negative or positive feelings (affective), your negative or 
positive beliefs (cognitive), and your intention or lack of intention to do 
anything (behavioral).
All three components are often manifested at any given time. For example, if you 
call a corporation and get one of those telephone-tree menus (“For customer service, 
press 1 . . .”) that never seems to connect you to a human being, you might be so irri-
tated that you would say:
■ 
“I hate being given the runaround.” [affective component—your feelings]
■ 
“That company doesn’t know how to take care of customers.” [cognitive 
component—your perceptions]
■ 
“I’ll never call them again.” [behavioral component—your intentions]
When Attitudes & Reality Collide: Consistency & Cognitive Dissonance 
One of the last things you want, probably, is to be accused of hypocrisy—to be criti-
cized for saying one thing and doing another. Like most people, you no doubt want to 
maintain consistency between your attitudes and your behavior.
But what if a strongly held attitude bumps up against a harsh reality that contradicts 
it? Suppose you’re extremely concerned about getting AIDS, which you believe you 
might get from contact with body fluids, including blood. Then you’re in a life-threatening 

346 
PART 5 
Leading
Leon Festinger. In 1957, the 
psychologist and his associates 
penetrated a cult whose 
members predicted that most 
people on earth would perish in 
a cataclysmic event except for a 
handful that would be rescued 
by aliens in a flying saucer. 
Festinger found himself 
standing with cult members on 
a hilltop awaiting the event, 
which, of course, did not 
happen. Later he proposed the 
term cognitive dissonance to 
explain how they rationalized 
the failure of their prophecy. 
Have you observed people 
employing this mechanism 
when the surefire thing they 
predicted did not occur?
auto accident in a third-world country and require surgery and blood transfusions—
including transfusions of blood from (possibly AIDS-infected) strangers in a blood bank. 
Do you reject the blood to remain consistent with your beliefs about getting AIDS?
In 1957, social psychologist Leon Festinger proposed the term cognitive dissonance 
to describe the psychological discomfort a person experiences between his or her cogni-
tive attitude and incompatible behavior.35 Because people are uncomfortable with incon-
sistency, Festinger theorized, they will seek to reduce the “dissonance” or tension of the 
inconsistency. How they deal with the discomfort, he suggested, depends on three factors:
■ 
Importance. How important are the elements creating the dissonance? Most 
people can put up with some ambiguities in life. For example, many drivers 
don’t think obeying speed limits is very important, even though they profess 
to be law-abiding citizens. People eat greasy foods even though they know 
that ultimately they may contribute to heart disease.
■ 
Control. How much control does one have over the matters that create dis-
sonance? A juror may not like the idea of voting the death penalty but believe 
that he or she has no choice but to follow the law in the case. A taxpayer may 
object to his taxes being spent on, say, special-interest corporate welfare for a 
particular company but not feel that he or she can withhold taxes.
■ 
Rewards. What rewards are at stake in the dissonance? You’re apt to cling to 
old ideas in the face of new evidence if you have a lot invested emotionally or 
financially in those ideas. If you’re a police officer who worked 20 years to 
prove a particular suspect guilty of murder, you’re not apt to be very accepting 
of contradictory evidence after all that time.
Among the main ways to reduce cognitive dissonance are the following. (See Table 11.4.)
■ 
Change your attitude and/or behavior. This would seem to be the most obvi-
ous, even rational, response to take when confronted with cognitive dissonance.
■ 
Belittle the importance of the inconsistent behavior. This happens all the 
time.
■ 
Find consonant elements that outweigh the dissonant ones. This kind of 
rationalizing goes on quite often, as when employees are confronted with 
ethical dilemmas but fear losing their jobs.
TABLE 11.4 
Examples of Ways to Reduce Cognitive Dissonance
Sources: R. Plotnik, Introduction to Psychology, 3rd ed. (Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1993), p. 602; E. Aronson, R. D. Akert, and T. D. Wilson, Social 
Psychology, 6th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006); S. Bok, cited in E. Venant, “A Nation of Cheaters,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
January 7, 1992, p. D3, reprinted from Los Angeles Times; A. Dobrzeniecki, quoted in D. Butler, “MIT Students Guilty of Cheating,” Boston Globe, March 2, 
1991, p. 25.
TECHNIQUE 
EXAMPLES
Change attitude and/or 
Gregory Withow once belonged to the White Aryan Resistance and other racist groups. He preached 
behavior 
hatred and bashed Japanese tourists in San Francisco. Then he met Sylvia, who rejected his white-
 
supremacist ideas. As he grew to love her, he found himself caught between his ideas and her 
 
disapproval. To decrease this cognitive dissonance, he renounced his old racist beliefs and changed 
 
his behavior, even becoming a spokesperson for the antiracist Anti-Defamation League.
Belittle importance of 
All cigarette smokers are repeatedly exposed to information that smoking is hazardous to health. But 
the inconsistent behavior  
many belittle the habit as not being as risky as the antismoking messages suggest. (“My grandmother
 
smokes, and she’s in her 80s.”)
Find consonant elements 
Ethics professor Sissela Bok says students may justify cheating on an exam by saying “I don’t 
that outweigh 
usually do this, but here I really have to do it.” As one MIT graduate student said, students see 
dissonant ones  
cheating take place and “feel they have to. People get used to it, even though they know it’s not right.”

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
347
Behavior: How Values & Attitudes Affect 
People’s Actions & Judgments
Values (global) and attitudes (specific) are generally in harmony, but not always. For 
example, a manager may put a positive value on helpful behavior (global) yet may 
have a negative attitude toward helping an unethical coworker (specific). Together, 
however, values and attitudes influence people’s workplace behavior—their actions 
and judgments. ●
How Values & Attitudes Affect Behavior: Thinking Beyond 
Profit to Create Value for Society
As a manager, would you think most employees would agree 
that innovation is beneficial—that the original Silicon Valley firms 
prospered because they were constantly creating new products 
and services? Employees may have the value, then, that innova-
tion is good—that it leads to productivity and profitability.
However, what if employees think that a company’s purpose 
is to be solely a money-making machine? They might have the 
attitude that social innovation is unnecessary, even discouraged.
The Thinking behind Great Companies. Great companies, 
suggests Rosabeth Moss Kanter of Harvard Business School, 
have broader values—and attitudes. Firms such as IBM, Pep-
siCo, and Procter & Gamble, she says, “work to make money, of 
course, but in their choices of how to do so, they think about 
building enduring institutions. . . . Society and people are not 
afterthoughts or inputs to be used and discarded but are core 
to their purpose.”36 Balancing public interest with financial in-
terest means that CEOs must expand their investments beyond 
profit-maximizing activities such as marketing, research and 
development, and the like, and include employee empower-
ment, emotional engagement, values-based leadership, and 
related social contributions.
Ways of Creating Value. “Affirming purpose and values through 
service is a regular part of how great companies express their 
identities,” Kanter believes. Thus, on the 100th anniversary of its 
founding, International Business Machines offered a global ser-
vice day, with 300,000 IBM employees signing up to perform 
2.6 million hours of service to the world, such as giving schools 
training in software tools. In West Africa, Procter & Gamble set up 
Pampers mobile clinics to reduce infant mortality by having 
health care professionals teach postnatal care, examine babies, 
and hand out Pampers diapers. “The emotional tugs for P&G em-
ployees are strong,” says Kanter; “they feel inspired by the fact 
that their product is at the center of a mission to save lives.”
YOUR CALL
Where do you think the inspiration for giving a firm a motivat-
ing purpose and values beyond making money should come 
from? Does it have to come from a company’s leaders? Do you 
think it could begin as voluntary activity, as with employees 
finding each other through company chat rooms and sharing 
ideas in their free time?
EXAMPLE
Service day. IBM employees in New York City work with NYC CoolRoofs 
to try to reduce energy usage and lower greenhouse gases. 

11.3 
Perception & Individual Behavior
What are the distortions in perception that can cloud one’s judgment?
THE BIG PICTURE
Perception, a four-step process, can be skewed by four types of distortion: stereotyping, the halo effect, 
the recency effect, and causal attribution. We also consider the self-fulfilling prophecy, which can affect 
our judgment as well.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
If you were a smoker, which warning on a cigarette pack would make you think more 
about quitting? “Smoking seriously harms you and others around you”? A blunt 
“Smoking kills”? Or a stark graphic image showing decaying teeth?
This is the kind of decision public health authorities in various countries are wres-
tling with. (One study found that highly graphic images about the negative effects of 
smoking had the greatest impact on smokers’ intentions to quit.37) These officials, in 
other words, are trying to decide how perception might influence behavior.
The Four Steps in the Perceptual Process
Perception is the process of interpreting and understanding one’s environment. The pro-
cess of perception is complex, but it can be boiled down to four steps.38 (See Figure 11.2.)
348 
PART 5 
Leading
1. Selective
attention
“Did I notice
something?”
2. Interpretation
& evaluation
“What was it I
noticed & what
does it mean?”
3. Storing in
memory
“Remember it
as an event,
concept, person,
or all three?”
4. Retrieving
from memory
to make
judgments &
decisions
“What do I recall
about that?”
FIGURE 11.2 
The four steps in the perceptual process
In this book, we are less concerned about the theoretical steps in perception than in 
how perception is distorted, since this has considerable bearing on the manager’s judg-
ment and job. In any one of the four stages of the perception process misunderstand-
ings or errors in judgment can occur. Perceptual errors can lead to mistakes that can be 
damaging to yourself, other people, and your organization.
Four Distortions in Perception
Although there are other types of distortion in perception, we will describe the follow-
ing: (1) stereotyping, (2) the halo effect, (3) the recency effect, and (4) causal attribution.
1. Stereotyping: “Those Sorts of People Are Pretty Much the Same” 
 If 
you’re a tall African American man, do people make remarks about basketball players? 
If you’re of Irish descent, do people believe you drink a lot? If you’re Jewish, do people 
think you’re money-oriented? If you’re a woman, do people think you’re automatically nur-
turing? All these are stereotypes. Stereotyping is the tendency to attribute to an individual 
the characteristics one believes are typical of the group to which that individual belongs.39
Principal areas of stereotyping that should be of concern to you as a manager are 
(1) sex-role stereotypes, (2) age stereotypes, and (3) race/ethnicity stereotypes. (People 
with disabilities, discussed in Section 11.5, are also apt to be stereotyped.)

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
349
Sex-Role Stereotypes  A sex-role stereotype is the belief that differing traits and 
abilities make males and females particularly well suited to different roles. Although 
research shows that men and women do not differ in stereotypical ways, the stereo-
types still persist.40 Thus, for example, people tend to prefer male bosses and generally 
view women leaders as being less effective than men.41
Some good news is that there doesn’t seem to be a pro-male bias in hiring recommen-
dations or in performance ratings.42 Unfortunately, promotional decisions may still be 
affected by sex-role stereotyping. A study of a multinational Fortune 500 company, for 
example, revealed that men received more favorable evaluations than women in spite of 
controlling for age, education, organizational tenure, salary grade, and type of job.43
Age Stereotypes Age stereotypes tend to depict older workers as less involved in 
their work, less satisfied, less motivated, and less committed than younger workers.44 
This may be why workers over age 55 found it harder to get jobs than younger col-
leagues during the 2009 recession year.45 But in fact research shows that as employ-
ees’ age increases, so does their job involvement and satisfaction, work motivation, 
and organizational commitment.46
Stereotypes also depict older workers as being less creative and more accident 
prone; however, this is not borne out.47 Finally, the stereotype that older workers have 
higher absenteeism—when an employee doesn’t show up for work—is not supported 
by the research; if anything, managers should focus more attention on absenteeism 
among younger rather than older workers.48
Because the median age of Americans is currently 37.6 years—the oldest in our 
history—it seems clear that managers will probably be dealing with an older 
workforce.49 Moreover, by 2050, about one-fifth of the population will be over age 65, 
but many, whether by choice or by necessity, will continue working.50 World-famous 
heart surgeon Michael DeBakey, for instance, who was born in 1908, continued to 
work into his late nineties.51
Race/Ethnicity Stereotypes Race/ethnicity stereotypes don’t bear repeating 
here, but it is noteworthy that there are not a lot of Hispanic and African American man-
agers in the United States. For example, in 2014, only 20.7% of Hispanics and Latinos 
held managerial, professional, and related jobs and only 29.1% of blacks, compared 
with 38.7% of whites and 49.5% of Asians.52 An encouraging sign, incidentally, is that 
analysis of census data found that in 14 of the 25 largest metropolitan areas, including 
Boston, New York, and San Francisco, more immigrants (who can be of any race, of 
course, but are often stereotyped as racial minorities) were employed in white-collar 
occupations than in lower-wage work, such as construction or cleaning.53
2. The Halo Effect: “One Trait Tells Me All I Need to Know” 
 Do you think 
physically attractive people have more desirable traits than unattractive people—that 
they are happier, kinder, more successful, more socially skilled, more sensitive, more 
interesting, independent, exciting, sexually warm, even smarter and nicer? All of these 
traits have been attributed to attractive people.54 This situation is an example of the halo 
effect, in which we form an impression of an individual based on a single trait. (The phe-
nomenon is also called the horn-and-halo effect, because not only can a single positive 
trait be generalized into an array of positive traits but the reverse is also true.)
As if we needed additional proof that life is unfair, it has been shown that attractive 
people generally are treated better than unattractive people. Attractive members of 
Congress get more TV coverage, and attractive political candidates win more often.55 
Attractive students have higher expectations by teachers in terms of academic achieve-
ment.56 Attractive employees are generally paid higher salaries than unattractive ones 
are, and attractive CEOs are paid more than less appealing CEOs.57 (Male CEOs also 
tend to be taller—6 feet compared to an average man’s 5-feet-10.5 inches, in one 
Swedish study.58) Clearly, however, if a manager fails to look at all of an individual’s 
traits, he or she has no right to complain if that employee doesn’t work out.

350 
PART 5 
Leading
Handsomely compensated. 
Attractive employees are 
generally paid better than 
unattractive ones are. Why do 
you think that is? Do you think 
it’s inevitable?
EXAMPLE
The Halo Effect: Do Good Looks Make People Richer & Happier?
Are attractive employees paid more than ordinary (or unattrac-
tive) people for the same work? Are they happier? That would 
seem to be the case, according to a 2011 study involving more 
than 25,000 people worldwide.59
$250,000 More. Five large surveys conducted from 1971 to 2009 
in the United States, Britain, and Germany found that beautiful 
people earn an extra $250,000 during their careers than the least 
attractive people. In addition, says University of Texas economist 
Daniel Hamermesh, leader of the study, the best-looking people 
are more likely to remain employed, get promoted, find a higher-
earning (and better-looking) spouse, and even get better deals on 
home loans.60 Hamermesh is also author of Beauty Pays: Why 
Attractive People Are More Successful.61 “In economic terms, 
beauty is scarce. People distinguish themselves and pay attention 
to beauty,” he says. “Companies realize that hiring better-looking 
people helps in various ways. In every market, whether it’s jobs or 
marriage, beauty matters.” The result of all this is that beautiful 
people are generally happier people than ordinary folks. “The ma-
jority of beauty’s effect on happiness works through its impact on 
economic outcomes,” says Hamermesh.62
Do Good Looks Produce Confident Communicators? Another 
study produces additional insights:63
• Although beautiful people are no better than ordinary peo-
ple at solving puzzles such as mazes, they are more self-
confident about their abilities. “Being good looking,” says 
one article about the study, “seems to be strongly associ-
ated with self-confidence, a trait that is apparently attrac-
tive to employers.”64
• When study subjects pretending to be employers looked 
only at resumes, physical appearance had no effect on 
their judgments, as you might expect. When photos, 
in-person interviews, and even phone interviews were 
involved, employers showed higher estimates for beautiful 
people’s productivity—especially when they had face-to-
face interviews but even with telephone-only interviews, 
the result, apparently, of the effect of self-confidence that 
came across on the phone.
• Good-looking people are good communicators, which also 
contributes to employers’ positive perceptions.
The Halo Misperception. In sum, “Employers (wrongly) expect 
good-looking workers to perform better than their less-attractive 
counterparts under both visual and oral interaction,” said the re-
searchers, “even after controlling for individual worker character-
istics and worker confidence.”
YOUR CALL
Are you yourself influenced in your judgment of people by how 
attractive they are? Do you think as a manager you could look 
beyond people’s physical appearances to be a good judge 
of their competence? Why?

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
351
3. The Recency Effect: “The Most Recent Impressions Are the Ones That 
Count” 
The recency effect is the tendency to remember recent information better 
than earlier information, perhaps because when you activate your recall, the later recol-
lections are still present in working memory.65 You see this misperception often operat-
ing among investors (even professionals), who are more likely to buy a stock if they 
see something about it in the news or if it has a high one-day return.66
The Recency Effect: Can You Use It to Get a Better Performance Review?
If you work for a firm that does employee performance re-
views only once a year, as is common in India, maybe you 
should take your vacation during the first six months and work 
your hardest during the second six months—those preceding 
your annual appraisal. “The recency effect has a lot to do with 
the [amount] of the bonus you make,” says one Indian man-
ager. “It’s often what you have done or achieved in the last 
three to six months that drives your bonus.”67 In 2012, Adobe 
Systems, maker of Photoshop and other software, which has 
10,000 employees, 2,000 of them in India, announced it was 
giving up the once-a-year performance review, in part be-
cause of the recency effect.68
YOUR CALL
What decision(s) would you admit to making in which you were 
influenced by the recency effect?
EXAMPLE
4. Causal Attributions 
Causal attribution is the activity of inferring causes for 
observed behavior. Rightly or wrongly, we constantly formulate cause-and-effect ex-
planations for our own and others’ behavior. Attributional statements such as the fol-
lowing are common: “Joe drinks too much because he has no willpower; but I need a 
few drinks after work because I’m under a lot of pressure.”
Even though our causal attributions tend to be self-serving and are often invalid, it’s 
important to understand how people formulate attributions because they profoundly 
affect organizational behavior. For example, a supervisor who attributes an employee’s 
poor performance to a lack of effort might reprimand that person. However, training 
might be deemed necessary if the supervisor attributes the poor performance to a lack 
of ability.
As a manager, you need to be alert to two attributional tendencies that can distort 
one’s interpretation of observed behavior—the fundamental attribution bias and the 
self-serving bias.
■ 
Fundamental attribution bias. In the fundamental attribution bias, people 
attribute another person’s behavior to his or her personal characteristics rather 
than to situational factors.
Example: A study of manufacturing employees found that top managers 
attributed the cause of industrial back pain to individuals, whereas workers 
attributed it to the environment.69
■ 
Self-serving bias. In the self-serving bias, people tend to take more personal 
responsibility for success than for failure.
Example: The way students typically analyze their performance on ex-
ams shows self-serving bias. “A” students are likely to attribute their 
grade to high ability or hard work and “D” students blame factors such as 
bad luck, unclear lectures, and unfair testing.70 
Another example: Europeans blamed Wall Street for the 2010 economic 
collapse in Greece. However, a Wall Street Journal article points out that 
a close look at Greece’s finances “over the nearly 10 years since it adopted 
the euro shows not only that Greece was the principal author of its debt 
problems, but also that fellow European governments repeatedly turned a 
blind eye to its flouting of rules.”71

352 
PART 5 
Leading
The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy, or Pygmalion Effect
The self-fulfilling prophecy, also known as the Pygmalion (“pig-mail-yun”) effect, 
describes the phenomenon in which people’s expectations of themselves or others lead 
them to behave in ways that make those expectations come true.
Expectations are important. An example is a waiter who expects some poorly 
dressed customers to be stingy tippers, who therefore gives them poor service and so 
gets the result he or she expected—a much lower tip than usual. Research has shown 
that by raising managers’ expectations for individuals performing a wide variety of 
tasks, higher levels of achievement and productivity can be achieved.72
The lesson for you as a manager is that when you expect employees to perform 
badly, they probably will, and when you expect them to perform well, they probably 
will. (In the G. B. Shaw play Pygmalion, a speech coach bets he can get a lower-class 
girl to change her accent and her demeanor so that she can pass herself off as a duch-
ess. In six months, she successfully “passes” in high society, having assumed the at-
tributes of a woman of sensitivity and taste.) ●
PRACTICAL ACTION
How Can Managers Harness the Pygmalion Effect 
to Lead Employees?
Luke Iorio, president of The Institute for Professional Excellence 
in Coaching, says that employees want to use their knowledge 
and experience to contribute to the value of the organization. 
“Employees have many answers [managers] haven’t thought 
of,” he says. “The main thing is to see people as they can be, 
and to expect great things of them.”73 And more often than not, 
they’ll deliver.
Research in a variety of industries and occupations shows 
that the effect of the self-fulfilling prophecy can be quite 
strong.74 That is, managerial expectations powerfully influence 
employee behavior and performance. Managers can harness 
this effect by building a hierarchical framework that reinforces 
positive performance expectations throughout the organization. 
The foundation of this framework is employee self-expectations. 
In turn, positive self-expectations improve interpersonal expec-
tations by encouraging people to work toward common goals. 
This cooperation enhances group-level productivity and pro-
motes positive performance expectations within the work group.
How to Create a Pygmalion Effect
Because positive self-expectations are the foundation for cre-
ating an organizationwide Pygmalion effect, let us consider 
how managers can create positive performance expectations. 
This task may be accomplished using various combinations of 
the following:
 1. Recognize that everyone has the potential to increase 
his or her performance.
 2. Instill confidence in your staff.
 3. Set high performance goals.
 4. Positively reinforce employees for a job well done.
 5. Provide constructive feedback when necessary.
 6. Help employees advance through the organization.
 7. Introduce new employees as if they have outstanding 
potential.
 8. Become aware of your personal prejudices and nonverbal 
messages that may discourage others.
 9. Encourage employees to visualize the successful 
execution of tasks.
 10. Help employees master key skills and tasks.75
YOUR CALL
How can you put the Pygmalion effect to use in college organi-
zational life?

11.4 
Work-Related Attitudes & Behaviors Managers 
Need to Deal With
Is it important for managers to pay attention to employee attitudes?
THE BIG PICTURE
Attitudes are important because they affect behavior. Managers need to be alert to the key work-related 
attitudes having to do with engagement, job satisfaction, and organizational commitment. Among the types 
of employee behavior they should attend to are their on-the-job performance and productivity, absenteeism 
and turnover, organizational citizenship behaviors, and counterproductive work behaviors.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
“Keep the employees happy,” we often hear. It’s true that attitudes are important, the 
reason being that attitudes affect behavior. But is keeping employees happy all that 
managers need to know to get results? We discuss motivation for performance in the 
next chapter. Here, let us consider what managers need to know about key work-
related attitudes and behaviors.
Three types of attitudes managers are particularly interested in are (1) employee 
engagement, (2) job satisfaction, and (3) organizational commitment.
1. Employee Engagement: How Connected Are You to Your Work? 
Research on job involvement has evolved into the study of an individual difference called 
employee engagement, defined as an individual’s involvement, satisfaction, and enthusi-
asm for work.76 Engaged employees are expected to have feelings of urgency, intensity, and 
enthusiasm, as well as focus, which make them more committed to their employer and to 
put more effort into their jobs.77 In other words, such employees “give their all” at work.
Some consulting firms have collected data to support the practical value of em-
ployee engagement.78 For example, when an employee is engaged, it can take 10 times 
as much money to lure him or her away as a disengaged employee, according to some 
data.79 Case studies further suggest that employee performance increases 10% when 
employees are highly engaged and increase 50% when they have both high engage-
ment and high enablement (such as a supportive environment).80
People who are positive or optimistic, proactive, conscientious, and mindful (focused 
in the present, not daydreaming) are thought to be more likely to be more engaged em-
ployees.81 Employees are also more likely to become engaged when an organization has 
the kind of culture that promotes employee development, recognition, and trust between 
management and employees.82 Job security and feelings of psychological safety (when 
employees feel free of fear in trying new ideas) also propel job engagement.83
Do you want to achieve higher grades in your classes? If yes, you will find that be-
ing engaged in your studies will help. You can determine your level of engagement 
with your studies by completing Self-Assessment 11.3. Results can be used to develop 
an engagement improvement plan.
 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
353
To What Extent Are You Engaged in Your 
Studies?
The following survey was designed to assess your level of en-
gagement in your studies. Go to connect.mheducation.com 
and take Self-Assessment 11.3. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
What is your level of engagement?
2. 
Find your three lowest-rated items. Based on the content 
of these items, what can you do to improve your level of 
engagement? Hint: doing this requires you to identify the 
cause of the low ratings for each item.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 11.3
®

354 
PART 5 
Leading
2. Job Satisfaction: How Much Do You Like or Dislike Your Job? 
Job 
satisfaction is the extent to which you feel positive or negative about various aspects 
of your work. Most people don’t like everything about their jobs. Their overall satisfac-
tion depends on how they feel about several components, such as work, pay, promo-
tions, coworkers, and supervision.84 Among the key correlates of job satisfaction are 
stronger motivation, job involvement, organizational commitment, and life satisfaction 
and less absenteeism, tardiness, turnover, and perceived stress.85
Reportedly only 47.7% of U.S. workers were satisfied with their jobs in 2013, down 
from 61.1% in 1987, according to a study of 5,000 households.86 But another survey 
found that employee job satisfaction in 2013 was 81%, down from a high of 86% in 
2009 but up from a low of 77% in 2002.87 Job satisfaction today is much better, of 
course, than in the aftermath of the 2007–2009 recession. Then Americans were forced 
to work longer hours and often for the same or less pay, and many struck back by suing 
employers for violating wage-and-hour laws, as by forcing them to work off the clock 
or without overtime pay.88
But what is the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance—does 
more satisfaction cause better performance or does better performance cause more 
satisfaction? This is a subject of much debate among management scholars.89 One 
comprehensive study found that (1) job satisfaction and performance are moderately 
related, meaning that employee job satisfaction is a key work attitude managers should 
consider when trying to increase performance; but (2) the relationship between satis-
faction and performance is complex and it seems that both variables influence each 
other through a host of individual differences and work-environment characteristics.90
How satisfied are you with the job you are in now, if you have one, or the last job 
you had? To get an idea, complete Self-Assessment 11.4.
How Satisfied Are You with Your Present Job?
The following survey was designed to assess how satisfied you 
are with your current job, or a previous job, if you’re not pres-
ently working. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take 
Self-Assessment 11.4. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
What is your level of satisfaction with recognition, 
compensation, and supervision?
2. 
If you have low to medium satisfaction with any aspect of 
the job, identify what can be done to increase your job 
satisfaction. Be sure to consider what you can do, what 
your boss might do, or what the organization might do. 
Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 11.4
®
3. Organizational Commitment 
Organizational commitment reflects the extent 
to which an employee identifies with an organization and is committed to its goals. For 
instance, some managers question whether mothers with children can be fully commit-
ted to their jobs, although one survey found that only 4% of more than 2,612 women 
said that their bosses think that they are not as committed to their jobs because they 
have children.91 Research shows a strong positive relationship between organizational 
commitment and job satisfaction and a moderate association with job performance.92 
Thus, if managers are able to increase job satisfaction, employees may show higher 
levels of commitment, which in turn can elicit higher performance.93 It can also reduce 
employee turnover.94
Important Workplace Behaviors
Why, as a manager, do you need to learn how to manage individual differences? 
The answer, as you might expect, is so that you can influence employees to do their 

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
355
Thriving employees. 
Zingerman’s, an Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, community of food-
related businesses, encourages 
employees to thrive through 
such devices as information 
sharing and experimenting with 
ways to solve problems on their 
own. Employees with high job 
satisfaction can help 
organizations grow.
best work. Among the types of behavior 
are (1) performance and productivity, 
(2) absenteeism and turnover, (3) organi-
zational citizenship behaviors, and 
(4) counterproductive work behaviors.
1. Evaluating Behavior When Em-
ployees Are Working: Performance 
& Productivity 
Every job has certain 
expectations, but in some jobs performance 
and productivity are easier to define than in 
others. How many contacts should a tele-
marketing sales rep make in a day? How 
many sales should he or she close? Often a 
job of this nature will have a history of ac-
complishments (from what previous job 
holders have attained) so that it is possible 
to quantify performance behavior.
However, an advertising agency account executive handling major clients such as a 
carmaker or a beverage manufacturer may go months before landing this kind of big 
account. Or, as we’ve mentioned, a researcher in a pharmaceutical company may take 
years to develop a promising new prescription drug.
In short, the method of evaluating performance must match the job being done.
2. Evaluating Behavior When Employees Are Not Working: Absenteeism 
& Turnover 
Should you be suspicious of every instance of absenteeism? Of course, 
some absences—illness, death in the family, or jury duty, for example—are legitimate. 
However, a lot of no-show behavior is related to job dissatisfaction.95 One study of 700 
managers found 20% called in sick simply because they didn’t feel like going to work 
that day. The top three reasons for employees taking bogus sick days are for doing 
personal errands, catching up on sleep, and relaxing.96
Absenteeism may be a precursor to turnover, when employees leave their jobs. 
 Every organization experiences some turnover, as employees leave for reasons of family, 
better job prospects, or retirement. However, except in low-skill industries, a continual 
revolving door of new employees is usually not a good sign, since replacement and 
training is expensive.97 For an hourly employee, experts estimate the cost of turnover 
is about 30% of annual salary and for professional employees it is up to 150%.98
Experience demonstrates five practical ways to reduce turnover: (1) Base hiring 
decisions on the extent to which an applicant’s values fit the organization’s values. 
(2) Provide post-hiring support, which is referred to as onboarding. Onboarding programs 
help employees to integrate and transition to new jobs by making them familiar with 
corporate policies, procedures, culture, and politics by clarifying work-role expectations 
and responsibilities.99 (3) Focus on enhancing employee engagement. (4) Incorporate 
realistic job previews (RJPs, discussed in Chapter 9) into the hiring process. (5) Offer 
employees benefits, such as flexible work hours (discussed in Chapter 12), that meet 
their needs and values.100
3. Evaluating Behavior That Exceeds Work Roles: Organizational Citizen-
ship Behaviors 
Organizational citizenship behaviors are those employee behav-
iors that are not directly part of employees’ job descriptions—that exceed their 
work-role requirements. Examples, according to one description, include “such ges-
tures as constructive statements about the department, expression of personal interest 
in the work of others, suggestions for improvement, training new people, respect for 
the spirit as well as the letter of housekeeping rules, care for organizational property, 
and punctuality and attendance well beyond standard or enforceable levels.”101 

356 
PART 5 
Leading
Research demonstrates a significant and moderately positive correlation between orga-
nizational citizenship behaviors and job satisfaction, productivity, efficiency, and cus-
tomer satisfaction.102
4. Evaluating Behavior That Harms the Organization: Counterproductive 
Work Behaviors 
The flip side of organizational citizenship behaviors would seem 
to be what are called counterproductive work behaviors (CWB), types of behavior that 
harm employees and the organization as a whole. Such behaviors may include absen-
teeism and tardiness, drug and alcohol abuse, and disciplinary problems but also ex-
tend beyond them to more serious acts such as accidents, sabotage, sexual harassment, 
violence, theft, and white-collar crime.103 Some 96% of workers say they have experi-
enced uncivil behavior, and 98% have witnessed it.104
Clearly, if an employee engages in some kind of CWB, the organization needs to 
respond quickly and appropriately, defining the specific behaviors that are unacceptable 
and the requirements for acceptable behavior.105 It is more desirable, however, to take 
preventive measures. One way is to screen for CWB during the hiring process. For in-
stance, it’s been found that applicants scoring higher on cognitive ability (intelligence) 
tests are less likely to be involved in violence and property damage after they are 
hired.106 Employees are also less likely to engage in CWB if they have satisfying jobs 
that offer autonomy or that don’t require them to supervise too many people.107 ●
EXAMPLE
Extreme Counterproductive Work Behaviors: Violence in the Workplace
A fairly common kind of CWB is bullying, which we described in 
Chapter 9. Bullying, harassment, or unfair treatment can be 
inflicted on subordinates, coworkers, and even customers. 
Indeed, in one survey of U.S. employees, 45% said they had had 
a boss who was abusive.108 Such behavior is especially toxic to 
the organization because when employees are intimidated, hu-
miliated, or undermined by an abusive manager, they say they 
are more likely to quit their jobs or to retaliate with CWB aimed 
at that manager or their fellow workers.109
Post Office Massacres. In Murder by Proxy: How America Went 
Postal (2010), filmmaker Emil Chiaberi takes a look at how hostile 
work environments, along with societal changes and economic 
downturns, have contributed to shooting sprees in post offices, 
businesses, and schools in the last quarter century. A focus of the 
documentary is Royal Oak, Michigan, letter carrier Thomas 
McIlvane, who was written up for taking lunch at inappropriate 
locations, ordered to have his vehicle inspected for a brake-light 
problem everyone could see didn’t exist, and then eventually dis-
missed for swearing at a supervisor. McIlvane later fired 
100 rounds at postal employees, killing four and injuring four 
before turning the gun on himself. A congressional committee de-
termined McIlvane “was a powder keg ready to blow because of 
petty, intimidating, even ‘reprehensible’ managers at the Royal 
Oak Post Office,” according to one account.110
Recognizing Potential Violence. “Violence rarely begins with 
someone walking in and shooting others,” says psychiatrist Roger 
Brunswick. “Violence usually builds slowly and starts with bully-
ing, intimidation, and threats.”111 Newspaper stories about mass 
shootings by disgruntled or mentally ill employees (or students, as 
in 2014 at the University of California, Santa Barbara) have made 
organizations more aware that erratic behavior has to be spotted 
and dealt with early. Pitney Bowes, for instance, set up a hotline 
that employees may call anonymously to report any such con-
cerns, and it has trained managers in identifying signs of troubling 
behavior.112
YOUR CALL
If a coworker of yours said something like, “I could KILL my 
boss for [something he or she did],” how would you take it? 
What would you do?

11.5 
The New Diversified Workforce
What trends in workplace diversity should managers be aware of?
THE BIG PICTURE
One of today’s most important management challenges is working with stakeholders of all sorts who 
vary widely in diversity—in age, gender, race, religion, ethnicity, sexual orientation, capabilities, and 
socioeconomic background. Managers should also be aware of the differences between internal and 
external dimensions of diversity and barriers to diversity.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Might you hold a few preconceptions that are worth examining? Here’s a reality 
check:
■ 
Assumption: Illegal immigrants dramatically impact the U.S. economy. 
No, says a study by the Migration Policy Institute. Undocumented immigrants 
represent only about 5% of the workforce and contribute just 0.03% of the 
U.S. gross domestic product.113
■ 
Assumption: Customer bias favoring white men has just about disap-
peared. Unfortunately not, suggests a study of college students, which found 
that people give higher ratings for customer satisfaction to white men than to 
women and members of minorities.114
■ 
Assumption: Young workers earn less than they used to. Yes, evidently. In 
the decade ending 2011, the average inflation-adjusted hourly wage for male 
college graduates dropped 11% and for female college graduates 7%, and it 
hasn't got much better since.115
The United States is becoming more diverse in its ethnic, racial, gender, and age 
makeup—more nonwhite, more single, more working parents, and so on—and the 
consequences are not always what you would expect.
In the view of Scott E. Page, professor of complex systems, political science, 
and economics at the University of Michigan, diversity and variety in staffing pro-
duces organizational strength.116 “Diverse groups of people bring to organizations 
more and different ways of seeing a problem,” he told an interviewer, “and, thus, 
faster/better ways of solving it. . . . There’s certainly a lot of evidence that people’s 
identity groups—ethnic, racial, sexual, age—matter when it comes to diversity 
in thinking.”117
Diversity may have its benefits, but it can also be an important management chal-
lenge. Let’s consider this.
How to Think about Diversity: 
Which Differences Are Important?
Diversity represents all the ways people are unlike and alike—the differences and 
similarities in age, gender, race, religion, ethnicity, sexual orientation, capabilities, and 
socioeconomic background. Note here that diversity is not synonymous with differ-
ences. Rather, it encompasses both differences and similarities. This means that as a 
manager you need to manage both simultaneously.
To help distinguish the important ways in which people differ, diversity experts Lee 
Gardenswartz and Anita Rowe have identified a “diversity wheel” consisting of four 
layers of diversity: (1) personality, (2) internal dimensions, (3) external dimensions, 
and (4) organizational dimensions. (See Figure 11.3, next page.)
 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
357

358 
PART 5 
Leading
Let’s consider these four layers:
Personality 
At the center of the diversity wheel is personality. It is at the center 
because, as we said in Section 11.1, personality is defined as the stable physical and 
mental characteristics responsible for a person’s identity.
Internal Dimensions 
Internal dimensions of diversity are those human differences 
that exert a powerful, sustained effect throughout every stage of our lives: gender, age, 
ethnicity, race, sexual orientation, physical abilities.118 These are referred to as the 
primary dimensions of diversity because they are not within our control for the most 
part. Yet they strongly influence our attitudes and expectations and assumptions about 
other people, which in turn influence our own behavior.
What characterizes internal dimensions of diversity is that they are visible and sa-
lient in people. And precisely because these characteristics are so visible, they may be 
associated with certain stereotypes—for example, that black people work in menial 
Or
ga
niz
ati
on
al 
Di
me
ns
io
ns
 
Management
status
Functional level/
classification
Union
affiliation
Geographic
location
Age
Marital
status
Parental
status
Ethnicity
Appearance
Work
experience
Work
location
Educational
background
Religion
Physical
ability
Sexual
orientation
Recreational
habits
Income
Personal
habits
Work
content/
field
Division/
department/
unit
group
Gender
Seniority
Race
Ex
te
rn
al 
Di
m
en
si
on
s 
I
n
te
r
n
al
 
D
i
m
e
n
si
o
n
s 
Personality
FIGURE 11.3 
The diversity wheel
Four layers of diversity
Source: From Diverse Teams at Work by Lee Gardenswartz and Anita Rowe. Copyright 2003, Society for Human Resource 
Management, Alexandria, VA. Used with permission. All rights reserved.

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
359
jobs. For instance, an African American female middle manager reports that, while on 
vacation and sitting by the pool at a resort, she was approached by a 50ish white male 
who “demanded that I get him extra towels. I said, ‘Excuse me?’ He then said, ‘Oh, 
you don’t work here,’ with no shred of embarrassment or apology in his voice.”119
External Dimensions 
External dimensions of diversity include an element of 
choice; they consist of the personal characteristics that people acquire, discard, or 
modify throughout their lives: educational background, marital status, parental status, 
religion, income, geographic location, work experience, recreational habits, appear-
ance, personal habits. They are referred to as the secondary dimensions of diversity 
because we have a greater ability to influence or control them than we do internal 
dimensions.
These external dimensions also exert a significant influence on our perceptions, 
behavior, and attitudes. If you are not a believer in the Muslim religion, for exam-
ple, you may not perceive the importance of some of its practices—as did 
Abercrombie and Fitch subsidiary Hollister, which told college student Hani Khan 
that she had to remove her hijab (Islamic headscarf) to work at its San Mateo, 
California, store, then fired her when she refused. The Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission sued the company in 2011 on Khan’s behalf, since headscarves did 
not affect her job performance.120
Organizational Dimensions 
Organizational dimensions include management 
status, union affiliation, work location, seniority, work content, and division or 
department.
Trends in Workforce Diversity
How is the U.S. workforce apt to become more diverse in the 21st century? Let’s 
examine five categories on the internal dimension—age, gender, race/ethnicity, 
sexual orientation, and physical/mental abilities—and one category on the external 
dimension, educational level.
Age: More Older People in the Workforce 
The 
most significant demographic event, the late Peter 
Drucker suggested, “is that in the developed countries 
the number and proportion of younger people is rap-
idly shrinking. . . . Those shrinking numbers of 
younger people will have to both drive their economies 
and help support much larger numbers of older peo-
ple.”121 Particularly in Europe and Northeast Asia, and 
to a lesser extent in the United States, an aging popula-
tion is “a looming economic and social burden,” says a 
2014 report.122
The United States, suggested Drucker, is the only de-
veloped economy to have enough young people, and that 
is only because immigrants to the United States still 
have large families. Even so, the median age of the 
American worker is predicted to reach 42.8 by 2020, up 
from 34.3 in 1980.123 Indeed, workers ages 55 and older 
are expected to make up over one-quarter of the labor 
force in 2022.124
Do you have much experience being around older 
people? How do you feel about the idea of working with 
them? To find out, try Self-Assessment 11.5.
Diversity enriches. A diverse 
population in a company can 
provide ideas, experience, and 
points of view that strengthen 
the business culture. What has 
been your experience, if any, 
with a diverse workplace?

360 
PART 5 
Leading
Gender: More Women Working 
Since the 1960s women have been flooding 
into the workplace in great numbers, with about 75% of women ages 25–54 in the 
workforce, up from about 40% in the late 1950s.125 In addition, more and more busi-
nesses are now owned by women—businesses where women were owners or half-
owners represented 45.7% of all firms.126 Finally, women are gaining ground in the top 
rungs of business. In 2014, 24 Fortune 500 companies were run by women (up from 
15 in 2009); in percentage terms, 4.8% of CEOs of Fortune 500 and 5.1% of Fortune 
1000 companies were women.127
But if pay discrepancies between women and men have improved slightly, as of 2012 
(as we noted in Chapter 9) women overall still earned only 77 cents to every $1 for a 
man.128 Traditionally, women have earned roughly the same pay as men only in jobs pay-
ing $25,000–$30,000 a year, but the farther up the pay scale and the higher the education 
level, the wider the earnings gap. Recently it was found that, for every dollar a man 
earns, a woman cashier earns 92 cents, a registered nurse 91 cents, and an administrative 
assistant 87 cents. But for a woman physician or surgeon, it is 68 cents, a woman lawyer 
or judge 75 cents, a woman college professor 77 cents, and a woman psychologist 77 
cents. In financial services, women earn as little as 66 cents to a man’s dollar.129
The obstacles to women’s progress are known as the glass ceiling—the metaphor 
for an invisible barrier preventing women and minorities from being promoted to top 
executive jobs. For instance, at Fortune 500 companies in 2013, females accounted for 
only 14.6% of executive-officer positions.130
What factors are holding women back? Three that are mentioned are negative ste-
reotypes, lack of mentors, and limited experience in line or general management.131 
For women who have become vice president or higher in Fortune 1000 companies, 
four strategies were identified as critical to their success: consistently exceeding per-
formance expectations, developing a style with which male managers are comfortable, 
seeking out difficult or challenging assignments, and having influential mentors.132
Interestingly, however, several studies have suggested that female managers outshine 
their male counterparts on almost every measure, from motivating others to fostering 
communication to producing high-quality work to goal-setting to mentoring employ-
ees.133 Indeed, one study, by Catalyst, an advocacy group for women in business, found 
that companies with more women executives have better financial performance.134 In 
Chapter 9 we mentioned that venture capital firms that invested in women-led compa-
nies during the decade 2000–2010 outperformed those that didn’t.135 We discuss women 
in leadership further in Chapter 14 and women and communication in Chapter 15.
Race & Ethnicity: More People of Color in the Workforce 
 The non-Hispanic 
white population is projected to peak in 2024, then to slowly decrease. By 2060, 
whites are projected to change from 78% in 2012 to 69%, African Americans from 
13.1% to 14.7%, Asians from 5.1% to 8.2%, Hispanics or Latinos from 17% to 31%, 
and American Indian/Alaskan Native from 1.2% to 1.5%.136 We already mentioned 
that people of color have hit the glass ceiling, with whites holding more of the mana-
gerial and professional jobs. In addition, there are two other trends that show that 
American businesses need to do a lot better by minority populations.
What Are Your Attitudes about Working with 
Older Employees?
The following survey was designed to assess your attitudes about 
working with older employees. Go to connect.mheducation
.com and take Self-Assessment 11.5. When you’re done, 
answer the following questions:
1. 
What is the quality of your relationships with older employees? 
How about your satisfaction with working with older people?
2. 
How might the quality of relationships with older 
employees affect your performance and promotability?
3. 
To what extent might your satisfaction with working with 
older people impact your performance and promotability?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 11.5
®

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
361
First, minorities tend to earn less than whites. Median household income in 2009 (a re-
cession year) was $38,409 for African Americans and $39,730 for Hispanics. It was $62,545 
for whites. (Asians and Pacific Islanders had the highest median income, at $75,027.)137
Second, a number of studies have shown that minorities experienced more perceived 
discrimination, racism-related stress, and less psychological support than whites did.138
Sexual Orientation: LGBT People Become More Visible 
In a Gallup survey 
of more than 120,000 U.S. adults, 3.4% answered “yes” when asked if they identified 
as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgendered (LGBT).139 Despite a changing social and 
legal landscape, however, over half (53%) of LGBT workers nationwide say they hide 
who they are at work, according to a recent report.140 (The corporate suite is one of the 
last frontiers for LGBT civil rights, as former BP oil giant CEO John Browne, who is 
gay, made clear in his 2014 book The Glass Closet.141) LGBT workers report higher 
levels of stress compared with other workers, stress that can be alleviated with LGBT-
supportive workplace policies.142 Finally, gay and bisexual male workers were found 
to earn 10%–32% less than equally qualified heterosexual counterparts.143
How important is the issue of sexual orientation? Once again, if managers are con-
cerned about hiring and keeping workplace talent, they shouldn’t ignore the motiva-
tion and productivity of 3.4% of the workforce. Many employers are recognizing this: 
88% of Fortune 500 companies include sexual orientation in their nondiscrimination 
policies, and more than 60% offer domestic partner health benefits for same-sex cou-
ples, according to the Human Rights Campaign.144 No doubt things will change further 
now that 19 states have legalized same-sex marriage and that protection for gay and 
transgender workers has been signed into law.145
People with Differing Physical & Mental Abilities 
 About 18.7% of civilian, 
noninstitutionalized Americans have a physical or mental disability, according to the U.S. 
Census Bureau.146 Since 1992 we have had the Americans with Disabilities Act, which 
prohibits discrimination against the disabled and requires organizations to reasonably 
accommodate an individual’s disabilities.147
Even so, disabled people have difficulty finding work. The Census Bureau found 
less than half (41.1%) of disabled people ages 21–64 were employed, compared to 
79.1% of abled people.148 Here, too, is a talent pool that managers will no doubt find 
themselves tapping into in the coming years. (Disability studies, incidentally, has 
become a hot subject on college campuses.149)
Educational Levels: Mismatches between Education & Workforce 
Needs 
Two important mismatches between education and workplace are these:
■ 
College graduates may be in jobs for which they are overqualified. Al-
most a half a million college graduates are working minimum-wage jobs—
260,000 with bachelor’s degrees, 200,000 with associates degrees.150 In other 
words, a great many college graduates are underemployed—working at jobs 
that require less education than they have—such as tending bar, stocking 
clothes at Target, or other jobs that someone with less education could do.
■ 
High-school dropouts and others may not have the literacy skills needed 
for many jobs. A recent study found that 7% of all people in the United 
States between the ages of 16 and 24 had dropped out of high school in 
2012.151 Men make up 56% of such dropouts. If, as has been alleged, more 
than two-thirds of the American workforce reads below ninth-grade level, that 
is a real problem for employers, because about 70% of the on-the-job reading 
materials are written at or above that level.152
Barriers to Diversity
Some barriers are erected by diverse people themselves. In the main, however, most bar-
riers are put in their paths by organizations.153 When we speak of “the organization’s 
Disability. Everyone recognizes 
the wheelchair as signifying that 
a person is disabled, but other 
disabilities are not easily 
identified—and may not invite 
understanding. Do you think that 
mental disabilities, for example, 
should be accommodated in 
employment? If you were 
subject to mood swings, would 
you think that would prevent you 
from doing your job effectively?

362 
PART 5 
Leading
Woman manager. On the job 
she might be a high-powered 
manager of scores of people, 
but at home she may still be 
expected to be the principal 
manager of an important few—
the children.
barriers,” we are, of course, referring to the people in the organization—especially those 
who may have been there for a while—who are resistant to making it more diverse.
Resistance to change in general is an attitude that all managers come up against 
from time to time, and resistance to diversity is simply one variation. It may be ex-
pressed in the following six ways:
1. Stereotypes & Prejudices 
Ethnocentrism is the belief that one’s native coun-
try, culture, language, abilities, or behavior is superior to those of another culture. (An 
example was the “Linsanity” or surprised enthusiasm expressed by sports fans in 2012 
over pro basketball player Jeremy Lin, a Harvard-educated economics graduate of 
Chinese descent, who defied racial stereotypes by scoring at least 23 points—in one 
case 38 points—in his first four games with the New York Knicks. Before Lin, many 
people assumed that blacks and whites were better basketball players than Asian 
Americans.154) When differences are viewed as being weaknesses—which is what 
many stereotypes and prejudices ultimately come down to—this may be expressed as 
a concern that diversity hiring will lead to a sacrifice in competence and quality.
2. Fear of Discrimination against Majority Group Members 
Some em-
ployees are afraid that attempts to achieve greater diversity in their organization will 
result in bias against the majority group—that more black or Asian employees will be 
promoted to fire captain or police lieutenant, for example, over the heads of suppos-
edly more qualified whites.
3. Resistance to Diversity Program Priorities 
Some companies, such as 
PepsiCo, IBM, and Deloitte & Touche, have taken aggressive diversity approaches, 
such as offering special classes teaching tolerance for diversity and seminars in how to 
get along.155 Some employees may see diversity programs as distracting them from the 
organization’s “real work.” In addition, they may be resentful of diversity-promoting 
policies that are reinforced through special criteria in the organization’s performance 
appraisals and reward systems.
4. Unsupportive Social Atmosphere 
Diverse employees may be excluded 
from office camaraderie and social events.
5. Lack of Support for Family Demands 
In 2013, there were over 34.4 million 
married couples with children under 18 in the United States. In 59.1% of such fami-
lies, both parents worked; in 31%, only the father worked; and in 6.3%, only the 
mother worked.156 But more and more women are moving back and forth between be-
ing at-home mothers and in the workforce, as economic circumstances dictate.157 Yet 
in a great many households, it is still women who primarily take care of children, as 
well as other domestic chores. When organiza-
tions aren’t supportive in offering flexibility in 
hours and job responsibilities, these women may 
find it difficult to work evenings and weekends 
or to take overnight business trips.
6. Lack of Support for Career-Building 
Steps 
Organizations may not provide diverse 
employees with the types of work assignments 
that will help qualify them for positions in senior 
management. In addition, organizations may fail 
to provide the kind of informal training or men-
toring that will help them learn the political 
savvy to do networking and other activities 
required to get ahead. ●

11.6 
Understanding Stress & Individual Behavior
What causes workplace stress, and how can it be reduced?
THE BIG PICTURE
Stress is what people feel when enduring extraordinary demands or opportunities and are not sure how 
to handle them. There are six sources of stress: individual differences, individual task, individual role, 
group, organizational, and nonwork demands. We describe some consequences of stress and three 
ways to reduce it in the organization.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Stress is the tension people feel when they are facing or enduring extraordinary de-
mands, constraints, or opportunities and are uncertain about their ability to handle 
them effectively.158 Stress is the feeling of tension and pressure; the source of stress is 
called a stressor.
There’s no question that work is stressful. Indeed, a 2013 study by the American Psy-
chological Association found that almost two-thirds (65%) of American adults cite work 
as a significant source of stress, with 35% saying they typically felt tense or stressed out 
during the workday.159 Low-paid workers are particularly apt to suffer stress more than 
those on top.160 Commonly cited causes of work stress include low salaries (54%), lack 
of opportunities for growth or advancement (53%), lack of recognition (53%), and dis-
satisfaction with their employer’s work-life balance practices (43%).161
The Toll of Workplace Stress
The American Institute of Stress estimates that workplace stress costs the U.S. econ-
omy over $300 billion a year in health care, missed work, and stress-reduction treat-
ment.162 Stress can cause conflicts at work, make you fatigued all the time, and 
generate problems like insomnia, backaches, headaches, and chest pain.163
Work stress can also, as you might guess, put managers at risk. Men who suppress 
anger at work are two to five times more likely to suffer heart attacks or die from heart 
disease as those who express their “desk rage.”164 Losing one’s job is, as you might 
imagine, a very stressful event, being associated with decreased psychological and 
physical well-being.165 A Yale study found that layoffs more than doubled the risk of 
heart attack and stroke among older workers.166
Workplace stress diminishes positive emotions, job satisfaction, organizational 
commitment, and job performance and increases alcohol and illicit drug use, overeat-
ing, and job turnover.167 Indeed, historically researchers have generally believed that 
there is an inverted U-shaped relationship between stress and performance. That is, 
low levels of stress lead to low performance (because people are not “charged up” to 
perform), but high levels of stress also lead to an energy-sapping fight-or-flight 
response that produces low performance. Optimal performance, according to this 
hypothesis, results when people are subjected to moderate levels of stress.
How Does Stress Work?
Stress has both physical and emotional components. Physically, according to Canadian 
researcher Hans Selye, considered the father of the modern concept of stress, stress is 
“the nonspecific response of the body to any demand made upon it.”168 Emotionally, 
stress has been defined as the feeling of being overwhelmed, “the perception that 
events or circumstances have challenged, or exceeded, a person’s ability to cope.”169
Stressors can be hassles, or simple irritants, such as misplacing or losing things, 
concerns about one’s physical appearance, and having too many things to do. Or they 
 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
363

364 
PART 5 
Leading
Stressful No. 7. Many jobs 
are stressful, some because 
people’s lives are at stake 
(military personnel, firefighters, 
police officers), some because 
they are highly deadline-driven 
(event coordinators, public 
relations executives). Senior 
corporate executives ranked 
No. 7 on CareerCast’s 2014 list 
of 10 most stressful jobs. If you 
hate stress, what kind of job 
should you have?
can be crises, such as sudden occasions of overwhelming terror—a horrible auto ac-
cident, an incident of childhood abuse. Or they can be strong stressors, which can 
dramatically strain a person’s ability to adapt—extreme physical discomfort, such as 
chronic severe back pain.
Stressors can be both negative and positive. That is, one can understand that being 
fired or being divorced can be a great source of stress but so can being promoted or get-
ting married. As Selye writes, “It is immaterial whether the agent or the situation we face 
is pleasant or unpleasant; all that counts is the intensity of the demand for adjustment and 
adaptation.”170 In addition, Selye distinguished between bad stress (what he called “dis-
tress”), in which the result of the stressor can be anxiety and illness, and good stress 
(“eustress,” pronounced yu stress), which can stimulate a person to better coping and 
adaptation, such as performing well on a test.171 In this discussion, however, we are 
mainly concerned with how stress negatively affects people and their performance.
The Sources of Job-Related Stress
There are six sources of stress on the job: (1) demands created by individual differ-
ences, (2) individual task demands, (3) individual role demands, (4) group demands, 
(5) organizational demands, and (6) nonwork demands.
1. Demands Created by Individual Differences: 
The Stress Created by Genetic or Personality 
Characteristics 
Some people are born worriers, 
those with a gene mutation (known as BDNF) that Yale 
researchers identify with people who chronically obsess 
over negative thoughts.172 Others are impatient, hurried, 
deadline-ridden, competitive types with the personality 
characteristic known as Type A behavior pattern, mean-
ing they are involved in a chronic, determined struggle to 
accomplish more in less time.173 Type A behavior has 
been associated with increased performance in the work 
of professors, students, and life insurance brokers.174 
However, it also has been associated with greater cardio-
vascular activity and higher blood pressure, as well as to 
heart disease, especially for individuals who showed strong feelings of anger, hostility, 
and aggression.175
2. Individual Task Demands: The Stress Created by the Job Itself 
Some 
occupations are more stressful than others.176 Being a retail store manager, for in-
stance, can be quite stressful for some people.177 But being a home-based blogger, paid 
on a piecework basis to generate news and comment, may mean working long hours to 
the point of exhaustion.178
Low-level jobs can be more stressful than high-level jobs because employees often 
have less control over their lives and thus have less work satisfaction. Being a barista, 
day care teacher, hotel concierge, or purchasing agent, which don’t usually pay very 
well, can be quite stressful.179
3. Individual Role Demands: The Stress Created by Others’ Expectations 
of You 
Roles are sets of behaviors that people expect of occupants of a position. 
Stress may come about because of role overload, role conflict, and role ambiguity.
■ 
Role overload. Role overload occurs when others’ expectations exceed one’s 
ability. Example: If you as a student are carrying a full course load plus work-
ing two-thirds time plus trying to have a social life, you know what role over-
load is—and what stress is. Similar things happen to managers and workers.

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
365
De-stressing. Experts say that exercise can be a 
tremendous stress reliever. Many companies maintain 
physical-fitness centers not only as an employee perk 
but also because they realize that exercise helps to 
improve stamina and endurance while reducing tension.
■ 
Role conflict. Role conflict occurs when one feels torn by the different expec-
tations of important people in one’s life. Example: Your supervisor says the 
company needs you to stay late to meet an important deadline, but your fam-
ily expects you to be present for your child’s birthday party.
■ 
Role ambiguity. Role ambiguity occurs when others’ expectations are un-
known. Example: You find your job description and the criteria for promotion 
vague, a complaint often voiced by newcomers to an organization.
4. Group Demands: The Stress Created by Coworkers & Managers 
Even 
if you don’t particularly care for the work you do but like the people you work with, 
that can be a great source of satisfaction and prevent stress. When people don’t get 
along, that can be a great stressor. Alternatively, even if you have stress under control, 
a coworker’s stress might bother you, diminishing productivity.180
In addition, managers can create stress for employees. People who have bad managers 
are five times more likely to have stress-induced headaches, upset stomachs, and loss 
of sleep.181
5. Organizational Demands: The Stress Created by the Environment 
& Culture 
The physical environments of some jobs are great sources of stress: 
poultry processing, asbestos removal, coal mining, fire fighting, police work, ambu-
lance driving, and so on. Even white-collar work can take place in a stressful environ-
ment, with poor lighting, too much noise, improper placement of furniture, and no 
privacy.182
An organizational culture that promotes high-pressure work demands on em-
ployees will fuel the stress response.183 The pace of information technology cer-
tainly adds to the stress. “For example,” says Michael Patsalos-Fox, chairman of 
the Americas region for consulting firm McKinsey & Company, “you used to have 
media companies and you used to have telecom [telecommunications] companies, 
right? . . . The problem is that they are encroaching on each other. The onset of a 
lot of technologies is blurring the boundary between industries that were quite 
separate, creating opportunities for industries to attack each other.”184 Such rapidly 
changing technologies and financial pressures are what keep top executives awake 
at night.
6. Nonwork Demands: The Stresses Created by Forces Outside the Orga-
nization 
As anyone knows who has had to cope with money problems, divorce, 
support of elderly relatives, or other serious nonwork concerns, the stresses outside 
one’s work life can have a significant effect on work. Even people with ordinary lives 
can find the stress of coping with family life rugged going.
The Consequences of Stress
Positive stress is constructive and can energize you, increasing your effort, creativity, 
and performance. Negative stress is destructive, resulting in poorer-quality work, 
dissatisfaction, errors, absenteeism, and turnover.

366 
PART 5 
Leading
Symptoms of Stress 
Negative stress reveals itself in three kinds of symptoms:
■ 
Physiological signs. Lesser physiological signs are sweaty palms, restless-
ness, backaches, headaches, upset stomach, and nausea. More serious signs 
are hypertension and heart attacks.
■ 
Psychological signs. Psychological symptoms include boredom, irritability, 
nervousness, anger, anxiety, hostility, and depression.
■ 
Behavioral signs. Behavioral symptoms include sleeplessness, changes in 
eating habits, and increased smoking/alcohol/drug abuse. Stress may be re-
vealed through reduced performance and job satisfaction.
Burnout 
 “When you keep investing more energy and the return remains low, that’s 
when you burn out,” suggests Michael Staver, founder of an executive training 
company.185
Burnout is a state of emotional, mental, and even physical exhaustion, expressed as 
listlessness, indifference, or frustration. The Maslach Burnout Inventory lists 22 ele-
ments, including emotional exhaustion, cynicism or depersonalization, and reduced 
personal efficacy.186 Clearly, the greatest consequence of negative stress for the organi-
zation is reduced productivity. Overstressed employees are apt to call in sick, miss 
deadlines, take longer lunch breaks, and show indifference to performance. However, 
some may put in great numbers of hours at work without getting as much accom-
plished as previously.187
Alcohol & Other Drug Abuse 
Have an employee who’s often late? Who fre-
quently calls in sick on Mondays? Who is somewhat sloppy? Whose memory is slip-
ping?188 Maybe he or she is afflicted with alcoholism, a chronic, progressive, and 
potentially fatal disease characterized by a growing compulsion to drink. Alcoholics 
come from every occupation and social class, from students to college professors to 
priests to airline pilots. Alcoholism may not interfere with a person’s job in an obvious 
way until it shows up in absenteeism, accidents, slipshod work, or significant use of a 
company’s medical benefits.
Alcohol is the most common drug of abuse, but the misuse of others may also affect 
a person’s productivity—legal drugs such as tranquilizers or illegal drugs such as mar-
ijuana, Ecstasy, cocaine, or heroin. If you as a manager think you might be dealing 
with an employee with a substance-abuse problem, it’s suggested you not try to make 
accusations but firmly point out that productivity is suffering and that it’s up to the 
subordinate to do something about it. While not doing any counseling yourself, you 
can try steering the employee to the Human Resources Department, which may have 
an employee assistance program that may help employees overcome personal prob-
lems affecting their job performance.
Incidentally, although many people swear by 12-step programs, such as that offered 
by Alcoholics Anonymous, an examination of several studies found that such pro-
grams were no more and no less successful than any other interventions in reducing 
alcohol dependence and alcohol-related problems.189
Reducing Stressors in the Organization
There are all kinds of buffers, or administrative changes, that managers can make to 
reduce the stressors that lead to employee burnout. Examples: Extra staff or equip-
ment at peak periods. Increased freedom to make decisions. Recognition for accom-
plishments. Time off for rest or personal development. Assignment to a new position. 
Three- to 5-day employee retreats at off-site locations for relaxation and team-building 
activities. Sabbatical leave programs to replenish employees’ energy and desire 
to work.

 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
367
Some general organizational strategies for reducing unhealthy stressors are the 
following:190
■ 
Roll out employee assistance programs. Employee assistance programs 
(EAPs) include a host of programs aimed at helping employees to cope with 
stress, burnout, substance abuse, health-related problems, family and marital 
issues, and any general problem that negatively influences job performance.191
■ 
Recommend a holistic wellness approach. A holistic wellness program fo-
cuses on self-responsibility, nutritional awareness, relaxation techniques, 
physical fitness, and environmental awareness. This approach goes beyond 
stress reduction by encouraging employees to strive, in one definition, for “a 
harmonious and productive balance of physical, mental, and social well-being 
brought about by the acceptance of one’s personal responsibility for develop-
ing and adhering to a health promotion program.”192
■ 
Create a supportive environment. Job stress often results because employees 
work under poor supervision and lack freedom. Wherever possible, it’s better 
to keep the organizational environment less formal, more personal, and more 
supportive of employees.
■ 
Make jobs interesting. Stress also results when jobs are routinized and boring. 
Better to try to structure jobs so that they allow employees some freedom.
■ 
Make career counseling available. Companies such as IBM make career 
planning available, which reduces the stress that comes when employees 
don’t know what their career options are and where they’re headed. ●
Good times—for now. Office 
stress can certainly lead to “a few 
drinks after work” becoming a 
regular pastime—and then almost 
a necessity, for some people. 
More than 30% of American 
adults have abused alcohol or 
suffered from alcoholism at some 
point in their lives. Those who 
get treatment first receive it, on 
average, at about age 30—eight 
years after they developed their 
dependency on drinking. Only 
24% of alcoholics, however, 
receive any treatment at all. 
Do you find alcohol helps relieve 
your stress? Are you concerned 
about it? 

Key Terms Used in This Chapter
absenteeism 349
affective component of an 
attitude 345
Americans with Disabilities Act 361
attitude 345
behavior 347
behavioral component of an 
attitude 345
Big Five personality 
dimensions 338
buffers 366
burnout 366
causal attribution 351
cognitive component of an 
attitude 345
cognitive dissonance 346
core self-evaluation 340
counterproductive work 
behaviors (CWB) 356
diversity 357
emotional intelligence 342
emotional stability 342
employee assistance programs 
(EAPs) 367
employee engagement 353
ethnocentrism 362
external dimensions of 
diversity 359
fundamental attribution bias 351
glass ceiling 360
halo effect 349
holistic wellness program 367
internal dimensions of diversity 358
job satisfaction 354
learned helplessness 340
locus of control 341
onboarding 355
organizational behavior (OB) 344
organizational citizenship 
behaviors 355
organizational commitment 354
perception 348
personality 338
proactive personality 340
recency effect 351
roles 364
self-efficacy 340
self-esteem 341
self-fulfilling prophecy 352
self-serving bias 351
stereotyping 348
stress 363
stressor 363
turnover 355
Type A behavior pattern 364
underemployed 361
values 344
Key Points
11.1 Personality & Individual Behavior
• Personality consists of the stable 
psychological traits and behavioral attributes 
that give a person his or her identity. There 
are five personality dimensions and five 
personality traits that managers need to be 
aware of to understand workplace behavior.
• The Big Five personality dimensions 
are extroversion, agreeableness, 
conscientiousness, emotional stability, and 
openness to experience. Extroversion, an 
outgoing personality, is associated with 
success for managers and salespeople. 
Conscientiousness, or a dependable 
personality, is correlated with successful 
job performance. A person who scores well 
on conscientiousness may be a proactive 
personality, someone who is more apt to 
take initiative and persevere to influence 
the environment.
• A core self-evaluation represents a broad 
personality trait comprising four positive 
individual traits: (1) Self-efficacy is the belief 
in one’s personal ability to do a task. Low 
self-efficacy is associated with learned 
helplessness, the debilitating lack of faith in 
one’s ability to control one’s environment. 
(2) Self-esteem is the extent to which people 
like or dislike themselves. (3) Locus of 
control indicates how much people believe 
they control their fate through their own 
efforts. (4) Emotional stability is the extent to 
which people feel secure and unworried and 
how likely they are to experience negative 
emotions under pressure.
• Emotional intelligence is defined as the 
ability to monitor your and others’ feelings 
and use this information to guide your 
thinking and actions.
11.2 Values, Attitudes, & Behavior
• Organizational behavior (OB) is dedicated to 
better understanding and managing people 
at work. OB looks at two areas: individual 
behavior (discussed in this chapter) and 
group behavior (discussed in later chapters).
• Values must be distinguished from attitudes 
and from behavior. Values are abstract ideals 
that guide one’s thinking and behavior 
across all situations.
• Attitudes are defined as learned 
predispositions toward a given object. 
Attitudes have three components. The 
affective component consists of the feelings 
or emotions one has about a situation. The 
368 
PART 5 
Leading

cognitive component consists of the beliefs 
and knowledge one has about a situation. 
The behavioral component refers to how 
one intends or expects to behave toward 
a situation.
• When attitudes and reality collide, the 
result may be cognitive dissonance, the 
psychological discomfort a person 
experiences between his or her cognitive 
attitude and incompatible behavior. Cognitive 
dissonance depends on three factors: 
importance, control, and rewards. The ways 
to reduce cognitive dissonance are to 
change your attitude and/or your behavior, 
belittle the importance of the inconsistent 
behavior, or find consonant elements that 
outweigh the dissonant ones.
• Together, values and attitudes influence 
people’s workplace behavior—their actions 
and judgments.
11.3 Perception & Individual Behavior
• Perception is the process of interpreting 
and understanding one’s environment. 
Four types of distortion in perception are 
(1) stereotyping, the tendency to attribute 
to an individual the characteristics one 
believes are typical of the group to which 
that individual belongs; (2) the halo effect, 
the forming of an impression of an 
individual based on a single trait; (3) the 
recency effect, the tendency to remember 
recent information better than earlier 
information; and (4) causal attribution, the 
activity of inferring causes for observed 
behavior. Two attributional tendencies that 
can distort one’s interpretation of observed 
behavior are the fundamental attribution 
bias, in which people attribute another 
person’s behavior to his or her personal 
characteristics rather than to situational 
factors, and the self-serving bias, in which 
people tend to take more personal 
responsibility for success than for failure.
• The self-fulfilling prophecy (Pygmalion effect) 
describes the phenomenon in which people’s 
expectations of themselves or others lead 
them to behave in ways that make those 
expectations come true.
11.4 Work-Related Attitudes & Behaviors 
Managers Need to Deal With
• Managers need to be alert to work-related 
attitudes having to do with (1) employee 
engagement, an individual’s involvement, 
satisfaction, and enthusiasm for work; (2) job 
satisfaction, the extent to which you feel 
positive or negative about various aspects of 
your work; and (3) organizational 
commitment, reflecting the extent to which 
an employee identifies with an organization 
and is committed to its goals.
• Among the types of behavior that managers 
need to influence are (1) performance and 
productivity; (2) absenteeism, when an 
employee doesn’t show up for work, and 
turnover, when employees leave their jobs; 
(3) organizational citizenship behaviors, those 
employee behaviors that are not directly 
part of employees’ job descriptions—that 
exceed their work-role requirements; and 
(4) counterproductive work behaviors, 
behaviors that harm employees and the 
organization as a whole.
11.5 The New Diversified Workforce
• Diversity represents all the ways people are 
alike and unlike—the differences and 
similarities in age, gender, race, religion, 
ethnicity, sexual orientation, capabilities, and 
socioeconomic background.
• There are two dimensions of diversity: 
(1) Internal dimensions of diversity are those 
human differences that exert a powerful, 
sustained effect throughout every stage 
of our lives: gender, ethnicity, race, physical 
abilities, age, and sexual orientation. 
(2) External dimensions of diversity consist 
of the personal characteristics that people 
acquire, discard, or modify throughout their 
lives: personal habits, educational 
background, religion, income, marital status, 
and the like.
• There are five categories in the internal 
dimension and one category in the 
external dimension in which the U.S. 
workforce is becoming more diverse: 
(1) age, (2) gender, (3) race and ethnicity, 
(4) sexual orientation, (5) physical/mental 
abilities, and, on the external dimension, 
(6) educational level.
• There are six ways in which employees and 
managers may express resistance to 
diversity: (1) Some express stereotypes and 
prejudices based on ethnocentrism, the 
belief that one’s native country, culture, 
language, abilities, or behavior is superior 
to that of another country. (2) Some 
employees are afraid of discrimination 
against majority group members. (3) Some 
employees see diversity programs as 
distracting them from the organization’s 
supposed “real work.” (4) Diverse employees 
may experience an unsupportive social 
atmosphere. (5) Organizations may not 
be supportive of flexible hours and other 
matters that can help employees cope with 
family demands. (6) Organizations may 
show lack of support for career-building 
steps for diverse employees.
 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
369

11.6 Understanding Stress & Individual 
Behavior
• Stress is the tension people feel when they 
are facing or enduring extraordinary 
demands, constraints, or opportunities and 
are uncertain about their ability to handle 
them effectively. Stress is the feeling of 
tension and pressure; the source of stress is 
called a stressor.
• There are six sources of stress on the job: 
(1) Demands created by individual 
differences may arise from a Type A behavior 
pattern, meaning people have the personality 
characteristic that involves them in a chronic, 
determined struggle to accomplish more in 
less time. (2) Individual task demands are the 
stresses created by the job itself. 
(3) Individual role demands are the stresses 
created by other people’s expectations of 
you. Roles are sets of behaviors that people 
expect of occupants of a position. Stress 
may come about because of role overload, 
role conflict, or role ambiguity. (4) Group 
demands are the stresses created by 
coworkers and managers. (5) Organizational 
demands are the stresses created by the 
environment and culture of the organization. 
(6) Nonwork demands are the stresses 
created by forces outside the organization, 
such as money problems or divorce.
• Positive stress can be constructive. Negative 
stress can result in poor-quality work; such 
stress is revealed through physiological, 
psychological, or behavioral signs. One sign 
is burnout, a state of emotional, mental, and 
even physical exhaustion. Stress can lead to 
alcohol and other drug abuse.
• There are buffers, or administrative changes, 
that managers can make to reduce the 
stressors that lead to employee burnout, such 
as adding extra staff or giving employees 
more power to make decisions. Some general 
organizational strategies for reducing 
unhealthy stressors are to roll out employee 
assistance programs, recommend a holistic 
wellness approach, create a supportive 
environment, make jobs interesting, and make 
career counseling available.
 1. What are the Big Five personality dimensions?
 2. What are four personality traits managers need to be 
aware of to understand workplace behavior?
 3. How is emotional intelligence defined?
 4. How do you distinguish values from attitudes 
and behavior?
 5. What is the process of perception?
 6. What are four types of distortion in perception, and 
what is the Pygmalion effect?
 7. What are three work-related attitudes managers 
need to be conscious of?
 8. What are four types of behavior that managers need 
to influence?
 9. Explain the two dimensions of diversity.
 10. What are six sources of stress on the job?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
Steve Jobs’s Personality & Attitudes 
Drove His Success
This case is based on an interview of Steve Jobs by 
Walter Isaacson, the author of the 2011 book Steve Jobs.
His saga is the entrepreneurial creation myth writ 
large. Steve Jobs cofounded Apple in his parents’ ga-
rage in 1976, was ousted in 1985, returned to rescue it 
from near bankruptcy in 1997, and by the time he died, 
in October 2011, had built it into the world’s most 
valuable company. Along the way he helped to trans-
form seven industries: personal computing, animated 
movies, music, phones, tablet computing, retail stores, 
and digital publishing. . . . 
When Jobs returned to Apple in 1997, it was pro-
ducing an array of computers and peripherals, includ-
ing a dozen different versions of the Macintosh. After 
a few weeks of product review sessions, he’d finally 
had enough. “Stop!” he shouted. “This is crazy.” He 
grabbed a Magic Marker, padded in his bare feet to a 
whiteboard, and drew a two-by-two grid. “Here’s what 
we need,” he declared. Atop the two columns, he wrote 
Management in Action
370 
PART 5 
Leading

“Consumer” and “Pro.” He labeled the two rows 
“Desktop” and “Portable.” Their job, he told his team 
members, was to focus on four great products, one for 
each quadrant. All other products should be canceled. 
There was a stunned silence. But by getting Apple to 
focus on making just four computers, he saved the 
company. “Deciding what not to do is as important as 
deciding what to do,” he told me. “That’s true for com-
panies, and it’s true for products.”
After he righted the company, Jobs began taking his 
“top 100” people on a retreat each year. On the last day, 
he would stand in front of a whiteboard (he loved white-
boards, because they gave him complete control of a sit-
uation and they engendered focus) and ask, “What are 
the 10 things we should be doing next?” People would 
fight to get their suggestions on the list. Jobs would write 
them down—and then cross off the ones he decreed 
dumb. After much jockeying, the group would come up 
with a list of 10. Then Jobs would slash the bottom seven 
and announce, “We can only do three.”
Focus was ingrained in Jobs’s personality and had 
been honed by his Zen training. He relentlessly filtered 
out what he considered distractions. Colleagues and 
family members would at times be exasperated as they 
tried to get him to deal with issues they considered im-
portant. But he would give a cold stare and refuse to 
shift his laserlike focus until he was ready. . . . 
Part of Jobs’s compulsion to take responsibility for 
what he called “the whole widget” stemmed from his per-
sonality, which was very controlling. But it was also 
driven by his passion for perfection and making elegant 
products. He got hives, or worse, when contemplating the 
use of great Apple software on another company’s unin-
spired hardware, and he was equally allergic to the 
thought that unapproved apps or content might pollute 
the perfection of an Apple device. It was an approach that 
did not always maximize short-term profits, but in a 
world filled with junky devices, inscrutable error mes-
sages, and annoying interfaces, it led to astonishing prod-
ucts marked by delightful user experiences. Being in the 
Apple ecosystem could be as sublime as walking in one 
of the Zen gardens of Kyoto that Jobs loved, and neither 
experience was created by worshipping at the altar of 
openness or by letting a thousand flowers bloom. Some-
times it’s nice to be in the hands of a control freak. . . . 
After the iPod became a huge success, Jobs spent 
little time relishing it. Instead he began to worry about 
what might endanger it. One possibility was that mo-
bile phone makers would start adding music players to 
their handsets. So he cannibalized iPod sales by creat-
ing the iPhone. “If we don’t cannibalize ourselves, 
someone else will,” he said. 
John Sculley, who ran Apple from 1983 to 1993, 
was a marketing and sales executive from Pepsi. He 
focused more on profit maximization than on product 
design after Jobs left, and Apple gradually declined. “I 
have my own theory about why decline happens at 
companies,” Jobs told me. They make some great 
products, but then the sales and marketing people take 
over the company, because they are the ones who can 
juice up the profits. “When the sales guys run the com-
pany, the product guys don’t matter so much, and a 
lot of them just turn off. It happened at Apple when 
Sculley came in, which was my fault, and it happened 
when Ballmer took over at Microsoft.”
When Jobs returned, he shifted Apple’s focus back 
to making innovative products: the sprightly iMac, the 
PowerBook, and then the iPod, the iPhone, and the 
iPad. As he explained, “My passion has been to build 
an enduring company where people were motivated to 
make great products. Everything else was secondary. 
Sure, it was great to make a profit, because that was 
what allowed you to make great products. But the 
products, not the profits, were the motivation. Sculley 
flipped these priorities to where the goal was to make 
money. It’s a subtle difference, but it ends up meaning 
everything—the people you hire, who gets promoted, 
what you discuss in meetings.” 
Caring deeply about what customers want is much 
different from continually asking them what they want; 
it requires intuition and instinct about desires that have 
not yet been formed. “Our task is to read things that are 
not yet on the page,” Jobs explained. Instead of relying 
on market research, he honed his version of empathy, an 
intimate intuition about the desires of his customers. He 
developed his appreciation for intuition—feelings that 
are based on accumulated experiential wisdom—while 
he was studying Buddhism in India as a college drop-
out. “The people in the Indian countryside don’t use 
their intellect like we do; they use their intuition in-
stead,” he recalled. “Intuition is a very powerful thing—
more powerful than intellect, in my opinion.” . . . 
Jobs’s (in)famous ability to push people to do the 
impossible was dubbed by colleagues his Reality Dis-
tortion Field, after an episode of Star Trek in which 
aliens create a convincing alternative reality through 
sheer mental force. An early example was when Jobs 
was on the night shift at Atari and pushed Steve 
Wozniak to create a game called Breakout. Woz said it 
would take months, but Jobs stared at him and insisted 
he could do it in four days. Woz knew that was impos-
sible, but he ended up doing it.
Those who did not know Jobs interpreted the Real-
ity Distortion Field as a euphemism for bullying and 
lying. But those who worked with him admitted that 
the trait, infuriating as it might be, led them to perform 
extraordinary feats. Because Jobs felt that life’s ordinary 
rules didn’t apply to him, he could inspire his team to 
change the course of computer history with a small 
fraction of the resources that Xerox or IBM had. “It 
was a self-fulfilling distortion,” recalls Debi Coleman, 
a member of the original Mac team who won an award 
 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
371

one year for being the employee who best stood up to 
Jobs. “You did the impossible because you didn’t real-
ize it was impossible.”
One day Jobs marched into the cubicle of Larry 
Kenyon, the engineer who was working on the Macintosh 
operating system, and complained that it was taking 
too long to boot up. Kenyon started to explain why re-
ducing the boot-up time wasn’t possible, but Jobs cut 
him off. “If it would save a person’s life, could you 
find a way to shave 10 seconds off the boot time?” he 
asked. Kenyon allowed that he probably could. Jobs 
went to a whiteboard and showed that if five million 
people were using the Mac and it took 10 seconds ex-
tra to turn it on every day, that added up to 300 million 
or so hours a year—the equivalent of at least 100 life-
times a year. After a few weeks Kenyon had the ma-
chine booting up 28 seconds faster. . . . 
During the development of almost every product he 
ever created, Jobs at a certain point “hit the pause but-
ton” and went back to the drawing board because he 
felt it wasn’t perfect. That happened even with the 
movie Toy Story. After Jeff Katzenberg and the team at 
Disney, which had bought the rights to the movie, 
pushed the Pixar team to make it edgier and darker, 
Jobs and the director, John Lasseter, finally stopped 
production and rewrote the story to make it friendlier. 
When he was about to launch Apple Stores, he and his 
store guru, Ron Johnson, suddenly decided to delay 
everything a few months so that the stores’ layouts 
could be reorganized around activities and not just 
product categories. . . . 
Jobs was famously impatient, petulant, and tough 
with the people around him. But his treatment of peo-
ple, though not laudable, emanated from his passion 
for perfection and his desire to work with only the 
best. It was his way of preventing what he called “the 
bozo explosion,” in which managers are so polite that 
mediocre people feel comfortable sticking around. “I 
don’t think I run roughshod over people,” he said, “but 
if something sucks, I tell people to their face. It’s my 
job to be honest.” When I pressed him on whether he 
could have gotten the same results while being nicer, 
he said perhaps so. “But it’s not who I am,” he said. 
“Maybe there’s a better way—a gentlemen’s club 
where we all wear ties and speak in this Brahmin lan-
guage and velvet code words—but I don’t know that 
way, because I am middle-class from California.” . . . 
It’s important to appreciate that Jobs’s rudeness and 
roughness were accompanied by an ability to be inspira-
tional. He infused Apple employees with an abiding pas-
sion to create groundbreaking products and a belief that 
they could accomplish what seemed impossible. And we 
have to judge him by the outcome. Jobs had a close-knit 
family, and so it was at Apple: His top players tended to 
stick around longer and be more loyal than those at other 
companies, including ones led by bosses who were 
kinder and gentler. CEOs who study Jobs and decide to 
emulate his roughness without understanding his ability 
to generate loyalty make a dangerous mistake.
“I’ve learned over the years that when you have re-
ally good people, you don’t have to baby them,” Jobs 
told me. “By expecting them to do great things, you 
can get them to do great things. Ask any member of 
that Mac team. They will tell you it was worth the 
pain.” Most of them do. “He would shout at a meeting, 
‘You asshole, you never do anything right,’” Debi 
Coleman recalls. “Yet I consider myself the absolute 
luckiest person in the world to have worked with him.” 
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. How would you evaluate Jobs in terms of the Big 
Five personality dimensions?
 2. How would you evaluate Jobs in terms of the five 
traits important to organizational behavior? Explain.
 3. What were Jobs’s attitudes about effective leader-
ship? Use the three components of attitudes to 
explain.
 4. Do you believe that Jobs’s personality and attitudes 
affected the workplace attitudes and behaviors of 
Apple employees? Explain.
 5. What factors were causing stress for Jobs? Explain.
Source: Excerpted from W. Isaacson, “The Real Leadership Lessons of 
Steve Jobs,” Harvard Business Review, April 2012, pp. 93–100.
Should Airlines Accommodate 
Overweight People?
Traveling on an airplane can be extra difficult for 
overweight and tall people. Boeing’s 757 standard 
seat width is 17 inches, while Airbus’s is 18 inches 
wide. Given individual differences in hip width, this 
can be a problem, particularly for women. This issue 
was investigated by the Civilian American and 
European Surface Anthropometry Resource Project 
Legal/Ethical Challenge
372 
PART 5 
Leading

(Caesar). The project was funded by a consortium of 
companies.
The Caesar project measured over 4,000 people 
from the U.S. and Europe and uncovered the follow-
ing: “the hip breadth of men in the 95th percentile of 
the population, i.e., on the very big side, measures 
17.6 inches.” This means that 95% of all men can fit 
into a standard Airbus seat. In contrast, females face a 
different situation. According to Caesar’s report, “the 
hip breadth of women in the 90th percentile is 
19.2 inches, and those in the 95th percentile have hips 
measuring 22.4 inches.” The core skeletal systems is 
the reason for the difference between men and women. 
Females simply have a larger pelvis than men.
Do you think airlines should accommodate people 
with larger hips? Although there are not any regula-
tions in the U.S. to accommodate people, airlines han-
dle the issue differently. Southwest used to make 
people purchase two tickets if they could not fit into 
one seat, then the company changed its mind. Custom-
ers complained. United currently requires people to 
purchase two seats if they can’t fit into one, but Amer-
ican, Delta, and US Airways will try to find an extra 
seat. If none are available, these airlines will bump the 
individual to a later flight in search of that extra seat. 
Pacific-based carrier Samoa Air resolved the issue by 
simply charging fees based on passengers’ weight.
Airbus has decided to turn the issue of seat size 
into a profit maker. The aircraft manufacturer is plan-
ning to make aisle seats 20 inches wide, while reduc-
ing the standard 18-inch seat to 17 inches. Travelers 
will be required to pay more for the larger aisle seat.
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
 1. Because women on average have larger hip breadth 
than men, it is not fair to base fees on the size of a 
seat. This would disadvantage women. I would fol-
low the policy of trying to find a person a second seat 
at no additional cost if they can’t fit into one seat.
 2. I like the policy of Samoa Air. Make people pay 
based on their weight. After all, airlines charge to 
check baggage based on its weight so why should it 
be any different for passengers.
 3. Airlines can’t accommodate everyone. If someone is 
overweight or has larger hip breadth, then they need 
to pay for the accommodation. This would also en-
able smaller people to pay additional fees for more 
space should they desire it.
 4. Airlines should try to maximize their profit, and 
charging for extra seat space makes great sense. The 
same is true for taller people. If they want more 
space, they should pay for it.
 5. Invent other options.
Source: Excerpted from K. Mayo, “Economy Plus Size,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, May 6–May 12, 2013, p. 81.
 
Managing Individual Differences & Behavior 
CHAPTER 11 
373

Motivating Employees
Achieving Superior Performance 
in the Workplace
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
12.1 Motivating for Performance
Major Question: What’s the motivation for studying motivation?
12.2 Content Perspectives on Employee Motivation
Major Question: What kinds of needs motivate employees?
12.3 Process Perspectives on Employee Motivation
Major Question: Is a good reward good enough? How do 
other factors affect motivation?
12.4 Job Design Perspectives on Motivation
Major Question: What’s the best way to design jobs—adapt 
people to work or work to people?
12.5 Reinforcement Perspectives on Motivation
Major Question: What are the types of incentives I might use 
to influence employee behavior?
12.6 Using Compensation & Other Rewards to Motivate
Major Question: How can I use compensation and other 
rewards to motivate people?
12

“Get a life!” everyone says. But what, exactly, is a 
“life,” anyway?
As more and more people have begun asking this 
question, it has spilled over into organizational life. 
The result has been a new category of work rewards 
and incentives called work–life benefits.
Balancing Work & Personal Lives
As one definition has it, work–life benefits are programs 
“used by employers to increase productivity and com-
mitment by removing certain barriers that make it hard 
for people to strike a balance between their work and 
personal lives.”1 Examples are nonsalary incentives 
such as flexible work arrangements, tuition assistance, 
and paid time off for education and community service.
In managing for motivation, the subject of this 
chapter, you need to be thinking about employees 
not as “human capital” or “capital assets” but as 
people who are investors: they are investing their 
time, energy, and intelligence—their lives—in your 
organization, for which they deserve a return that 
makes sense to them.
What Workers Want—Yes!
To keep your employees invested in their jobs and 
performing well, it helps to know what the Gallup 
Organization discovered in surveying 80,000 managers 
and 1 million workers over 25 years.2 Gallup found 
that in the best workplaces employees gave strong 
“yes” answers to the following 12 questions:
• 
Do I know what’s expected of me?
• 
Do I have the right materials and equipment 
I need to do my work right?
• 
Do I have the opportunity to do what I do best 
every day?
• 
In the last seven days, have I received 
recognition or praise for good work?
• 
Does my supervisor, or someone at work, seem 
to care about me as a person?
• 
Is there someone at work who encourages 
my development?
• 
Does my opinion seem to count?
• 
Does the mission of my company make me 
feel like my work is important?
• 
Are my coworkers committed to doing quality work?
• 
Do I have a best friend at work?
• 
In the last six months, have I talked with 
someone about my progress?
• 
Have I had opportunities to learn and grow?
Involving Employees in the Company’s Success
The best managers, Gallup says, meet with workers 
individually at least every three months, not just once 
or twice a year. In doing so, they not only discuss 
performance but also try to find out what employees 
want to accomplish and how the manager can help. 
In addition, good managers focus on strengths, 
rather than weaknesses, allowing employees to 
devote time to what they do best.
Even before Fortune magazine began publishing 
its annual list of “The 100 Best Companies to Work 
For” (Google was No. 1 in 2014), managers had been 
concerned about trying to motivate their employees. 
In prerecession times, according to a project leader 
who helped with the Fortune list, the best companies 
kept their employees an average of 6 years, as op-
posed to a U.S. average of 3.6 years. They accom-
plished this by pushing for employees at all levels to 
feel involved in the company’s success.3
For Discussion Which 3 of the 12 questions listed 
above are most important to you? Which do you think 
are most important to most employees?
the manager’s toolbox
Managing for Motivation: Keeping Employees 
Invested in Their Jobs
forecast
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
This chapter discusses motivation from four perspectives: content (theories by Maslow, 
McClelland, Deci and Ryan, and Herzberg); process (equity, expectancy, and goal-setting theo-
ries); job design; and reinforcement. We then consider rewards for motivating performance.

12.1 
Motivating for Performance
What’s the motivation for studying motivation?
THE BIG PICTURE
Motivation is defined as the psychological processes that arouse and direct people’s goal-directed behavior. 
The model of how it works is that people have certain needs that motivate them to perform specific behav-
iors for which they receive rewards, both extrinsic and intrinsic, that feed back and satisfy the original need. 
The three major perspectives on motivation are need-based, process, and reinforcement.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
376 
PART 5 
Leading
• Organizational culture
• Cross-cultural values
• Physical environment 
• Rewards and reinforcement
• Group norms
• Communication technology
• Leader behavior
• Organizational design
Contextual factors
• Personality
• Ability
• Core self-evaluations
• Emotions
• Attitudes
• Needs
Personal factors
  Motivation & employee engagement
FIGURE 12.1
An integrated model 
of motivation
What would make you rise a half hour earlier than usual to ensure you got to work on 
time—and to perform your best once there? Among the possible inducements (such as 
those offered by SAS, Google, and Salesforce): free snacks, on-site laundry, child care 
assistance, freedom to paint your walls, scholarships for employees’ children, having 
your dog at work.4
Whether employment rates are high or low, there are always companies, industries, 
and occupations in which employers feel they need to bend over backward to retain 
their human capital.
Motivation: What It Is, Why It’s Important
Why do people do the things they do? The answer is this: they are mainly motivated to 
fulfill their wants, their needs.
What Is Motivation & How Does It Work? 
Motivation may be defined as the 
psychological processes that arouse and direct goal-directed behavior.5 Motivation is 
difficult to understand because you can’t actually see it or know it in another person; it 
must be inferred from one’s behavior. Nevertheless, it’s imperative that you as a man-
ager understand the process of motivation if you are to guide employees in accom-
plishing your organization’s objectives.
The way motivation works actually is complex, the result of multiple personal and 
contextual factors. (See Figure 12.1.) 

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
377
The individual personal factors that employees bring to the workplace range from 
personality to ability to emotions to attitudes, many of which we described in Chapter 
11. The contextual factors range from organizational culture, to cross-cultural values, to 
the physical environment, and other matters we discuss in this chapter and the next. 
Both categories of factors influence an employee’s level of motivation and engagement 
at work.
However, motivation can also be expressed in a simple model—namely, that  
people have certain needs that motivate them to perform specific behaviors 
for which they receive rewards that feed back and satisfy the original need. (See 
Figure 12.2, below.)
Unfulfilled need
Desire is created
to fulfill a need—as
for food, safety,
recognition.
Behaviors
You choose a type
of behavior you
think might satisfy
the need.
Rewards
Two types of
rewards satisfy
needs—extrinsic
or intrinsic.
Motivation
You search for
ways to satisfy
the need.
Feedback Reward informs you whether behavior worked and should be used again.
Yo
o
th
re
ne
FIGURE 12.2 
A simple model of motivation
For example, as an hourly worker you desire more money (need), which impels you 
(motivates you) to work more hours (behavior), which provides you with more money 
(reward) and informs you (feedback loop) that working more hours will fulfill your need 
for more money in the future.
Rewards (as well as motivation itself) are of two types—extrinsic and intrinsic.6 
Managers can use both to encourage better work performance.
■ 
Extrinsic rewards—satisfaction in the payoff from others. An extrinsic reward 
is the payoff, such as money, a person receives from others for performing a 
particular task. An extrinsic reward is an external reward; the payoff comes 
from pleasing others.
Example: An experiment by General Electric found that paying employees 
who were smokers up to $750—an extrinsic reward—to quit and stay off cig-
arettes was three times as successful as a comparison group that got no paid 
incentives.7 (Some firms are asking their employees to pay higher insurance 
premiums or adopt other financial incentives to spur them to quit smoking, 
lose weight, or join a fitness program.8)
■ 
Intrinsic rewards—satisfaction in performing the task itself. An intrinsic 
reward is the satisfaction, such as a feeling of accomplishment, a person 
receives from performing the particular task itself. An intrinsic reward is an 
internal reward; the payoff comes from pleasing yourself.
Example: Jenny Balaze left her post in Ernst & Young LLC’s Washing-
ton, DC, office to spend 12 weeks in Buenos Aires as a volunteer provid-
ing free accounting services to a small publishing firm. It was among “the 
best three months of my life,” says the 27-year-old business advisory ser-
vices manager.9

378 
PART 5 
Leading
Why Is Motivation Important? 
It seems obvious that organizations would want 
to motivate their employees to be more productive. Actually, though, as a manager you 
will find knowledge of motivation important for five reasons.10 In order of importance, 
you want to motivate people to:
 1. Join your organization. You need to instill in talented prospective workers 
the desire to come to work for you.
 2. Stay with your organization. Whether you are in good economic times or 
bad, you always want to be able to retain good people.
 3. Show up for work at your organization. In many organizations, absentee-
ism and lateness are tremendous problems.11
 4. Be engaged while at your organization. Engaged employees produce 
higher-quality work and better customer service.
 5. Do extra for your organization. You hope your employees will perform extra 
tasks above and beyond the call of duty (be organizational “good citizens”).
The Four Major Perspectives on Motivation: Overview
There is no theory accepted by everyone as to what motivates people. In this chapter, 
therefore, we present the four principal perspectives. From these, you may be able to 
select what ideas seem most workable to you. The four perspectives on motivation are 
(1) content, (2) process, (3) job design, and (4) reinforcement, as described in the fol-
lowing four main sections. ●
Are You More Interested in Extrinsic or Intrinsic 
Rewards? 
The following survey was designed to assess extrinsic and in-
trinsic motivation. Go to connect.mheducation.com and 
take Self-Assessment 12.1. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
What is more important to you, extrinsic or intrinsic 
rewards? Are you surprised by the results?
2. 
How can you use the results to increase your motivation 
to obtain good grades in your classes?
3. 
If you were managing someone like yourself, what would 
you do to increase the individual’s motivation?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 12.1
®
We all are motivated by a combination of extrinsic and intrinsic rewards. Which 
type of reward is more valuable to you? Answering this question can help you generate 
self-motivation and higher performance. Find out about your relative interest in extrin-
sic and intrinsic rewards by taking Self-Assessment 12.1.

12.2 Content Perspectives on Employee Motivation
What kinds of needs motivate employees?
THE BIG PICTURE
Content perspectives are theories emphasizing the needs that motivate people. Needs are defined as 
 physiological or psychological deficiencies that arouse behavior. The content perspective includes 
four  theories: Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, McClelland’s acquired needs theory, Deci and Ryan’s 
self- determination theory, and Herzberg’s two-factor theory.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Content perspectives, also known as need-based perspectives, are theories that em-
phasize the needs that motivate people. Content theorists ask, “What kind of needs 
motivate employees in the workplace?” Needs are defined as physiological or psycho-
logical deficiencies that arouse behavior. They can be strong or weak, and, because 
they are influenced by environmental factors, they can vary over time and from place 
to place.
In addition to McGregor’s Theory X/Theory Y (see Chapter 2), content perspectives 
include four theories:
■ 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs theory
■ 
McClelland’s acquired needs theory
■ 
Deci and Ryan’s self-determination theory
■ 
Herzberg’s two-factor theory
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory: Five Levels
In 1943, one of the first researchers to study motivation, Brandeis University psychol-
ogy professor Abraham Maslow (mentioned previously in Chapter 2) put forth his 
hierarchy of needs theory, which proposes that people are motivated by five levels of 
needs: (1) physiological, (2) safety, (3) love, (4) esteem, and (5) self-actualization.12 
(See Figure 12.3.)
 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
379
Self-
actualization
Esteem
Love
Safety
5. Self-actualization need—the highest level need:  Need for self-fulﬁllment: increasing competence, using
    abilities to the fullest. Workplace example: sabbatical leave to further personal growth.
4. Esteem need: Need for self-respect, status, reputation, recognition, self-conﬁdence. Workplace examples:
    bonuses, promotions, awards.
3. Love need: Need for love, friendship, affection. Workplace examples: ofﬁce parties, company softball teams,
    management retreats.  
2. Safety need: Need for physical safety, emotional security, avoidance of violence. Workplace examples: health
    insurance, job security, work safety rules, pension plans satisfy this need. 
1. Physiological need—the most basic human physical need: Need for food, clothing, shelter, comfort, self-
    preservation. Workplace example: these are covered by wages.
Physiological
FIGURE 12.3
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs

380 
PART 5 
Leading
The Five Levels of Needs 
In proposing this hierarchy of five needs, ranging from 
basic to highest level, Maslow suggested that needs are never completely satisfied. 
That is, our actions are aimed at fulfilling the “deprived” needs, the needs that remain 
unsatisfied at any point in time. Thus, for example, once you have achieved safety 
(security), which is the second most basic need, you will then seek to fulfill the third 
most basic need—love (belongingness).
EXAMPLE
Looking for Peak Performance: A Hotel CEO Applies Maslow’s Hierarchy 
to Employees, Customers, & Investors
Chip Conley is CEO and founder of boutique hotel company Joie 
de Vivre (JDV), whose mission statement is “creating opportuni-
ties to celebrate the joy of life.” In Peak: How Great Companies 
Get Their Mojo from Maslow, he describes how JDV used 
Maslow’s theory to motivate the business’s three key stakeholders—
employees, customers, and investors—by tapping into the 
power of self-actualization to create peak performance.13
Motivating Employees. Applying the Maslow pyramid to em-
ployees, says Conley, “the basic need that a job satisfies is money. 
Toward the middle are needs like recognition for a job well done, 
and at the top are needs like meaning and creative expression.”14
Thus, housekeepers, who represent half of a hotel’s work-
ers, would be gathered in small groups and asked what the 
hotels would look like if they weren’t there each day. Following 
their answers (unvacuumed carpets, piled-up trash, bathrooms 
filled with wet towels), they were then asked to come up with 
alternative names for housekeeping. Some responses: “seren-
ity keepers,” “clutter busters,” “the peace-of-mind police.” 
From this exercise, workers developed a sense of how the 
customer experience would not be the same without them.15
And that, says Conley, “gets to a sense of meaning in your work 
that satisfies that high-level human motivation.” Addressing 
the highest-level need gives employees “a sense that the job 
helps them become the best people they can be.”16
Motivating Customers. Many hotels offer clean, safe accommo-
dations. JDV designs each of its 30 hotels to “flatter and vindicate 
a different category of customers’ distinct self-image,” says Conley. 
Thus, in San Francisco, the Hotel Rex’s tweedy décor and Jack 
London touches appeal to urbane literary types. The Vitale’s 
fitness-conscious services and minimalist design target “the kind 
of bourgeois bohemian who might like Dwell Magazine.”17
Motivating Investors. Although most investors focus on a 
“returns-driven relationship” (bottom of the pyramid), some have 
higher motivations. They are driven not by the deal “but rather [by] 
an interesting, worthwhile deal,” which JDV attempts to provide.18
YOUR CALL
To what extent can Chip Conley’s ideas be used in larger 
organizations?
Using the Hierarchy of Needs Theory to Motivate Employees 
Research 
does not clearly support Maslow’s theory, although it remains popular among managers. 
Still, the importance of Maslow’s contribution is that he showed that workers have 
needs beyond that of just earning a paycheck. To the extent the organization permits, 
managers should first try to meet employees’ level 1 and level 2 needs, of course, so 
that employees won’t be preoccupied with them. Then, however, they need to give 
employees a chance to fulfill their higher-level needs in ways that also advance the 
goals of the organization.19
McClelland’s Acquired Needs Theory: Achievement, 
Affiliation, & Power
David McClelland, a well-known psychologist, investigated the needs for affili-
ation and power and as a consequence proposed the acquired needs theory, which 
states that three needs—achievement, affiliation, and power—are major motives 
determining people’s behavior in the workplace.20 McClelland believes that we are 
not born with our needs; rather we learn them from the culture—from our life 
experiences.

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
381
A “well-balanced”
individual: achievement,
affiliation, and power
are of equal size.
A “control freak”
individual: achievement
is normal, but affiliation is
small and power is large.
Ach.
Power
Aff.
Ach.
Power
Aff.
FIGURE 12.4
McClelland’s three needs
The Three Needs 
Managers are encouraged to recognize three needs in them-
selves and others and to attempt to create work environments that are responsive to 
them. The three needs, one of which tends to be dominant in each of us, are as follows. 
(See Figure 12.4, right.)
■ 
Need for achievement—“I need to excel at tasks.” This is the desire to ex-
cel, to do something better or more efficiently, to solve problems, to achieve 
excellence in challenging tasks.
■ 
Need for affiliation—“I need close relationships.” This is the desire for 
friendly and warm relations with other people.
■ 
Need for power—“I need to control others.” This is the desire to be respon-
sible for other people, to influence their behavior or to control them.21
McClelland identifies two forms of the need for power—personal and institutional.
The negative kind is the need for personal power, as expressed in the 
desire to dominate others, and involves manipulating people for one’s own 
gratification.
The positive kind, characteristic of top managers and leaders, is the desire for 
institutional power, as expressed in the need to solve problems that further organi-
zational goals.
Research tells us that your performance will vary along the lines of the three ac-
quired needs. Where do you think you stand in terms of being motivated by these three 
needs? You can find out by completing Self-Assessment 12.2.
Assessing Your Acquired Needs
The following survey was designed to assess your motivation 
in terms of acquired needs. Go to connect.mheducation.com 
and take Self-Assessment 12.2. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
What is the order of your most important needs? Are you 
surprised by this result?
2. 
Given that achievement and power needs are associated 
with career advancement, how might you increase these 
two need states?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 12.2
®
Using Acquired Needs Theory to Motivate Employees 
McClelland associ-
ates the three needs with different sets of work preferences, as follows:22
Need for Achievement If you (or an employee) are happy with accomplishment 
of a task being its own reward, don’t mind or even prefer working alone, and are will-
ing to take moderate risks, then you probably have a high need for achievement. That 
being the case, you (or your employee) would probably prefer doing the kind of work 
that offers pay for performance, challenging but achievable goals, and individual re-
sponsibility for results. People high in need for achievement tend to advance in techni-
cal fields requiring creativity and individual skills.23
Need for Power If you, like most effective managers, have a high need for power, 
that means you enjoy being in control of people and events and being recognized for 
this responsibility. Accordingly, your preference would probably be for work that 
allows you to control or have an effect on people and be publicly recognized for your 
accomplishments.

382 
PART 5 
Leading
Need for Affiliation If you tend to seek social approval and satisfying personal 
relationships, you may have a high need for affiliation. In that case, you may not be the 
most efficient manager because at times you will have to make decisions that will 
make people resent you. Instead, you will tend to prefer work, such as sales, that pro-
vides for personal relationships and social approval.
Deci & Ryan’s Self-Determination Theory: 
Competence, Autonomy, & Relatedness
Developed by Edward Deci (pronounced “Dee-see”) and Richard Ryan, psycholo-
gists at the University of Rochester, self-determination theory assumes that people 
are driven to try to grow and attain fulfillment, with their behavior and well-being influ-
enced by three innate needs: competence, autonomy, and relatedness.24
Focus on Intrinsic Motivation 
Self-determination theory focuses primarily on 
intrinsic motivation and rewards (such as feeling independent) rather than on extrinsic 
motivation and rewards (such as money or fame). Intrinsic motivation is longer lasting 
than extrinsic motivation and has a more positive impact on task performance.25
The Three Innate Needs 
To achieve psychological growth, according to the 
theory, people need to satisfy the three innate (that is, inborn) needs of competence, 
autonomy, and relatedness:
 1. Competence—“I want to feel a sense of mastery.” People need to feel qual-
ified, knowledgeable, and capable of completing a goal or task and to learn 
different skills.
 2. Autonomy—“I want to feel independent and able to influence my envi-
ronment.” People need to feel they have freedom and the discretion to deter-
mine what they want to do and how they want to do it.
 3. Relatedness—“I want to feel connected to other people.” People need to 
feel a sense of belonging, of attachment to others.
Using Self-Determination Theory to Motivate Employees 
Managers can 
apply this theory by trying to create work environments that encourage employees to 
experience competence, autonomy, and relatedness. Some specific suggestions:
■ 
Competence. Managers can provide tangible resources, time, contacts, and 
coaching to improve employee competence, making sure that employees have 
the knowledge and information they need to perform their jobs. Example: At 
NetApp, a data storage company, managers regularly notify the vice chairman 
when they “catch someone doing something right.” He makes 10–20 phone 
calls a day to thank such special employees.26
■ 
Autonomy. To enhance feelings of autonomy, managers can develop trust 
with their employees and empower them by delegating meaningful tasks 
to them. Example: Unilever provides smartphones and other technologies to 
100,000 employees (factory production workers excepted) to enable them 
to work anytime, anywhere, as long as they meet company needs.27
■ 
Relatedness. Many companies, such as Sacramento-based Nugget Market, 
use camaraderie to foster relatedness. “The company doesn’t see this as a 
workplace,” says one employee. “They see it as a family. This is our home, 
where customers are treated as guests.”28
Are you feeling motivated in this course? To what extent does the instructor for this 
course satisfy your needs for competence, autonomy, and relatedness? You can find 
out by taking Self-Assessment 12.3.

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
383
Herzberg’s Two-Factor Theory: From Dissatisfying 
Factors to Satisfying Factors
Frederick Herzberg arrived at his needs-based theory as a result of a landmark 
study of 203 accountants and engineers who were interviewed to determine the 
factors responsible for job satisfaction and dissatisfaction.29 Job satisfaction was 
more frequently associated with achievement, recognition, characteristics of the 
work, responsibility, and advancement. Job dissatisfaction was more often associ-
ated with working conditions, pay and security, company policies, supervisors, 
and interpersonal relationships. The result was Herzberg’s two-factor theory, 
which proposed that work satisfaction and dissatisfaction arise from two different 
factors—work satisfaction from motivating factors and work dissatisfaction from 
hygiene factors.
Hygiene Factors versus Motivating Factors 
In Herzberg’s theory, the hygiene 
factors are the lower-level needs, and the motivating factors are the higher-level needs. 
The two areas are separated by a zone in which employees are neither satisfied nor 
dissatisfied. (See Figure 12.5, next page.)
Assessing Your Needs for Self-Determination 
The following survey was designed to assess the extent to 
which an instructor is satisfying your needs for self-determination. 
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 
12.3. When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Are your needs being met? Do the results make sense in 
terms of your level of motivation in this course?
2. 
Based on the results, identify two things you might do to 
increase your motivation.
3. 
Based on the results, identify two things your instructor 
might do to increase your motivation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 12.3
®
How much do you want? 
Would a clean desk in a big 
office with a view represent 
the tangible realization of 
managerial success for you? 
Would this be a motivation that 
would make you feel satisfied?

384 
PART 5 
Leading
Motivating factors:
“What will make my people satisfied?”
Achievement
Recognition
The work itself
Responsibility
Advancement & growth
Hygiene  factors:
“What will make my people dissatisfied?”
Pay & security
Working conditions
Interpersonal relationships
Company policy
Supervisors
No satisfaction
Satisfaction
Dissatisfaction
No dissatisfaction
Neutral area: neither satisfied nor dissatisfied
FIGURE 12.5
Herzberg’s two-factor 
theory: satisfaction 
versus dissatisfaction
■ 
Hygiene factors—“Why are my people dissatisfied?” The lower-level 
needs, hygiene factors, are factors associated with job dissatisfaction—such 
as salary, working conditions, interpersonal relationships, and company policy—
all of which affect the job context in which people work.
An example of a hygiene factor is the temperature in a factory that’s 
not air-conditioned during the summer. Installing air-conditioning will 
remove a cause of job dissatisfaction. It will not, however, spur factory 
workers’ motivation and make them greatly satisfied in their work. Be-
cause motivating factors are absent, workers become, in Herzberg’s view, 
merely neutral in their attitudes toward work—neither dissatisfied nor 
satisfied.
■ 
Motivating factors—“What will make my people satisfied?” The higher-
level needs, motivating factors, or simply motivators, are factors associated 
with job satisfaction—such as achievement, recognition, responsibility, and 
advancement—all of which affect the job content or the rewards of work per-
formance. Motivating factors—challenges, opportunities, recognition—must 
be instituted, Herzberg believed, to spur superior work performance.
An example of a motivating factor would be to give factory workers more 
control over their work. For instance, instead of repeating a single task over 
and over, a worker might join with other workers on a team in which each one 
does several tasks. This is the approach that Swedish automaker Volvo took in 
building cars.

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
385
Deci & Ryan
Higher-level
needs
Lower-level
needs
Maslow
Self-actualization
Esteem
Safety
Physiological
Deci & Ryan
Competence
Autonomy
Relatedness
Achievement
Power
Affiliation
McClelland
Herzberg
Motivating factors
Hygiene factors
Love
FIGURE 12.6 
A comparison of needs & satisfaction theories: Maslow hierarchy of needs, 
McClelland acquired need, Deci & Ryan self-determination, and Herzberg two-factor
Using Two-Factor Theory to Motivate Employees 
During the Great Reces-
sion, with fewer jobs available, many people felt they were stuck in jobs they 
disliked—61% in 2009, according to a survey by the Conference Board.30 In 2013, the 
survey found even worse results—only half of American workers said they were sat-
isfied with their jobs.31 Another study, however, finds that 81% of U.S. employees 
report overall satisfaction with their current job, with the important parts being com-
pensation/pay (by 60%), job security (59%), and opportunities to use skills/abilities 
(also 59%).32
There will always be some employees who dislike their jobs, but the basic lesson 
of Herzberg’s research is that you should first eliminate dissatisfaction (hygiene 
factors), making sure that working conditions, pay levels, and company policies are 
reasonable. You should then concentrate on spurring motivation by providing op-
portunities for achievement, recognition, responsibility, and personal growth (moti-
vating factors).
Positive hygiene factors could include allowing pets at work; offering video-
game arcades, fitness classes, and intramural sports (volleyball, soccer); and pro-
viding a library of free movies, books, and magazines.33 (Or, if you work at Google, 
you could also have a college reimbursement plan, legal aid, and travel assistance—
and if you die, the company will pay your family half your salary for a decade.)34
The four needs theories are compared below. (See Figure 12.6.) Note how acquired 
need theory (McClelland) and self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan) focus only
on higher-level needs. ●

Process perspectives are concerned with the thought processes by which people 
decide how to act—how employees choose behavior to meet their needs. Whereas need-
based perspectives simply try to understand employee needs, process perspectives go 
further and try to understand why employees have different needs, what behaviors they 
select to satisfy them, and how they decide if their choices were successful.
In this section we discuss three process perspectives on motivation:
■ 
Equity theory
■ 
Expectancy theory
■ 
Goal-setting theory
Equity Theory: How Fairly Do You Think You’re Being 
Treated in Relation to Others?
Fairness—or, perhaps equally important, the perception of fairness—can be a big issue 
in organizations. For example, if, as a salesperson for Target, you received a 10% bo-
nus for doubling your sales, would that be enough? What if other Target salespeople 
received 15%?
Equity theory focuses on employee perceptions as to how fairly they think they are be-
ing treated compared with others. Developed by psychologist J. Stacey Adams, equity 
theory is based on the idea that employees are motivated to see fairness in the rewards they 
expect for task performance.35 Employees are motivated to resolve feelings of injustice. 
How, for example, might employees respond to knowing that the average pay for 
CEOs in 2013 was about 257 times the average worker’s pay, up from 181 times in 
2009?36 (The head of a typical large public company earned $10.5 million in 2013. 
The average American with a bachelor’s degree makes $2.3 million—over a lifetime. 
By contrast, Apple CEO Timothy Cook earns that amount in a shade over two days.37) 
How about the fact that in 2013 women made only 81% of men’s earnings?38 Some 
experts suggest that such imbalances are partly responsible for the more than $50 bil-
lion a year in employee theft.39
The Elements of Equity Theory: Comparing Your Inputs & Outputs with 
Those of Others 
The key elements in equity theory are inputs, outputs (rewards), 
and comparisons. (See Figure 12.7, opposite page.)
■ 
Inputs—“What do you think you’re putting into the job?” The inputs that 
people perceive they give to an organization are their time, effort, training, 
experience, intelligence, creativity, seniority, status, and so on.
■ 
Outputs or rewards—“What do you think you’re getting out of the job?” 
The outputs are the rewards that people receive from an organization: pay, 
benefits, praise, recognition, bonuses, promotions, status perquisites (corner 
office with a view, say, or private parking space), and so on.
■ 
Comparison—“How do you think your ratio of inputs and rewards com-
pares with those of others?” Equity theory suggests that people compare the 
ratio of their own outcomes to inputs against the ratio of someone else’s 
12.3 Process Perspectives on Employee Motivation
Is a good reward good enough? How do other factors affect motivation?
THE BIG PICTURE
Process perspectives, which are concerned with the thought processes by which people decide how to act, 
have three viewpoints: equity theory, expectancy theory, and goal-setting theory.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
386 
PART 5 
Leading

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
387
outcomes to inputs. When employees compare the ratio of their inputs and 
outputs (rewards) with those of others—whether coworkers within the organi-
zation or even other people in similar jobs outside it—they then make a judg-
ment about fairness. Either they perceive there is equity, and so are satisfied 
with the ratio and so they don’t change their behavior. Or they perceive there 
is inequity, and so they feel resentful and act to change the inequity.40
Using Equity Theory to Motivate Employees 
Adams suggests that employees 
who feel they are being underrewarded will respond to the perceived inequity in one or 
more negative ways, as by reducing their inputs, trying to change the outputs or rewards 
they receive, distorting the inequity, changing the object of comparison, or leaving the 
situation. (See Table 12.1.)
My inputs
“What does it
seem like I am
putting into the
job?”: time,
effort, training, etc.
My outputs
“What does it
seem like I am
getting out of
the job?”: pay,
benefits, praise, etc.
Comparison
“How does it seem the ratio of my inputs and
outputs compares with the ratio of theirs? Are
they fair (equity) or unfair (inequity)?”
Their inputs
“What does it
seem like they are
putting into the
job?”: time,
effort, training, etc.
Their outputs
“What does it
seem like they are
getting out of the
job?”: pay, bene-
fits, praise, etc.
Equity is
perceived
“I’m satisfied and
so I won’t
change my
behavior.”
Inequity is
perceived
“I’m dissatisfied
and so I will
change my
behavior.”
My inputs are compared
with other employees’
inputs.
My outputs (rewards) are
compared with other
employees’ outputs.
FIGURE 12.7
Equity theory
How people perceive they are 
being fairly or unfairly rewarded.
• 
They will reduce their inputs: They will do less work, take long breaks, call in “sick” on Mondays, 
leave early on Fridays, and so on.
• 
They will try to change the outputs or rewards they receive: They will lobby the boss for a 
raise, or they will pilfer company equipment.
• 
They will distort the inequity: They will exaggerate how hard they work so they can complain 
they’re not paid what they’re worth.
• 
They will change the object of comparison: They may compare themselves with another person 
instead of the original one.
• 
They will leave the situation: They will quit, transfer, or shift to another reference group.
TABLE 12.1
Some Ways Employees Try 
to Reduce Inequity

388 
PART 5 
Leading
By contrast, employees who think they are treated fairly are more likely to support 
organizational change, more apt to cooperate in group settings, and less apt to turn to 
arbitration and the courts to remedy real or imagined wrongs.
Three practical lessons that can be drawn from equity theory are as follows.
1. Employee Perceptions Are What Count Probably the most important re-
sult of research on equity theory is this: No matter how fair managers think the organi-
zation’s policies, procedures, and reward system are, each employee’s perception of 
those factors is what counts. Thus, managers should provide positive recognition about 
employee behavior and performance and explain the reasons behind their decisions.
2. Employee Participation Helps Managers benefit by allowing employees to 
participate in important decisions. For example, a recent study showed that employees 
were more satisfied with changes to their jobs when they participated in creating the 
changes.41
3. Having an Appeal Process Helps When employees are able to appeal deci-
sions affecting their welfare, it promotes the belief that management treats them fairly. 
Perceptions of fair treatment promote job satisfaction, commitment, and citizenship 
behavior and reduce absenteeism and turnover.42
Research clearly shows that our perceptions of equity or fair treatment are signifi-
cantly associated with job satisfaction, commitment, performance, and turnover. It 
thus is important for managers to understand employees’ feelings about equitable 
treatment. Are you being treated fairly at work? Do you have an appreciation for the 
different ways in which managers can treat us fairly? You can get answers to these 
questions by taking Self-Assessment 12.4.
Measuring Perceived Fair Interpersonal 
Treatment
The following survey was designed to assess the extent to 
which you are experiencing fair interpersonal treatment at work. 
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 
12.4. When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Are you being treated equitably?
2. 
Based on examining the three lowest-scoring items, what 
could your manager do to improve your perceptions 
of equity?
3. 
What can you do to increase your perceptions of fair 
interpersonal treatment?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 12.4
®
Expectancy Theory: How Much Do You Want & How 
Likely Are You to Get It?
Introduced by Victor Vroom, expectancy theory suggests that people are motivated 
by two things: (1) how much they want something and (2) how likely they think they are 
to get it.43 In other words, assuming they have choices, people will make the choice 
that promises them the greatest reward if they think they can get it.
The Three Elements: Expectancy, Instrumentality, Valence 
What deter-
mines how willing you (or an employee) are to work hard at tasks important to the 
success of the organization? The answer, says Vroom, is: You will do what you can do 
when you want to.

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
389
Your motivation, according to expectancy theory, involves the relationship between 
your effort, your performance, and the desirability of the outcomes (such as pay or 
recognition) of your performance. These relationships, which are shown in the follow-
ing drawing, are affected by the three elements of expectancy, instrumentality, and 
valence. (See Figure 12.8.)
Performance
. . . a particular
level of task
performance, . . .
Effort
I exert an
effort . . .
Outcomes
. . . certain
outcomes
(e.g., pay or
recognition)
Expectancy
“Will I be able to
perform at the
desired level
on a task?”
Valence
“How much do I
want the
outcome?”
Instrumentality
“What outcome
will I receive if I
perform at this
level?”
. . . in order 
to achieve . . .
. . . so that I
can realize . . .
FIGURE 12.8 
Expectancy theory: the major elements
1. Expectancy—“Will I Be Able to Perform at the Desired Level on a 
Task?” 
Expectancy is the belief that a particular level of effort will lead to a particu-
lar level of performance. This is called the effort-to-performance expectancy.
Example: If you believe that putting in more hours working at Target selling clothes will 
result in higher sales, then you have high effort-to-performance expectancy. That is, you 
believe that your efforts will matter. You think you have the ability, the product knowledge, 
and so on so that putting in extra hours of selling can probably raise your sales of clothes.
2. Instrumentality—“What Outcome Will I Receive If I Perform at This 
Level?” 
Instrumentality is the expectation that successful performance of the task 
will lead to the outcome desired. This is called the performance-to-reward expectancy.
Example: If you believe that making higher sales will cause Target to give you a 
bonus, then you have high performance-to-reward expectancy. You believe if you can 
achieve your goals, the outcome will be worthwhile. This element is independent of 
the previous one—you might decide you don’t have the ability to make the extra sales, 
but if you did, you’ll be rewarded. (Lately, because of the public’s concern about the 
quality of the educational system in the United States, school boards and politicians 
are implementing programs that tie teachers’ pay to performance.44)
3. Valence—“How Much Do I Want the Outcome?” 
Valence is value, the 
importance a worker assigns to the possible outcome or reward.
Example: If you assign a lot of importance or a high value to Target’s prospective 
bonus or pay raise, then your valence is said to be high.
For your motivation to be high, you must be high on all three elements—expectancy, 
instrumentality, and valence. If any element is low, you will not be motivated. Your 
effort-to-performance expectancy might be low, for instance, because you doubt 
making an effort will make a difference (because retail clothing selling has too much 
competition). Or your performance-to-reward expectancy might be low because you 
don’t think Target is going to give you a bonus for being a star at selling. Or your va-
lence might be low because you don’t think the bonus or raise is going to be high 
enough to justify working evenings and weekends.

390 
PART 5 
Leading
Using Expectancy Theory to Motivate Employees 
The principal problem with 
the expectancy theory is that it is complex. Even so, the underlying logic is understand-
able, and research seems to show that managers are not following its principles.45
When attempting to motivate employees, managers should ask the following 
questions:
■ 
What rewards do your employees value? As a manager, you need to get to 
know your employees and determine what rewards (outcomes) they value, 
such as pay raises or recognition.
■ 
What are the job objectives and the performance level you desire? You 
need to clearly define the performance objectives and determine what perfor-
mance level or behavior you want so that you can tell your employees what 
they need to do to attain the rewards.
■ 
Are the rewards linked to performance? You want to reward high perfor-
mance, of course. Thus, employees must be aware that X level of performance 
within Y period of time will result in Z kinds of rewards. In a team context, 
however, research shows that it is best to use a combination of individual and 
team-based rewards.46
■ 
Do employees believe you will deliver the right rewards for the right per-
formance? Your credibility is on the line here. Your employees must believe 
that you have the power, the ability, and the will to give them the rewards you 
promise for the performance you are requesting.
EXAMPLE
Reducing the F’s: Applying Expectancy Theory to Failing Students
“A highly skilled CEO is hard to find,” observes a business 
writer. “Highly paid CEOs, however, are everywhere you 
look.”47
Indeed, the mass media are full of stories about top manag-
ers who don’t produce results but are still rewarded (such as 
the Staples executives who didn’t make their 2013 goals but 
received a special bonus anyway—“for effort”).48 Where’s the 
inducement to deliver superior performance when you’re going 
to be rewarded anyway?49
Maybe we can learn from high school.
Fewer F’s. As a principal in Arizona high schools, Dr. Tim 
Richard has used a motivational program called Celebration/
Remediation to improve the grades of students. For instance, 
at 3,000-student Westwood High School in Mesa, which had 
1,200 failing pupils, students with F grades dropped to 900 
within the first few months. At Poston Butte High School, the 
number of students with one or more F’s was reduced from 
555 to 262 in nine weeks. “Once we changed the culture by 
bringing on Celebration/Remediation . . . ,” Richard said, “the 
kids have completely embraced it.”50 (Poston Butte also 
rewards students who pass all their classes with an early 
release from school.)
Celebration or Remediation? At Westwood, the program 
worked like this: “Students are allowed to go outside and 
have fun with their friends for 28 minutes on four mornings 
a week,” Richard told The Arizona Republic. “But those 
who have even one F must stay inside for ‘remediation’—
28 minutes of extra study, help from peer tutors, or meetings 
with teachers.”51
Richard believes the key to motivating students is to link a 
highly valued reward—socializing with friends outside—with 
grades. Socializing includes not only hanging out but also eat-
ing snacks, playing organized games, and listening and danc-
ing to music. “You really appreciate celebration after you have 
been in remediation,” said Ivana Baltazar, a 17-year-old senior 
who raised her grade in economics from an F to a B after re-
ceiving help through the program.
YOUR CALL
The tricky part, observes Westwood student tutor Joseph 
Leung, is addressing expectancy—“getting people out of the 
mindset that they can’t succeed. . . . A lot of times they just 
haven’t done their homework. I try to help them understand 
that the difference between a person passing and failing is 
their work ethic.” For top executives in business, expectancy 
doesn’t seem to be a problem, it’s instrumentality and valence. 
How could you apply Richard’s program to reward performance 
in business?

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
391
Goal-Setting Theory: Objectives Should Be Specific 
& Challenging but Achievable
We have been considering the importance of goal setting since first introducing the 
topic in Chapter 5. Goal-setting theory suggests that employees can be motivated by 
goals that are specific and challenging but achievable. According to psychologists 
Edwin Locke and Gary Latham, who developed the theory, it is natural for people to 
set and strive for goals; however, the goal-setting process is useful only if people 
understand and accept the goals.
The Four Motivational Mechanisms of Goal-Setting Theory 
Goal setting 
helps motivate you by doing the following:
1. It Directs Your Attention Goal setting directs your attention toward goal-
relevant tasks and away from irrelevant ones.
2. It Regulates the Effort Expended The effort you expend is generally pro-
portional to the goal’s difficulty.
3. It Increases Your Persistence Goal setting makes obstacles become chal-
lenges to be overcome, not reasons to fail.
4. It Fosters Use of Strategies & Action Plans The use of strategies and 
action plans make it more likely you will realize success.
Some Practical Results of Goal-Setting Theory 
A goal is defined as an ob-
jective that a person is trying to accomplish through his or her efforts. To result in high 
motivation and performance, according to recent research, goals must have a number 
of characteristics, as follows:
1. Goals Should Be Specific Goals such as “Sell as many cars as you can” or “Be 
nicer to customers” are too vague. Instead, goals need to be specific—usually meaning 
quantitative, as in “Boost your revenues 25%” and “Cut absenteeism by 10%.”52
2. Goals Should Be Challenging but Achievable Goals should be tailored 
to fit individual abilities and training, not set so low that lots of people can achieve 
them nor set so high that most people will give up. Difficult goals will lead to higher 
performance only when employees are committed to them; if they are not, difficult 
goals may simply lead to low performance.53
3. Goals Should Be Linked to Action Plans An action plan outlines the ac-
tivities or tasks that need to be accomplished in order to obtain a goal and reminds us of 
what we should be working on. Both individuals (such as college students) and organi-
zations are more likely to achieve their goals when they develop detailed action plans.54
4. Goals Need Not Be Set Jointly to Be Effective It doesn’t seem to matter 
whether goals are set by managers, by employees, or by both together to be effective.55 
Thus, managers should probably do whatever suits the individual and the situation (a 
contingency approach). On the other hand, employees should be encouraged to de-
velop their own action plans, which will foster stronger goal commitment.56
5. Feedback Enhances Goal Attainment Feedback lets employees know if 
they are on or off course, provides them with performance standards, and gives them 
the information they need to adjust their efforts.
Some of the preceding recommendations are embodied in the advice we presented 
in Chapter 5—namely, that goals should be SMART: Specific, Measurable, Attainable, 
Results-oriented, and have Target dates. ●

12.4 Job Design Perspectives on Motivation
What’s the best way to design jobs—adapt people to work or work to people?
THE BIG PICTURE
Job design, the division of an organization’s work among employees, applies motivational theories to jobs 
to increase performance and satisfaction. The traditional approach to job design is to fit people to the jobs; 
the modern way is to fit the jobs to the people, using job enrichment and approaches that are based on 
Herzberg’s landmark two-factor theory, discussed earlier in this chapter. The job characteristics model 
offers five job attributes for better work outcomes.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
About half of workers reported in a recent year that their current job was stagnant.57 
Is there anything that can be done about this?
Job design is (1) the division of an organization’s work among its employees and 
(2) the application of motivational theories to jobs to increase satisfaction and perfor-
mance. There are two different approaches to job design, one traditional, one modern, 
that can be taken in deciding how to design jobs. The traditional way is fitting people 
to jobs; the modern way is fitting jobs to people.58
Fitting People to Jobs
Fitting people to jobs is based on the assumption that people will gradually adapt to 
any work situation. Even so, jobs must still be tailored so that nearly anyone can do 
them. This is the approach often taken with assembly-line jobs and jobs involving rou-
tine tasks. For managers the main challenge becomes “How can we make the worker 
most compatible with the work?”
One technique is job simplification, the process of reducing the number of tasks a 
worker performs. When a job is stripped down to its simplest elements, it enables a 
worker to focus on doing more of the same task, thus increasing employee efficiency 
and productivity. This may be especially useful, for instance, in designing jobs for 
mentally disadvantaged workers, such as those run by Goodwill Industries. However, 
research shows that simplified, repetitive jobs lead to job dissatisfaction, poor mental 
health, and a low sense of accomplishment and personal growth.59
Fitting Jobs to People
Fitting jobs to people is based on the assumption that people are underutilized at work and 
that they want more variety, challenges, and responsibility. This philosophy, an outgrowth 
of Herzberg’s theory, is one of the reasons for the popularity of work teams in the United 
States. The main challenge for managers is “How can we make the work most compatible 
with the worker so as to produce both high performance and high job satisfaction?” 
Two techniques for this type of job design are (1) job enlargement and (2) job 
enrichment.
Job Enlargement: Putting More Variety into a Job 
The opposite of job sim-
plification, job enlargement consists of increasing the number of tasks in a job to in-
crease variety and motivation. For instance, the job of installing flat screens in 
television sets could be enlarged to include installation of the circuit boards as well.
Although proponents claim job enlargement can improve employee satisfaction, 
motivation, and quality of production, research suggests job enlargement by itself 
won’t have a significant and lasting positive effect on job performance. After all, work-
ing at two boring tasks instead of one doesn’t add up to a challenging job. Instead, job 
enlargement is just one tool of many that should be considered in job design.60
392 
PART 5 
Leading

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
393
Job Enrichment: Putting More Responsibility & Other Motivating Factors into 
a Job 
Job enrichment is the practical application of Frederick Herzberg’s two-factor 
motivator-hygiene theory of job satisfaction.61 Specifically, job enrichment consists of 
building into a job such motivating factors as responsibility, achievement, recognition, stim-
ulating work, and advancement.
However, instead of the job-enlargement technique of simply giving employees ad-
ditional tasks of similar difficulty (known as horizontal loading), with job enrichment 
employees are given more responsibility (known as vertical loading). Thus, employees 
take on chores that would normally be performed by their supervisors. For example, 
one department store authorized thousands of its sales clerks to handle functions nor-
mally reserved for store managers, such as handling merchandise-return problems and 
approving customers’ checks.
The Job Characteristics Model: Five Job Attributes 
for Better Work Outcomes
Developed by researchers J. Richard Hackman and Greg Oldham, the job charac-
teristics model of design is an outgrowth of job enrichment.62 The job characteristics 
model consists of (a) five core job characteristics that affect (b) three critical 
psychological states of an employee that in turn affect (c) work outcomes—the 
employee’s motivation, performance, and satisfaction. The model is illustrated 
below. (See Figure 12.9.)
FIGURE 12.9
The job characteristics 
model
Source: From J. Richard Hackman 
and Greg R. Oldham, Work 
Redesign, le ©1980. Reproduced 
by permission of Pearson 
Education, Inc., Upper Saddle 
River, New Jersey.
Skill variety
Five core
job characteristics
Task identity
Task significance
Autonomy
Feedback
Contingency factors
Experienced
meaningfulness of
work
Experienced
responsibility for
work outcomes
C
i
f
Knowledge of
actual results
of the work
High work
motivation
High work
performance
High work
satisfaction
Low absenteeism
& turnover
Degree to which individuals want personal and psychological development:
 
•  Knowledge & skill
 
•  Desire for personal growth
 
•  Context satisfactions
Work outcomes
Three
psychological states
Five Job Characteristics 
The five core job characteristics are skill variety, task 
identity, task significance, autonomy, and feedback, as follows.

394 
PART 5 
Leading
1. Skill Variety—“How Many Different Skills Does Your Job Re-
quire?” Skill variety describes the extent to which a job requires a person to use a 
wide range of different skills and abilities.
Example: The skill variety required by a rocket scientist is higher than that for a 
short-order cook.
2. Task Identity—“How Many Different Tasks Are Required to Com-
plete the Work?” Task identity describes the extent to which a job requires a 
worker to perform all the tasks needed to complete the job from beginning to end.
Example: The task identity for a craftsperson who goes through all the steps to 
build a handmade acoustic guitar is higher than it is for an assembly-line worker who 
just installs windshields on cars.
3. Task Significance—“How Many Other People Are Affected by Your 
Job?” Task significance describes the extent to which a job affects the lives of other 
people, whether inside or outside the organization.
Example: A technician who is responsible for keeping a hospital’s electronic equipment 
in working order has higher task significance than a person wiping down cars in a carwash.
4. Autonomy—“How Much Discretion Does Your Job Give You?” Au-
tonomy describes the extent to which a job allows an employee to make choices about 
scheduling different tasks and deciding how to perform them.
Example: College-textbook salespeople have lots of leeway in planning which cam-
puses and professors to call on. Thus, they have higher autonomy than do toll-takers 
on a bridge, whose actions are determined by the flow of vehicles.
5. Feedback—“How Much Do You Find Out How Well You’re Doing?” 
Feedback describes the extent to which workers receive clear, direct information about 
how well they are performing the job.
Skill variety. Being an airline pilot—
or a museum curator, a building 
contractor, a physician, or an 
orchestra conductor—requires a 
greater number of skills than, say, 
driving a truck. Do highly skilled 
employees typically make good 
managers? What skills do airline 
pilots have that would make them 
effective managers in other kinds 
of work?

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
395
Example: Professional basketball players receive immediate feedback on how many 
of their shots are going into the basket. Engineers working on new weapons systems 
may go years before learning how effective their performance has been.
How the Model Works 
According to the job characteristics model, these five core 
characteristics affect a worker’s motivation because they affect three critical psychological 
states: meaningfulness of work, responsibility for results, and knowledge of results. (Refer 
to Figure 12.9 again.) In turn, these positive psychological states fuel high motivation, high 
performance, high satisfaction, and low absenteeism and turnover.
One other element—shown at the bottom of Figure 12.9—needs to be discussed: 
contingency factors. This refers to the degree to which a person wants personal and 
psychological development. Job design works when employees are motivated; to be 
so, they must have three attributes: (1) necessary knowledge and skill, (2) desire for 
personal growth, and (3) context satisfactions—that is, the right physical working con-
ditions, pay, and supervision.
Job design works. A meta-analysis of 259 studies involving 219,625 people showed 
that job design was positively associated with employee performance, job satisfaction, 
organizational commitment, and physical and psychological well-being. Job design 
also was associated with lower absenteeism and intentions to quit.63 Similar results 
were found in another meta-analysis involving studies of over 75,000 people.64
Applying the Job Characteristics Model 
There are three major steps to follow 
when applying the model.
■ 
Diagnose the work environment to see whether a problem exists. Hackman 
and Oldham developed a self-report instrument for managers to use called the 
job diagnostic survey. This will indicate whether an individual’s so-called 
motivating potential score (MPS)—the amount of internal work motivation 
associated with a specific job—is high or low.
■ 
Determine whether job redesign is appropriate. If a person’s MPS score is 
low, an attempt should be made to determine which of the core job character-
istics is causing the problem. You should next decide whether job redesign is 
appropriate for a given group of employees. Job design is most likely to work 
in a participative environment in which employees have the necessary 
knowledge and skills.
■ 
Consider how to redesign the job. Here you try to increase those core job 
characteristics that are lower than national norms.
Example: Employers want to save on health costs by helping employees with diabe-
tes, heart disease, and similar chronic conditions avoid emergency room visits and 
hospital admissions.65 However, since primary care doctors, who could help patients 
manage their conditions (as by reminding diabetics to monitor their blood-glucose 
levels daily), are paid less than physicians in other specialties, the system has turned 
such doctors “into little chipmunks on a wheel, pumping out patients every five min-
utes,” as one observer described it.66 The solution? Redesign the job by rewarding 
primary care doctors for spending more time with patients.67 ●

12.5 Reinforcement Perspectives on Motivation
What are the types of incentives I might use to influence employee behavior?
THE BIG PICTURE
Reinforcement theory suggests behavior will be repeated if it has positive consequences and won’t be 
if it has negative consequences. There are four types of reinforcement: positive reinforcement, negative 
reinforcement, extinction, and punishment. This section also describes how to use some reinforcement 
techniques to modify employee behavior.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Reinforcement evades the issue of people’s needs and thinking processes in relation to 
motivation, as we described under the need-based and process perspectives. Instead, 
the reinforcement perspective, which was pioneered by Edward L. Thorndike and 
B. F. Skinner, is concerned with how the consequences of a certain behavior affect 
that behavior in the future.68
Skinner was the father of operant conditioning, the process of controlling behavior 
by manipulating its consequences. Operant conditioning rests on Thorndike’s law of 
effect, which states that behavior that results in a pleasant outcome is likely to be re-
peated and behavior that results in unpleasant outcomes is not likely to be repeated.
From these underpinnings has come reinforcement theory, which attempts to ex-
plain behavior change by suggesting that behavior with positive consequences tends 
to be repeated, whereas behavior with negative consequences tends not to be 
repeated. The use of reinforcement theory to change human behavior is called behav-
ior modification.
The Four Types of Reinforcement: Positive, Negative, 
Extinction, & Punishment
Reinforcement is anything that causes a given behavior to be repeated or inhibited,
whether praising a child for cleaning his or her room or scolding a child for leaving a 
tricycle in the driveway. 
There are four types of reinforcement: (1) positive reinforcement, (2) negative rein-
forcement, (3) extinction, and (4) punishment. (See Figure 12.10, next page.)
Positive Reinforcement: Strengthens Behavior 
Positive reinforcement is the 
use of positive consequences to strengthen a particular behavior.
Example: A supervisor who’s asked an insurance salesperson to sell more policies 
might reward successful performance by saying, “It’s great that you exceeded your 
sales quota, and you’ll get a bonus for it. Maybe next time you’ll sell even more and 
will become a member of the Circle of 100 Top Sellers and win a trip to Paris as well.” 
Note the rewards: praise, more money, recognition, awards. Presumably this will 
strengthen the behavior and the sales rep will work even harder in the coming months.
Negative Reinforcement: Also Strengthens Behavior 
Negative reinforcement 
is the process of strengthening a behavior by withdrawing something negative.
Example: A supervisor who has been nagging a salesperson might say, “Well, so 
you exceeded your quota” and stop the nagging. Note the neutral statement; there is no 
praise but also no longer any negative statements. This could cause the sales rep to 
maintain his or her existing behavior.
Extinction: Weakens Behavior 
Extinction is the weakening of behavior by ignoring 
it or making sure it is not reinforced.
396 
PART 5 
Leading

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
397
Increases
chances behavior
will be repeated 
“I’ll keep up the
faster pace.”
Increases
chances behavior
will be repeated 
“I’ll keep up the
faster pace.”
Reduces
chances behavior
will be repeated 
“I’ll have to work
faster to receive
praises or raises.”
Reduces
chances behavior
will be repeated 
“Okay, I’ll work a
bit faster from
now on.”
Improved
employee
performance
“I want you
to work faster.”
Improved
employee
performance
“Okay, I’m
working faster.”
Employee
performance
not improved
“I’m working at
the pace I
always have.”
Positive
reinforcement 
Rewards employee
improvement:
“You get a raise
and promotion!”
Manager’s type of
reinforcement
What the
employee does
What the
manager wants
Resulting employee
behavior
Negative
reinforcement 
Avoids employee
reprimands:
“I’m no longer
nagging you.”
Extinction 
Withholds
employee rewards:
“No praise, raises,
or promotion.”
Punishment 
Reprimands and
disciplines
employee:
“I’m docking
your pay.”
FIGURE 12.10
Four types of reinforcement
These are different ways of 
changing employee behavior.
Example: A supervisor might tell a successful salesperson, “I know you exceeded 
your sales-goal quota, but now that our company has been taken over by another firm, 
we’re not giving out bonuses anymore.” Presumably this will weaken the salesperson’s 
efforts to perform better in the future.
Punishment: Also Weakens Behavior 
Punishment is the process of weakening 
behavior by presenting something negative or withdrawing something positive.
Example: A supervisor might tell an unsuccessful salesperson who’s been lazy 
about making calls to clients and so didn’t make quota, “Well, if this keeps up, you’ll 
probably be let go.” This could inhibit the salesperson from being so lackadaisical 
about making calls to clients. (Incidentally, criticism has a stronger impact than praise, 
suggests one social psychologist, and is longer lasting in its effects.69)
Using Reinforcement to Motivate Employees
The following are some guidelines for using two types of reinforcement—positive re-
inforcement and punishment.
Positive Reinforcement 
There are several aspects of positive reinforcement, 
which should definitely be part of your toolkit of managerial skills:
■ 
Reward only desirable behavior. You should give rewards to your employ-
ees only when they show desirable behavior. Thus, for example, you should 

398 
PART 5 
Leading
Punishment. Does getting a 
wallet-busting speeding ticket 
change your behavior? What if it 
happens several times? Yet 
consider also other, presumably 
stronger forms of governmental 
punishment that are supposed to 
act as deterrents to bad behavior. 
Does the possibility of the death 
penalty really deter homicides? 
Why or why not?
give praise to employees not for showing up for work on time (an expected 
part of any job) but for showing up early.
■ 
Give rewards as soon as possible. You should give a reward as soon as pos-
sible after the desirable behavior appears. Thus, you should give praise to an 
early-arriving employee as soon as he or she arrives, not later in the week.
■ 
Be clear about what behavior is desired. Clear communication is everything. 
You should tell employees exactly what kinds of work behaviors are desirable 
and you should tell everyone exactly what they must do to earn rewards.
■ 
Have different rewards and recognize individual differences. Recognizing 
that different people respond to different kinds of rewards, you should have 
different rewards available. Thus, you might give a word of praise verbally to 
one person, text or e-mail a line or two to another person, or send a hand-
scrawled note to another.
Punishment 
Unquestionably there will be times when you’ll need to threaten or 
administer an unpleasant consequence to stop an employee’s undesirable behavior. 
Sometimes it’s best to address a problem by combining punishment with positive rein-
forcement. Some suggestions for using punishment are as follows.
■ 
Punish only undesirable behavior. You should give punishment only when 
employees show frequent undesirable behavior. Otherwise, employees may 
come to view you negatively as a tyrannical boss. Thus, for example, you 
should reprimand employees who show up, say, a half hour late for work but 
not 5 or 10 minutes late.
■ 
Give reprimands or disciplinary actions as soon as possible. You should 
mete out punishment as soon as possible after the undesirable behavior oc-
curs. Thus, you should give a reprimand to a late-arriving employee as soon 
as he or she arrives.
■ 
Be clear about what behavior is undesirable. Tell employees exactly 
what kinds of work behaviors are undesirable and make any disciplinary 
action or reprimand match the behavior. A manager should not, for exam-
ple, dock an hourly employee’s pay if he or she is only 5 or 10 minutes 
late for work.
■ 
Administer punishment in private. You would hate to have your boss 
chew you out in front of your subordinates, and the people who report to 
 you also shouldn’t be repri-
manded in public, which would 
lead only to resentments that 
may have nothing to do with an 
employee’s infractions.
■    Combine punishment and 
positive reinforcement. If 
you’re reprimanding an em-
ployee, be sure to also say 
what he or she is doing right 
and state what rewards the 
employee might be eligible 
for. For example, while repri-
manding someone for being 
late, say that a perfect atten-
dance record over the next 
few months will put that em-
ployee in line for a raise 
or promotion. ●

12.6 Using Compensation & Other Rewards to Motivate
How can I use compensation and other rewards to motivate people?
THE BIG PICTURE
Compensation, the main motivator of performance, includes pay for performance, bonuses, profit sharing, 
gainsharing, stock options, and pay for knowledge. Other nonmonetary incentives address needs that aren’t 
being met, such as work–life balance, growth in skills, and commitment.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
399
“In the past, people could see the fruits of their labor immediately: a chair made or a 
ball bearing produced,” writes Wall Street Journal columnist Jared Sandberg. How-
ever, in the information age, when so much of a person’s time is spent looking into a 
phone display or computer screen and working on partial tasks seemingly unconnected 
to something whole, “it can be hard to find gratification from work that is largely in-
visible.”70 As work becomes more invisible and intangible, more team based rather 
than individual based, it also becomes harder to measure, harder to define its success-
ful accomplishment—and harder to motivate employees to perform well at it.
Is Money the Best Motivator?
Most workers rate having a caring boss higher than they value monetary benefits, ac-
cording to several surveys.71 The Great Place to Work Institute has determined that 
great employers have three traits in common: employee trust in management, pride in 
the company, and camaraderie with colleagues.72 Clearly, then, motivating doesn’t just 
involve dollars.
Motivation & Compensation
Most people are paid an hourly wage or a weekly or monthly salary. Both of these are 
easy for organizations to administer, of course. But by itself a wage or a salary gives an 
employee little incentive to work hard. Incentive compensation plans try to do so, al-
though no single plan will boost the performance of all employees.
Characteristics of the Best Incentive Compensation Plans 
In accordance 
with most of the theories of motivation we described earlier, for incentive plans to 
work, certain criteria are advisable, as follows. (1) Rewards must be linked to perfor-
mance and be measurable. (2) The rewards must satisfy individual needs. (3) The re-
wards must be agreed on by manager and employees. (4) The rewards must be 
believable and achievable by employees.
Popular Incentive Compensation Plans 
In what way would you like to be 
rewarded for your efforts? Some of the most well-known incentive compensation plans 
are pay for performance, bonuses, profit sharing, gainsharing, stock options, and pay 
for knowledge.
■ 
Pay for performance. Also known as merit pay, pay for performance bases 
pay on one’s results. Thus, different salaried employees might get different 
pay raises and other rewards (such as promotions) depending on their overall 
job performance.73
Examples: One standard pay-for-performance plan, already mentioned, is 
payment according to a piece rate, in which employees are paid according 
to how much output they produce, as is often used with farmworkers 
picking fruit and vegetables. Another is the sales commission, in which sales 

Motivation as a small business owner. Susan Brown 
of Golden, Colorado, had dreamed of opening her own 
business since she was a child. However, she invented 
the Boppy, a simple pillow stuffed with foam, almost 
accidentally, when her daughter’s day care center 
asked parents to bring in pillows to prop up infants who 
couldn’t sit up on their own. Today the Boppy Co. (now 
part of the Artsana Group) has annual sales of $15–
$25 million. For some people, like Brown, the only 
way to merge motivation and compensation is to 
own and manage their own business. What factors 
or incentives motivate you to work hard?
representatives are paid a percentage of the earnings the company made from 
their sales, so that the more they sell, the more they are paid.74
■ 
Bonuses. Bonuses are cash awards given to employees who achieve specific 
performance objectives.
Example: Nieman Marcus, the department store, pays its salespeople a per-
centage of the earnings from the goods they sell.
Unfortunately, the documents that most companies file (proxy documents 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission) to explain what specific targets 
executives had to meet to earn their bonuses are not very clear, being couched 
mainly in legalese.75
■ 
Profit sharing. Profit sharing is the distribution to employees of a percentage 
of the company’s profits.
Example: In one T-shirt and sweatshirt manufacturing company, 10% of 
pretax profits are distributed to employees every month, and more is given out 
at the end of the year. Distributions are apportioned according to such criteria 
as performance, attendance, and lateness for individual employees.
■ 
Gainsharing. Gainsharing is the distribution of savings or “gains” to groups of 
employees who reduced costs and increased measurable productivity. In one 
version (the so-called Scanlon plan), a portion of any cost savings, usually 
75%, are distributed to employees. Example: In a recent year, Indianapolis-
based Mike’s Carwash paid out $569,000 in gainsharing to 437 employees in 
37 locations who had been challenged to beat targets set at the corporate level.
■ 
Stock options. With stock options, certain employees are given the right to 
buy stock at a future date for a discounted price. The motivator here is that 
employees holding stock options will supposedly work hard to make the com-
pany’s stock rise so that they can obtain it at a cheaper price. Along with its 
other benefits, by giving stock options to all employees who work 20 or more 
hours a week, Starbucks Corp. has been able to hold its employee turnover 
rate 120% below the quick-service restaurant industry average.76
■ 
Pay for knowledge. Also known as skill-based pay, pay for knowledge ties em-
ployee pay to the number of job-relevant skills or academic degrees they earn.
Example: The teaching profession is a time-honored instance of this incen-
tive, in which elementary and secondary teachers are encouraged to increase 
their salaries by earning further college credit. However, firms such as FedEx 
also have pay-for-knowledge plans.
400 
PART 5 
Leading

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
401
Nonmonetary Ways of Motivating Employees
Employees who can behave autonomously, solve problems, and take the initiative are apt 
to be the very ones who will leave if they find their own needs aren’t being met—namely:
■ 
The need for work–life balance. For more than half of men and women in a 
2013 Accenture survey, work–life balance is the key determinant of career 
success—ahead of money, recognition, autonomy, or making a difference.77 A 
25-year study of values in the United States found that “employees have be-
come less convinced that work should be an important part of one’s life or that 
working hard makes me a better person.”78 Millennials in particular are apt to 
say the most important things in life are “being a good parent” (52%) and 
“having a successful marriage” (30%) rather than “having a high-paying 
career” (15%).79
■ 
The need to expand skills. Having watched their parents undergo downsiz-
ing, younger workers in particular are apt to view a job as a way of gaining 
skills that will enable them to earn a decent living in the future.
■ 
The need to matter. Workers now want to be with an organization that allows 
them to feel they matter. They want to commit to their profession or fellow 
team members rather than have to profess a blind loyalty to the corporation.80
There is a whole class of nonmonetary incentives to attract, retain, and motivate 
employees. The foremost example is the flexible workplace—including part-time 
work, flextime, compressed workweek, job sharing, and telecommuting, as described 
in the Practical Action box.
PRACTICAL ACTION
The Flexible Workplace81
At Maynard Webb’s investment fund, Webb Investment Net-
work, employees are encouraged to work remotely and set 
their own schedules, and are assessed by their performance. 
That’s because, says Webb, the author of Reinventing Work, 
traditional 9-to-5 jobs are becoming a thing of the past, and top 
talent are looking for more options in their lives.82
But it’s not just the cream of the crop who can benefit. With 
so many two-paycheck families, single parents, and other di-
verse kinds of employees in the workforce, many employers 
now recognize the idea of a flexible workplace as a way of re-
cruiting, retaining, and motivating staff. Several studies have 
found that employees with flexible work arrangements are 
healthier, happier, more productive, more positive about their 
work, and less likely to change jobs.83 Among the types of al-
ternative work schedules available are the following.
Part-Time Work—Less Than 40 hours
Part-time work is any work done on a schedule less than the 
standard 40-hour workweek. Some part-time workers—so-
called temporary workers or contingency workers—actually 
want to work 40 hours or more, but can’t find full-time jobs.84 
Others, however, work part time by choice. Today an organiza-
tion can hire not only part-time clerical help, for instance, but 
also part-time programmers, market researchers, lawyers, 
even part-time top executives.
Flextime—Flexible Working Hours
Flextime, or flexible time, consists of flexible working hours, or 
any schedule that gives one some choices in working hours. If, 
for example, an organization’s normal working hours are 9 a.m. 
to 5 p.m., a flextime worker might be allowed to start and finish 
an hour earlier or an hour later—for instance, to work from 
8 a.m. to 4 p.m. The main requirement is that the employee be 
at work during certain core hours, to be available for meetings, 
consultations, and so on. By offering flextime hours, organiza-
tions can attract and keep employees with special requirements 
such as the need to take care of children or elderly parents. It 
also benefits employees who wish to avoid commuting during 
rush hour. (Unfortunately, one study found that it was men—
particularly men seeking career advancement opportunities—
who are more likely to be granted a flexible schedule.85)
Compressed Workweek—40 Hours in Four Days
In a compressed workweek, employees perform a full-time job 
in less than 5 days of standard 8- (or 9-) hour shifts. The most 
common variation is a 40-hour week performed in 4 days of 
10 hours each, which gives employees three (instead of two) 
consecutive days off. The benefits are that organizations can 
offer employees more leisure time and reduced wear and tear 
and expense from commuting. The disadvantages are possible 

402 
PART 5 
Leading
Other incentives can be expressed simply as treat employees well, some examples 
of which follow.
Thoughtfulness: The Value of Being Nice 
A study by Walker Information, an 
Indianapolis-based research firm, found that employers spend too little time showing 
workers they matter, as manifested in lack of communication and lack of interest in 
new ideas and contributions.90 A majority of employees feel underappreciated, accord-
ing to one survey. Forty percent of employees who rated their boss’s performance as 
poor said they were likely to look for a new job; only 11% of those who rated it excel-
lent said they would.91 “Being nice” to employees means, for example, reducing criti-
cism, becoming more effusive in your praise, and writing thank-you notes to employees 
for exceptional performance.92
The number one reason people quit their jobs, it’s believed, is their dissatisfaction 
with their supervisors, not their paychecks. Thus, industrial psychologist B. Lynn 
Ware suggests that if you learn valued employees are disgruntled, you should discuss 
it with them.93 Employers can promote personal relationships, which most employees 
are concerned about on the job, by offering breaks or other opportunities in which 
people can mix and socialize.
Work–Life Benefits 
Work–life benefits, according to Kathie Lingle, are programs 
“used by employers to increase productivity and commitment by removing certain bar-
riers that make it hard for people to strike a balance between their work and personal 
lives.”94 (Unfortunately, the United States ranks 28 out of 36 on a list of countries with 
the best work–life balance.95)
Lingle, who is national work–life director for KPMG, an accounting and consulting 
firm, emphasizes that work–life benefits “are not a reward, but a way of getting work 
done.” After all, some employees are low performers simply because of a lack of work–
life balance, with great demands at home. “If you only give these ‘rewards’ to exist-
ing high performers,” says Lingle, “you’re cutting people off who could, with some 
support, be high performers.” Nevertheless, handing out extra time off can be used to 
reward performance and prevent burnout.96
Besides alternative scheduling, work–life benefits include helping employees with 
day care costs or even establishing on-site centers; domestic-partner benefits; job-
protected leave for new parents; and provision of technology such as mobile phones 
and laptops to enable parents to work at home.97
scheduling problems, unavailability of an employee to cowork-
ers and customers, and fatigue from long workdays.
Job Sharing—Two People Split the Same Job
In job sharing, two people divide one full-time job. Usually, 
each person works a half day, although there can be other 
arrangements—working alternate days or alternate weeks, for 
example. As with a compressed workweek, job sharing 
provides employees with more personal or leisure time. The 
disadvantage is that it can result in communication problems 
with coworkers or customers. (Recently only 18% of employers in 
one survey allowed two workers to divide responsibilities 
between them, down from 29% in 2008.86)
Telecommuting & Other Work-at-Home Schedules
There have always been some employees who have had spe-
cial full-time or part-time arrangements whereby they are 
allowed to work at home—an activity known as telecommuting—
keeping in touch with their employers and coworkers by e-mail 
and phone. By one estimate, 2.6% of the American workforce 
are telecommuting.87 Today two-thirds of employers in one 
study allow at least some employees to work from home oc-
casionally (up from 50% in 2008), and 38% allow some to do 
so occasionally (up from 23%).88
Working at home with telecommunications between office 
and home is called telecommuting. The advantages to employ-
ers are increased productivity because telecommuters experi-
ence less distraction at home and can work flexible hours.89
YOUR CALL
For what you’re doing right now at this point in your life, 
which of these possibilities would suit you best, and why? 
Would it be workable for your employer if all your coworkers 
did it as well?

 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
403
Surroundings 
The cubicle, according to new research, is stifling the creativity and 
morale of many workers, and the bias of modern-day office designers for open spaces 
and neutral colors is leading to employee complaints that their workplaces are too 
noisy or too bland. Some businesses, such as advertising giant Grey Group in New 
York, have even moved beyond cubicles to completely open offices, which at Grey has 
required a business psychologist to hold “space therapy” sessions to ease employee 
concerns.98
“There is no such thing as something that works for everybody,” says Alan Hedge, 
a professor of environmental analysis at Cornell University.99 An 8-foot-by-8-foot cu-
bicle may not be a good visual trigger for human brains, and companies wanting to 
improve creativity and productivity may need to think about giving office employees 
better things to look at.100
Skill-Building & Educational Opportunities 
Learning opportunities can take 
two forms. Managers can see that workers are matched with coworkers from whom 
they can learn, allowing them, for instance, to “shadow” (watch and imitate) workers 
in other jobs or be in interdepartmental task forces. There can also be tuition reim-
bursement for part-time study at a college or university.101
Sabbaticals 
Intel and Apple understand that in a climate of 80-hour weeks people 
need to recharge themselves. But even McDonald’s offers sabbaticals to long-time 
employees, giving a month to a year of paid time off in which to travel, learn, and pur-
sue personal projects. The aim, of course, is to enable employees to recharge them-
selves but also, it is hoped, to cement their loyalty to the organization.102 ●
Cubicle culture. It might be too 
difficult to design a setup in 
which everyone has an office 
with a view. But would it be 
possible to design a layout in 
which everyone has a private 
office? Do you think it would 
better motivate employees?

Key Terms Used in This Chapter
acquired needs theory 380
bonuses 400
content perspectives 379
equity theory 386
expectancy 389
expectancy theory 388
extinction 396
extrinsic reward 377
gainsharing 400
goal-setting theory 391
hierarchy of needs theory 379
hygiene factors 384
instrumentality 389
intrinsic reward 377
job characteristics model 393
job design 392
job enlargement 392
job enrichment 392
job simplification 392
motivating factors 384
motivation 376
needs 379
negative reinforcement 396
pay for knowledge 400
pay for performance 399
piece rate 399
positive reinforcement 396
process perspectives 386
profit sharing 400
punishment 397
reinforcement 396
reinforcement theory 396
sales commission 399
self-determination theory 382
stock options 400
two-factor theory 383
valence 389
Key Points
12.1 Motivating for Performance
• Motivation is defined as the psychological 
processes that arouse and direct goal-
directed behavior.
• In a simple model of motivation, people have 
certain needs that motivate them to perform 
specific behaviors for which they receive 
rewards that feed back and satisfy the 
original need.
• Rewards are of two types: (1) An extrinsic 
reward is the payoff, such as money, a 
person receives from others for performing a 
particular task. (2) An intrinsic reward is the 
satisfaction, such as a feeling of 
accomplishment, that a person receives from 
performing the particular task itself.
• As a manager, you want to motivate people to 
do things that will benefit your organization—
join it, stay with it, show up for work at it, 
perform better for it, and do extra for it.
• Four major perspectives on motivation are 
(1) content, (2) process, (3) job design, and 
(4) reinforcement.
12.2 Content Perspectives on Employee 
Motivation
• Content perspectives or need-based 
perspectives emphasize the needs that 
motivate people. Needs are defined as 
physiological or psychological deficiencies 
that arouse behavior.
• Besides the McGregor Theory X/Theory Y 
(Chapter 2), need-based perspectives 
include (1) the hierarchy of needs theory, 
(2) the acquired needs theory, (3) the 
self-determination theory, and (4) the two-
factor theory.
• The hierarchy of needs theory proposes that 
people are motivated by five levels of need: 
physiological, safety, love, esteem, and self-
actualization needs.
• The acquired needs theory states that three 
needs—achievement, affiliation, and 
power—are major motives determining 
people’s behavior in the workplace.
• The self-determination theory assumes that 
people are driven to try to grow and attain 
fulfillment, with their behavior and well-being 
influenced by three innate needs: 
competence, autonomy, and relatedness.
• The two-factor theory proposes that work 
satisfaction and dissatisfaction arise from two 
different factors: work satisfaction from 
so-called motivating factors, and work 
dissatisfaction from so-called hygiene factors.
• Hygiene factors, the lower-level needs, are 
factors associated with job dissatisfaction—
such as salary and working conditions—
which affect the environment in which people 
work. Motivating factors, the higher-level 
needs, are factors associated with job 
satisfaction—such as achievement and 
advancement—which affect the rewards of 
work performance.
12.3 Process Perspectives on Employee 
Motivation
• Process perspectives are concerned with the 
thought processes by which people decide 
how to act. Three process perspectives on 
404 
PART 5 
Leading

motivation are (1) equity theory, (2) expectancy 
theory, and (3) goal-setting theory.
• Equity theory focuses on employee 
perceptions as to how fairly they think they 
are being treated compared with others.
• The key elements in equity theory are inputs, 
outputs (rewards), and comparisons. (1) With 
inputs, employees consider what they are 
putting into the job in time, effort, and so on. 
(2) With outputs or rewards, employees 
consider what they think they’re getting out 
of the job in terms of pay, praise, and so on. 
(3) With comparison, employees compare 
the ratio of their own outcomes to inputs 
against the ratio of someone else’s outcomes 
to inputs. Three practical lessons of equity 
theory are that employee perceptions are 
what count, employee participation helps, 
and having an appeal process helps.
• Expectancy theory suggests that people are 
motivated by how much they want 
something and how likely they think they are 
to get it. The three elements affecting 
motivation are expectancy, instrumentality, 
and valence. (1) Expectancy is the belief that 
a particular level of effort will lead to a 
particular level of performance. (2) 
Instrumentality is the expectation that 
successful performance of the task will lead 
to the outcome desired. (3) Valence is the 
value, the importance a worker assigns to 
the possible outcome or reward.
• When attempting to motivate employees, 
according to the logic of expectancy theory, 
managers should ascertain what rewards 
employees value, what job objectives and 
performance level they desire, whether there are 
rewards linked to performance, and whether 
employees believe managers will deliver the 
right rewards for the right performance.
• Goal-setting theory suggests that employees 
can be motivated by goals that are specific 
and challenging but achievable and linked to 
action plans.
• In addition, the theory suggests that goals 
should be set jointly with the employee, be 
measurable, and have a target date for 
accomplishment and that employees should 
receive feedback and rewards.
12.4 Job Design Perspectives on 
Motivation
• Job design is, first, the division of an 
organization’s work among its employees 
and, second, the application of motivational 
theories to jobs to increase satisfaction and 
performance.
• Two approaches to job design are fitting 
people to jobs (the traditional approach) and 
fitting jobs to people.
• Fitting jobs to people assumes people are 
underutilized and want more variety. Two 
techniques for this type of job design include 
(1) job enlargement, increasing the number of 
tasks in a job to increase variety and 
motivation, and (2) job enrichment, building 
into a job such motivating factors as 
responsibility, achievement, recognition, 
stimulating work, and advancement.
• An outgrowth of job enrichment is the job 
characteristics model, which consists of 
(a) five core job characteristics that affect 
(b) three critical psychological states of 
an employee that in turn affect (c) work 
outcomes—the employee’s motivation, 
performance, and satisfaction.
• The five core job characteristics are (1) skill 
variety—how many different skills a job 
requires; (2) task identity—how many different 
tasks are required to complete the work; 
(3) task significance—how many other people 
are affected by the job; (4) autonomy—how 
much discretion the job allows the worker; 
and (5) feedback—how much employees find 
out how well they’re doing.
• These five characteristics affect three critical 
psychological states: meaningfulness of 
work, responsibility for results, and 
knowledge of results.
• Three major steps to follow when applying 
the job characteristics model are 
(1) diagnose the work environment to see if 
a problem exists, (2) determine whether job 
redesign is appropriate, and (3) consider 
how to redesign the job.
12.5 Reinforcement Perspectives on 
Motivation
• Reinforcement theory attempts to explain 
behavior change by suggesting that behavior 
with positive consequences tends to be 
repeated whereas behavior with negative 
consequences tends not to be repeated. 
Reinforcement is anything that causes a 
given behavior to be repeated or inhibited.
• There are four types of reinforcement. 
(1) Positive reinforcement is the use of positive 
consequences to strengthen a particular 
behavior. (2) Negative reinforcement is 
the process of strengthening a behavior 
by withdrawing something negative. 
(3) Extinction is the weakening of behavior by 
ignoring it or making sure it is not reinforced. 
(4) Punishment is the process of weakening 
behavior by presenting something negative 
or withdrawing something positive.
• In using positive reinforcement to motivate 
employees, managers should reward only 
desirable behavior, give rewards as soon as 
possible, be clear about what behavior is 
 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
405

desired, and have different rewards and 
recognize individual differences.
• In using punishment, managers should 
punish only undesirable behavior, give 
reprimands or disciplinary actions as soon as 
possible, be clear about what behavior is 
undesirable, administer punishment in 
private, and combine punishment and 
positive reinforcement.
12.6 Using Compensation & Other 
Rewards to Motivate
• Compensation is only one form of motivator. 
For incentive compensation plans for work, 
rewards must be linked to performance and 
be measurable; they must satisfy individual 
needs; they must be agreed on by manager 
and employee; and they must be perceived 
as being equitable, believable, and 
achievable by employees.
• Popular incentive compensation plans are 
the following. (1) Pay for performance bases 
pay on one’s results. One kind is payment 
according to piece rate, in which employees 
are paid according to how much output they 
produce. Another is the sales commission, in 
which sales representatives are paid a 
percentage of the earnings the company 
made from their sales. (2) Bonuses are cash 
awards given to employees who achieve 
specific performance objectives. (3) Profit 
sharing is the distribution to employees 
of a percentage of the company’s profits. 
(4) Gainsharing is the distribution of savings or 
“gains” to groups of employees who reduced 
costs and increased measurable productivity. 
(5) Stock options allow certain employees to 
buy stock at a future date for a discounted 
price. (6) Pay for knowledge ties employee 
pay to the number of job-relevant skills or 
academic degrees they earn.
• There are also nonmonetary ways of 
compensating employees. Some employees 
will leave because they feel the need for work–
life balance, the need to expand their skills, 
and the need to matter. To retain such 
employees, nonmonetary incentives have been 
introduced, such as the flexible workplace.
• Other incentives that keep employees from 
leaving are thoughtfulness by employees’ 
managers, work–life benefits such as day 
care, attractive surroundings, skill-building 
and educational opportunities, and work 
sabbaticals.
406 
PART 5 
Leading
 1. What is motivation, and how does it work?
 2. What are the two principal types of rewards?
 3. What are the four major perspectives on motivation?
 4. Briefly describe the four content perspectives 
discussed in this chapter: hierarchy of needs theory, 
acquired needs theory, self-determination theory, 
and two-factor theory.
 5. What are the principal elements of the three process 
perspectives: equity theory, expectancy theory, and 
goal-setting theory?
 6. What is the definition of job design, and what are 
two techniques of job design?
 7. Describe the five job attributes of the job 
characteristics model?
 8. What are the four types of reinforcement?
 9. What are six incentive compensation plans?
 10. Discuss some nonmonetary ways of motivating 
employees?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
Caterpillar Puts Employee Pay at Risk, but Is 
It Done Fairly?
Caterpillar has put workers on notice that its short-
term incentive plan, the centerpiece of a performance-
based, profit-sharing program, will make its smallest 
payout since the recession when the payments go out 
next March [2014].
Like a lot of companies, the world’s largest maker 
of mining and construction equipment has adopted 
what is known as a “pay-at-risk” compensation sys-
tem, which ties a percentage of nearly every nonunion 
employee’s income to Caterpillar’s financial perfor-
mance.
In updates to the plan’s roughly 60,000 participants, 
and in quarterly disclosures to investors, Caterpillar 
Management in Action

said it expects outlays related to the program to be 
down as much as 40% from last year, reflecting 
sharply reduced payments to employees.
As U.S. workers pause this weekend to mark Labor 
Day, more of them than ever before are being required 
to participate in these alternative pay systems. The 
plans enable companies to have their labor costs more 
closely track the ups and downs of business cycles—
but they also expose employees to those fluctuations.
Advocates of the plans say they allow employees to 
participate in the prosperity of their employers. Cater-
pillar, for instance, has issued checks worth nearly 
$2.8 billion over the last three years.
But critics say the plans are also part of a broader 
transfer of risk from employer to employee that has in 
recent decades led to the demise of company-paid tra-
ditional pension plans and the rise of self-funded, self-
directed 401(k)s.
“Variable pay is not just for executives anymore,” 
said Ken Abosch, a compensation expert at Aon 
Hewitt. “There’s been a very strong but consistent 
trend to push variable pay programs deeper into orga-
nizations, and it’s become a mainstream pay-for- 
performance practice.”
The “pay-at-risk” plan at Caterpillar, like similar in-
centive programs at thousands of other U.S. companies, 
accounts for between 8% and 64% of an employee’s 
annual compensation, depending upon pay grade.
Yet the payouts can roller coaster in ways that seem 
unrelated to the company’s actual performance, and 
create uncertainty around what employees actually get 
paid for the work they do.
In March 2012, shortly after Caterpillar closed out 
what was at the time the most profitable year since its 
founding, it distributed a record $1.2 billion to the 
roughly 50% of its 120,000 global workers who par-
ticipate in the plan.
The next year, the Peoria, Illinois, company did 
even better, with sales up 10% and earnings-per-share 
up 15%. But the payout to employees plunged 31%. 
The reason: The results, while impressive and an 
all-time record, fell short of internal targets set by 
management.
Doug Oberhelman, Caterpillar’s chairman and chief 
executive, was not exempted. His short-term incentive 
pay dropped 34% last year, according to securities 
filings. But unlike many rank-and-file employees, 
Oberhelman also participates in a medium-term incen-
tive plan, which pays out cash each year based on 
three-year performance measures, providing a cushion 
from annual fluctuations.
As a result, Oberhelman’s total cash incentive pay 
rose 2% last year, and his overall compensation 
jumped 32%, according to SEC filings.
Caterpillar spokesman Jim Dugan said in a state-
ment that the anticipated reduction in short-term 
incentive pay for 2013 would “impact Doug Ober-
helman’s compensation significantly in total cash 
terms.” Dugan added that “the value of other com-
pensation components will also significantly impact 
his total compensation” but declined to be more 
specific.
Caterpillar will not break any profit records in 2013. 
Cancellations from mining customers have weighed 
on sales and profits, and the company has been forced 
to cut its forecast for full-year earnings twice, and to 
plan major cost cuts.
Still, Caterpillar is on track to report its third-highest 
profit in history. If the company’s current projections hold 
up, when this year ends, Caterpillar’s earnings per 
share will have fallen 12% over a two-year period. But 
payouts under its short-term incentive plan will have 
plunged 60%.
In Peoria, home to 6,000 of the workers covered by 
the plan, City Treasurer Patrick Nichting said that in 
good years, it is easy to see ripple effects of the Cater-
pillar payouts on the local economy.
“If we just look at home rule sales tax, from 2009 to 
2012, comparing it year over year and month over 
month, there always seems to be a spike in March,” 
Nichting said.
This year, though, retailers noticed a dip after 
Caterpillar began to warn employees that payments 
for 2013 could drop. Some local business people 
say they noticed an almost immediate drop in sales 
activity.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. To what extent is Caterpillar’s compensation plan 
consistent with recommendations derived from need 
theories? Discuss.
 2. To what extent is Caterpillar’s pay plan consistent 
with equity theory? Explain.
 3. To what extent is Caterpillar’s pay plan consistent 
with expectancy theory? Explain.
 4. What are the key lessons learned from this case? 
Discuss.
Source: Excerpted from James B. Kelleher, “Caterpillar Plan 
Illustrates Risk of Variable Pay Plans,” Reuters, September 1, 2013, 
www.reuters.com/article/2013/09/01/us-usa-workers-pay-analysis 
(accessed August 15, 2014).
 
Motivating Employees 
CHAPTER 12 
407

408 
PART 5 
Leading
Should College Athletes Be Paid to Perform? 
As of today, college athletes are not allowed to be 
paid for playing a sport according to rules established 
by the National Collegiate Athletic Association 
(NCAA). The NCAA describes it mission as “a 
membership-driven organization dedicated to safe-
guarding the well-being of student-athletes and 
equipping them with the skills to succeed on the play-
ing field, in the classroom and throughout life.”103 The 
NCAA believes that athletes should not receive any 
direct compensation because they receive benefits 
such as athletic scholarships, medical care, academic 
support services, and first-class training.
Others think that the NCAA is unfairly benefiting 
on the talent of college athletes. Consider the revenue 
generated only from the Bowl Championship Series 
(BCS) to determine a national champion in college 
football. According to Bloomberg Businessweek, the 
BCS generated $170 million in 2013. Revenue from 
college football is expected to grow in 2014 under a 
new system called the College Football Playoff.
Here is what Bloomberg Businessweek had to say 
about the new playoff system. “The new system will 
be better in almost every conceivable way. Regular-
season games will matter more. In addition to the title 
game, we’ll be given two high stakes semifinals. The 
national champion will truly be the national cham-
pion. And let’s not forget about the money. More 
games mean more revenue—a lot more revenue—for 
the school and the NCAA.” It is estimated that the 
playoff series will generate $480 million a year.104
The NCAA has also refused to pay college ath-
letes for the use of their likeness in licensing agree-
ments. This led to a lawsuit in 2009 by Ed O’Bannon, 
a former University of California at Los Angeles bas-
ketball player. His image was used in video games, 
yet he received nothing from the profits. He filed an 
antitrust suit against the NCAA, and a federal judge 
ruled in his favor in August 2014. The judge con-
cluded that basketball and football players can earn 
“a limited share of the revenues generated from the 
use of their names, images, and likeness in addition 
to a full grant-in-aid.”105 The ruling says nothing 
about paying athletes separately for their perfor-
mance in a chosen sport.
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
Is it fair to not pay college athletes direct compensa-
tion for playing a sport?
 1. Yes. I agree with the NCAA. Athletes receive plenty 
of benefits such as scholarships, medical coverage, 
and world class training.
 2. No. The athletes risk personal injury and they spend 
lots of time practicing instead of studying, which can 
impact their nonathletic marketability upon gradua-
tion. Athletes deserve to be paid.
 3. No, but doing so would create havoc with college 
sports. It would mean that players in every sport 
would need to be paid. This would likely lead to the 
cancellation of low revenue sports like volleyball, 
swimming, golf, and gymnastics. I would pay ath-
letes for the use of their likenesses in games and 
marketing, but no direct compensation for playing 
the sport.
 4. Invent another option.
Legal/Ethical Challenge


Groups & Teams
Increasing Cooperation, Reducing Conflict
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
13.1 Groups versus Teams
Major Question: How is one collection of workers different 
from any other?
13.2 Stages of Group & Team Development
Major Question: How does a group evolve into a team?
13.3 Building Effective Teams
Major Question: How can I as a manager build an effective 
team?
13.4 Managing Conflict
Major Question: Since conflict is a part of life, what should a 
manager know about it in order to deal successfully with it?
13

Once upon a time, managers subscribed to the so-
called Fifty-Foot Rule—namely, “If people are more 
than 50 feet apart, they are not likely to collaborate.” 
That is no longer true in today’s era of virtual teams. 
Virtual teams (also known as geographically dispersed 
teams) are groups of people who use information 
technology—computers and telecommunications—
to collaborate across space, time, and organizational 
boundaries.1
As technology has made it easier for workers to 
function from remote places, it has posed challenges 
for managers. Following are some suggestions for man-
aging virtual workers, whether they are working a few 
miles away at home or on the other side of the world:2
Take Baby Steps & Manage by Results
When trying out virtual arrangements with new employ-
ees, take it slow. Let them show they can handle the 
challenge. Focus on what’s accomplished, not whether 
an employee is working from her patio or at 10 p.m. 
Set interim deadlines on projects and stick to them.
State Expectations
Nip problems in the bud by letting virtual workers 
know what you expect from them. With home-based 
workers, for example, go over the terms of your vir-
tual arrangement—whether, for example, you want 
them to carry an office cell phone—and tell them if 
there are specific ways you want the job done.
Write It Down
Record directions, project changes, and updates in 
writing, by sending an e-mail or fax or by using 
web-based services that allow for sharing calendars 
and tracking projects. Keep all communications in a 
shared database, so that a historical document of 
the group’s work is available for new team members 
to study.
Communicate, but Be Considerate
Team members should know what times are appro-
priate to call one another (think time zones here) and 
what days (considering cultural, family, or work 
schedules) are off-limits. Make sure everyone is 
reachable during normal business hours, as via 
phone, e-mail, or text.
Be Aware of Cultural Differences
Even if everyone on a global team speaks English, be 
aware that others may not understand slang, culturally 
narrow expressions, and American humor.  Encourage 
everyone to slow down their speech.  Realize that 
team members from China and India, say, may have 
difficulty saying no or may fall silent in order to save 
face. At bottom, building global and virtual teams is 
all about building trust—being respectful and doing 
what you say you’re going to do. Handle serious 
 conflicts face-to-face whenever possible.
Meet Regularly
Human contact still matters. If possible, launch the 
team with a face-to-face meeting. When possible, 
schedule periodic and regular meetings where all 
team members can discuss current projects and 
telecommuters can catch up on office gossip. Fly 
out-of-towners in at least quarterly, so they can 
 develop working friendships with your in-office staff.
For Discussion What do you feel might be the 
greatest difficulties of always working online with 
 numerous people that you never see? How would 
you try to avoid or solve these difficulties?
the manager’s toolbox
Reaching across Time & Space: The Challenge 
of Managing Virtual Teams
In this chapter, we consider groups versus teams and discuss different kinds of teams. 
We describe how groups evolve into teams and discuss how managers can build 
effective teams. We also consider the nature of conflict, both good and bad.
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
forecast

13.1 
Groups versus Teams
How is one collection of workers different from any other?
THE BIG PICTURE
Teamwork promises to be a cornerstone of future management. A team is different from a group. A group 
typically is management-directed, a team self-directed. Groups may be formal, created to do productive 
work, or informal, created for friendship. Work teams, which engage in collective work requiring coordinated 
effort, may be organized according to four basic purposes: advice, production, project, and action. Two types 
of teams are continuous improvement and self-managed teams.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Over a quarter century ago, management philosopher Peter Drucker predicted that fu-
ture organizations would not only be flatter and information-based but also organized 
around teamwork—and that has certainly come to pass.3
“You lead today by building teams and placing others first,” says General Electric 
CEO Jeffrey Immelt. “It’s not about you.”4 “We have this mythology in America about 
the lone genius,” says Tom Kelley, general manager of Ideo, a Palo Alto, California, 
multidisciplinary industrial design company that helped create the Apple mouse, first 
laptop computer, and soft-handled Gripper toothbrush for Oral-B. “We love to per-
sonify things. But Michelangelo didn’t paint the Sistine Chapel alone, and Edison 
didn’t invent the light bulb alone.”5
Regardless, when you take a job in an organization, the chances are you won’t be 
working alone. You’ll be working with others in situations requiring teamwork.
The argument for promoting diversity suggested by scholar Scott E. Page (see 
Chapter 3)—namely, that different kinds of people “bring to organizations more 
and different ways of seeing a problem and, thus, faster/better ways of solving 
it”—is also a principal strength of teams.6 However, teamwork is now the corner-
stone of progressive management for many other reasons, as the table below 
shows. (See Table 13.1.)
412 
PART 5 
Leading
TABLE 13.1 
Why Teamwork IS Important
THE IMPROVEMENTS 
EXAMPLE
Increased productivity 
 At one GE factory, teamwork resulted in a workforce that was 20% more productive than 
comparable GE workforces elsewhere.
Increased speed 
 Guidant Corp., maker of lifesaving medical devices, halved the time it took to get products 
to market.
Reduced costs 
 Boeing used teamwork to develop the 777 at costs far less than normal.
Improved quality 
 Westinghouse used teamwork to improve quality performance in its truck and trailer 
division and within its electronic components division.
Reduced destructive 
Men’s Wearhouse fired a salesman who wasn’t sharing walk-in customer traffic, and total 
internal competition  
clothing sales volume among all salespeople increased significantly.
Improved workplace 
Cisco Systems told executives they would gain or lose 30% of their bonuses based on how 
cohesiveness  
well they worked with peers and in 3 years had record profits.

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
413
Groups & Teams: How Do They Differ?
Aren’t a group of people and a team of people the same thing? By and large, no. One 
is a collection of people, the other a powerful unit of collective performance. One is 
typically management-directed, the other self-directed.
Consider the differences.
What a Group Is: A Collection of People Performing as Individuals 
A 
group is defined as (1) two or more freely interacting individuals who (2) share norms, 
(3) share goals, and (4) have a common identity.7 A group is different from a crowd, a 
transitory collection of people who don’t interact with one another, such as a crowd 
gathering on a sidewalk to watch a fire. And it is different from an organization, such 
as a labor union, which is so large that members also don’t interact.8
An example of a work group would be a collection of, say, 10 employees meeting 
to exchange information about various companies’ policies on wages and hours.
What a Team Is: A Collection of People with Common Commitment 
McKinsey & Company management consultants Jon R. Katzenbach and Douglas K. Smith 
say it is a mistake to use the terms group and team interchangeably. Successful teams, they 
say, tend to take on a life of their own. Thus, a team is defined as a small group of people 
with complementary skills who are committed to a common purpose, performance goals, 
and approach for which they hold themselves mutually accountable.9 “The essence of a 
team is common commitment,” say Katzenbach and Smith. “Without it, groups perform as 
individuals; with it, they become a powerful unit of collective performance.”10
An example of a team would be a collection of 2–10 employees who are studying 
industry pay scales, with the goal of making recommendations for adjusting pay 
grades within their own company.
Three traits employees like about their most admired bosses are they trust their em-
ployees, show honesty and authenticity, and possess great team-building skills.11 Sur-
veys of recruiters also reveal a preference to hire people with good teaming skills. 
How do you feel about working in teams? To find out, try Self-Assessment 13.1.
Attitudes toward Teamwork
The following survey was designed to assess your attitude 
toward teamwork. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take 
Self-Assessment 13.1. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
What is your attitude toward teamwork?
2. 
If you do not have a positive teamwork attitude, consider 
the reason why and identify what you might do to foster a 
more positive attitude.
3. 
Develop three potential questions that a recruiter might 
ask to determine if you are positively disposed to 
teamwork. Now answer the questions.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 13.1
®
Formal versus Informal Groups
Groups may be either formal or informal.12
■ 
Formal groups—created to accomplish specific goals. A formal group is a 
group assigned by organizations or its managers to accomplish specific goals. 
A formal group may be a division, a department, a work group, or a commit-
tee. It may be permanent or temporary. In general, people are assigned to 
them according to their skills and the organization’s requirements.

414 
PART 5 
Leading
■ 
Informal groups—created for friendship. An informal group is a group 
formed by people whose overriding purpose is getting together for friendship 
or a common interest. An informal group may be simply a collection of 
friends who hang out with one another, such as those who take coffee breaks 
together, or it may be as organized as a prayer breakfast, a bowling team, a 
service club, a company “alumni group” (for example, former Apple employ-
ees), or other voluntary organization.
What’s important for you as a manager to know is that informal groups can advance 
or undercut the plans of formal groups. The formal organization may make efforts, say, 
to speed up the plant assembly line or to institute workplace reforms. But these at-
tempts may be sabotaged through the informal networks of workers who meet and 
gossip over lunch pails and after-work beers.13
However, interestingly, informal groups can also be highly productive—even more 
so than formal groups.
EXAMPLE
Informal Groups & Informal Learning: Sharing Knowledge 
in the Lunchroom & on Social Media
As a manager, what would you think if you saw employees 
making brief conversation near the lunchroom coffeepot? “The 
assumption was made that this was chitchat, talking about 
their golf game,” said a training director at the Siemens Power 
Transmission and Distribution plant in Wendell, North Carolina, 
where managers worried about workers gathering so often in 
the cafeteria. “But there was a whole lot of work activity.”14
Workplace Learning: Mostly Informal. And indeed research has 
found that 70% of workplace learning is informal.15 With this 
knowledge, Siemens managers alerted supervisors about the in-
formal meetings and even placed overhead projectors and empty 
pads of paper in the lunchroom to facilitate the exchange of infor-
mation. Technology firm Qualcomm uses employees’ storytelling 
tendencies as a way to communicate information, as well as to 
reinforce the company’s culture and values.16
The Peer-to-Peer Web. What about when employees are in far-
flung places? “Sales reps are out in the field and they’re kind of 
on islands,” pointed out an Indianapolis software-firm executive 
“It’s a challenge to keep everyone connected.”17 So when the 75 
reps started overwhelming the sales-support staff with ques-
tions about product details and client information, the company 
created a website on which the reps could post and answer 
questions in an informal peer-to-peer learning setting. (Inciden-
tally, to do parts of their jobs, 47% of business technology users 
at North American and European companies use websites that 
are not sanctioned by their corporate information technology 
department, according to one study.18)
YOUR CALL
Can games (such as the online multiplayer game Second Life) 
or other social media (Facebook, Twitter) be used to foster in-
formal workplace collaboration? How about allowing employ-
ees to BYOD—“bring your own device” to work, such as their 
own smartphone or tablet?19
Talking it out. Ever worked in a job in which you got a 
lot of informal training through conversations over 
coffee? Could this be done with social networking?
Work Teams for Four Purposes: Advice, Production, 
Project, & Action
The names given to different kinds of teams can be bewildering. We have identified 
some important ones on the next page. (See Table 13.2.)

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
415
We described virtual teams extensively in Chapter 8, as well as in the Manager’s 
Toolbox at the start of this chapter.
You will probably benefit most by understanding the various types of work teams 
distinguished according to their purpose. Work teams, which engage in collective work 
requiring coordinated effort, are of four types, which may be identified according to 
their basic purpose: advice, production, project, or action.20
1. Advice Teams 
Advice teams are created to broaden the information base for 
managerial decisions. Examples are committees, review panels, advisory councils, 
employee involvement groups, and continuous improvement teams (as we’ll 
discuss).
2. Production Teams 
Production teams are responsible for performing day-to-
day operations. Examples are mining teams, flight-attendant crews, maintenance 
crews, assembly teams, data processing groups, and manufacturing crews.
3. Project Teams 
Project teams work to do creative problem solving, often by 
applying the specialized knowledge of members of a cross-functional team, which 
is staffed with specialists pursuing a common objective. Examples are task forces, 
research groups, planning teams, architect teams, engineering teams, and develop-
ment teams.
4. Action Teams 
Action teams work to accomplish tasks that require people with 
(1) specialized training and (2) a high degree of coordination, as on a baseball team, 
with specialized athletes acting in coordination. Examples are hospital surgery teams, 
airline cockpit crews, mountain-climbing expeditions, police SWAT teams, and labor 
contract negotiating teams. (A unique challenge for action teams is to exhibit peak 
performance on demand.21)
TABLE 13.2 
Various Types of Teams
These teams are not mutually exclusive. Work teams, for instance, may also be self-managed, cross-functional, or virtual.
Continuous improvement team 
 Volunteers of workers and supervisors who meet intermittently to discuss workplace and 
quality-related problems; formerly called quality circle
Cross-functional team 
 Members composed of people from different departments, such as sales and production, 
pursuing a common objective
Problem-solving team 
 Knowledgeable workers who meet as a temporary team to solve a specific problem and 
then disband
Self-managed team 
 Workers are trained to do all or most of the jobs in a work unit, have no direct supervisor, and 
do their own day-to-day supervision
Top-management team 
 Members consist of the CEO, president, and top department heads and work to help the 
organization achieve its mission and goals
Virtual team 
 Members interact by computer network to collaborate on projects
Work team 
 Members engage in collective work requiring coordinated effort; purpose of team is advice, 
production, project, or action (see text discussion)

416 
PART 5 
Leading
Team building. The team ethic at 
Hong Kong–based Cathay Pacific 
has helped the multinational 
airline provide excellent service 
that pleases both passengers 
and shareholders. Here Cathay 
trainees get practice handling 
unruly passengers and putting 
on their best face. Do you think 
there are better ways to get this 
training?
Self-Managed Teams: Workers with 
Own Administrative Oversight
To give you an idea of how teams work, consider self-managed 
teams. These kinds of teams have emerged out of what were called 
quality circles, now known as continuous improvement teams, 
which consist of small groups of volunteers or workers and super-
visors who meet intermittently to discuss workplace- and quality-
related problems. Typically a group of 10–12 people will meet for 
60–90 minutes once or twice a month, with management listening 
to presentations and the important payoff for members usually be-
ing the chance for meaningful participation and skills training.22
From Continuous Improvement Teams to Self-Managed Teams 
 In many 
places, such as the Texas Instruments electronics factory in Malaysia, the continuous 
improvement teams have evolved into a system made up almost entirely of self- 
managed teams, with routine activities formerly performed by supervisors now per-
formed by team members. “Self-managed” does not, however, mean simply turning 
workers loose to do their own thing. Self-managed teams are defined as groups of 
workers who are given administrative oversight for their task domains. Administrative 
oversight involves delegated activities such as planning, scheduling, monitoring, and 
staffing. More than 75% of the top 1,000 U.S. companies currently use some form of 
self-managed work teams.23
Self-managed teams are an outgrowth of a blend of behavioral science and management 
practice.24 The goal has been to increase productivity and employee quality of work life. The 
traditional clear-cut distinction between manager and managed is being blurred as non-
managerial employees are delegated greater authority and granted increased autonomy.25
Are Self-Managed Teams Effective? 
 The most common chores of today’s 
self-managed teams are work scheduling and customer interaction, and the least com-
mon are hiring and firing. Most self-managed teams are also found at the shop-floor 
level in factory settings, although some experts predict growth of the practice in ser-
vice operations and even management ranks.26 Self-managed teams have been found 
to have a positive effect on productivity and attitudes of self-responsibility and control, 
although there is no significant effect on job satisfaction and organizational commit-
ment.27 Although these conclusions don’t qualify as a sweeping endorsement of self-
managed teams, experts expect a trend toward such teams in North America because of 
a strong cultural bias in favor of direct participation. The following table shows some 
ways to empower self-managed teams. (See Table 13.3.) ●
TABLE 13.3 
Some Ways to Empower Self-Managed Teams
Source: Adapted from B. L. Kirkman and B. Rosen, “Powering Up Teams,” Organizational Dynamics, Winter 2000, p. 56. Reprinted with permission of Elsevier.
 1. Managers should make team members accountable for their work, allow them to set their own team goals, and let them solve their 
own work-related problems.
 2. The team should work with a whole product or service (not just a part), assign jobs and tasks to its members, develop their own quality 
standards and measurement techniques, and handle their own problems with internal and external customers.
 3. Team members are cross-trained on jobs within their (and other) teams; do their own hiring, training, and firing; do their own 
evaluations of each other; and are paid (at least in part) as a team.
 4. The team has access to important information and resources inside and outside the organization, is allowed to communicate with 
and draw support from other teams and departments, and sets its own rules and policies.

13.2 Stages of Group & Team Development
How does a group evolve into a team?
THE BIG PICTURE
Groups may evolve into teams by going through five stages of development: forming, storming, norming, 
performing, and adjourning.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Managers often talk of products and organizations going through stages of develop-
ment, from birth to maturity to decline. Groups and teams go through the same thing. 
One theory proposes five stages of development: forming, storming, norming, per-
forming, adjourning.28 (See Figure 13.1, right.)
Let us consider these stages in which groups may evolve into teams—bearing in 
mind that the stages often aren’t of the same duration or intensity or even necessarily 
always in this sequence.
Stage 1: Forming—“Why Are We Here?”
The first stage, forming, is the process of getting oriented and getting acquainted. This stage 
is characterized by a high degree of uncertainty as members try to break the ice and figure 
out who is in charge and what the group’s goals are. For example, if you were to become 
part of a team that is to work on a class project, the question for you as an individual would 
be “How do I fit in here?” For the group, the question is “Why are we here?”29
At this point, mutual trust is low, and there is a good deal of holding back to see 
who takes charge and how.30 Conflict at this stage may actually be beneficial, leading 
to increased creativity.31 At this juncture, if the formal leader (such as the class instructor 
or a supervisor) does not assert his or her authority, an emergent leader will eventually 
step in to fill the group’s need for leadership and direction.
What the Leader Should Do 
Leaders typically mistake this honeymoon period as a 
mandate for permanent control, but later problems may force a leadership change. During 
this stage, leaders should allow time for people to become acquainted and to socialize.
Stage 2: Storming—“Why Are We Fighting over 
Who’s in Charge & Who Does What?”
The second stage, storming, is characterized by the emergence of individual personali-
ties and roles and conflicts within the group. For you as an individual, the question is 
“What’s my role here?”32 For the group, the issue is “Why are we fighting over who’s 
in charge and who does what?” This stage may be of short duration or painfully long, 
depending on the goal clarity and the commitment and maturity of the members.
This is a time of testing. Individuals test the leader’s policies and assumptions as 
they try to determine how they fit into the power structure.33 Subgroups take shape, 
and subtle forms of rebellion, such as procrastination, occur. Many groups stall in 
stage 2 because power politics may erupt into open rebellion.
What the Leader Should Do 
In this stage, the leader should encourage members to 
suggest ideas, voice disagreements, and work through their conflicts about tasks and goals.
Stage 3: Norming—“Can We Agree on Roles & Work 
as a Team?”
In the third stage, norming, conflicts are resolved, close relationships develop, and 
unity and harmony emerge. For individuals, the main issue is “What do the others 
 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
417
Forming
Getting
oriented &
getting
acquainted
Storming
Individual
personalities
& roles
emerge
Norming
Conflicts
resolved,
relationships
develop,
unity emerges
Performing
Solving
problems &
completing
the assigned
task
Adjourning
Preparing 
for
disbandment
FIGURE 13.1
Five stages of group & 
team development

418 
PART 5 
Leading
expect me to do?” For the group, the issue is “Can we agree on roles and work as a 
team?” Note, then, that the group may now evolve into a team.
Teams set guidelines related to what members will do together and how they will do 
it. The teams consider such matters as attendance at meetings, being late, and missing 
assignments as well as how members treat one another.
Groups that make it through stage 2 generally do so because a respected member 
other than the leader challenges the group to resolve its power struggles so something 
can be accomplished. Questions about authority are resolved through unemotional, 
matter-of-fact group discussion. A feeling of team spirit is experienced because mem-
bers believe they have found their proper roles. Group cohesiveness, a “we feeling” 
binding group members together, is the principal by-product of stage 3.34 (We discuss 
cohesiveness next, in Section 13.3.)
What the Leader Should Do 
This stage generally does not last long. Here the 
leader should emphasize unity and help identify team goals and values.
Stage 4: Performing—“Can We Do the Job Properly?”
In performing, members concentrate on solving problems and completing the assigned 
task. For individuals, the question here is “How can I best perform my role?” For the 
group/team, the issue is “Can we do the job properly?”
What the Leader Should Do 
During this stage, the leader should allow members 
the empowerment they need to work on tasks.
Research tells us that high-performing teams successfully navigating the process of 
group or team development tend to display productive energy toward getting things 
done.35 Do your current teams at work or school display this productive energy? You 
can find out by completing Self-Assessment 13.2.
Assessing Your Team’s Productive Energy
The following survey was designed to assess your team’s produc-
tive energy. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-
Assessment 13.2. When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
To what extent does the team display productive energy? 
Are you surprised by the results?
2. 
Based on your survey scores, what can be done to improve 
the level of energy being displayed by the team? Be specific.
3. 
What would the survey suggest that you should do next 
time you are the leader of a work or school project team?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 13.2
®
Stage 5: Adjourning—“Can We Help Members 
Transition Out?”
In the final stage, adjourning, members prepare for disbandment. Having worked so 
hard to get along and get something done, many members feel a compelling sense of 
loss. For the individual, the question now is “What’s next?” For the team, the issue is 
“Can we help members transition out?”
What the Leader Should Do 
The leader can help ease the transition by rituals 
celebrating “the end” and “new beginnings.” Parties, award ceremonies, graduations, 
or mock funerals can provide the needed punctuation at the end of a significant team-
work project. The leader can emphasize valuable lessons learned in group dynamics to 
prepare everyone for future group and team efforts. ●

13.3 Building Effective Teams
How can I as a manager build an effective team?
THE BIG PICTURE
To build a group into a high-performance team, managers must consider matters of cooperation, trust, and 
cohesiveness, followed by performance goals and feedback, motivation through mutual accountability, team 
size, roles, norms, and awareness of groupthink.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
“What is a high-performance team?” Answers to that question in a nationwide survey 
of team members from many organizations revealed several attributes: participative 
leadership, shared responsibility, sense of common purpose, trust and open communi-
cation, application of creative talents, seeing change as an opportunity for growth, task 
focus, and rapid acting on opportunities.36 Thus, as a future manager, the first thing 
you have to realize is that building a high-performance team is going to require some 
work. But the payoff will be a stronger, better-performing work unit.37
The most essential considerations in building a group into an effective team are 
(1) cooperation, (2) trust, and (3) cohesiveness. These are followed by (4) performance 
goals and feedback, (5) motivation through mutual accountability, (6) size, (7) roles,
(8) norms, and (9) awareness of groupthink.
1. Cooperation: “We Need to Systematically 
Integrate Our Efforts”
Human cooperation has a long history, with some hunter-gatherers in Tanzania—who 
live much as humans did about 10,000 years ago—linked in social networks very 
much like ours (without the cell phones and other connections, of course).38 Indeed, 
unlike other animals, such as chimpanzees and monkeys, humans are able to build big-
ger and better tools by sharing knowledge and learning from one another—in short, by 
cooperating.39 Individuals are said to be cooperating when their efforts are systemati-
cally integrated to achieve a collective objective.40 One meta-analysis of 122 studies 
suggests that cooperation is superior to competition and individualistic efforts in pro-
moting achievement and productivity.41
2. Trust: “We Need to Have Reciprocal Faith 
in Each Other”
Trust is defined as reciprocal faith in others’ intentions and behaviors.42 The word 
“reciprocal” emphasizes the give-and-take aspect of trust—that is, we tend to give 
what we get: trust begets trust, distrust begets distrust. Trust is based on credibility—
how believable you are based on your past acts of integrity and follow-through on your 
promises. Besides enhancing your credibility by showing professionalism, technical 
ability, and good business sense, you can build trust in your team members by the 
methods shown at right. (See Table 13.4.)
3. Cohesiveness: “Togetherness Is Vital”
Another important characteristic of teams is cohesiveness, the tendency of a group or 
team to stick together. This is the familiar sense of togetherness or “we-ness” you feel, for 
example, when you’re a member of a volleyball team, a fraternity or a sorority, or a com-
pany’s sales force.43 Managers can stimulate cohesiveness by encouraging people to have 
face-to-face exchanges at work. A recent study found that patterns of communication 
 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
419
Source: Reprinted by permission 
of Harvard Business Review. 
Adapted from “Nobody Trusts the 
Boss Completely—Now What?” by 
F. Bartolome, March–April 1989. 
Copyright 1989 by the Harvard 
Business School Publishing 
Corporation. All rights reserved.
TABLE 13.4
How to Build & Maintain Trust 
with Team Members
 1. Communicate truthfully. 
Be candid about problems 
and limitations (including 
your own), explain 
decisions, provide 
accurate feedback.
 2. Offer support—by 
being available. Be 
approachable, provide 
help, coaching, and 
support members’ ideas.
 3. Show respect—by 
delegating and listening. 
Respect members’ 
decision making by 
delegating authority and 
actively listening.
 4. Show fairness—by giving 
credit and being impartial. 
Give recognition when 
deserved, be objective 
when evaluating 
performance.
 5. Show predictability—by 
keeping promises, both 
expressed and implied.

420 
PART 5 
Leading
Cooperation and collaboration. 
A crew swarms over a car driven 
by A. J. Allmendinger during a pit 
stop in the NASCAR 2014 Sprint 
Cup All-Star Race at Watkins 
Glen, New York. Cereal maker 
General Mills was able to cut the 
time workers changed a 
production line for a Betty 
Crocker product from 4.5 hours 
to just 12 minutes by adapting 
ideas in efficiency and high 
performance from a NASCAR pit 
crew working at blinding speed.
among team members were the most important predictor of team success.44 Cohesive-
ness is also achieved by following the tips in the following table. (See Table 13.5.)
Source: Adapted and modified from R. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organizational Behavior, 10th ed. (New York: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2013), p. 315.
TABLE 13.5
How to Enhance Cohesiveness 
in Teams: Ten Factors that 
Lead to Success
 1. Keep the team small.
 2. Encourage members’ interaction and cooperation.
 3. Emphasize members’ common characteristics.
 4. Strive for a favorable public image to enhance the team’s prestige.
 5. Give each member a stake in the team’s success—a “piece of the action.”
 6. Point out threats from competitors to enhance team togetherness.
 7. Ensure performance standards are clear and regularly update members on team goals.
 8. Frequently remind members they need each other to get the job done.
 9. Direct each member’s special talents toward the common goals.
 10. Recognize each member’s contributions.
4. Performance Goals & Feedback
As an individual, you no doubt prefer to have measurable goals and to have feedback 
about your performance. The same is true with teams. Teams are not just collections of 
individuals. They are individuals organized for a collective purpose. That purpose 
needs to be defined in terms of specific, measurable performance goals with continual 
feedback to tell team members how well they are doing.
An obvious example are the teams you see on television at Indianapolis or Daytona 
Beach during automobile racing. When the driver guides the race car off the track to 
make a pit stop, a team of people quickly jack up the car to change tires, refuel the 
tank, and clean the windshield—all operating in a matter of seconds. The performance 
goals are to have the car back on the track as quickly as possible. The number of sec-
onds of elapsed time—and the driver’s place among competitors once back in the 
race—tells them how well they are doing.
5. Motivation through Mutual 
Accountability
Do you work harder when you’re alone or when you’re 
in a group? When clear performance goals exist, when 
the work is considered meaningful, when members be-
lieve their efforts matter, and when they don’t feel they 
are being exploited by others—this kind of culture sup-
ports teamwork.45 Being mutually accountable to other 
members of the team rather than to a supervisor makes 
members feel mutual trust and commitment—a key 
part in motivating members for team effort. To bring 
about this team culture, managers often allow teams to 
do the hiring of new members.

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
421
6. Size: Small Teams or Large Teams?
Size, which is often determined by the team’s purpose, can be important in affecting 
members’ commitment and performance. Whereas in some flat-organization struc-
tures, groups may consist of 30 or more employees, teams seem to range in size from 
2 to 16 people, with those of 5–12 generally being the most workable and 5–6 consid-
ered optimal.46 A survey of 400 workplace team members in the United States found 
that the average team consisted of 10 members, with 8 being the most common size.47
Small and large teams have different characteristics, although the number of mem-
bers is, to be sure, somewhat arbitrary.48
Small Teams: 2–9 Members for Better Interaction & Morale 
Teams with 
9 or fewer members have two advantages:
■ 
Better interaction. Members are better able to interact, share information, 
ask questions of one another, and coordinate activities than are those in larger 
teams. In particular, teams with five or fewer offer more opportunity for per-
sonal discussion and participation.
■ 
Better morale. They are better able to see the worth of their individual con-
tributions and thus are more highly committed and satisfied. Members are less 
apt to feel inhibited in participating. Team leaders are subject to fewer de-
mands and are able to be more informal.49
However, small teams also have some disadvantages:
■ 
Fewer resources. With fewer hands, there will be fewer resources—less 
knowledge, experience, skills, and abilities to apply to the team’s tasks.
■ 
Possibly less innovation. A group that’s too small may show less creativity 
and boldness because of the effect of peer pressure.
■ 
Unfair work distribution. Because of fewer resources and less specializa-
tion, there may be an uneven distribution of the work among members.
Large Teams: 10–16 Members for More Resources & Division of Labor 
Teams with 10–16 members have different advantages over small teams. (Again, the 
numbers are somewhat arbitrary.)
■ 
More resources. Larger teams have more resources to draw on: more knowl-
edge, experience, skills, abilities, and perhaps time. These will give them 
more leverage to help them realize the team’s goals.
■ 
Division of labor. In addition, a large team can take advantage of division of 
labor, in which the work is divided into particular tasks that are assigned to 
particular workers.
Yet bigness has its disadvantages:
■ 
Less interaction. With more members, there is less interaction, sharing of in-
formation, and coordinating of activities. Leaders may be more formal and 
autocratic, since members in teams this size are apt to be more tolerant of au-
tocratic leadership. The larger size may also lead to the formation of cliques.
■ 
Lower morale. Because people are less able to see the worth of their indi-
vidual contributions, they show less commitment and satisfaction and more 
turnover and absenteeism. They also express more disagreements and turf 
struggles and make more demands on leaders.
■ 
Social loafing. The larger the size, the more likely performance is to drop, 
owing to the phenomenon known as social loafing, the tendency of people to 
exert less effort when working in groups than when working alone.50 (Today 

422 
PART 5 
Leading
social loafers are more apt to be known as sliders—high achievers who have 
“checked out,” in the words of former BusinessWeek columnists Jack and 
Suzy Welch, and who have to be dealt with “before they begin to suck the 
team into their negative energy field and drag it down.”51)
EXAMPLE
Team Size: And the Magic Number Is . . .
The subject of team size has become a topic of fascination, 
according to two scholars, because “in the past decade, re-
search on team effectiveness has burgeoned as teams have 
become increasingly common in organizations of all kinds.”52
What’s the right number of people for a team?
The “Two-Pizza Rule.” Various companies have various rules. At 
Amazon.com, there is a “two-pizza rule”—namely, if a team can’t 
be fed by two pizzas, it’s too large.53 Other companies have their 
own ideal sizes: Titeflex, 6–10 people; EDS, 8–12; Johnsonville 
Foods, 12; Volvo, 20. Microsoft Corp. felt the optimal size for a 
software-development team was 8.54
The late J. Richard Hackman, a Harvard professor of social 
and organizational psychology, thought there should be no 
more than 6—the maximum he would allow for students 
forming project groups.55 In 1970, Hackman and colleague Neil 
Vidmar set out to discover the perfect size, asking various 
teams large and small whether their number was too large or 
too small for the task.56
The optimal number: 4.6.
Task Is Key. Size is not the only consideration, however. For in-
stance, says Wharton management professor Katherine J. Klein, 
the nature of the team’s task is key because it defines the type of 
skills you are looking for and the type of coordination necessary.57
YOUR CALL
What’s been your experience, if any, with team size? At what 
point does adding members begin to hurt a team’s perfor-
mance as people become less motivated and group coordina-
tion becomes more difficult?
7. Roles: How Team Members 
Are Expected to Behave
Roles are socially determined expectations of how individuals should behave in a spe-
cific position. As a team member, your role is to play a part in helping the team reach 
its goals. Members develop their roles based on the expectations of the team, of the 
organization, and of themselves, and they may do different things. You, for instance, 
might be a team leader. Others might do some of the work tasks. Still others might 
communicate with other teams.58
Two types of team roles are task and maintenance.59
Task Roles: Getting the Work Done 
A task role, or task-oriented role, consists
of behavior that concentrates on getting the team’s tasks done. Task roles keep the 
team on track and get the work done. If you stand up in a team meeting and say, “What 
is the real issue here? We don’t seem to be getting anywhere,” you are performing a 
task role.
Examples: Coordinators, who pull together ideas and suggestions; orienters, who 
keep teams headed toward their stated goals; initiators, who suggest new goals or 
ideas; and energizers, who prod people to move along or accomplish more are all play-
ing task roles.
Maintenance Roles: Keeping the Team Together 
A maintenance role, or
relationship-oriented role, consists of behavior that fosters constructive relationships 
among team members. Maintenance roles focus on keeping team members. If some-
one at a team meeting says, “Let’s hear from those who oppose this plan,” he or she is 
playing a maintenance role.

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
423
Examples are encouragers, who foster group solidarity by praising various viewpoints; 
standard setters, who evaluate the quality of group processes; harmonizers, who mediate 
conflict through reconciliation or humor; and compromisers, who help resolve conflict 
by meeting others “halfway.”
8. Norms: Unwritten Rules for Team Members
Norms are more encompassing than roles. Norms are general guidelines or rules of be-
havior that most group or team members follow. Norms point up the boundaries between 
acceptable and unacceptable behavior.60 Although some norms can be made explicit (as 
the example below shows), typically they are unwritten and seldom discussed openly; 
nevertheless, they have a powerful influence on group and organizational behavior.
How to Develop Team Norms: Creating a “Fear-Free Zone” of Trust
Trust is everything. The CEO of Siemens, the German electron-
ics and electrical engineering powerhouse, says that a climate 
of trust is required to make teams work.61 So does the lead 
scientist of the IBM team that built Watson, the computer smart 
enough to beat the grand champions of the game of “Jeop-
ardy.”62 And so does Pamela Fields, CEO of Stetson, the hat and 
apparel company.63
“You’re Not Telling Us What You Want.” In her first man-
agement job, at cosmetics giant Avon, Fields was “just a bull in 
a china shop,” she said, failing to direct the three people re-
porting to her. Finally, they sat her down and told her “you’re 
not telling us what you want and you’re not telling us how you 
think we should get there.” From this and other frank discus-
sion, Fields learned the necessity for creating a workplace 
where honesty is valued. Thus, she says, “I vowed to create an 
environment in which truth is important. It takes a lot of spine 
to tell the truth, especially in a large organization, where obfus-
cation is a political skill that I don’t have.”
Fields’s way of establishing the norms for a “truth-telling” 
climate, she said in an interview, is to tell her team members 
that everyone matters, that she has their back, that if some-
thing goes wrong, it’s her problem and that if something 
goes right, it’s their success. “And people know that they can 
come to me and let me have it. . . . There’s a complete fear-
free zone.”
YOUR CALL
Creating a fear-free zone starts with establishing the norms in 
a public forum, as when Fields tells audiences about an em-
ployee coming to her and saying that an idea is dumb, that it 
isn’t going to work, and they should talk about it. Such public 
acknowledgments by the boss encourages a spirit of openness 
and candor among team members. As a manager of a team, do 
you think you could adopt a climate of trust in which your team 
members understand that if something goes wrong it’s your 
problem, not theirs?
EXAMPLE
Why Norms Are Enforced: Four Reasons 
Norms tend to be enforced by group 
or team members for four reasons:64
■ 
To help the group survive—“Don’t do anything that will hurt us.” Norms 
are enforced to help the group, team, or organization survive.
Example: The manager of your team or group might compliment you be-
cause you’ve made sure it has the right emergency equipment.
■ 
To clarify role expectations—“You have to go along to get along.” Norms 
are also enforced to help clarify or simplify role expectations.
Example: At one time, new members of Congress wanting to buck the sys-
tem by which important committee appointments were given to those with the 
most seniority were advised to “go along to get along”—go along with the 
rules in order to get along in their congressional careers.
■ 
To help individuals avoid embarrassing situations—“Don’t call attention 
to yourself.” Norms are enforced to help group or team members avoid em-
barrassing themselves.
Examples: You might be ridiculed by fellow team members for dominating 
the discussion during a report to top management (“Be a team player, not a 

424 
PART 5 
Leading
The importance of trust. David 
A. Ferucci (center), with two IBM 
colleagues, led a team of 
artificial intelligence researchers 
that programmed a computing 
system named Watson to 
compete on the game show 
Jeopardy, whose host, Alex 
Trebeck, is shown in 2011 
talking about the upcoming 
event. Watson beat the previous 
(human) grand champions. All 
successful teams operate within 
a climate of trust.
show-off”). Or you might be told not to discuss religion or politics with 
customers, whose views might differ from yours.
■ 
To emphasize the group’s important values and identity—“We’re known 
for being special.” Finally, norms are enforced to emphasize the group, team, 
or organization’s central values or to enhance its unique identity.
Examples: Nordstrom’s department store chain emphasizes the great 
lengths to which it goes in customer service. Some colleges give an annual 
award to the instructor whom students vote best teacher.
9. Groupthink: When Peer Pressure Discourages 
“Thinking Outside the Box”
On a hot day, as the family is comfortably playing dominoes on a porch in Coleman, 
Texas, the father-in-law suggests taking a 53-mile trip to Abilene for dinner. Though 
the rest of the family—wife, husband, and mother-in-law—would rather not make the 
long, hot drive, they keep their preferences to themselves and agree to the trip. Later, 
back home after suffering a good deal of discomfort (including bad food), the mother-
in-law says she would rather have stayed home. The husband and wife chime in that 
they agreed only to keep the others happy; the father-in-law then announces he only 
suggested it because he thought the others might be bored. This, says scholar James 
Harvey, is what he calls the Abilene paradox—the tendency of people to go along with 
others for the sake of avoiding conflict.65
Cohesiveness? Or Blind Unwillingness? 
The Abilene paradox shows that cohe-
siveness isn’t always good. An undesirable by-product that may occur, according to psy-
chologist Irvin Janis, is groupthink—a cohesive group’s blind unwillingness to consider 
alternatives. In this phenomenon, group or team members are friendly and tight-knit, but 
they are unable to think “outside the box.” Their “strivings for unanimity override their 
motivation to realistically appraise alternative courses of action,” said Janis.66
Examples: The Senate Intelligence Committee said groupthink was a major factor in the 
U.S. invasion of Iraq because too many people in the government had tended to think alike 
and therefore failed to challenge basic assumptions about Iraq’s weapons capability.67 In-
vestors in Silicon Valley often show a herd mentality to be part of “the next big thing.”68
It cannot be said, however, that group opinion is always risky. Indeed, financial 
writer James Surowiecki, author of The Wisdom of Crowds, argues that “Under the 
right circumstances, groups are remarkably intelligent, and are often smarter than the 

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
425
smartest people in them.”69 As evidence, he cites how groups have been used to predict 
the election of the president of the United States, find lost submarines, and correct the 
spread on a sporting event.70
Symptoms of Groupthink 
How do you know that you’re in a group or team that 
is suffering from groupthink? Some symptoms include the following:71
■ 
Invulnerability, inherent morality, and stereotyping of opposition. Because 
of feelings of invulnerability, group members have the illusion that nothing can 
go wrong, breeding excessive optimism and risk taking. Members may also be 
so assured of the rightness of their actions that they ignore the ethical implica-
tions of their decisions. These beliefs are helped along by stereotyped views of 
the opposition, which leads the group to underestimate its opponents.
■ 
Rationalization and self-censorship. Rationalizing protects the pet assump-
tions underlying the group’s decisions from critical questions. Self-censorship 
also stifles critical debate. It is especially hard to argue with success, of course. 
But if enough key people, such as outside analysts, had challenged Lehman 
Brothers, the fourth-largest U.S. investment bank, when it seemed to be flying 
high, it might not have led to the largest bankruptcy filing in corporate history.
■ 
Illusion of unanimity, peer pressure, and mindguards. The illusion of una-
nimity is another way of saying that silence by a member is interpreted to 
mean consent. But if people do disagree, peer pressure leads other members 
to question the loyalty of the dissenters. In addition, in a groupthink situation 
there may exist people who might be called mindguards—self-appointed pro-
tectors against adverse information.
■ 
Groupthink versus “the wisdom of crowds.” Groupthink is characterized 
by a pressure to conform that often leads members with different ideas to cen-
sor themselves—the opposite of collective wisdom, says James Surowiecki, 
in which “each person in the group is offering his or her best independent 
forecast. It’s not at all about compromise or consensus.”72
No doubt you’ve felt yourself pulled in a “groupthink opinion” at some point. Prob-
ably we all have. Self-Assessment 13.3 provides you with a way to evaluate the extent 
to which groupthink is affecting a team. Results provide insight about reducing this 
counterproductive group dynamic.
Assessing Groupthink
The following survey was designed to assess groupthink. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 13.3. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Where does the team stand on the three aspects 
of groupthink?
2. 
Based on your survey scores, what would you do 
differently to reduce groupthink in the group you 
evaluated? Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 13.3
®
The Results of Groupthink: Decision-Making Defects 
Groups with a moder-
ate amount of cohesiveness tend to produce better decisions than groups with low or 
high cohesiveness. Members of highly cohesive groups victimized by groupthink 
make the poorest decisions—even though they show they express great confidence in 
those decisions.73
Among the decision-making defects that can arise from groupthink are the following:
■ 
Reduction in alternative ideas. The principal casualty of groupthink is a 
shrinking universe of ideas. Decisions are made based on few alternatives. 

426 
PART 5 
Leading
Once preferred alternatives are decided on, they are not reexamined, and, of 
course, rejected alternatives are not reexamined.
■ 
Limiting of other information. When a groupthink group has made its deci-
sion, others’ opinions, even those of experts, are rejected. If new information is 
considered at all, it is biased toward ideas that fit the group’s preconceptions. 
Thus, no contingency plans are made in case the decision turns out to be faulty.
EXAMPLE
Groupthink: An Enthusiasm for Brainstorming, a Technique that Often 
Doesn’t Work
Promoted as an idea-generation machine, brainstorming has 
become “practically a religion” at design firm Ideo (developer 
of the first Apple mouse) and other companies.74 As we de-
scribed in Chapter 7, brainstorming consists of employees get-
ting together and pouring forth as many ideas as possible (“go 
for quantity”) while withholding criticism and negative feed-
back (“defer judgment”). In an era of open work environments 
and team-based collaboration, brainstorming would seem to 
be a perfect fit.
Groupthink about Group Thinking. Unfortunately, the enthu-
siasm for this group-thinking technique may itself be a form of 
groupthink—a belief that brainstorming is more productive 
than in fact it is. According to Washington University psycholo-
gist Keith Sawyer, “Decades of research have consistently 
shown that brainstorming groups think of far fewer ideas than 
the same number of people who work alone and pool their 
ideas.”75 Three characteristics of brainstorming have been 
called into question:
 1. Free Association. A problem with free association is that 
it doesn’t produce much creativity because for most peo-
ple the first thoughts that come to mind are entirely pre-
dictable (if you say “blue,” most people will say “green,” 
“sky,” or “ocean”).76 To develop original ideas, one must 
first get past the layer of predictability.
 2. No Criticism. Brainstorming orthodoxy dictates that 
there should be no criticism during idea generation. 
However, research comparing three groups—no criticism 
allowed, debate and criticism encouraged, and no guide-
lines given—found that the debaters produced more 
ideas than the brainstormers and no-guidelines groups.77 
Although staying positive and not hurting people’s 
feelings is all well and good, debate seems to spur 
more creativity.
 3. Groups versus Individuals. “Research strongly suggests 
that people are more creative when they enjoy  privacy and 
freedom from interruption,” says Susan Cain.78 The author 
of Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World that Can’t Stop 
Talking, Cain cites evidence that the most spectacularly 
creative people in many fields (such as Steve Wozniak, 
who invented the user-friendly personal computer and co-
founded Apple with Steve Jobs) are often introverted and 
need solitude as a catalyst to innovation.
YOUR CALL
Do you agree that brainstorming has endured too long because of 
admirers’ groupthink? But an important exception to its dismal 
record, says Cain, is Internet “electronic brainstorming, where 
large groups outperform individuals.” Why do you suppose that is?
Preventing Groupthink: Making Criticism & Other Perspectives Permissible 
Janis believes it is easier to prevent groupthink than to cure it. As preventive measures, 
he suggests the following:
■ 
Allow criticism. Each member of a team or group should be told to be a 
critical evaluator, able to actively voice objections and doubts. Subgroups 
within the group should be allowed to discuss and debate ideas. Once a 
consensus has been reached, everyone should be encouraged to rethink his or 
her position to check for flaws.
■ 
Allow other perspectives. Outside experts should be used to introduce fresh 
perspectives. Different groups with different leaders should explore the same 
policy questions. Top-level executives should not use policy committees to 
rubber-stamp decisions that have already been made. When major alternatives 
are discussed, someone should be made devil’s advocate to try to uncover all 
negative factors.

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
427
Thus far in this chapter we have considered the things that make groups and teams 
both effective and ineffective. So how can you determine if a team is effective? A group’s 
output surely is one indicator, but there are others that are more “process-oriented.” You 
can get an idea of these process-oriented indicators by taking Self-Assessment 13.4. ●
Assessing Team Effectiveness
The following survey was designed to assess the overall effective-
ness of a team’s internal processes. Go to connect.mheducation
.com and take Self-Assessment 13.4. When you’re done, answer 
the following questions:
1. 
How effective is the team?
2. 
What aspects of the team’s internal processes are 
most in need of positive development?
3. 
Based on your survey scores, what are three 
recommendations for improving the team’s internal 
processes? Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 13.4
®
Thinking alike. Is it too much 
of a stretch to assume that 
people who look alike think 
alike? What are more important 
influences on groupthink?

13.4 Managing Conflict
Since conflict is a part of life, what should a manager know about it in order to deal 
successfully with it?
THE BIG PICTURE
Conflict, an enduring feature of the workplace, is a process in which one party perceives that its interests are 
being opposed or negatively affected by another party. Conflict can be negative (bad) or functional (good). In-
deed, either too much or too little conflict can affect performance. This section identifies three sources of 
conflict in organizations and also describes four ways to stimulate constructive conflict.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
428 
PART 5 
Leading
Mistakes, pressure-cooker deadlines, increased workloads, demands for higher pro-
ductivity, and other kinds of stress—all contribute to on-the-job conflict.79 Most peo-
ple envision conflict as meaning shouting and fighting, but as a manager you will 
encounter more subtle, nonviolent forms: opposition, criticism, arguments. Thus, a 
definition of conflict seems fairly mild: Conflict is a process in which one party per-
ceives that its interests are being opposed or negatively affected by another party.80
The Nature of Conflict: Disagreement Is Normal
Conflict is simply disagreement, a perfectly normal state of affairs. Conflicts may take 
many forms: between individuals, between an individual and a group, between groups, 
within a group, and between an organization and its environment.
Although all of us might wish to live lives free of conflict, it is now recognized that 
certain kinds of conflict can actually be beneficial.81 Let us therefore distinguish be-
tween dysfunctional conflict (bad) and functional conflict (good).
■ 
Dysfunctional conflict—bad for organizations. From the standpoint of the 
organization, dysfunctional conflict is conflict that hinders the organization’s 
performance or threatens its interests. As a manager, you need to do what you 
can to remove negative conflict, sometimes called dysfunctional conflict.
■ 
Functional conflict—good for organizations. The good kind of conflict is 
functional conflict, which benefits the main purposes of the organization and 
serves its interests.82 There are some situations in which this kind of con-
flict—also called functional conflict or cooperative conflict—is considered 
advantageous.
EXAMPLE
Dysfunctional & Functional Conflict: Do Nasty Bosses Get 
Better Performance?
There are some great films about horrible bosses—Kevin 
Spacey in Swimming with Sharks (“My bathmat means more to 
me than you”), so abusive he is kidnapped by his employee, and 
Meryl Streep in The Devil Wears Prada (“Details of your incom-
petence do not interest me”), a fear-inspiring fashion-magazine 
editor who keeps her new assistant quivering with dread. Are 
such portraits real? Says one former magazine editorial assis-
tant about the Streep-style boss, “If you happen to be working 
for the wrong editor, you could find yourself doing their kid’s 
homework or being yelled at, or crying in the bathroom.”83
Unfortunately, this kind of tyranny is very common. As we 
mentioned in Chapter 9, bullying at work is experienced by 
35% of employees, according to one survey, and 51%, accord-
ing to another—and often the bully is the boss.84
Abuse Flows Downhill. Does such negative conflict get results? 
Surprisingly, often it does. One study of 373 randomly chosen em-
ployees found that, although some reacted to abusive bosses by 
doing little or nothing, others performed better—in part, it’s spec-
ulated, to make themselves look good and others look worse.85

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
429
Can Too Little or Too Much Conflict Affect 
Performance?
It’s tempting to think that a conflict-free work group is a happy work group, as indeed 
it may be. But is it a productive group? In the 1970s, social scientists specializing in 
organizational behavior introduced the revolutionary idea that organizations could suf-
fer from too little or too much conflict. Neither scenario is good.
■ 
Too little conflict—indolence. Work groups, departments, or organizations 
that experience too little conflict tend to be plagued by apathy, lack of creativ-
ity, indecision, and missed deadlines. The result is that organizational perfor-
mance suffers.
Yet other research shows that abuse flows downhill, and 
when supervisors feel they have been unjustly treated, they may 
vent their resentment by abusing those who report to them. Sub-
ordinates generally cope either through avoidance or, less com-
monly, through confrontation and are in any case less inclined to 
feel committed to their organizations, to speak unfavorably about 
their companies to outsiders, and to seek jobs elsewhere.86
The “No-Jerk Rule.” When Stanford organizational psychologist 
Robert Sutton published a short essay in which he urged more 
civility in organizations by steady application of what he calls “the 
no-jerk rule” (although he used a far stronger word than “jerk”), 
he elicited more e-mails than he had received on any other sub-
ject, showing the topic had touched a nerve.87
Jerks may be everywhere, he says, but “the key is to make 
explicit to everyone involved in hiring decisions that candidates 
who have strong skills but who show signs they will belittle 
and disrespect others cannot be hired under any circum-
stances.” In addition, “Insults, put-downs, nasty teasing, and 
rude interruptions [should be] dealt with as soon as possible, 
preferably by the most respected and powerful members” of 
the company.88
YOUR CALL
Have you ever worked for jerks (otherwise known, as Sutton puts 
it, as “tyrants, bullies, boors, destructive narcissists, and psycho-
logically abusive people”)? How did you respond to them?
The jerk. Ever worked for an angry boss? How did you deal with the situation? Have there been circumstances in 
which people working for you might have called you a jerk (or worse)? What should you have done differently?

430 
PART 5 
Leading
■ 
Too much conflict—warfare. Excessive conflict, on the other hand, can 
erode organizational performance because of political infighting, dissatisfac-
tion, lack of teamwork, and turnover. Workplace aggression and violence are 
manifestations of excessive conflict.89
Thus, it seems that a moderate level of conflict can induce creativity and initiative, 
thereby raising performance, as shown in the diagram below. (See Figure 13.2.)90 As 
might be expected, however, the idea as to what constitutes “moderate” will vary 
among managers.
Low 
conflict
Positive
performance
Negative
performance
Intensity of
conflict
High 
conflict
Performance 
outcomes
FIGURE 13.2 
The relationship between 
intensity of conflict & 
performance outcomes
Too little conflict or too much 
conflict causes performance 
to suffer.
Source: Derived from L. D. Brown, 
Managing Conflict at Organizational 
Interfaces (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983). 
Three Kinds of Conflict: Personality, 
Intergroup, & Cross-Cultural
There are a variety of sources of conflict—so-called conflict triggers. Three of the 
principal ones are (1) between personalities, (2) between groups, and (3) between cul-
tures. By understanding these, you’ll be better able to take charge and manage the 
conflicts rather than letting the conflicts take you by surprise and manage you.
1. Personality Conflicts: Clashes Because of Personal Dislikes or 
Disagreements 
We’ve all had confrontations, weak or strong, with people be-
cause we disagreed with them or disliked their personalities, such as their opinions, 
their behavior, their looks, whatever. Personality conflict is defined as interpersonal 
opposition based on personal dislike or disagreement. Such conflicts often begin with 
instances of workplace incivility, or employees’ lack of regard for each other, which, if 
not curtailed, can diminish job satisfaction and organizational loyalty.91
Some particular kinds of personality conflicts are the following:
■ 
Personality clashes—when individual differences can’t be resolved. Per-
sonality, values, attitudes, and experience can be so disparate that sometimes 
the only way to resolve individual differences—personality clashes—is to 
separate two people.
■ 
Competition for scarce resources—when two parties need the same 
things. Within organizations there is often a scarcity of needed resources—
for example, funds, office space, equipment, employees, and money for raises. 
When resources are scarce, being a manager becomes more difficult and con-
flict more likely.
■ 
Time pressure—when people believe there aren’t enough hours to do the 
work. Setting a deadline is a useful way of inducing people to perform. Or 
it can be a source of resentment, rage, and conflict if employees think their 
manager has unrealistic expectations.

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
431
■ 
Communication failures—when people misperceive and misunder-
stand. The need for clear communication is a never-ending, ongoing pro-
cess. Even under the best of circumstances, people misunderstand others, 
leading to conflict.
2. Intergroup Conflicts: Clashes between Work Groups, Teams, & 
Departments 
The downside of cohesiveness, the “we” feeling discussed earlier, is 
that it can translate into “we versus them.” This produces conflict among work groups, 
teams, and departments within an organization.
Some ways in which intergroup conflicts are expressed are as follows:
■ 
Inconsistent goals or reward systems—when people pursue different ob-
jectives. It’s natural for people in functional organizations to be pursuing 
different objectives and to be rewarded accordingly, but this means that con-
flict is practically built into the system.
■ 
Ambiguous jurisdictions—when job boundaries are unclear. “That’s not 
my job and those aren’t my responsibilities.” “Those resources belong to me 
because I need them as part of my job.” When task responsibilities are un-
clear, that can often lead to conflict.
■ 
Status differences—when there are inconsistencies in power and influence.
It can happen that people who are lower in status according to the organization 
chart actually have disproportionate power over those theoretically above them, 
which can lead to conflicts.
3. Multicultural Conflicts: Clashes between Cultures 
With cross-border 
mergers, joint ventures, and international alliances common features of the global 
economy, there are frequent opportunities for clashes between cultures. Often success 
or failure, when business is being conducted across cultures, arises from dealing with 
differing assumptions about how to think and act.
One study of 409 expatriates (14% of them female) from U.S. and Canadian mul-
tinational firms working in 51 different countries identified nine specific ways to 
facilitate interaction with host-country nationals, the results of which are shown at 
“What We’ve Got Have Here Is a Failure to Communicate”: 
The Plight of the Tongue-Tied
Miscommunication happens for all kinds of reasons—
sometimes because there is no communication at all.
Clamming Up in Small Groups. Some people simply clam up in 
small-group settings, often because they think others are smarter 
or of higher status. Becoming tongue-tied this way seems to be 
more common in women and in people with higher IQs, according 
to a Virginia Tech study.92 The researchers speculate they are 
“more attuned to group social dynamics, subconsciously worry-
ing about their performance and evaluating themselves in relation 
to others,” says one report.93
Ways to Cope. If speaking up is hard for you to do in small groups, 
you can take comfort that the people who froze the most in the 
study were actually the smartest. Otherwise, you can cope by pre-
paring before the meeting (practice your delivery and bring notes), 
telling the person running the meeting beforehand that you have 
some points and would like the opportunity to be called upon, or 
joining with a more outgoing or higher-status member in the group 
who can bring up your points and then toss you an opening.94
YOUR CALL
Do you tend to go silent during some small-group settings or 
social situations? Perhaps it’s not that you’re shy but rather an 
introvert and want to collect your thoughts before speaking—
hard to do in the company of extroverts who “think out loud.” 
Could any of the advice above work for you?
EXAMPLE

432 
PART 5 
Leading
left. (See Table 13.6.) Note that “Be a good listener” tops the list—the very thing 
lacking in so many American managers, who are criticized for being blunt to the 
point of insensitivity.95
How to Stimulate Constructive Conflict
As a manager you are being paid not just to manage conflict but even to create some, 
where it’s constructive and appropriate, in order to stimulate performance. Construc-
tive conflict, if carefully monitored, can be very productive under a number of circum-
stances: when your work group seems afflicted with inertia and apathy, resulting in 
low performance; when there’s a lack of new ideas and resistance to change; when 
there seem to be a lot of yes-men and yes-women (expressing groupthink) in the work 
unit; when there’s high employee turnover; or when managers seem unduly concerned 
with peace, cooperation, compromise, consensus, and their own popularity rather than 
in achieving work objectives.
The following four devices are used to stimulate constructive conflict:
1. Spur Competition among Employees 
Competition is, of course, a form of 
conflict, but competition is often healthy in spurring people to produce higher results. 
Thus, a company will often put its salespeople in competition with one another by of-
fering bonuses and awards for achievement—a trip to a Caribbean resort, say, for the 
top performer of the year.
2. Change the Organization’s Culture & Procedures 
Competition may also 
be established by making deliberate and highly publicized moves to change the corpo-
rate culture—by announcing to employees that the organization is now going to be 
more innovative and reward original thinking and unorthodox ideas. Procedures, such 
as paperwork sign-off processes, can also be revamped. Results can be reinforced in 
visible ways through announcements of bonuses, raises, and promotions.
3. Bring in Outsiders for New Perspectives 
Without “new blood,” organiza-
tions can become inbred and resistant to change. This is why managers often bring in 
outsiders—people from a different unit of the organization, new hires from competing 
companies, or consultants. With their different backgrounds, attitudes, or management 
styles, these outsiders can bring a new perspective and can shake things up.
4. Use Programmed Conflict: Devil’s Advocacy & the Dialectic Method 
Programmed conflict is designed to elicit different opinions without inciting people’s 
personal feelings.96 Sometimes decision-making groups become so bogged down in 
TABLE 13.6
Ways to Build Cross-Cultural 
Relationships
 1. Be a good listener
 2. Be sensitive to others’ 
needs 
tied with . . .
 3. Be cooperative, not overly 
competitive
 4. Advocate inclusive 
(participative) leadership
 5. Compromise rather than 
dominate
 6. Build rapport through 
conversations
 7. Be compassionate and 
understanding
 8. Avoid conflict by 
emphasizing harmony
 9. Nurture others (develop 
and mentor)
Source: Adapted from R. L. 
Tung, “American Expatriates 
Abroad: From Neophytes to 
Cosmopolitans,” Journal of World 
Business, Summer 1998, table 6, 
p. 136. Reprinted with permission 
from Elsevier.
Top employee. Companies 
frequently stimulate constructive 
competition among employees 
to produce better performance. 
Top salespeople, for instance, 
may be rewarded with a trip to a 
Mexican resort. Do you think you 
would do well in a company that 
makes you compete with others 
to produce higher results?

 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
433
details and procedures that nothing of substance gets done. The idea here is to get 
people, through role playing, to defend or criticize ideas based on relevant facts rather 
than on personal feelings and preferences.
The method for getting people to engage in this debate of ideas is to do disciplined 
role playing, for which two proven methods are available: devil’s advocacy and the 
dialectic method. These two methods work as follows:
■ 
Devil’s advocacy—role-playing criticism to test whether a proposal is 
workable. Devil’s advocacy is the process of assigning someone to play the 
role of critic to voice possible objections to a proposal and thereby generate 
critical thinking and reality testing.97
Periodically role-playing devil’s advocate has a beneficial side effect in 
that it is great training for developing analytical and communicative skills. 
However, it’s a good idea to rotate the job so no one person develops a nega-
tive reputation.
■ 
The dialectic method—role-playing two sides of a proposal to test 
whether it is workable. Requiring a bit more skill training than devil’s 
advocacy does, the dialectic method is the process of having two people 
or groups play opposing roles in a debate in order to better understand a 
proposal. After the structured debate, managers are more equipped to make 
an intelligent decision.98
Five Basic Behaviors to Help You Better 
Handle Conflict
Whatever kind of organization you work for, you’ll always benefit from knowing how 
to manage conflict. There are five basic behaviors that enable you to work on disagree-
ments and keep them from flaring into out-of-control personality conflicts: openness, 
equality, empathy, supportiveness, and positiveness.99
1. Openness 
 State your views openly and honesty, not trying to disguise the real 
object of your disagreement. Look at the conflict as a way to better understand the 
situation and find a solution. Concentrate on identifying the problem and taking a 
problem-solving approach.
2. Equality 
 Treat the other’s status and ideas as equal to yours, allowing that per-
son time to completely express his or her opinions. Evaluate all ideas fairly and logi-
cally, without regard to ownership.
3. Empathy 
 Try to experience the other person’s feelings and point of view, show-
ing you are truly listening by using such expressions as “I appreciate how you feel . . .”
4. Supportiveness 
Let the other person know you want to find a resolution that 
will benefit you both. Describe the specifics you have difficulty understanding, with-
out evaluating or judging them. Support the other person’s position when it makes 
sense to do so.
5. Positiveness 
Be positive about the other person and your relationship. Express 
your willingness to work toward a resolution that will be feasible for everyone.
Before beginning to try to adopt these behaviors preparatory to dealing with a dis-
pute, you should also try to be aware of your customary conflict-handling style. We 
describe five possibilities in the Practical Action box, opposite. ●

434 
PART 5 
Leading
PRACTICAL ACTION
Dealing with Disagreements: Five Conflict-Handling Styles
Even if you’re at the top of your game as a manager, working 
with groups and teams of people will now and then put you in 
the middle of disagreements, sometimes even destructive con-
flict. How can you deal with it?
There are five conflict-handling styles, or techniques, a manager 
can use for handling disagreements with individuals: avoiding, ac-
commodating, forcing, compromising, and problem solving.100
Avoiding—“Maybe the Problem Will Go Away”
Avoiding involves ignoring or suppressing a conflict. Avoidance 
is appropriate for trivial issues, when emotions are high and a 
cooling-off period is needed, or when the cost of confrontation 
outweighs the benefits of resolving the conflict. It is not appro-
priate for difficult or worsening problems.
The benefit of this approach is that it buys time in unfolding 
and ambiguous situations. The weakness is that it provides 
only a temporary fix and sidesteps the underlying problem.
Accommodating—“Let’s Do It Your Way”
An accommodating manager is also known as a “smoothing” 
or “obliging” manager. Accommodating is allowing the desires 
of the other party to prevail. As one writer describes it, “An 
obliging [accommodating] person neglects his or her own con-
cern to satisfy the concern of the other party.”101 Accommodat-
ing may be an appropriate conflict-handling strategy when it’s 
possible to eventually get something in return or when the is-
sue isn’t important to you. It’s not appropriate for complex or 
worsening problems.
The advantage of accommodating is that it encourages co-
operation. The weakness is that once again it’s only a tempo-
rary fix that fails to confront the underlying problem.
Forcing—“We Have to Do It My Way”
Also known as “dominating,” forcing is simply ordering an out-
come, when a manager relies on his or her formal authority 
and power to resolve a conflict, but the needs of the other party 
are largely ignored. Forcing is appropriate when an unpopular 
solution must be implemented and when it’s not important that 
others be committed to your viewpoint.
The advantage of forcing is speed: It can get results quickly. 
The disadvantage is that in the end it doesn’t resolve personal 
conflict—if anything, it aggravates it by breeding hurt feelings 
and resentment.
Compromising—“Let’s Split the Difference”
In compromising, both parties give up something in order to gain 
something. Compromise is appropriate when both sides have op-
posite goals or possess equal power. But compromise isn’t work-
able when it is used so often that it doesn’t achieve results—for 
example, continual failure to meet production deadlines. Compro-
mise, says one writer, sometimes represents “the mistaken idea 
that any agreement is better than no agreement.”102
The benefit of compromise is that it is a democratic process 
that seems to have no losers. However, since so many people 
approach compromise situations with a win-lose attitude, they 
may be disappointed and feel cheated.
Problem Solving—“Let’s Cooperate to Reach a Win-
Win Solution that Benefits Both of Us”
Problem solving, or integrating, is about collaboration. In this 
style, the manager strives to confront the issue and coopera-
tively identify the problem, generating and weighing alterna-
tives, and selecting a solution. Problem solving is appropriate 
for complex issues plagued by misunderstanding. It is inappro-
priate for resolving conflicts rooted in opposing value systems.
The strength of problem solving is its longer-lasting impact 
because it deals with the underlying problem, not just its symp-
toms. Its weakness is that it’s very time-consuming. Neverthe-
less, problem solving is usually the best approach for dealing 
with groups and teams of people.
YOUR CALL
Which style are you most likely to use, based on your experi-
ence? You can find out by completing Self-Assessment 13.5.
What Is Your Conflict-Management Style?
The following exercise is designed to determine your conflict-
handling style. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take 
Self-Assessment 13.5. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
Were you surprised by the results? Why or why not? 
Explain.
2. 
Were the scores for your primary and backup conflict-
handling styles relatively similar, or was there a large 
gap? What does this imply? Discuss.
3. 
Is your conflict-handling style one that can be used in 
many different conflict scenarios? Explain.
4. 
What are some skills you can work on to become more 
effective at handling conflict?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 13.5
®

adjourning 418
cohesiveness 419
conflict 428
continuous improvement 
teams 416
cooperating 419
cross-functional team 415
devil’s advocacy 433
dialectic method 433
division of labor 421
dysfunctional conflict 428
formal group 413
forming 417
functional conflict 428
group 413
group cohesiveness 418
groupthink 424
informal group 414
maintenance role 422
norming 417
norms 423
performing 418
personality conflict 430
programmed conflict 432
roles 422
self-managed teams 416
social loafing 421
storming 417
task role 422
team 413
trust 419
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
13.1 Groups versus Teams
• Groups and teams are different—a group is 
typically management-directed, a team self-
directed. A group is defined as two or more 
freely interacting individuals who share collective 
norms, share collective goals, and have a 
common identity. A team is defined as a small 
group of people with complementary skills who 
are committed to a common purpose, 
performance goals, and approach for which 
they hold themselves mutually accountable.
• Groups may be either formal, established to 
do something productive for the organization 
and headed by a leader, or informal, formed 
by people seeking friendship with no officially 
appointed leader.
• Teams are of various types, but one of the 
most important is the work team, which 
engages in collective work requiring 
coordinated effort. Work teams may be of 
four types, identified according to their basic 
purpose: advice, production, project, and 
action. A project team may also be a cross-
functional team, staffed with specialists 
pursuing a common objective.
• Two types of teams worth knowing about are 
continuous improvement teams, consisting 
of small groups of volunteers or workers and 
supervisors who meet intermittently to 
discuss workplace and quality-related 
problems, and self-managed teams, defined 
as groups of workers given administrative 
oversight for their task domains.
13.2 Stages of Group & Team 
Development
• A group may evolve into a team through five 
stages. (1) Forming is the process of getting 
oriented and getting acquainted. (2) Storming 
is characterized by the emergence of 
individual personalities and roles and 
conflicts within the group. (3) In norming, 
conflicts are resolved, close relationships 
develop, and unity and harmony emerge. 
(4) In performing, members concentrate on 
solving problems and completing the 
assigned task. (5) In adjourning, members 
prepare for disbandment.
13.3 Building Effective Teams
• There are nine considerations managers 
must take into account in building a group 
into an effective team. (1) They must ensure 
individuals are cooperating, or systematically 
integrating their efforts to achieve a collective 
objective. (2) They must establish a climate 
of trust, or reciprocal faith in others’ 
intentions and behaviors. (3) They must 
consider the team’s cohesiveness, the 
tendency of a group or team to stick 
together.
• (4) They must establish measurable goals 
and have feedback about members’ 
performance. (5) They must motivate 
members by making them mutually 
accountable to one another. (6) They must 
consider what size is optimal. Teams with 
nine or fewer members have better 
interaction and morale, yet they also have 
fewer resources, are possibly less innovative, 
and may have work unevenly distributed 
among members. Teams of 10–16 members 
have more resources and can take 
advantage of division of labor, yet they may 
be characterized by less interaction, lower 
morale, and social loafing.
• (7) They must consider the role each team 
member must play. A role is defined as the 
Key Points
 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
435

socially determined expectation of how an 
individual should behave in a specific 
position. Two types of team roles are task 
and maintenance. A task role consists of 
behavior that concentrates on getting the 
team’s tasks done. A maintenance role 
consists of behavior that fosters constructive 
relationships among team members.
• (8) They must consider team norms, the 
general guidelines or rules of behavior that 
most group or team members follow. Norms 
tend to be enforced by group or team 
members for four reasons: to help the group 
survive, to clarify role expectations, to help 
individuals avoid embarrassing situations, 
and to emphasize the group’s important 
values and identity.
•  (9) They must be aware of groupthink, a 
cohesive group’s blind unwillingness to 
consider alternatives. Symptoms of 
groupthink are feelings of invulnerability, 
certainty of the rightness of their actions, 
and stereotyped views of the opposition; 
rationalization and self-censorship; and 
illusion of unanimity, peer pressure, and 
the appearance of self-appointed 
protectors against adverse information. 
The results of groupthink can be reduction 
in alternative ideas and limiting of other 
information. Two ways to prevent 
groupthink are to allow criticism and to 
allow other perspectives.
13.4 Managing Conflict
• Conflict is a process in which one party 
perceives that its interests are being opposed 
or negatively affected by another party. 
Conflict can be dysfunctional, or negative. 
However, constructive, or functional, conflict 
benefits the main purposes of the 
organization and serves its interests. Too little 
conflict can lead to indolence; too much 
conflict can lead to warfare.
• Three types of conflict are clashes between 
personalities, intergroup conflict, and cross-
cultural conflict.
• Four devices for stimulating constructive 
conflict are (1) spurring competition among 
employees, (2) changing the organization’s 
culture and procedures, (3) bringing in 
outsiders for new perspectives, and (4) using 
programmed conflict to elicit different opinions 
without inciting people’s personal feelings.
• Two methods used in programmed conflict 
are (1) devil’s advocacy, in which someone is 
assigned to play the role of critic to voice 
possible objections to a proposal, and (2) the 
dialectic method, in which two people or 
groups play opposing roles in a debate in 
order to better understand a proposal. There 
are five basic behaviors that enable you to 
work on disagreements and keep them from 
flaring into out-of-control personality 
conflicts: openness, equality, empathy, 
supportiveness, and positiveness.
 1. How do groups and teams differ?
 2. What’s the difference between formal groups and 
informal groups?
 3. Describe four types of work teams.
 4. What are the stages of group and team 
development?
 5. Explain the nine most essential considerations in 
building a group into an effective team.
 6. How do functional and dysfunctional conflict 
differ?
 7. What are three types of conflict?
 8. How would you go about stimulating constructive 
conflict?
 9. What are devil’s advocacy and the dialectic method?
 10. What are five basic behaviors to help you better 
handle conflict?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
436 
PART 5 
Leading
Wooga Effectively Utilizes Teams When 
Creating Game Apps
Wooga is a collection of many small, independent 
teams. Each team is responsible for making and run-
ning a single game and is expected to make their own 
decisions while being cross-functional and autono-
mous. They should freely share learnings and don’t 
compete with each other, meaning they effectively act 
like small, independent start-ups within a larger 
framework.
Management in Action

It’s completely up to them if they want to listen or 
ignore outside advice—even if it’s from one of the 
founders. This is only possible by having great people. 
So hiring the right people is the single most important 
thing we do at Wooga. We believe in the mantra, “If in 
doubt, don’t hire.” That works very well. Teams are at 
the heart of how Wooga is organized. Seventy percent 
of employees are working in a game team. There are 
departmental heads, such as the Head of Engineering, 
of which we have two, who take care of different parts 
of that field, and others that look after their respective 
departments.
The rest are providing central services like market-
ing, customer care, and localization (20%) or others 
like HR, PR, Finance, Business Analytics, and teams 
that maintain simple services for persistence of games. 
“Service” is the key word here—those teams serve the 
game teams and not the other way around. For exam-
ple, there are no artificial budget processes and game 
teams can decide release dates themselves.
Each game team is led by a product lead that has the 
final decision for the team. This ensures a fast decision 
is always possible and the company can scale without 
top management becoming a bottleneck. In essence 
this is a delegation of power from central management 
to the teams. This starts with the type of game a prod-
uct lead wants to make and ends with the way the 
teams organize themselves internally.
Teams start small with 1–3 people, with the first al-
ways being the future lead and providing the initial 
concept of the game. They develop a prototype that 
can be reviewed and, most importantly, play tested. If 
it’s not good enough, the team starts afresh. If it looks 
promising, the team is ramped up slowly, keeping it 
below 10 people for as long as possible.
After going live, the team size can remain stable or 
be increased. Further feature development does not 
slow down the development process but as extra in-
formation is derived from live metrics, a/b testing be-
comes possible and the whole game needs to be 
operated.
An important point is that even though teams are 
independent and compare KPIs [key performance indi-
cators], they do not compete with each other. There is 
a constant exchange of knowledge and lessons learned 
between them. This is how we leverage the innova-
tions made by individual teams (and compensate risks 
individual teams take).
On one level this is done by each team being asked 
to provide a 5–10 minute weekly meeting where they 
report their progress to the rest of the company and 
explain their learnings, which could be from some-
thing like previous a/b tests or new feature announce-
ments. There are no limits or off areas regarding which 
information can be shared, as long as others can bene-
fit from the information.
Also, these meeting are open for every employee to 
attend. This way we can try out new things in one 
game, and when they work, that knowledge is spread 
to other teams. This works quite organically.
Another level of knowledge exchange is between 
members of the same discipline. We organize monthly 
internal lightning talk rounds called “5 minutes of 
fame” where anyone in the company can give a short 
talk regarding something they want to share and every-
one can attend these talks. . . .
Whenever a topic is too complex to handle it in a 
lightning talk we do brown bag talks. This is a lunch-
time talk, where participants get a free lunch after the 
25-minute talk. Half of the company usually attends 
these talks, of which we have about one per month. . . .
Since teams are cross-functional, there is a wide 
range of skills to utilize, and good teams organize 
themselves with members working closely together. 
Again, the idea is not to have a single person know-
ing and deciding everything, but making it the re-
sponsibility of every team member to push the game 
forward.
Teams themselves are autonomous and do not de-
pend on other teams to create and run their game. As a 
result, teams do their own analytics while using a 
shared service provided by the Business Analytics ser-
vice team and a few standardized KPIs. Similarly, 
there is no operation/admin team to operate the servers 
or other parts of infrastructure. Those who write the 
software operate it themselves. Engineers are not 
forced to share or reuse code, so there is no central 
framework that everyone must use. . . .
We think agile development is not about applying 
a specific methodology, it is about following the cor-
rect principles and to constantly reflect on whether 
you are aligned correctly and to correct things when 
necessary.
As a result there is no unified process on how teams 
should develop their software. Teams decide on their 
own how to do things, although they usually blend in 
elements of Scrum and/or Kanban. That means stand-
ups in the morning are the standard, although varia-
tions do exist.
The company also has a unique view of using 
monetary performance bonuses. Co-founder and 
CEO Jens Begemann told Fast Company that mone-
tary performance bonuses promote internal compe-
tition. He believes that this would in turn undermine 
the collaboration among team members and across 
teams that is needed to generate great products. In-
stead, the company uses shares of stock as incen-
tives to motivate employees to care about the greater 
good of the company. This seems to be working be-
cause the company has experienced tremendous 
growth in the last few years and there is very little 
employee turnover.
 
Groups & Teams 
CHAPTER 13 
437

FOR DISCUSSION
 1. Are the product development teams at Wooga more 
of a group or a team? Explain your rationale.
 2. What does Wooga do to promote cooperation and co-
hesiveness among their product development teams?
 3.  To what extent are Wooga’s teams subject to group-
think? Does the company do anything to prevent 
groupthink among its development teams?
 4. What is your opinion about the company’s view of 
not paying performance bonuses? What are the pros 
and cons?
 5. What is your biggest takeaway about teams based on 
this case?
Source: Excerpted from Jesper Richter-Reichhelm, “Using 
Independent Teams to Scale a Small Company: A Look at How Games 
Company Wooga Works,” Entrepreneur, September 8, 2013, http://
thenextweb.com/entrepreneur/2013/09/08/using-independent-teams-to-
scale-a-small-company-a-look-at-how-games-company-wooga-works 
(accessed August 17, 2014).
Information in last paragraph based on P. Glader, “Wooga, a Case 
Study in No Cash Bonus Culture,” Fast Company, February 21, 2012, 
www.fastcompany.com/1816541/wooga-case-study-no-cash-bonus-
culture (accessed August 17, 2014).
438 
PART 5 
Leading
When Employees Smoke Marijuana Socially: 
A Manager’s Quandary
You work in a state where it is illegal to smoke mari-
juana, and your employer has a zero-tolerance policy 
regarding the use of drugs. You also are a supervisor 
at a telephone call center and have very positive rela-
tionships with members of your work team and your 
manager. A friend of yours, Christina, is also a super-
visor, and her younger brother, Blake, is a member of 
your work team.
Christina invites you to her birthday party at her 
home, and you happily agree to attend. During the 
party, you walk out to the backyard to get some fresh 
air and notice that Blake and several other employees 
of your company are smoking marijuana: None of 
these individuals have prescriptions for medical mari-
juana. You have been told on several occasions by 
members of your own work team that these same indi-
viduals have used marijuana at other social events.
Although Blake is a member of your work team, 
his friends are not. You don’t really feel any need to 
tell management about these people smoking pot 
because you have never noticed their being im-
paired at work. If the company found out that you 
knew about their smoking, it could adversely affect 
your career. The company expects managers to act 
with honesty, integrity, and to be forthright with se-
nior management. That said, the issue has come up 
in your mind because Blake applied for a promo-
tion to a supervisory position. Although he is a 
good worker, you wonder if his smoking marijuana 
might affect his judgment. More importantly, 
the vice president of Human Resources just re-
quested a recommendation from you regarding Blake’s 
promotion.
SOLVING THE DILEMMA
As a supervisor, what would you do?
 1. I would not tell the vice president of human re-
sources about Blake’s drug use. He’s doing a good 
job and I have not seen any impairment.
 2. I would tell the vice president of human resources 
about the incident in which I observed Blake smoking 
marijuana. I need to honor the company’s directives 
about a zero-tolerance policy on drug use.
 3. I would talk to Blake. I would explain my predica-
ment and then ask him about the frequency of his 
drug use. If Blake promised to stop smoking mari-
juana, I would not tell the vice president of human 
resources about the incident.
 4. Invent other options. Discuss.
Legal/Ethical Challenge


Power, Influence, 
& Leadership
From Becoming a Manager to Becoming 
a Leader
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
14.1 The Nature of Leadership: Wielding Influence
Major Question: I don’t want to be just a manager; I want to 
be a leader. What’s the difference between the two?
14.2 Trait Approaches: Do Leaders Have Distinctive 
Personality Characteristics?
Major Question: What does it take to be a successful leader?
14.3 Behavioral Approaches: Do Leaders Show Distinctive 
Patterns of Behavior?
Major Question: Do effective leaders behave in similar ways?
14.4 Situational Approaches: Should Leadership Vary with 
the Situation?
Major Question: How might effective leadership vary according 
to the situation at hand?
14.5 The Uses of Transformational Leadership
Major Question: What does it take to truly inspire people to 
perform beyond their normal levels?
14.6 Three Additional Perspectives
Major Question: If there are many ways to be a leader, which 
one would describe me best?
14

Someday maybe you can afford to have a personal 
career coach—the kind long used by sports and en-
tertainment figures and now adopted in the upper 
ranks of business. These individuals “combine exec-
utive coaching and career consulting with marketing 
and negotiations,” says one account. “They plot 
career strategy, help build networks of business 
contacts, . . . and shape their clients’ images.”1
One such career coach is Richard L. Knowdell, 
president of Career Research and Testing in San 
Jose, California. He offers the following strategies for 
staying ahead in the workplace of tomorrow.2
Take Charge of Your Career, & Avoid 
Misconceptions
Because you, not others, are in charge of your career, 
and it’s an ongoing process, you should develop a 
career plan and base your choices on that plan. 
When considering a new job or industry, find out how 
that world really works, not what it’s reputed to be. 
When considering a company you might want to 
work for, find out its corporate “style” or culture by 
talking to its employees.
Develop New Capacities
“Being good at several things will be more advanta-
geous in the long run than being excellent at one nar-
row specialty,” says Knowdell. “A complex world will 
not only demand specialized knowledge but also 
general and flexible skills.”
Anticipate & Adapt to, Even Embrace, Changes
Learn to analyze, anticipate, and adapt to new circum-
stances in the world and in your own life. For instance, as 
technology changes the rules, embrace the new rules.
Keep Learning
“You can take a one- or two-day course in a new 
subject,” says Knowdell, “just to get an idea of 
whether you want to use those specific skills and to 
see if you would be good at it. Then, if there is a 
match, you could seek out an extended course.”
Develop Your People & Communications Skills
No matter how much communication technology 
takes over the workplace, there will always be a 
strong need for effectiveness in interpersonal rela-
tionships. In particular, learn to listen well. Inciden-
tally, one poll found that “appearance”—meaning 
clothes, accessories, and shoes—ranked second 
only to “communication skills” as the quality most 
associated with professionalism.3 (You might try 
imitating your bosses’ clothing styles.)
For Discussion Which of these five rules do you 
think is most important—and why?
the manager’s toolbox
Advancing Your Career: Staying Ahead 
in the Workplace of Tomorrow
Are there differences between managers and leaders? This chapter considers this ques-
tion. We discuss the sources of a leader’s power and how leaders use persuasion to 
influence people. We then consider the following approaches to leadership: trait, behav-
ioral, situational, transformational, and three additional perspectives.
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
forecast

14.1 
The Nature of Leadership: Wielding Influence
I don’t want to be just a manager; I want to be a leader. What’s the difference between 
the two?
THE BIG PICTURE
Being a manager and being a leader are not the same. That said, they both are necessary in the pursuit of 
organizational goals. For example, leadership skills are needed to create and communicate a company’s 
vision, strategies, and goals, while management skills are needed to execute on these plans and goals. This 
section highlights how management and leadership skills are complementary and describes five sources of 
power leaders draw on to influence others. Leaders use the power of persuasion to get others to follow 
them. Five approaches to leadership are described in the next five sections.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Leadership. What is it? Is it a skill anyone can develop?
Leadership is the ability to influence employees to voluntarily pursue organizational 
goals.4 In an effective organization, leadership is present at all levels, say Tom Peters 
and Nancy Austin in A Passion for Excellence, and it represents the sum of many 
things. Leadership, they say, “means vision, cheerleading, enthusiasm, love, trust, 
verve, passion, obsession, consistency, the use of symbols, paying attention as illus-
trated by the content of one’s calendar, out-and-out drama (and the management 
thereof), creating heroes at all levels, coaching, effectively wandering around, and nu-
merous other things.”5
Managers & Leaders: Not Always the Same
You see the words manager and leader used interchangeably all the time. However, as 
one pair of leadership experts has said, “Leaders manage and managers lead, but the 
two activities are not synonymous.”6
“Management,” says Tim Bucher, CEO of TastingRoom.com, a wine site, “is about 
doing things right—dotting the I’s, crossing the T’s. . . . But leadership is about doing 
the right thing. . . . You have to make a call, and in some ways it might be against com-
pany policy.”7
Managers do planning, organizing, directing, and control. Leaders inspire, encour-
age, and rally others to achieve great goals. Managers implement a company’s vision 
and strategic plan. Leaders create and articulate that vision and plan. The table on the 
next page summarizes key characteristics of each. (See Table 14.1.)
Managerial Leadership: Can You Be Both 
a Manager & a Leader?
Absolutely. The latest thinking is that individuals are able to exhibit a broad array of 
the contrasting behaviors shown in Table 14.1 (a concept called behavioral complexity).8 
Thus, in the workplace, many people are capable of exhibiting managerial leadership, 
defined as “the process of influencing others to understand and agree about what 
needs to be done and the process of facilitating individual and collective efforts to 
accomplish shared objectives.”9 Here the “influencing” part is leadership and the 
“facilitating” part is management.
Managerial leadership may be demonstrated not only by managers appointed to 
their positions but also by those who exercise leadership on a daily basis but don’t 
carry formal management titles (such as certain coworkers on a team).
442 
PART 5 
Leading

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
443
Coping with Complexity versus Coping with Change: 
The Thoughts of John Kotter
In considering management versus leadership, retired Harvard Business School pro-
fessor John Kotter suggests that one is not better than the other, that in fact they are 
complementary systems of action. The difference is that . . .
■ 
Management is about coping with complexity,
■ 
Leadership is about coping with change.10
Let’s consider these differences.
Being a Manager: Coping with Complexity 
Management is necessary because 
complex organizations, especially the large ones that so much dominate the economic 
landscape, tend to become chaotic unless there is good management.11 (For a good 
description of a manager’s busy day, review Chapter 1, as analyzed by Henry Mintzberg.)
According to Kotter, companies manage complexity in three ways:
■ 
Determining what needs to be done—planning and budgeting. Companies 
manage complexity first by planning and budgeting—setting targets or goals 
for the future, establishing steps for achieving them, and allocating resources 
to accomplish them.
■ 
Creating arrangements of people to accomplish an agenda—organizing 
and staffing. Management achieves its plan by organizing and staffing, 
Kotter says—creating the organizational structure and hiring qualified individuals 
to fill the necessary jobs, then devising systems of implementation.
■ 
Ensuring people do their jobs—controlling and problem solving. 
Management ensures the plan is accomplished by controlling and problem 
solving, says Kotter. That is, managers monitor results versus the plan in some 
detail by means of reports, meetings, and other tools. They then plan and 
organize to solve problems as they arise.
TABLE 14.1
Characteristics of Being 
a Manager & a Leader
BEING A MANAGER MEANS . . . 
BEING A LEADER MEANS . . .
Planning, organizing, directing, controlling 
Being visionary
Executing plans and delivering goods 
Being inspiring, setting the tone, and 
and services  
articulating the vision
Managing resources 
Managing people
Being conscientious 
Being inspirational (charismatic)
Acting responsibly 
Acting decisively
Putting customers first—responding to and 
Putting people first—responding to 
acting for customers  
and acting for followers
Mistakes can happen when managers don’t 
Mistakes can happen when leaders choose 
appreciate people are the key resource,  
the wrong goal, direction, or inspiration; 
underlead by treating people like other 
overlead; or fail to implement the vision
resources, or fail to be held accountable
Source: Adapted from P. Lorenzi, “Managing for the Common Good: Prosocial Leadership,” Organizational 
Dynamics, Vol. 33, No. 3 (2004), p. 286. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.

444 
PART 5 
Leading
Amazing Amazon. Jeffrey 
Bezos, founder and CEO of 
online retailer Amazon.com, has 
done nearly everything Kotter 
suggests. For instance, Bezos’s 
“culture of divine discontent” 
permits employees to plunge 
ahead with new ideas even 
though they know that most 
will probably fail.
Being a Leader: Coping with Change 
As the business world has become more 
competitive and volatile, doing things the same way as last year (or doing it 5% better) 
is no longer a formula for success. More changes are required for survival—hence the 
need for leadership.
Leadership copes with change in three ways:
■ 
Determining what needs to be done—setting a direction. Instead of deal-
ing with complexity through planning and budgeting, leaders strive for con-
structive change by setting a direction. That is, they develop a vision for the 
future, along with strategies for realizing the changes.
■ 
Creating arrangements of people to accomplish an agenda—aligning 
people. Instead of organizing and staffing, leaders are concerned with align-
ing people, Kotter says. That is, they communicate the new direction to peo-
ple in the company who can understand the vision and build coalitions that 
will realize it.
■ 
Ensuring people do their jobs—motivating and inspiring. Instead of con-
trolling and problem solving, leaders try to achieve their vision by motivating 
and inspiring. That is, they appeal to “basic but often untapped human needs, 
values, and emotions,” says Kotter, to keep people moving in the right direc-
tion, despite obstacles to change.
Do Kotter’s ideas describe real leaders in the real business world? Certainly many 
participants in a seminar convened by Harvard Business Review appeared to agree. 
“The primary task of leadership is to communicate the vision and the values of an or-
ganization,” Frederick Smith, chairman and CEO of FedEx, told the group. “Second, 
leaders must win support for the vision and values they articulate. And third, leaders 
have to reinforce the vision and the values.”12
Do You Have What It Takes to Be a Leader? 
 Managers have legitimate 
power (as we’ll describe) that derives from the formal authority of the positions to 
which they have been appointed. This power allows managers to hire and fire, reward 
and punish. Managers plan, organize, and control, but they don’t necessarily have the 
characteristics to be leaders.
Whereas management is a process that lots of people are able to learn, leadership is 
more visionary. As we’ve said, leaders inspire others, provide emotional support, and 
try to get employees to rally around a common goal. Leaders also play a role in creat-
ing a vision and strategic plan for an organization, which managers are then charged 
with implementing.
Do you feel you’re up for being a leader? Is getting a college degree part of your 
plan for moving into the managerial ranks? Everyone is not suited to lead and you can 
get feedback on your readiness to lead by completing Self-Assessment 14.1.
Assessing Your Readiness to Assume the 
Leadership Role 
The following survey was designed to assess your readiness to 
assume the leadership role. Go to connect.mheducation.com 
and take Self-Assessment 14.1. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
What is your level of readiness? Are you surprised by the 
results? 
2. 
Looking at the three highest- and lowest-rated items in 
the survey, what can you do to increase your readiness to 
lead? Think of specific actions you take right now.
3. 
Do you think your readiness to lead will change over 
time? Explain your rationale. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 14.1
®

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
445
Five Sources of Power
To really understand leadership, we need to understand the concept of power and au-
thority. Authority is the right to perform or command; it comes with the job. In con-
trast, power is the extent to which a person is able to influence others so they respond 
to orders.
People who pursue personalized power—power directed at helping oneself—as a 
way of enhancing their own selfish ends may give the word power a bad name. However, 
there is another kind of power, socialized power—power directed at helping others.13 
This is the kind of power you hear in expressions such as “My goal is to have a powerful 
impact on my community.”
Within organizations there are typically five sources of power leaders may draw on: 
legitimate, reward, coercive, expert, and referent.
1. Legitimate Power: Influencing Behavior Because of One’s Formal 
Position 
Legitimate power, which all managers have, is power that results from 
managers’ formal positions within the organization. All managers have legitimate 
power over their employees, deriving from their position, whether it’s a construction 
boss, ad account supervisor, sales manager, or CEO. This power may be exerted both 
positively or negatively—as praise or as criticism, for example.
2. Reward Power: Influencing Behavior by Promising or Giving 
Rewards 
Reward power, which all managers have, is power that results from man-
agers’ authority to reward their subordinates. Rewards can range from praise to pay 
raises, from recognition to promotions.
Example: “Talking to people effectively is all about being encouraging,” says 
Andrea Wong, president and CEO of Lifetime Network and Entertainment Services. 
She tries to use praise to reward positive behavior. “When I have something bad to say 
to someone, it’s always hard because I’m always thinking of the best way to say it.”14
3. Coercive Power: Influencing Behavior by Threatening or Giving 
Punishment 
Coercive power, which all managers have, results from managers’ 
authority to punish their subordinates. Punishment can range from verbal or written 
reprimands to demotions to terminations. In some lines of work, fines and suspensions 
may be used. Coercive power has to be used judiciously, of course, since a manager who 
is seen as being constantly negative will produce a lot of resentment among employees. 
But there have been many leaders who have risen to the top of major corporations—
such as Disney’s Michael Eisner, Miramax’s Harvey Weinstein, and Apple’s Steve 
Jobs—who have been abrasive and intimidating.15
4. Expert Power: Influencing Behavior Because of One’s Expertise 
Expert 
power is power resulting from one’s specialized information or expertise. Expertise, or 
special knowledge, can be mundane, such as knowing the work schedules and assign-
ments of the people who report to you. Or it can be sophisticated, such as having com-
puter or medical knowledge. Secretaries may have expert power because, for example, 
they have been in a job a long time and know all the necessary contacts. CEOs may have 
expert power because they have strategic knowledge not shared by many others.
5. Referent Power: Influencing Behavior Because of One’s Personal 
Attraction 
Referent power is power deriving from one’s personal attraction. As we will 
see later in this chapter (under the discussion of transformational leadership, Section 14.5), 
this kind of power characterizes strong, visionary leaders who are able to persuade their 
followers by dint of their personality, attitudes, or background. Referent power may be 
associated with managers, but it is more likely to be characteristic of leaders.

446 
PART 5 
Leading
Leadership & Influence: Using Persuasion 
to Get Your Way at Work
Steve Harrison, CEO of a career management firm, was escorting Ray, his newly hired 
chief operating officer, to meet people at a branch office. After greeting the reception-
ist and starting to lead Ray past her into the interior offices, Harrison felt himself being 
pulled back. He watched as Ray stuck out his hand, smiled, and said, “Good morning, 
Melissa, I’m Ray. I’m new here. It’s so great to meet you!” He then launched into a 
dialogue with Melissa, to her obvious delight.
Afterward, Harrison asked Ray, “What was that all about?” “It’s called the two-
minute schmooze,” Ray replied. “Our receptionists meet or talk by phone to more 
people critical to our company in one day than you or I will ever meet in the course 
of a year.”16
Ray would probably be considered a leader because of his ability to influence others—
to get them to follow his wishes. There are nine tactics for trying to influence others, but 
some work better than others. In one pair of studies, employees were asked in effect, 
“How do you get your boss, coworker, or subordinate to do something you want?” The 
nine answers—ranked from most used to least used tactics—were as follows.17
1. Rational Persuasion Trying to convince someone by using reason, logic, 
or facts.
Example: “You know, all the cutting-edge companies use this approach.”
2. Inspirational Appeals Trying to build enthusiasm or confidence by appealing 
to others’ emotions, ideals, or values.
Example: “If we do this as a goodwill gesture, customers will love us.”
3. Consultation Getting others to participate in a decision or change.
Example: “Wonder if I could get your thoughts about this matter.”
4. Ingratiating Tactics Acting humble or friendly or making someone feel good 
or feel important before making a request.
Example: “I hate to impose on your time, knowing how busy you are, but you’re the 
only one who can help me.”
5. Personal Appeals Referring to friendship and loyalty when making a 
request.
Example: “We’ve known each other a long time, and I’m sure I can count on you.”
6. Exchange Tactics Reminding someone of past favors or offering to trade 
favors.
Example: “Since I backed you at last month’s meeting, maybe you could help me 
this time around.”
7. Coalition Tactics Getting others to support your effort to persuade someone.
Example: “Everyone in the department thinks this is a great idea.”
8. Pressure Tactics Using demands, threats, or intimidation to gain compliance.
Example: “If this doesn’t happen, you’d better think about cleaning out your desk.”
9. Legitimating Tactics Basing a request on one’s authority or right, organiza-
tional rules or policies, or express or implied support from superiors.
Example: “This has been green-lighted at the highest levels.”

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
447
These influence tactics are considered generic because they are applied in all 
directions—up, down, and sideways within the organization. The first five influence 
tactics are considered “soft” tactics because they are considered friendlier than the last 
four “hard,” or pressure, tactics. As it happens, research shows that of the three possible 
responses to an influence tactic—enthusiastic commitment, grudging compliance, and 
outright resistance—commitment is most apt to result when the tactics used are 
consultation, strong rational persuasion, and inspirational appeals.18
Knowing this, do you think you have what it takes to be a leader? To answer this, 
you need to understand what factors produce people of leadership character. We con-
sider these in the rest of the chapter.
Five Approaches to Leadership
The next five sections describe five principal approaches or perspectives on leadership, 
which have been refined by research. They are (1) trait, (2) behavioral, (3) situational, 
(4) transformational, and (5) three additional. (See Table 14.2.) ●
TABLE 14.2
Five Approaches to 
Leadership
 1. Trait approaches
•  Leadership traits—positive task-oriented traits and positive/negative interpersonal attributes 
•  Gender studies—motivating others, fostering communication, producing high-quality work, 
and so on
 2. Behavioral approaches 
•  Task-oriented behavior—initiating-structure and transactional leadership 
•  Relationship-oriented behavior—three behaviors: consideration, empowering leadership, and 
servant leadership 
•  Passive behavior—laissez-faire leadership
•  Transformational behavior—discussed in Section 14.5
 3. Situational approaches
•  Fiedler’s contingency model—task-oriented style and relationship-oriented style—and three 
dimensions of control: leader-member, task structure, position power
•  House’s path–goal revised leadership model—clarifying paths for subordinates’ goals, and 
employee characteristics and environmental factors that affect leadership behaviors
 4. Transformational leadership approach
•  Transformational leadership—transform employees to pursue organizational goals over self-
interests, using inspirational motivation, idealized influence, individualized consideration, 
intellectual stimulation
 5. Three additional perspectives
•  Leader–member exchange (LMX) model—leaders have different sorts of relationships with 
different subordinates
•  E-Leadership—using information technology for one-to-one, one-to-many, and between group 
and collective interactions
•  Followers—we also describe the role of followers in the leadership process.

14.2 Trait Approaches: Do Leaders Have Distinctive 
Personality Characteristics?
What does it take to be a successful leader?
THE BIG PICTURE
Trait approaches attempt to identify distinctive characteristics that account for the effectiveness of leaders. 
We describe (1) positive task-oriented traits and positive/negative interpersonal attributes (narcissism, 
Machiavellianism, psychopathy) and (2) some results of gender studies.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Consider a leader dubbed “CEO of the Decade” in 2009 by Fortune magazine for 
10 years of achievements in the fields of music, movies, and mobile phones, not to 
mention computing. “Remaking any one business is a career-defining achievement,” 
wrote Fortune editor Adam Lashinsky; “four is unheard of.”19
That leader was, of course, the late Steve Jobs of Apple. Did he have distinctive 
personality traits that might teach us something about leadership? Perhaps he did. He 
seemed to embody the traits of (1) dominance, (2) intelligence, (3) self-confidence, 
(4) high energy, and (5) task-relevant knowledge.
These are the five traits that researcher Ralph Stogdill in 1948 concluded were 
typical of successful leaders.20 Stogdill is one of many contributors to trait approaches 
to leadership, which attempt to identify distinctive characteristics that account for the 
effectiveness of leaders.21
Positive Task-Oriented Traits & Positive/Negative 
Interpersonal Attributes
Traits play a central role in how we perceive leaders, and they ultimately affect leader-
ship effectiveness.22 On the basis of more recent studies, we would revise Stogdill’s 
leadership list to comprise the following four positive task-oriented traits: (1) intelli-
gence, (2) conscientiousness, (3) openness to experience, and (4) emotional stability.
These traits in turn can be expanded into a list of both positive and negative inter-
personal attributes often found in leaders, as shown at left.23 (See Table 14.3.)
“Dark Side” Traits: Narcissism, Machiavellianism, & Psychopathy 
We 
have discussed most positive interpersonal attributes elsewhere, but we need to de-
scribe the negative, or “dark side,” traits of some leaders: narcissism, Machiavellian-
ism, and psychopathy.24
■ 
Narcissism. Narcissism is defined as having “a self-centered perspective, 
feelings of superiority, and a drive for personal power and glory.”25 Narcissists 
have inflated views of themselves, seek to attract the admiration of others, and 
fantasize about being in control of everything. Although passionate and char-
ismatic, narcissistic leaders may provoke counterproductive work behaviors 
in others, such as strong resentments and resistance.26
■ 
Machiavellianism. Inspired by the pessimistic beliefs of Niccolò Machiavelli, 
a philosopher and writer (The Prince) in the Italian Renaissance,
Machiavellianism (pronounced “mah-kyah-vel-yahn-izm”) displays a cynical 
view of human nature and condones opportunistic and unethical ways of 
manipulating people, putting results over principles. This view is manifested 
in such expressions as “All people lie to get what they want” and “You have to 
cheat to get ahead.” Like narcissism, Machiavellianism is also associated with 
counterproductive work behaviors, especially as people begin to understand 
that they are being coldly manipulated. 
448 
PART 5 
Leading
TABLE 14.3
Key Positive & Negative 
Interpersonal Attributes Often 
Found in Leaders
POSITIVE 
ATTRIBUTES
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Communication skills
NEGATIVE 
ATTRIBUTES
Narcissism
Machiavellianism
Psychopathy

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
449
■ 
Psychopathy. Psychopathy (“sigh-kop-a-thee”) is characterized by lack of 
concern for others, impulsive behavior, and a dearth of remorse when the psy-
chopath’s actions harm others. Not surprisingly, a person with a psychopathic 
personality can be a truly toxic influence in the workplace. 
If you have a propensity for any of these, you need to know that the expression of 
“dark side” traits tends to result in career derailment—being demoted or fired.27 
Is Trait Theory Useful? 
Three ways in which organizations may apply trait theory 
are as follows:
■ 
Use personality and trait assessments. Organizations may incorporate per-
sonality and trait assessments into their selection and promotion processes 
(being careful to use valid measures of leadership traits).
■ 
Choose personality over intelligence. According to research, when organi-
zations are selecting leaders, personality should be considered more impor-
tant than intelligence.28
■ 
Use management development programs. To enhance employee leader-
ship traits and positive personal attributes, a great number of companies 
send targeted employees to management development programs that in-
clude management classes, coaching sessions, trait assessments, mentor-
ing, and the like.29
Gender Studies: Do Women Have Traits that Make 
Them Better Leaders?
Do women not want to be at the top of the organizational pyramid? Despite the myths, 
actually they do.
Indeed, a New York research firm found that 55% of women and 57% of men aspire 
to be CEO, challenging the notion that more women aren’t at the top because they 
don’t want to be there.30 Indeed, women have been found to be just as assertive as 
men.31 In fact, it’s possible that women may have traits that make them better managers—
indeed, better leaders—than men.
The Evidence on Women Executives 
A number of management studies have 
found, according to BusinessWeek, that by and large “women executives, when rated 
by their peers, underlings, and bosses, score higher than their male counterparts on a 
wide variety of measures—from producing high-quality work to goal-setting to men-
toring employees.”32 In one study of 425 high-level executives, women won higher 
ratings on 42 of the 52 skills measured.33
What are the desirable traits in which women excel?
■ 
Women were found to be better at teamwork and partnering, being more col-
laborative, seeking less personal glory, being motivated less by self-interest 
than in what they can do for the company, being more stable, and being less 
turf conscious. Women were also found to be better at producing quality 
work, recognizing trends, and generating new ideas and acting on them. 
Women used a more democratic or participative style than men, who were apt 
to use a more autocratic and directive style than women.34
■ 
Women have been found to display more social leadership, whereas men have 
been found to display more task leadership.35
■ 
Women executives, when rated by their peers, managers, and direct reports, 
scored higher than their male counterparts on a variety of effectiveness 
criteria.36

450 
PART 5 
Leading
The Lack of Women at the Top 
Only 24 women (4.8%) are CEOs of Fortune 
500 companies, and only 45 women (5.1%) are CEOs of Fortune 1000 firms.37 In 
addition, less than 9% of top management positions are filled by women.38 Interestingly, 
however, companies with the top 10 highest paid female CEOs produce significantly 
higher dividends than firms with the top 10 highest paid male CEOs—2.98% versus 
2.45%, according to one study.39 So why, then, aren’t more women in positions of 
leadership? Among the possible explanations:
■ 
Unwillingness to compete or sacrifice. Though hardworking, many women 
simply aren’t willing to compete as hard as most men are or are not willing to 
make the required personal sacrifices.40 As Jamie Gorelick, former vice chair 
of Fannie Mae but also mother of two children ages 10 and 15, said when 
declining to be considered for CEO: “I just don’t want that pace in my life.”41 
■ 
Modesty. Women have a tendency to be overly modest and to give credit to 
others rather than taking it for themselves, which can undermine opportunities 
for promotions and raises.42 
■ 
Lack of mentor. Women are less likely than their male counterparts to have 
access to a supportive mentor.43 
■ 
Starting out lower, and more likely to quit. Perhaps most important, early 
career success is pivotal; women MBAs start out at lower levels than men do 
in their first jobs, putting them at a disadvantage that is hard to overcome. 
Further, findings from a study of over 475,000 people from 20 corporations 
revealed that women quit their jobs more often than men.44 Higher quit rates 
can deprive women from obtaining promotions and experiences needed for 
career advancement.
Things may be gradually changing, though not as fast as they should. With more 
than half of college students being women and with women making up half the work-
force, it’s possible that the new group rising through middle management could well 
lead to more than 100 Fortune 500 CEOs in the next 10 years.45 ●
Sheryl Sandberg. Named in 2014 
the ninth most powerful woman in 
the world by Forbes and the 10th 
most powerful woman in business 
by Fortune, Sandberg is the chief 
operating officer (COO) and 
business face of Facebook. She’s 
also a passionate advocate for 
women achieving more top 
corporate leadership jobs. As she 
told a Barnard College graduating 
class, “A world where men ran 
half our homes and women ran 
half our institutions would be just 
a much greater world.” 

Men of steel. What kind of 
leadership behavior is 
appropriate for directing 
these kinds of workers—the 
kind that directs them how 
to complete the task or the 
kind that develops good 
worker-boss relationships?
14.3 Behavioral Approaches: Do Leaders Show 
Distinctive Patterns of Behavior?
Do effective leaders behave in similar ways?
THE BIG PICTURE
Behavioral leadership approaches try to determine unique behaviors displayed by effective leaders. 
These approaches can be divided into four categories, the first three of which are discussed in this 
section: (1) task-oriented behavior, (2) relationship-oriented behavior, (3) passive behavior, and 
(4) transformational behavior (discussed in Section 14.5).
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Maybe what’s important to know about leaders is not their personality traits but rather 
their patterns of behavior. This is the line of thought pursued by those interested in 
behavioral leadership approaches, which attempt to determine the unique behaviors 
displayed by effective leaders. These approaches can be divided into four categories:
■ 
Task-oriented behavior 
■ 
Relationship-oriented behavior 
■ 
Passive behavior 
■ 
Transformational behavior (discussed in Section 14.5)
Task-Oriented Leader Behaviors: Initiating-Structure 
Leadership & Transactional Leadership
The primary purpose of task-oriented leadership behaviors is to ensure that people, 
equipment, and other resources are used in an efficient way to accomplish the mission 
of a group or organization.46 Examples of task-oriented behaviors are planning, clarify-
ing, monitoring, and problem solving. However, two kinds are particularly important: 
(1) initiating-structure leadership and (2) transactional leadership.47
 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
451

452 
PART 5 
Leading
Initiating-Structure Leadership: “Here’s What We Do to Get the Job Done”  
Initiating-structure leadership is leader behavior that organizes and 
defines—that is, “initiates the structure for”—what employees should be doing to maxi-
mize output. Clearly, this is a very task-oriented approach.
Example: Stephen Greer, head of Hong Kong–based metal recycler Hartwell Pacific, 
was so focused on new markets that he neglected to keep his eye on essential control 
systems such as accounting procedures, inventory audits, and new-hire reference 
checks—until the day he woke up to find the company was losing several million dol-
lars from fraud and theft. Greer, whose entrepreneurial experience is described in Start-
ing from Scrap, then launched oversight systems for his Asian operations: installing 
metal detectors, requiring three management signatures on company checks, having 
local finance managers report directly to headquarters instead of to their own general 
managers, and regularly bringing local managers to the headquarters to compare reve-
nues, costs, and overall performance so as to determine if one site might be out of line 
with the others. Result: Greer’s initiating-structure leadership helped to correct the 
fraud and theft problems, ultimately leading to profitable growth.48 
Transactional Leadership: “Here’s What We Do to Get the Job Done, & Here 
Are the Rewards” 
As a manager, your power stems from your ability to provide 
rewards (and threaten reprimands) in exchange for your subordinates’ doing the work. 
When you do this, you are performing transactional leadership, focusing on clarifying 
employees’ roles and task requirements and providing rewards and punishments 
contingent on performance. As with initiating structure leadership, transactional 
leadership also encompasses setting goals and monitoring progress.49
Example: Chicago-based ThoughtWorks, a software developer, 40 sales representa-
tives. When the company was founded in 1993, CEO Craig Gorsline determined the sales 
reps’ roles and task requirements were to explain software pricing and policies, as well as 
close sales and do customer hand holding. The rewards paid to reps consisted of commis-
sions on the revenue they generated, a common method of compensation in sales.
Recently, ThoughtWorks executives decided this transactional model had to be 
changed. Customers now used the Internet to compare pricing and policies. Moreover, 
paying sales commissions ran the risk of such negative behaviors as, according to The 
New York Times, “focusing on an individual’s profit over the company’s, emphasizing 
short-term outcomes, and encouraging competition among sales representatives.”50 The 
new world demanded reps who could do what was right for the customer rather than 
themselves. Accordingly, ThoughtWorks abolished commissions in favor of paying reps 
a straight salary—a move many favored because it guaranteed them a steady paycheck.
Initiating-structure leadership has a moderately strong positive relationship with 
leadership effectiveness, according to research.51 Transaction leadership also has a 
positive association with leader effectiveness and group performance.52
Relationship-Oriented Leader Behavior: Consideration, 
Empowerment, & Servant Leadership
Relationship-oriented leadership is primarily concerned with the leader’s interactions 
with his or her people. The emphasis is on enhancing employees’ skills and creating 
positive work relationships among coworkers and between the leader and the led. Such 
leaders often act as mentors, providing career advice, giving employees assignments 
that will broaden their skills, and empowering them to make their own decisions.53
There are three kinds of relationship-oriented behaviors: 
■ 
Consideration 
■ 
Empowering leadership 
■ 
Servant leadership 

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
453
Empowering Leadership: “I Want My Employees to Feel They Have Con-
trol over Their Work” 
Empowering leadership represents the extent to which a 
leader creates perceptions of psychological empowerment in others. Psychological 
empowerment is employees’ belief that they have control over their work. Such 
psychological empowerment is expected to drive intrinsic motivation, creativity, and 
performance.55 Let’s see how this process works.
Increasing employee psychological empowerment requires four kinds of 
behaviors—leading for (1) meaningfulness, (2) self-determination, (3) competence, and 
(4) progress. 
■ 
Leading for meaningfulness: inspiring and modeling desirable behav-
iors. Managers lead for meaningfulness by inspiring their employees and 
modeling desired behaviors. Example: Employees may be helped to iden-
tify their passions at work by the leader’s creating an exciting organiza-
tional vision that employees can connect with emotionally. Employees at 
drug maker Millennium, for example, are inspired by the company’s 
vision to cure cancer.56
■ 
Leading for self-determination: delegating meaningful tasks. Managers 
can lead for employee self-determination by delegating meaningful tasks to 
them. “Delegating is essential,” says Gail Evans, an executive vice president 
at Atlanta-based CNN. “If you refuse to let your staff handle their own proj-
ects, you’re jeopardizing their advancement—because they aren’t learning 
new skills and adding successes to their resume.”57
■ 
Leading for competence: supporting and coaching employees. It goes 
without saying that employees need to have the necessary knowledge to 
Assessing Your Task & Relationship-Oriented 
Leader Behavior 
The following survey was designed to evaluate your own 
leader behavior. Go to connect.mheducation.com and take 
Self-Assessment 14.2. When you’re done, answer the following 
questions:
1. 
Do you prefer to use task or relationship leadership? Why 
do you think this is the case?
2. 
Look at the items for the two lowest scored items for 
initiating structure and consideration and then identify 
how you can increase the extent to which you display 
both types of leadership. 
3. 
When would it be most important to display initiating 
structure and consideration? Explain your rationale. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 14.2
®
Consideration: “The Concerns & Needs of My Employees Are Highly 
Important” 
 Consideration is leader behavior that is concerned with group mem-
bers’ needs and desires and that is directed at creating mutual respect or trust. This is 
an important type of behavior to use in addition to task leadership because it promotes 
social interactions and identification with the team and leader. Considerate leader be-
havior has a moderately strong positive relationship with measures of leadership 
effectiveness.54
The most effective leaders use different blends of task behavior and consider-
ation when interacting with others. To what extent do you think you do this when 
interacting with school or work colleagues?  You can answer this question by taking 
Self-Assessment 14.2.

454 
PART 5 
Leading
Servant Leadership: “I Want to Serve My Subordinates & the Organiza-
tion, Not Myself” 
 The term servant leadership, coined by Robert Greenleaf in 
1970, reflects not only his onetime background as a management researcher for AT&T 
but also his views as a lifelong philosopher and devout Quaker.64 Servant leadership 
focuses on providing increased service to others—meeting the goals of both followers 
and the organization—rather than to oneself.
Servant leadership is not a quick-fix approach to leadership. Rather, it is a long-term, 
approach to life and work. Ten characteristics of the servant leader are shown opposite. 
(See Table 14.4.) One can hardly go wrong by trying to adopt these characteristics.
PRACTICAL ACTION
Participative Management: Empowering Employees to Handle 
Decision Making
Participatory management (PM) is predicted to increase motivation, 
innovation, and performance because it helps employees fulfill 
three basic needs: autonomy, meaningfulness of work, and in-
terpersonal contact.58 Indeed, employees themselves seem to 
want to participate more in management: In one nationwide 
survey of 2,408 workers, two-thirds expressed the desire for 
more influence or decision-making power in their jobs.59 PM 
can address these needs because it has been shown to in-
crease employee job involvement, organizational commitment, 
and creativity, and it can lower role conflict and ambiguity.60
Is PM Really Effective? Although participation has a significant 
effect on job performance and job satisfaction, that effect, unfor-
tunately, is small.61 Accordingly, PM is probably not a quick-fix 
solution for low productivity and motivation. Nonetheless, it can 
probably be effective in certain situations, assuming that manag-
ers and employees interact constructively—that is, have the kind 
of relationship that fosters cooperation and respect rather than 
competition and defensiveness.62
Factors that Can Help Make PM Work. Although participative 
management doesn’t work in all cases, it can be effective if 
certain factors are present, such as the following.63
• Top management is continually involved: Implementing 
PM must be monitored and managed by top management.
• Middle and supervisory managers are supportive: 
These managers tend to resist PM because it reduces their 
authority. Thus, it’s important to gain the support and com-
mitment of managers in these ranks.
• Employees trust managers: PM is unlikely to succeed 
when employees don’t trust management.
• Employees are ready: PM is more effective when 
employees are properly trained, prepared, and interested 
in participating.
• Employees don’t work in interdependent jobs: Interde-
pendent employees generally don’t have a broad under-
standing of the entire production process, so their PM 
contribution may actually be counterproductive.
• PM is implemented with TQM: A study of Fortune 
1000 firms during three different years found employee 
involvement was more effective when it was implemented 
as part of a broader total quality management (TQM) 
program.
perform their jobs. Accomplishing this goal involves managers’ supporting 
and coaching their employees. Assigning a challenging task will help to fuel 
workers’ intrinsic motivation, and deficiencies can be handled through train-
ing, mentoring, positive feedback, and sincere recognition. 
■ 
Leading for progress: monitoring and rewarding employees. Managers 
lead for progress by monitoring and rewarding others. We discussed how to 
do this in Chapter 12.
One technique used to empower employees is participative management (PM), 
the process of involving employees in setting goals, making decisions, solving prob-
lems, and making changes in the organization. We consider this further in the Practical 
Action box.

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
455
TABLE 14.4
Ten Characteristics 
of the Servant Leader
 1. Focus on listening.
 2. Ability to empathize with others’ feelings.
 3. Focus on healing suffering.
 4. Self-awareness of strengths and weaknesses.
 5. Use of persuasion rather than positional authority to influence others.
 6. Broad-based conceptual thinking.
 7. Ability to foresee future outcomes.
 8. Belief they are stewards of their employees and resources.
 9. Commitment to the growth of people.
 10. Drive to build community within and outside the organization.
Source: From L. C. Spears, “Introduction: Servant-Leadership and the Greenleaf Legacy,” in L. C. Spears, ed., 
Reflections on Leadership: How Robert K. Greenleaf’s Theory of Servant-Leadership Influenced Today’s Top 
Management (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1995), pp. 1–14. Reprinted with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Servant Leadership: Leaders Who Work for the Led
Who are some famous servant leaders?
A Covenant with Customers. John Donahoe, CEO of eBay, 
thinks of customers first, and employees second. He tries his best 
to deliver what customers want. For example, reports one article, 
“on trips around the world he takes along a Flip video camera and 
films interviews with eBay sellers to share their opinions with his 
staff. He has even tied managers’ compensation to customer loy-
alty, measured through regular surveys.”65
A Covenant with Employees. Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz is 
also cited as being one of the foremost practitioners of servant-
style leadership. Schultz has made sure his employees have health 
insurance and work in a positive environment, and as a result 
Starbucks has a strong brand following.66 Max De Pree, former 
chairman of furniture maker Herman Miller Inc., promoted a “cov-
enant” with his employees. Leaders, he wrote, should give em-
ployees “space so that we can both give and receive such beautiful 
things as ideas, openness, dignity, joy, healing, and inclusion.”67
YOUR CALL
Understandably, servant leadership is popular with employees. 
Can you think of situations in which this kind of leadership role 
would not be appropriate?
EXAMPLE
Employees whose manager displays the characteristics shown in Table 14.4 above 
are likely to be happier, more productive, more creative, and more willing to go above and 
beyond their customary duties.68 To see how your boss measures up as a servant leader, 
try taking Self-Assessment 14.3.
Assessing Your Boss’s Servant Leadership 
The following survey is designed to assess the extent to which 
a current or former boss displayed servant leadership. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 14.3. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Where does the boss stand? Are you surprised by the results? 
2. 
Did you like this boss? Were you satisfied with your job? 
To what extent do you think your boss’s level of servant 
leadership affected your attitudes toward the boss and 
your job? 
3. 
How can you become more of a servant leader? Explain. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 14.3
®

456 
PART 5 
Leading
Passive leadership. Do you 
really hate to get involved in 
conflict? Do you think you 
might be tempted to “manage 
by exception”—not get involved 
in solving difficult employee 
problems until you’re forced to, 
as this executive staring out the 
window seems to be doing?
Passive Leadership: The Lack of Leadership Skills
Passive leadership is a form of leadership behavior characterized by a lack of leader-
ship skills. For example, in the type of passive leadership called the management-by-
exception style, managers do not intervene until problems are brought to their attention 
or until the problems become serious enough to demand action.69
Another passive type is laissez-faire leadership, a form of “leadership” character-
ized by a general failure to take responsibility for leading. Not taking responsibility can 
hardly be considered leadership (although it often seems to be manifested by CEOs 
whose companies get in trouble, as when they say “I had no idea about the criminal 
behavior of my subordinates”). Interestingly, laissez-faire (“lay-zay fair”) leadership is 
seen more in men than women.70
Examples of laissez-faire leadership are seen in various kinds of failure—failing to 
deal with conflict, to coach employees on difficult assignments, to help set perfor-
mance goals, to give performance feedback, to deal with bullying, and so on. This 
passive leadership has a huge negative impact on employee perceptions of leaders—
outweighing their positive perceptions of contributions by initiating structure, transac-
tional, and consideration forms of leadership.71
Some Practical Implications of the Behavioral 
Approaches
Two key conclusions we may take away from the behavioral approaches are the 
following:
 1. A leader’s behavior is more important than his or her traits. It is important 
to train managers on the various forms of task and relationship leadership.
 2. There is no one best style of leadership. How effective a particular leader-
ship behavior is depends on the situation at hand. ●

Packin’ pecans. Do successful 
entrepreneurs or small-business 
managers need to be task-
oriented, relationship-oriented, 
or both? What style of 
leadership model would best 
suit a small enterprise in which 
employees work without the 
owner always being present?
14.4 Situational Approaches: Does Leadership Vary 
with the Situation?
How might effective leadership vary according to the situation at hand?
THE BIG PICTURE
Effective leadership behavior depends on the situation at hand, say believers in two contingency approaches: 
Fiedler’s contingency leadership model and House’s path–goal leadership model.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
457
Perhaps leadership is not characterized by universally important traits or behaviors. As 
we noted above, there is no one best style that will work in all situations. This is the 
point of view of proponents of the situational approach (or contingency approach) to 
leadership, who believe that effective leadership behavior depends on the situation at 
hand. That is, as situations change, different styles become appropriate.
Let’s consider two situational approaches: (1) the contingency leadership model by 
Fiedler and (2) the path–goal leadership model by House.
1. The Contingency Leadership Model: 
Fiedler’s Approach
The oldest model of the contingency approach to leadership was developed by Fred 
Fiedler and his associates in 1951.72 The contingency leadership model determines if a 
leader’s style is (1) task-oriented or (2) relationship-oriented 
and if that style is effective for the situation at hand. Fiedler’s 
work was based on 80 studies conducted over 30 years.
Two Leadership Orientations: Tasks versus Rela-
tionships 
Are you task-oriented or relationship- 
oriented? That is, are you more concerned with task 
accomplishment or with people?
To find out, you or your employees would fill out a ques-
tionnaire (known as the least preferred coworker, or LPC, 
scale), in which you think of the coworker you least enjoyed 
working with and rate him or her according to an eight-point 
scale of 16 pairs of opposite characteristics (such as 
friendly/unfriendly, tense/relaxed, efficient/inefficient). 
The higher the score, the more the relationship-oriented the 
respondent; the lower the score, the more task-oriented.
The Three Dimensions of Situational Control 
Once the leadership orientation is known, then you deter-
mine situational control—how much control and influence 
a leader has in the immediate work environment.
There are three dimensions of situational control: leader-
member relations, task structure, and position power.
■ 
Leader-member relations—“Do my subordinates 
accept me as a leader?” This dimension, the most 
important component of situational control, reflects 
the extent to which a leader has or doesn’t have the 
support, loyalty, and trust of the work group.

458 
PART 5 
Leading
Situational
Control
Situation
1
11
111
1V
V
V1
V11
V111
Leader-member
relations
Good
Good
Good
Good
Poor
Poor
Poor
Low
High
High
Low
Weak
Strong
Weak
Strong
Poor
Low
Weak
High
High
Low
Strong
Weak
Strong
Task structure
Position power
Optimal
Leadership
Style
Task-
Motivated
Leadership
Relationship-
Motivated
Leadership
Task-
Motivated
Leadership
High-Control
Situations
Moderate-Control
Situations
Low-Control
Situations
FIGURE 14.1 
Representation of Fiedler’s contingency model
Source: Adapted from F. E. Fiedler, “Situational Control and a Dynamic Theory of Leadership,” in Managerial Control 
and Organizational Democracy, ed. B. King, S. Streufert, and F. E. Fiedler (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1978), p. 114.
Which Style Is Most Effective? 
Neither leadership style is effective all the time, 
Fiedler’s research concludes, although each is right in certain situations.
■ 
When task-oriented style is best. The task-oriented style works best in either 
high-control or low-control situations.
Example of high-control situation (leader decisions produce predictable re-
sults because he or she can influence work outcomes): Suppose you were su-
pervising parking-control officers ticketing cars parked illegally in expired 
meter zones, bus zones, and the like. You have (1) high leader-member rela-
tions because your subordinates are highly supportive of you and (2) high task 
structure because their jobs are clearly defined. (3) You have high position 
control because you have complete authority to evaluate their performance and 
dole out punishment and rewards. Thus, a task-oriented style would be best.
Example of low-control situation (leader decisions can’t produce predict-
able results because he or she can’t really influence outcomes): Suppose you 
were a high school principal trying to clean up graffiti on your private-school 
campus, helped only by students you can find after school. You might have 
(1) low leader-member relations because many people might not see the need 
■ 
Task structure—“Do my subordinates perform unambiguous, easily un-
derstood tasks?” This dimension refers to the extent to which tasks are rou-
tine, unambiguous, and easily understood. The more structured the jobs, the 
more influence a leader has.
■ 
Position power—“Do I have power to reward and punish?” This dimen-
sion refers to how much power a leader has to make work assignments and 
reward and punish. More power equals more control and influence.
For each dimension, the amount of control can be high—the leader’s decisions will 
produce predictable results because he or she has the ability to influence work outcomes. 
Or it can be low—he or she doesn’t have that kind of predictability or influence. By com-
bining the three different dimensions with different high/low ratings, we have eight differ-
ent leadership situations. These are represented in the diagram below. (See Figure 14.1.)

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
459
for the goal. (2) The task structure might also be low because people might see 
many different ways to achieve the goal. And (3) your position power would be 
low because the committee is voluntary and people are free to leave. In this low-
control situation, a task-oriented style would also be best.
■ 
When relationship-oriented style is best. The relationship-oriented style 
works best in situations of moderate control.
Example: Suppose you were working in a government job supervising a 
group of firefighters fighting wildfires. You might have (1) low leader-member 
relations if you were promoted over others in the group but (2) high task 
structure, because the job is fairly well defined. (3) You might have low posi-
tion power, because the rigidity of the civil-service job prohibits you from 
doing much in the way of rewarding and punishing. Thus, in this moderate-
control situation, relationship-oriented leadership would be most effective.
What do you do if your leadership orientation does not match the situation? Then, 
says Fiedler, it’s better to try to move leaders into suitable situations rather than try to 
alter their personalities to fit the situations.73
2. The Path–Goal Leadership Model: House’s Approach
A second situational approach, advanced by Robert House in the 1970s and revised 
by him in 1996, is the path–goal leadership model, which holds that the effective 
leader makes available to followers desirable rewards in the workplace and increases 
their motivation by clarifying the paths, or behavior, that will help them achieve those 
goals and providing them with support. A successful leader thus helps followers by ty-
ing meaningful rewards to goal accomplishment, reducing barriers, and providing sup-
port, so as to increase “the number and kinds of personal payoffs to subordinates for 
work-goal attainment.”74
Numerous studies testing various predictions from House’s original path–goal the-
ory provided mixed results.75 As a consequence, he proposed a new model, a graphical 
version of which is shown below. (See Figure 14.2.)
FIGURE 14.2
General representation 
of House’s revised path–goal 
theory
1  
. . . influenced by the two contingency
factors of  2  employee characteristics
and  3  environmental factors . . .
. . . in determining  4  the most
effective leadership.
3  Environmental factors
• Task structure
• Work group dynamics
• Locus of control
• Task ability
• Need for achievement
• Experience
• Need for path–goal clarity
2  Employee
characteristics
• Path–goal clarifying
• Achievement-oriented
• Work facilitation
• Supportive
• Interaction facilitation
• Group-oriented
 decision making
• Representation &
 networking
• Value-based
• Employee motivation
• Employee satisfaction
• Employee performance
• Leader acceptance
• Interaction facilitation
• Work-unit performance
4  Leadership
effectiveness
1   Leader behaviors
Leader behaviors are . . .

460 
PART 5 
Leading
What Determines Leadership Effectiveness: Employee Characteristics & 
Environmental Factors Affect Leader Behavior 
As the drawing indicates, 
two contingency factors, or variables—employee characteristics and environmental 
factors—cause some leadership behaviors to be more effective than others.
■ 
Employee characteristics. Five employee characteristics are locus of control 
(described in Chapter 11), task ability, need for achievement, experience, and 
need for path–goal clarity.
■ 
Environmental factors. Two environmental factors are task structure (inde-
pendent versus interdependent tasks) and work group dynamics.
■ 
Leader behaviors. Originally House proposed that there were four leader 
behaviors, or leadership styles—directive (“Here’s what’s expected of you 
and here’s how to do it”), supportive (“I want things to be pleasant, since 
 everyone’s about equal here”), participative (“I want your suggestions in order 
to help me make decisions”), and achievement-oriented (“I’m confident you 
can accomplish the following great things”). The revised theory expands the 
number of leader behaviors from four to eight. (See Table 14.5, below.)
TABLE 14.5 
Eight Leadership Styles of the Revised Path–Goal Theory
Source: Adapted from R. J. House, “Path–Goal Theory of Leadership: Lessons, Legacy, and a Reformulated Theory,” Leadership Quarterly, Autumn 1996, 
pp. 323–352.
STYLE OF LEADER BEHAVIORS 
DESCRIPTION OF BEHAVIOR TOWARD EMPLOYEES
 1. Path–goal clarifying  
Clarify performance goals. Provide guidance on how employees can complete 
(“Here’s what’s expected of  
tasks. Clarify performance standards and expectations. Use positive and negative 
you and here’s how to do it.”) 
rewards contingent on performance.
 2. Achievement oriented 
Set challenging goals. Emphasize excellence. Demonstrate confidence in 
(“I’m confident you can accomplish 
employee abilities.
the following great things.”)
 3. Work facilitation 
Plan, schedule, organize, and coordinate work. Provide mentoring, coaching, counseling,
(“Here’s the goal, and here’s what I  
and feedback to assist employees in developing their skills. Eliminate roadblocks.
can do to help you achieve it.”) 
Provide resources. Empower employees to take actions and make decisions.
 4. Supportive 
Treat as equals. Show concern for well-being and needs. Be friendly and approachable.
(“I want things to be pleasant, since 
everyone’s about equal here.”)
 5. Interaction facilitation 
Emphasize collaboration and teamwork. Encourage close employee relationships and
(“Let’s see how we can all work  
sharing of minority opinions. Facilitate communication, resolve disputes.
together to accomplish our goals.”)
 6. Group-oriented decision making  
Pose problems rather than solutions to work group. Encourage members to participate
(“I want your suggestions in order  
in decision making. Provide necessary information to the group for analysis. Involve
to help me make decisions.”) 
knowledgeable employees in decision making.
 7. Representation & networking  
Present work group in positive light to others. Maintain positive relationships with
(“I’ve got a great bunch of people 
influential others. Participate in organization-wide social functions and ceremonies. Do
working for me whom you’ll  
unconditional favors for others.
probably want to meet.”)
 8. Value-based 
Establish a vision, display passion for it, and support its accomplishment. Communicate
(“We’re destined to accomplish  
high performance expectations and confidence in others’ abilities to meet their goals.
great things.”) 
Give frequent positive feedback. Demonstrate self-confidence.

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
461
Thus, for example, employees with an internal locus of control are more likely to 
prefer achievement-oriented leadership or group-oriented decision making (formerly 
participative) leadership because they believe they have control over the work environ-
ment. The same is true for employees with high task ability and experience.
Employees with an external locus of control, however, tend to view the environment as 
uncontrollable, so they prefer the structure provided by supportive or path–goal clarifying 
(formerly directive) leadership. The same is probably true of inexperienced employees.
Besides expanding the styles of leader behavior from four to eight, House’s revision 
of his theory also puts more emphasis on the need for leaders to foster intrinsic motiva-
tion through empowerment. Finally, his revised theory stresses the concept of shared 
leadership, the idea that employees do not have to be supervisors or managers to 
engage in leader behavior but rather may share leadership among all employees of the 
organization.
Does the Revised Path–Goal Theory Work? 
There have not been enough di-
rect tests of House’s revised path–goal theory using appropriate research methods and 
statistical procedures to draw overall conclusions. Research on transformational lead-
ership, however, which is discussed in Section 14.5, is supportive of the revised 
model.76
Although further research is needed on the new model, it offers three important 
implications for managers:77
■ 
Use more than one leadership style. Effective leaders possess and use more 
than one style of leadership. Thus, you are encouraged to study the eight 
styles offered in path–goal theory so that you can try new leader behaviors 
when a situation calls for them.
■ 
Help employees achieve their goals. Leaders should guide and coach em-
ployees in achieving their goals by clarifying the path and removing obstacles 
to accomplishing them. 
■ 
Modify leadership style to fit employee and task characteristics. A small set 
of employee characteristics (ability, experience, and need for independence) 
and environmental factors (task characteristics of autonomy, variety, and sig-
nificance) are relevant contingency factors, and managers should modify their 
leadership style to fit them. ●
Co-leaders. David Byttow (left) 
and Chrys Bader are co-founders 
of San Francisco–based Secret, 
an app that allows people to 
share messages anonymously 
with their friends. Which of the 
eight path-goal leadership 
styles would you expect to find 
dominating this organization?

14.5 The Uses of Transformational Leadership
What does it take to truly inspire people to perform beyond their normal levels?
THE BIG PICTURE
Four key behaviors of transformational leaders in affecting employees are they inspire motivation, inspire 
trust, encourage excellence, and stimulate them intellectually.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
We have considered the major traditional approaches to understanding leadership—the 
trait, behavioral, and situational approaches. But newer approaches seem to offer 
something more by trying to determine what factors inspire and motivate people to 
perform beyond their normal levels.
One recent approach proposed by Bernard Bass and Bruce Avolio, known as 
full-range leadership, suggests that leadership behavior varies along a full range of 
leadership styles, from passive (laissez-faire) “leadership” at one extreme, through 
transactional leadership, to transformational leadership at the other extreme.78 As 
we stated, passive leadership is not leadership, but transactional and transforma-
tional leadership behaviors are both positive aspects of being a good leader.79 We 
considered transactional leadership in Section 14.3. Here let’s consider transforma-
tional leadership.
Transformational Leaders
Transformational leadership transforms employees to pursue organizational goals 
over self-interests. Transformational leaders, in one description, “engender trust, 
seek to develop leadership in others, exhibit self-sacrifice, and serve as moral 
agents, focusing themselves and followers on objectives that transcend the more 
immediate needs of the work group.”80 Whereas transactional leaders try to get 
people to do ordinary things, transformational leaders encourage their people to 
do exceptional things—significantly higher levels of intrinsic motivation, trust, 
commitment, and loyalty—that can produce significant organizational change 
and results.
Transformational leaders are influenced by two factors:
■ 
Individual characteristics. The personalities of such leaders tend to be more 
extroverted, agreeable, proactive, and open to change than nontransforma-
tional leaders. (Female leaders tend to use transformational leadership more 
than male leaders do.81)
■ 
Organizational culture. Adaptive, flexible organizational cultures are more 
likely than are rigid, bureaucratic cultures to foster transformational leadership.
The Best Leaders Are Both Transactional 
& Transformational
It’s important to note that transactional leadership is an essential prerequisite to effec-
tive leadership, and the best leaders learn to display both transactional and transforma-
tional styles of leadership to some degree. Indeed, research suggests that 
transformational leadership leads to superior performance when it “augments” or adds 
to transactional leadership.82
462 
PART 5 
Leading

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
463
Four Key Behaviors of Transformational Leaders
Whereas transactional leaders are dispassionate, transformational leaders excite pas-
sion, inspiring and empowering people to look beyond their own interests to the inter-
ests of the organization. They appeal to their followers’ self-concepts—their values 
and personal identity—to create changes in their goals, values, needs, beliefs, and 
aspirations.
Transformational leaders have four key kinds of behavior that affect followers.88
1. Inspirational Motivation: “Let Me Share a Vision that Transcends Us 
All” 
Transformational leaders have charisma (“kar-riz-muh”), a form of interpersonal 
attraction that inspires acceptance and support. At one time, charismatic leadership—
which was assumed to be an individual inspirational and motivational characteristic of 
particular leaders, much like other trait-theory characteristics—was viewed as a cate-
gory of its own, but now it is considered part of transformational leadership.89 Some-
one with charisma, then, is presumed to be more able to persuade and influence people 
than someone without charisma.90
A transformational leader inspires motivation by offering an agenda, a grand de-
sign, an ultimate goal—in short, a vision, “a realistic, credible, attractive future” for 
the organization, as leadership expert Burt Nanus calls it. The right vision unleashes 
human potential, says Nanus, because it serves as a beacon of hope and common pur-
pose. It does so by attracting commitment, energizing workers, creating meaning in 
their lives, establishing a standard of excellence, promoting high ideals, and bridging 
the divide between the organization’s problems and its goals and aspirations.91
Examples: Civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. had a vision—a “dream,” as 
he put it—of racial equality. Candy Lightner, founder of Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving, had a vision of getting rid of alcohol-related car crashes. Apple Computer’s 
Steve Jobs had a vision of developing an “insanely great” desktop computer. Indra 
Nooyi wants to develop healthier foods, while still making a profit. “Companies to-
day are bigger than many economies,” she says. “If companies don’t do [responsible] 
things, who is going to?”92
The Superior Performance of Both a Transactional & Transformational 
Leader: PepsiCo’s CEO Indra Nooyi
For PepsiCo CEO Nooyi, one of her “most stunning talents is the 
art of suasion [persuasion],” says one writer. “She can rouse an 
audience and rally them around something as mind-numbing 
as a new companywide software installation. Her . . . motto, 
‘Performance With Purpose,’ is both a means of ‘herding the 
organization’ and of presenting PepsiCo globally.”83
The Nooyi Vision. Most important is her vision for moving the 
company beyond what it calls “fun for you foods” (soda pop and 
salty snacks) and into “better for you” foods, and into tackling is-
sues like obesity and sustainability.84
Long Term: Healthier Food. Nooyi, says Howard Schultz, CEO of 
Starbucks, which has a joint-venture partnership with PepsiCo, 
was “way ahead of her competitors in moving the company to-
ward healthier products. She pushed for PepsiCo to buy Quaker 
Oats and Tropicana, and . . . PepsiCo removed trans fats from its 
products well before most other companies did.”85
Short Term: Stay Profitable. However, in remaking PepsiCo 
over the long term so that it sells less fat and sugar, Nooyi has 
also run up against the other goal for a public company—short-term 
results, or “maximizing shareholder value,” where the company 
briefly fell behind. Nooyi must be careful not to stray too far back 
to being driven by short-term results, especially at a time when 
soft drink sales have been in a long-term slide.86 So far, however, 
the company has stayed profitable.87
YOUR CALL
Do you think you might have what it takes to be both a transac-
tional and transformational leader? What’s the evidence?
EXAMPLE

464 
PART 5 
Leading
Sir Branson. One of today’s most flamboyant 
businessmen, Britain’s Richard Branson is shown 
here announcing new service for his Virgin Atlantic 
airline. Branson left school at 16 to start a 1960s 
counterculture magazine. By 2006, he was heading a 
$5-billion-plus empire—the Virgin Group—that 
includes airlines, entertainment companies, car 
dealerships, railroads, bridal gowns, soft drinks, 
financial services, and a space tourism company. 
Knighted in 2000—which entitles him to be called 
“Sir”—Branson, who is dyslexic, says he is not for 
scrutinizing spreadsheets and plotting strategies 
based on estimates of market share. “In the end,” 
he says, “it is your own gut and your own experience 
of running businesses.” Do you think charismatic 
business leaders like Sir Branson are able to be 
more successful than more conventional and 
conservative managers?
2. Idealized Influence: “We Are Here to Do the Right Thing” 
 Transforma-
tional leaders are able to inspire trust in their followers because they express their in-
tegrity by being consistent, single-minded, and persistent in pursuit of their goal. Not 
only do they display high ethical standards and act as models of desirable values, but 
they are also able to make sacrifices for the good of the group.93
Example: Nooyi’s goal of reinventing PepsiCo’s product line to concentrate on more 
nutritional drinks and snacks (and double revenue to $30 billion by 2020) is ambitious, but 
it actually is in accord with the times. Americans are paying more attention to healthy eating, 
especially because of the U.S. obesity problem, and more consumers—and companies—are 
focusing on corporate responsibility and issues of greenness and sustainability.94
3. Individualized Consideration: “You Have the Opportunity Here to Grow 
& Excel” 
 Transformational leaders don’t just express concern for subordinates’ 
well-being. They actively encourage them to grow and to excel by giving them chal-
lenging work, more responsibility, empowerment, and one-on-one mentoring.
Example: When Indra Nooyi was chosen over her friend Mike White to lead PepsiCo, 
she went to great lengths to try to keep him on. “I treat Mike as my partner,” she said. “He 
could easily have been CEO.” At meetings, she always made sure he was seated at her 
right.95 (Even so, in 2010 he left to become CEO of DirectTV.96)
4. Intellectual Stimulation: “Let Me Describe the Great Challenges We 
Can Conquer Together” 
 These leaders are gifted at communicating the organi-
zation’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats so that subordinates develop 
a new sense of purpose. Employees become less apt to view problems as insurmount-
able or “that’s not my department.” Instead they learn to view them as personal chal-
lenges that they are responsible for overcoming, to question the status quo, and to seek 
creative solutions.
Example: Nooyi seeks to have “a positive impact on the world,” as she puts it. How-
ever, in 2012, with shareholders complaining about PepsiCo’s slipping share price, she 
had to pull back somewhat from emphasizing nutritious products to boosting the old 
Pepsi brand. She compared the change to a racecar taking a pit stop as the company 
sought to regain momentum in its soft drink business. Still, as one commentator 
pointed out, “She needs to soothe investors, but she shouldn’t surrender to them.” He 

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
465
endorsed Nooyi’s moves to achieve long-term gains—“that is, if Nooyi can fend off 
those looking for the financial equivalent of a sugar rush.”97
Implications of Transformational Leadership 
for Managers
The research shows that transformational leadership yields several positive results. For ex-
ample, it is positively associated with (1) measures of organizational effectiveness;98 (2) mea-
sures of leadership effectiveness and employee job satisfaction;99 (3) more employee 
identification with their leaders and with their immediate work groups;100 (4) commitment to 
organizational change; 101 and (5) higher levels of intrinsic motivation, group cohesion, work 
engagement, setting of goals consistent with those of the leader, and proactive behavior.102
Besides the fact that, as we mentioned, the best leaders are both transactional and 
transformational, there are three important implications of transformational leadership 
for managers, as follows.
1. It Can Improve Results for Both Individuals & Groups 
You can use 
the four types of transformational behavior just described to improve results for 
individuals—such as job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and performance. You 
can also use them to improve outcomes for groups—an important matter in today’s orga-
nization, where people tend not to work in isolation but in collaboration with others.
2. It Can Be Used to Train Employees at Any Level 
Not just top managers 
but employees at any level can be trained to be more transactional and transforma-
tional.103 This kind of leadership training among employees should be based on an 
overall corporate philosophy that constitutes the foundation of leadership 
development.
3. It Requires Ethical Leaders 
For a long time, top managers were assumed to 
be ethical. But in recent years, that notion has been disabused by news stories about 
scurrilous leaders ranging from the CEOs of Enron to pyramid schemer Bernard 
Madoff to failed commercial bankers paying themselves huge bonuses even as they 
accepted taxpayer bailouts and resisted regulation.104 With such high-profile revela-
tions, the need for ethical leadership has become more apparent. Without honesty and 
trust, even transformational leaders lose credibility—not only with employees but also 
with investors, customers, and the public.105
To better ensure positive results from transformational leadership, top managers 
should follow the practices shown below. (See Table 14.6.) ●
TABLE 14.6
The Ethical Things Top 
Managers Should Do to Be 
Effective Transformational 
Leaders
Source: These recommendations were derived from J. M. Howell and B. J. Avolio, “The Ethics of Charismatic 
Leadership: Submission or Liberation?” The Executive, May 1992, pp. 43–54.
• 
Employ a code of ethics. The company should create and enforce a clearly stated code of ethics.
• 
Choose the right people. Recruit, select, and promote people who display ethical behavior.
• 
Make performance expectations reflect employee treatment. Develop performance expectations 
around the treatment of employees; these expectations can be assessed in the performance-
appraisal process.
• 
Emphasize value of diversity. Train employees to value diversity.
• 
Reward high moral conduct. Identify, reward, and publicly praise employees who exemplify high 
moral conduct.

14.6 Three Additional Perspectives
If there are many ways to be a leader, which one would describe me best?
THE BIG PICTURE
Two other kinds of leadership are the leader–member exchange model, which emphasizes that leaders have 
different sorts of relationships with different subordinates, and e-leadership, which involves leader interactions 
with others via information technology. A third perspective is the role of followers in the leadership process.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Two additional kinds of leadership deserve discussion: (1) leader–member exchange 
(LMX) model of leadership; and (2) e-leadership.
Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Leadership: Having 
Different Relationships with Different Subordinates
Proposed by George Graen and Fred Dansereau, the leader–member exchange (LMX) 
model of leadership emphasizes that leaders have different sorts of relationships with 
different subordinates.106 Unlike other models we’ve described, which focus on the be-
haviors or traits of leaders or followers, the LMX model looks at the quality of relation-
ships between managers and subordinates. Also, unlike other models, which presuppose 
stable relationships between leaders and followers, the LMX model assumes each man-
ager-subordinate relationship is unique.
In-Group Exchange versus Out-Group Exchange 
The unique relationship, 
which supposedly results from the leader’s attempt to delegate and assign work roles, 
can produce two types of leader–member exchange interactions.107
■ 
In-group exchange: trust and respect. In the in-group exchange, the rela-
tionship between leader and follower becomes a partnership characterized by 
mutual trust, respect and liking, and a sense of common fates. Subordinates 
may receive special assignments and may also receive special privileges.
■ 
Out-group exchange: lack of trust and respect. In the out-group exchange, 
leaders are characterized as overseers who fail to create a sense of mutual 
trust, respect, or common fate. Subordinates receive less of the manager’s 
time and attention than those in in-group exchange relationships.
What type of exchange do you have with your manager? The quality of the relationship 
between you and your boss matters. Not only does it predict your job satisfaction and 
happiness, but it also is related to turnover. You can assess the quality of the relationship 
with a current or former boss by completing Self-Assessment 14.4.
466 
PART 5 
Leading
Assessing Your Leader–Member Exchange
The following survey was designed to assess the quality of 
your leader–member exchange. Go to connect.mheducation
.com and take Self-Assessment 14.4. When you’re done, 
answer the following questions:
1. 
Where do you stand on the different dimensions underlying 
leader–member exchange? Are you surprised by the results? 
2. 
Do you think the quality of your leader–member 
exchange is impacting your job satisfaction or 
performance? Explain. 
3. 
Based on your survey scores, how might you improve 
the quality of your relationship with your boss? 
Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 14.4
®

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
467
Is the LMX Model Useful? 
It is not clear why a leader selects particular subordi-
nates to be part of the in-group, but presumably the choice is made for reasons of 
compatibility and competence. Certainly, however, a positive (that is, in-group) 
leader–member exchange is positively associated with goal commitment, trust be-
tween managers and employees, work climate, satisfaction with leadership, and—
important to any employer—job performance and job satisfaction.108 There is also a 
moderately strong positive relationship between LMX and organizational citizenship 
behaviors.109
E-Leadership: Managing for Global Networks
The Internet and other forms of advanced information technology have led to new pos-
sible ways for interacting within and between organizations (e-business) and with cus-
tomers and suppliers (e-commerce). Leadership within the context of this electronic 
technology, called e-leadership, can involve one-to-one, one-to-many, within-group and 
between-group and collective interactions via information technology.110 E-leadership 
means having to deal with quite a number of responsibilities, such as developing busi-
ness opportunities through cooperative relationships, restructuring a company into 
global networks, decentralizing the company’s organization, and energizing the staff.111
E-leaders, says one writer, “have a global mind-set that recognizes that the Internet 
is opening new markets and recharging existing ones. They don’t bother fighting mere 
battles with competitors because they’re too busy creating businesses that will sur-
round and destroy them.”112 Harvard Business School professor D. Quinn Mills, author 
of E-Leadership, suggests that individual companies will be replaced by much 
broader global networks that a single CEO will not be able to manage. Thus, while 
20th-century management emphasized competition, he says, future organizations will 
run on knowledge sharing and open exchange.113
Followers: What Do They Want, How Can They Help?
Is the quality of leadership dependent on the qualities of the followers being led? So it 
seems. Leaders and followers need each other, and the quality of the relationship de-
termines how we behave as followers.114
What Do Followers Want in Their Leaders? 
Research shows that followers 
seek and admire leaders who create feelings of . . .
■ 
Significance. Such leaders make followers feel that what they do at work is 
important and meaningful.
■ 
Community. These leaders create a sense of unity that encourages followers 
to treat others with respect and to work together in pursuit of organizational 
goals.
■ 
Excitement. The leaders make people feel energetic and engaged at work.115 
What Do Leaders Want in Their Followers? 
 Followers vary, of course, in 
their level of compliance with a leader, with helpers (most compliant), showing defer-
ence to their leaders, independents (less compliant) distancing themselves, and rebels 
(least compliant) showing divergence.116
Leaders clearly benefit from having helpers (and, to some extent, independents). 
They want followers who are productive, reliable, honest, cooperative, proactive, and 
flexible. They do not want followers who are reluctant to take the lead on projects, fail 
to generate ideas, are unwilling to collaborate, withhold information, provide inaccu-
rate feedback, or hide the truth.117
We give some suggestions on how to be a better follower—and enhance your own 
career prospects—in the Practical Action box opposite. ●

468 
PART 5 
Leading
PRACTICAL ACTION
How to Be a Great Follower: Benefiting 
Your Boss—& Yourself
“We degrade the very idea of followers—lemmings!—yet the 
world needs people who can follow intelligently,” says Dress 
for Success founder Nancy Lublin. “The key word is ‘intelli-
gently.’ Good followers ask good questions. They probe their 
leaders. They crunch the numbers to ensure that their visionary 
boss’s gorgeous plans actually works.”118
How do you become an intelligent follower? Four suggested 
steps:119
1. Learn about Your Boss
It’s critical you understand your boss—interpersonal style, 
leadership style, pressures, goals, expectations, and strengths 
and weaknesses. To discover these, you might try asking him 
or her some of the following questions.120
 1. How can I help you?
 2. How do you want me to communicate with you—e-mail, 
phone, in person?
 3. When do you like to be approached with questions, and 
are some situations (such as social occasions) off-limits?
 4. What is your approach toward giving feedback?
 5. Are there attitudes or behaviors you won’t tolerate?
 6. What is your most effective way of working?
2. Learn about Yourself
Do some self-analysis. Make an attempt to understand your own 
needs, expectations, goals, style, and strengths and weaknesses.
3. Analyze Your Differences
Does your boss hate small talk, work late hours, run disorga-
nized meetings, and expect you to read his or her mind—
whereas none of these characteristics apply to you? Do a “gap 
analysis” to see where the two of you differ.
4. Try to Adjust to the Boss’s Style, While Building on 
Your Mutual Strengths 
Naturally you will have to adapt your work style to the boss’s 
style rather than the other way around (after all, he or she is 
the boss). But based on your analysis in Step 3, you’re in a po-
sition to see how your strengths can help cover your boss’s 
weaknesses. For instance, if your manager is pushed for time, 
as most managers are, and so tends to be a bit scattered, then 
if you’re an organized type you can help by preparing well-
thought-out agendas for meetings. You can also be respectful 
of the boss’s time when you drop in to have a question 
answered.
YOUR CALL
Although it’s always in your and the leader’s best interest if you 
become an “intelligent follower,” we recognize that sometimes 
the two of you may differ so completely in habits, dislikes, and 
so on that you may simply have to look for opportunities out-
side your present work situation. Do you think you’ve been a 
good follower in past jobs?

behavioral leadership 
approaches 451
charisma 463
charismatic leadership 463
coercive power 445
consideration 453
contingency leadership model 457
e-leadership 467
empowering leadership 453
expert power 445
full-range leadership 462
initiating-structure leadership 452
laissez-faire leadership 456
leader–member exchange (LMX) 
model of leadership 466
leadership 442
legitimate power 445
Machiavellianism 448
managerial leadership 442
narcissism 448
participative management 454
passive leadership 456
path–goal leadership model 459
personalized power 445
psychological empowerment 453
psychopathy 449
referent power 445
relationship-oriented 
leadership 452
reward power 445
servant leadership 454
situational approach 457
socialized power 445
task-oriented leadership 
behaviors 451
trait approaches to leadership 448
transactional leadership 452
transformational leadership 462
Key Terms Used in This Chapter
14.1 The Nature of Leadership: Wielding 
Influence
• Leadership is the ability to influence 
employees to voluntarily pursue 
organizational goals. 
• Being a manager and being a leader are not 
the same. Management is about coping with 
complexity, whereas leadership is about 
coping with change. Companies manage 
complexity by planning and budgeting, 
organizing and staffing, and controlling and 
problem solving. Leadership copes with 
change by setting a direction, aligning 
people to accomplish an agenda, and 
motivating and inspiring people.
• To understand leadership, we must 
understand authority and power. Authority is 
the right to perform or command; it comes 
with the manager’s job. Power is the extent to 
which a person is able to influence others so 
they respond to orders. People may pursue 
personalized power, power directed at helping 
oneself, or, better, they may pursue socialized 
power, power directed at helping others.
• Within an organization there are typically five 
sources of power leaders may draw on; all 
managers have the first three. (1) Legitimate 
power is power that results from managers’ 
formal positions within the organization. 
(2) Reward power is power that results 
from managers’ authority to reward their 
subordinates. (3) Coercive power results 
from managers’ authority to punish their 
subordinates. (4) Expert power is power 
resulting from one’s specialized information 
or expertise. (5) Referent power is power 
deriving from one’s personal attraction.
• There are nine influence tactics for trying to 
get others to do something you want, 
ranging from most used to least used tactics 
as follows: rational persuasion, inspirational 
appeals, consultation, ingratiating tactics, 
personal appeals, exchange tactics, 
coalition tactics, pressure tactics, and 
legitimating tactics.
• Four principal approaches or perspectives 
on leadership, as discussed in the rest of 
the chapter, are (1) trait, (2) behavioral, 
(3) situational, and (4) transformational.
14.2 Trait Approaches: Do Leaders Have 
Distinctive Personality 
Characteristics?
• Trait approaches to leadership attempt to 
identify distinctive characteristics that account 
for the effectiveness of leaders. We describe 
(1) positive task-oriented traits and positive/
negative interpersonal attributes (narcissism, 
Machiavellianism, and psychopathy), and 
(2) some results of gender studies. 
• Four positive task-oriented traits are 
(1) intelligence, (2) consciousness, openness 
to experience, and (4) emotional stability. These 
traits in turn can be expanded into a list of 
both positive and negative interpersonal 
attributes often found in leaders. Among the 
positive attributes are extraversion, 
agreeableness, and communication skills. 
Among the negative attributes are narcissism, 
Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. 
Key Points
 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
469

470 
PART 5 
Leading
• Women may rate higher than men do on 
producing high-quality work, goal setting, 
mentoring employees, and other measures. 
Women excel in such traits as teamwork and 
partnering, being more collaborative, seeking 
less personal glory, being motivated less by 
self-interest than company interest, being 
more stable, and being less turf-conscious. 
14.3 Behavioral Approaches: Do Leaders 
Show Distinctive Patterns of 
Behavior?
• Behavioral leadership approaches try to 
determine the unique behaviors displayed 
by effective leaders. Four categories are 
task-oriented behavior, relationship-oriented 
behavior, passive behavior, and 
transformational behavior (discussed in 
Section 14.5). 
• Task-oriented behaviors are those that ensure 
that people, equipment, and other resources 
are used in an efficient way to accomplish the 
mission of a group or organization. Two types 
of task-oriented behaviors are (1) initiating-
structure leadership, leader behavior that 
organizes and defines what employers 
should be doing to maximize output, and 
(2) transactional leadership, which focuses 
on clarifying employees’ roles and task 
requirements and providing rewards and 
punishments contingent on performance.
• Relationship-oriented leadership is primarily 
concerned with the leader’s interaction 
with his or her people. There are three 
kinds of relationship-oriented behaviors: 
(1) consideration, (2) empowering leadership, 
and (3) servant leadership.
• Consideration is leader behavior that is 
concerned with group members’ needs and 
desires and that is directed at creating 
mutual respect or trust. 
• Empowering leadership represents the extent 
to which a leader creates perceptions of 
psychological empowerment in others. 
Psychological empowerment is employees’ 
belief that they have control over their work. 
Increasing employee psychological 
empowerment requires four kinds of 
behaviors—leading for (a) meaningfulness, 
(b) self-determination, (c) competence, and 
(d) progress. Leading for meaningfulness is 
inspiring and modeling desirable behaviors. 
Leading for self-determination is delegating 
of meaningful tasks. Leading for competence 
is supporting and coaching employees. 
Leading for progress is monitoring and 
rewarding employees. One technique used 
to empower employees is participative 
management (PM), the process of involving 
employees in setting goals, making 
decisions, solving problems, and making 
changes in the organization. 
• Servant leadership focuses on providing 
increased service to others—meeting the 
goals of both followers and the 
organization—rather than to oneself. 
• Passive leadership is a form of leadership 
behavior characterized by a lack of 
leadership skills. One type of passive 
leadership is laissez-faire leadership, a form 
of “leadership” characterized by a general 
failure to take responsibility for leading.
• Two conclusions that may be drawn from 
behavioral approaches are that (1) a leader’s 
behavior is more important than his or her 
traits and (2) there is no one best style 
of leadership. 
14.4 Situational Approaches: Should 
Leadership Vary with the Situation?
• Proponents of the situational approach (or 
contingency approach) to leadership believe 
that effective leadership behavior depends 
on the situation at hand—that as situations 
change, different styles become effective. 
Two contingency approaches are described: 
the Fiedler contingency leadership model 
and the path–goal leadership model.
• The Fiedler contingency leadership model 
determines if a leader’s style is task-oriented 
or relationship-oriented and if that style is 
effective for the situation at hand. Once it is 
determined whether a leader is more 
oriented toward tasks or toward people, then 
it’s necessary to determine how much 
control and influence a leader has in the 
immediate work environment. 
• The three dimensions of situational control are 
leader–member relations, which reflect the 
extent to which a leader has the support of the 
work group; the task structure, which reflects 
the extent to which tasks are routine and easily 
understood; and position power, which reflects 
how much power a leader has to reward and 
punish and make work assignments.
• For each dimension, the leader’s control may 
be high or low. A task-oriented style has 
been found to work best in either high-
control or low-control situations; the 
relationship-oriented style is best in 
situations of moderate control.
• The House path–goal leadership model, in its 
revised form, holds that the effective leader 
clarifies paths through which subordinates can 
achieve goals and provides them with support. 
Two variables, employee characteristics and 
environmental factors, cause one or more 
leadership behaviors—which House expanded 
to eight from his original four—to be more 
effective than others.

Leadership Lessons from Sir Alex Ferguson
Sir Alex Ferguson was the manager for Manchester 
United for 26 years. Manchester United is an English 
football (soccer) club that is one of the most successful 
sports franchises in history. As manager of that club, 
Ferguson won 13 English titles as well as 25 addi-
tional domestic and international titles. This case is 
based on an interview he did for the Harvard Business 
Review. Consider the seven leadership lessons and 
how they might apply to businesses in general. 
Management in Action
 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
471
14.5 The Uses of Transformational 
Leadership
• Full-range leadership describes leadership 
along a range of styles (from passive to 
transactional to transformational), with the 
most effective being transactional/
transformational leaders. 
• Transformational leadership transforms 
employees to pursue goals over self-
interests. Transformational leaders are 
influenced by two factors: (1) Their 
personalities tend to be more extroverted, 
agreeable, and proactive. (2) Organizational 
cultures are more apt to be adaptive 
and flexible.
• The best leaders are both transactional and 
transformational. Four key behaviors of 
transformational leaders in affecting 
employees are they inspire motivation, 
inspire trust, encourage excellence, and 
stimulate them intellectually.
• Transformational leadership has three 
implications. (1) It can improve results for 
both individuals and groups. (2) It can be 
used to train employees at any level. 
(3) It can be used by both ethical or 
unethical leaders.
14.6 Three Additional Perspectives
• Two additional kinds of leadership are 
(1) leader–membership exchange model, 
and (2) e-leadership.
• The leader–member exchange (LMX) model 
of leadership emphasizes that leaders have 
different sorts of relationships with different 
subordinates. 
• E-leadership involves leader interactions with 
others via the Internet and other forms of 
advanced information technology, which 
have made possible new ways for interacting 
within and between organizations 
(e-business) and with customers and 
suppliers (e-commerce). E-leadership can 
involve one-to-one, one-to-many, within-
group and between-group, and collective 
interactions via information technology.
• Whatever their type, leaders need followers 
who vary in compliance from helpers to 
independents to rebels. Leaders want 
followers who are productive, reliable, honest, 
cooperative, proactive, and flexible. They do 
not want followers who are reluctant to take 
the lead on projects, fail to generate ideas, are 
unwilling to collaborate, withhold information, 
provide inaccurate feedback, or hide the truth.
 1. What is the difference between being a manager and 
being a leader?
 2. What are five sources of power?
 3. In brief, what are five approaches to leadership 
described in this chapter?
 4. What are some positive task-oriented traits and 
positive/negative interpersonal attributes?
 5. Explain the two types of task-oriented behavior.
 6. Describe the three types of relationship-oriented 
behaviors.
 7. Briefly discuss the two types of situational 
leadership approaches.
 8. What are key constituents of transformational 
leadership?
 9. Explain how the leader–member exchange (LMX) 
model works.
 10. What is e-leadership?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?

472 
PART 5 
Leading
Start with the Foundation
From the moment I got to Manchester United, I 
thought of only one thing: building a football club. I 
wanted to build right from the bottom. That was in 
order to create fluency and a continuity of supply to 
the first team. With this approach, the players all grow 
up together, producing a bond that, in turn, creates a 
spirit.
When I arrived, only one player on the first 
team was under 24. Can you imagine that, for a 
club like Manchester United? I knew that a focus 
on youth would fit the club’s history, and my ear-
lier coaching experience told me that winning 
with young players could be done and that I was 
good at working with them. So I had the confi-
dence and conviction that if United was going to 
mean anything again, rebuilding the youth struc-
ture was crucial. You could say it was brave, but 
fortune favors the brave. . . . 
I always take great pride in seeing younger play-
ers develop. The job of a manager, like that of a 
teacher, is to inspire people to be better. Give them 
better technical skills, make them winners, make 
them better people, and they can go anywhere in life. 
When you give young people a chance, you not only 
create a longer life span for the team, you also create 
loyalty. They will always remember that you were 
the manager who gave them their first opportunity. 
Once they know you are batting for them, they will 
accept your way. You’re really fostering a sense of 
family. If you give young people your attention and 
an opportunity to succeed, it is amazing how much 
they will surprise you. . . . 
Set High Standards & Hold Everyone 
to Them
Everything we did was about maintaining the stan-
dards we had set as a football club—this applied to 
all my team building and all my team preparation, 
motivational talks, and tactical talks. For example, 
we never allowed a bad training session. What you 
see in training manifests itself on the game field. 
So every training session was about quality. We 
didn’t allow a lack of focus. It was about intensity, 
concentration, speed—a high level of performance. 
That, we hoped, made our players improve with 
each session.
I had to lift players’ expectations. They should 
never give in. I said that to them all the time: “If you 
give in once, you’ll give in twice.” And the work ethic 
and energy I had seemed to spread throughout the 
club. I used to be the first to arrive in the morning. In 
my later years, a lot of my staff members would al-
ready be there when I got in at 7 a.m. I think they un-
derstood why I came in early—they knew there was a 
job to be done. There was a feeling that “if he can do 
it, then I can do it.”
I constantly told my squad that working hard all 
your life is a talent. But I expected even more from the 
star players. I expected them to work even harder. I 
said, “You’ve got to show that you are the top players.” 
And they did. That’s why they are star players—they 
are prepared to work harder. Superstars with egos are 
not the problem some people may think. They need to 
be winners, because that massages their egos, so they 
will do what it takes to win. . . . . 
Never, Ever Cede Control
If the day came that the manager of Manchester 
United was controlled by the players—in other 
words, if the players decided how the training should 
be, what days they should have off, what the disci-
pline should be, and what the tactics should be— 
then Manchester United would not be the Manchester 
United we know. Before I came to United, I told my-
self I wasn’t going to allow anyone to be stronger 
than I was. Your personality has to be bigger than 
theirs. That is vital.
There are occasions when you have to ask yourself 
whether certain players are affecting the dressing-
room atmosphere, the performance of the team, and 
your control of the players and staff. If they are, you 
have to cut the cord. There is absolutely no other way. 
It doesn’t matter if the person is the best player in the 
world. The long-term view of the club is more impor-
tant than any individual, and the manager has to be the 
most important one in the club. . . . 
I tended to act quickly when I saw a player become 
a negative influence. . . .
Match the Message to the Moment
No one likes to be criticized. Few people get better 
with criticism; most respond to encouragement in-
stead. So I tried to give encouragement when I could. 
For a player—for any human being—there is noth-
ing better than hearing “Well done.” Those are the 
two best words ever invented. You don’t need to use 
superlatives.
At the same time, in the dressing room, you need 
to point out mistakes when players don’t meet ex-
pectations. That is when reprimands are important. I 
would do it right after the game. I wouldn’t wait un-
til Monday. I’d do it, and it was finished. I was on to 
the next match. There is no point in criticizing a 
player forever. 
Generally, my pregame talks were about our expec-
tations, the players’ belief in themselves, and their 
trust in one another. I liked to refer to a working-class 
principle. Not all players come from a working-
class background, but maybe their fathers do, or their 

 
Power, Influence, & Leadership 
CHAPTER 14 
473
grandfathers, and I found it useful to remind players 
how far they have come. I would tell them that having 
a work ethic is very important. It seemed to enhance 
their pride. I would remind them that it is trust in one 
another, not letting their mates down, that helps build 
the character of a team. 
In halftime talks, you have maybe eight minutes to 
deliver your message, so it is vital to use the time well. 
Everything is easier when you are winning: You can 
talk about concentrating, not getting complacent, and 
the small things you can address. But when you are 
losing, you have to make an impact. I liked to focus on 
our own team and our own strengths, but you have to 
correct why you are losing. . . . 
Prepare to Win
Winning is in my nature. I’ve set my standards over 
such a long period of time that there is no other op-
tion for me—I have to win. I expected to win every 
time we went out there. Even if five of the most im-
portant players were injured, I expected to win. 
Other teams get into a huddle before the start of a 
match, but I did not do that with my team. Once we 
stepped onto the pitch before a game, I was confi-
dent that the players were prepared and ready to 
play, because everything had been done before they 
walked out onto the pitch.
I am a gambler—a risk taker—and you can see 
that in how we played in the late stages of matches. If 
we were down at halftime, the message was simple: 
Don’t panic. Just concentrate on getting the task 
done. If we were still down—say, 1–2—with 15 min-
utes to go, I was ready to take more risks. I was per-
fectly happy to lose 1–3 if it meant we’d given 
ourselves a good chance to draw or to win. So in 
those last 15 minutes, we’d go for it. We’d put in an 
extra attacking player and worry less about defense. 
We knew that if we ended up winning 3–2, it would 
be a fantastic feeling. And if we lost 1–3, we’d been 
losing anyway. . . . 
Rely on the Power of Observation
Observation is the final part of my management 
structure. When I started as a coach, I relied on sev-
eral basics: that I could play the game well, that I un-
derstood the technical skills needed to succeed at the 
highest level, that I could coach players, and that I 
had the ability to make decisions. One afternoon at 
Aberdeen I had a conversation with my assistant 
manager while we were having a cup of tea. He said, 
“I don’t know why you brought me here.” I said, 
“What are you talking about?” and he replied, “I 
don’t do anything. I work with the youth team, but 
I’m here to assist you with the training and with pick-
ing the team. That’s the assistant manager’s job.” And 
another coach said, “I think he’s right, boss,” and 
pointed out that I could benefit from not always hav-
ing to lead the training. At first I said, “No, no, no,” 
but I thought it over for a few days and then said, “I’ll 
give it a try. No promises.” Deep down I knew he was 
right. So I delegated the training to him, and it was 
the best thing I ever did. . . .
Never Stop Adapting
One of the things I’ve done well over the years is man-
age change. I believe that you control change by ac-
cepting it. That also means having confidence in the 
people you hire. The minute staff members are em-
ployed, you have to trust that they are doing their jobs. 
If you micromanage and tell people what to do, there 
is no point in hiring them. The most important thing is 
to not stagnate. I said to David Gill a few years ago, 
“The only way we can keep players at Manchester 
United is if we have the best training ground in 
Europe.” That is when we kick-started the medical 
center. We can’t sit still.
Most people with my kind of track record don’t 
look to change. But I always felt I couldn’t afford not 
to change. We had to be successful— there was no 
other option for me—and I would explore any means 
of improving. I continued to work hard. I treated every 
success as my first. My job was to give us the best pos-
sible chance of winning. That is what drove me.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. Which of Sir Alex Ferguson’s leadership lessons 
apply to any type of organization? Explain your 
rationale. 
 2. Use Table 14.2 to evaluate the extent to which 
Ferguson displays the characteristics associated with 
being a good leader and good manager.
 3. Which different positive and negative leadership 
traits and styles are displayed by Ferguson? Cite 
examples.
 4. Use Table 14.4 to determine the extent to which 
Ferguson exhibits servant leadership. Provide 
supportive examples.
 5. Which of the four types of transformational leadership 
behavior are displayed by Ferguson? Provide examples.
 6. What did you learn about leadership from this case?
Reprinted by permission of Harvard Business Review. Excerpt from 
“Ferguson’s Formula,” by Anita Elberse with Sir Alex Ferguson, 
October 2013. Copyright © 2013 by the Harvard Business School 
Publishing Corporation; all rights reserved.

474 
PART 5 
Leading
Is It Ethical for Organizations to Incentivize 
Their Employees to Poach People from 
Competing Companies?
Have you used Uber or Lyft instead of a taxi? These 
two companies are major competitors in the ride-
share and car-for-hire market, and they are creating 
major competition for the taxi industry. Both compa-
nies rely on the use of apps to connect riders with 
drivers.
According to The Wall Street Journal, both compa-
nies are “undercutting each other’s prices, poaching 
drivers and co-opting innovations.” Lyft claims that 
Uber has “abused its service in the past several months 
with the goal of poaching drivers and slowing down 
its network. Passengers who identify themselves as 
working for Uber frequently order a Lyft and then ride 
for only a few blocks, sometimes repeating this pro-
cess dozens of times a day.” Is this practice ethical?
According to an internal Uber e-mail that was sent 
to its drivers and reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, 
“the company offers $250 for referring a new driver to 
its service; $500 for referring a Lyft driver; and $1,000 
for signing up a Lyft ‘mentor.’” A mentor is an experi-
enced Lyft employee who trains new drivers. Losing 
mentors would be a blow to Lyft.
Uber denies that it is “intentionally ordering Lyft rides 
to add congestion to its competitor’s service, but con-
firmed the company does offer recruitment incentives.”
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
Would you change your competitive practices if you 
were a senior leader at Uber or Lyft? 
 1. Yes. Having employees taking short rides to jam up 
your competitor’s network is not ethical. Companies 
should compete on price and the quality of service, 
and Uber seems to be using techniques that affect 
Lyft’s quality of service. 
 2. No. This is hard-core competition and neither com-
pany is breaking any laws. I applaud Uber for offer-
ing incentives to poach key employees from Lyft.
 3. Invent another option. 
Source: The case is based on D. MacMillan, “The Fiercest Rivalry in 
Tech: Uber vs. Lyft,” The Wall Street Journal, August 12, 2014, pp. B1, B4.
Legal/Ethical Challenge


Interpersonal & 
Organizational 
Communication
Mastering the Exchange of Information
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
15.1 The Communication Process: What It Is, How It Works
Major Question: What do I need to know about the 
communication process to be an effective communicator?
15.2 How Managers Fit into the Communication Process
Major Question: How can I use the different channels and 
patterns of communication to my advantage?
15.3 Barriers to Communication
Major Question: What are the important barriers I need to be 
aware of, so I can improve my communication skills?
15.4 Communication in the Information Age
Major Question: How do contemporary managers use 
information technology to communicate more effectively?
15.5 Improving Communication Effectiveness
Major Question: How can I be a better listener, reader, writer, 
and speaker?
15

In an interview situation, you need to prove you’re the 
one best candidate for the available position. Thus, 
you need to think out your strategy, deal with your 
nervousness, and perform well—as follows:1
Think Out Your Strategy: “I Know What This 
Company Is About”
You need to do your homework, anticipate the ques-
tions, and rehearse your selling points.
Use the web and other resources to learn about the 
company—past, present, and future events and initia-
tives, which you can use when discussing the firm. Antic-
ipate the questions you’ll be asked—such as “What do 
you consider your greatest weakness?”—that you can 
respond to briefly and turn to your advantage. (“I tend to 
be too impatient and want to get things done quickly.”)
Identify your top three selling points—such as, if 
you have little experience, your personal qualities 
(“I’m results oriented, a good listener, and will work all 
hours”) or, if you have lots of experience, your signifi-
cant achievements. Have evidence (stories or data) to 
substantiate your claims.
Deal with Your Nervousness: “I’ll Just Take 
My Time”
Preparation will help you stay calm during the interview. 
So will the use of visualization and positive self-talk to 
keep your confidence up (“I can handle this!”). Don’t 
admit you’re nervous. Breathe slowly. Don’t rush to 
answer. Take a one-second pause before responding 
to a question.
Give a Strong Performance: “I Can Help 
This Company”
Your focus is to show the company what’s in it for 
them by hiring you. To give your best impression, 
dress as people in the company do. Smile—it’s one 
of the easiest ways to win people over. Make eye 
contact. Above all, express your enthusiasm and 
show your willingness “to do anything,” not just the 
interesting stuff. Close with a thank you, a firm 
handshake, and ask the interviewer when he or she 
would like you to follow up. Drop the interviewer a 
note of thanks.
For Discussion How good are you at preparing for 
and rehearsing for an event (the job interview) that is 
as important as the application you did to get into 
college? How good are you at listening? How do 
you think you appear to other people in an important 
interaction?
the manager’s toolbox
Acing the Interview: Communicating Counts 
in Landing a Job
This chapter describes the process of transferring information and understanding from 
one person to another. It also describes three communication barriers—physical, se-
mantic, and personal. It shows how you can use different channels and patterns of 
communication, both formal and informal, to your advantage. It discusses how star 
managers use information technology to communicate more effectively. Finally, we talk 
about how to be a better listener, reader, writer, and speaker.
What’s Ahead in This Chapter
forecast

15.1 
The Communication Process: What It Is, 
How It Works
What do I need to know about the communication process to be an effective 
communicator?
THE BIG PICTURE
Communication is the transfer of information and understanding from one person to another. The process 
involves sender, message, and receiver; encoding and decoding; the medium; feedback; and dealing with 
“noise,” or interference. Managers need to tailor their communication to the appropriate medium (rich or 
lean) for the appropriate situation.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Do you have difficulty accepting compliments, especially from close friends and loved 
ones? When you’re ridiculed, as online, do you respond with over-the-top rage? Do 
you know how to apologize to someone—and do it in person, not by e-mail or text 
message, the coward’s way? Are you so used to using profanity that you assume others 
are comfortable with it as well?2
All these matters show how difficult it is to communicate well.
Problems with communicating are a fact of human existence. That said, it is essen-
tial to develop your communication skills, which 636 human resource professionals 
rated as the most important factor in advancing their careers.3
No wonder faulty communication has become such a problem in the workplace. 
According to one survey, executives say 14% of each 40-hour workweek is wasted 
because of poor communication between staff and managers.4 That’s the equivalent of 
seven workweeks of lost productivity a year. Thus, there’s a hardheaded argument for 
better communication: It can save money.
How good a communicator do you think you are? Whether good or bad, there al-
ways is room for improvement. You can assess your communication competence by 
completing Self-Assessment 15.1.
478 
PART 5 
Leading
Assessing Your Communication Competence
The following survey was designed to assess your level of com-
munication competence. Go to connect.mheducation.com and 
take Self-Assessment 15.1. When you’re done, answer the 
following questions:
1. 
Where do you stand in terms of communication skills? 
Would you like to improve your skills? Based on 
reviewing the skills associated with your three lowest 
scored items, what can you do to improve your 
communication skills? Be specific.
2. 
How might you get feedback on whether your 
communication skills improve after implementing your 
ideas in question 1 above?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 15.1
®
Communication Defined: The Transfer of Information & 
Understanding
Communication—the transfer of information and understanding from one person to 
another—is an activity that you as a manager will have to do a lot of. Indeed, one study 
found that 81% of a manager’s time in a typical workday is spent communicating.5

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
479
Everything’s clicking. Today 
some people can work almost 
anywhere, even more so as 
laptops, tablets, and cell phones 
have become such versatile 
instruments, permitting Internet 
and e-mail access, text 
messaging, and access to huge 
databases. Do you think our 
ability to work outside 
traditional offices because of 
today’s technology will 
negatively affect the 
communication process and 
employee camaraderie?
The fact that managers do a lot of communicating doesn’t mean 
they’re necessarily good at it—that is, that they are efficient or effec-
tive. You are an efficient communicator when you can transmit your 
message accurately in the least time. You are an effective communica-
tor when your intended message is accurately understood by the other 
person. Thus, you may well be efficient in sending a group of people 
a reprimand by e-mail. But it may not be effective if it makes them 
angry so that they can’t absorb its meaning.
From this, you can see why it’s important to have an understanding 
of the communication process.
How the Communication Process Works
Communication has been said to be a process consisting of “a sender 
transmitting a message through media to a receiver who responds.”6 
Let’s look at these and other parts of the process.
Sender, Message, & Receiver 
The sender is the person want-
ing to share information—called a message—and the receiver is the 
person for whom the message is intended, as follows.
Sender → Message → Receiver
Encoding & Decoding 
Of course, the process isn’t as simple as just sender/
message/receiver. If you were an old-fashioned telegraph operator using Morse code to 
send a message over a telegraph line, you would first have to encode the message, and 
the receiver would have to decode it. But the same is true if you are sending the mes-
sage by voice to another person in the same room, when you have to decide what lan-
guage to speak in and what terms to use.
Encoding is translating a message into understandable symbols or language. 
Decoding is interpreting and trying to make sense of the message. Thus, the commu-
nication process is now
Sender [Encoding] → Message → [Decoding] Receiver
The Medium 
The means by which you as a communicator send a message is im-
portant, whether it is by typing an e-mail traveling over the Internet, by voice over a 
telephone line, or by hand-scrawled note. This is the medium, the pathway by which a 
message travels:
Sender [Encoding] → Message [Medium] Message → [Decoding] Receiver
Feedback 
“Flight 123, do you copy?” In the movies, that’s what you hear the flight 
controller say when radioing the pilot of a troubled aircraft to see if he or she received 
(“copied”) the previous message. And the pilot may radio back, “Roger, Houston, 
I copy.” This is an example of feedback, whereby the receiver expresses his or her 
reaction to the sender’s message.
Sender   [Encoding]         Message   [Medium]   Message      [Decoding]   Receiver
Message
[Feedback]
Feedback is essential in communication so that the person sending the message can 
know whether the receiver understood it in the same way the sender intended—and 
whether he or she agrees with it. It is an essential component of communication ac-
curacy and can be facilitated by paraphrasing. Paraphrasing occurs when people 

480 
PART 5 
Leading
Did you
finish your
assignment?
1. Sender encodes
 
message, selects
 
medium (e.g.,
 
telephone).
What assign-
ment do you
mean?
3.  Receiver decodes
 
the message,
 
decides if feedback
 
needed.
2. Message is transmitted
 
through a medium (e.g.,
 
telephone).
3
Ree
meean?
4.  Receiver expresses
 
reaction, or feedback,
 
through a medium.
Noise!
(e.g., static, slurring)
 restate in their words the crux of what they heard or read. It clarifies that a message was 
accurately understood. If you want to ensure that someone understands something you 
said, ask him or her to paraphrase your message.
Noise 
Unfortunately, the entire communication process can be disrupted at several 
different points by what is called noise—any disturbance that interferes with the trans-
mission of a message. The noise can occur in the medium, of course, as when you have 
static in a radio transmission or fadeout on a cell phone or when there’s loud music when 
you’re trying to talk in a noisy restaurant. Or it can occur in the encoding or decoding, as 
when a pharmacist can’t read a prescription because of a doctor’s poor handwriting.7
Noise also occurs in nonverbal communication (discussed later in this chapter), as 
when our physical movements send a message that is different from the one we are 
speaking, or in cross-cultural communication (discussed in Chapter 4), as when we 
make assumptions about other people’s messages based on our own culture instead of 
theirs. We discuss noise further in the next section.
The communication process is shown below. (See Figure 15.1.)
FIGURE 15.1 
The communication process
“Noise” is not just noise or loud background sounds but any disturbance that interferes with transmission—static, fadeout, distracting facial 
expressions, uncomfortable meeting site, competing voices, and so on.
Selecting the Right Medium for Effective 
Communication
All kinds of communications tools are available to managers, ranging from one-to-one 
face-to-face conversation all the way to use of the mass media. However, managers 
need to know how to use the right tool for the right condition—when to use e-mail or 
when to meet face-to-face, for example. Should you praise an employee by voicing 
a compliment, sending an e-mail, posting an announcement near the office coffee 
machine—or all three? How about when carrying out a reprimand?
Is a Medium Rich or Lean in Information? 
As a manager, you will have many 
media to choose from: conversations, meetings, speeches, the telephone, e-mail, 
memos, letters, bulletin boards, PowerPoint presentations, videoconferencing, printed 

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
481
publications, videos, and so on. Beyond these are the sophisticated communications 
possibilities of the mass media: public relations; advertising; news reports via print, 
radio, TV, the Internet.
Media richness indicates how well a particular medium conveys information and pro-
motes learning. That is, the “richer” a medium is, the better it is at conveying informa-
tion. The term media richness was proposed by respected organizational theorists 
Richard Daft and Robert Lengel as part of their contingency model for media selection.8
Ranging from high media richness to low media richness, types of media may be 
positioned along a continuum as follows:
High media richness
(Best for nonroutine,
ambiguous situations)
Low media richness
(Best for routine,
clear situations)
Face-to-face
presence
Video-
conferencing
Telephone
Personal written
media (e-mail,
text messages,
memos, letters)
Impersonal written
media (newsletters,
fliers, general reports)
Face-to-face communication, also the most personal form of communication, is the 
richest. It allows the receiver of the message to observe multiple cues, such as body 
language and tone of voice. It allows the sender to get immediate feedback, to see how 
well the receiver comprehended the message. At the other end of the media richness 
scale, impersonal written media is just the reverse—only one cue and no feedback—
making it low in richness.
Matching the Appropriate Medium to the Appropriate Situation 
In gen-
eral, follow these guidelines:9
Rich Medium: Best for Nonroutine Situations & to Avoid Oversimpli-
fication A rich medium is more effective with nonroutine situations. Examples: In 
what way would you like to learn the facts from your boss of a nonroutine situation 
such as a major company reorganization, which might affect your job? Via a memo 
tacked on the bulletin board (a lean medium)? Or via face-to-face meeting or phone 
call (rich medium)?
The danger of using a rich medium for routine matters (such as monthly sales re-
ports) is that it results in information overloading—more information than necessary.
Lean Medium: Best for Routine Situations & to Avoid Overloading 
A lean medium is more effective with routine situations. Examples: In what manner 
would you as a sales manager like to get routine monthly sales reports from your 
50 sales reps? Via time-consuming phone calls (somewhat rich medium)? Or via e-mails 
or text messages (somewhat lean medium)? The danger of using a lean medium for 
nonroutine matters (such as an announcement of a company reorganization) is that it 
results in information oversimplification—it doesn’t provide enough of the informa-
tion the receiver needs and wants.
E-mail and Facebook and Twitter messages (social media, discussed in Section 
15.4) vary in media richness, being leaner if they impersonally blanket a large audi-
ence and richer if they mix personal textual and video information that prompts quick 
conversational feedback.10 ●

15.2 How Managers Fit into the Communication 
Process
How can I use the different channels and patterns of communication to my advantage?
THE BIG PICTURE
Formal communication channels follow the chain of command, which is of three types—vertical, horizontal, 
and external. Informal communication channels develop outside the organization’s formal structure. One type 
is gossip and rumor. Another is management by wandering around, in which a manager talks to people 
across all lines of authority.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
If you’ve ever had a low-level job in nearly any kind of organization, you know that 
there is generally a hierarchy of management between you and the organization’s pres-
ident, director, or CEO. If you had a suggestion that you wanted him or her to hear, 
you doubtless had to go up through management channels. That’s formal communica-
tion. However, you may have run into that top manager in the elevator. Or in the rest-
room. Or in a line at the bank. You could have voiced your suggestion casually then. 
That’s informal communication.
Formal Communication Channels: Up, Down, 
Sideways, & Outward
Formal communication channels follow the chain of command and are recognized as 
official. The organization chart we described in Chapter 8 (page 239) indicates how 
official communications—memos, letters, reports, announcements—are supposed to 
be routed.
Formal communication is of three types: (1) vertical—meaning upward and down-
ward, (2) horizontal—meaning laterally (sideways), and (3) external—meaning out-
side the organization.
1. Vertical Communication: Up & Down the Chain of Command 
Vertical 
communication is the flow of messages up and down the hierarchy within the organi-
zation: bosses communicating with subordinates, subordinates communicating with 
bosses. As you might expect, the more management levels through which a message 
passes, the more it is prone to some distortion.
482 
PART 5 
Leading
Upward bound. How do you 
communicate with a manager two 
or three levels above you in the 
organization’s hierarchy? You can send 
a memo through channels. Or you can 
watch for when that manager goes to 
the watercooler or the coffeepot.

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
483
■ 
Downward communication—from top to bottom. Downward communica-
tion flows from a higher level to a lower level (or levels). In small organizations, 
top-down communication may be delivered face-to-face. In larger organiza-
tions, it’s delivered via meetings, e-mail, official memos, and company publi-
cations.
■ 
Upward communication—from bottom to top. Upward communication 
flows from a lower level to a higher level(s). Often this type of communica-
tion is from a subordinate to his or her immediate manager, who in turn 
will relay it up to the next level, if necessary. Effective upward communi-
cation depends on an atmosphere of trust. No subordinate is going to 
want to be the bearer of bad news to a manager who is always negative 
and bad-tempered.
Types of downward and upward communication are shown below. (See Table 15.1.)
TABLE 15.1 
Types of Downward & Upward Communication
Sources: D. Katz and R. Kahn, The Social Psychology of Organizations (New York: Wiley, 1966); and E. Planty and W. Machaver, “Upward 
Communications: A Project in Executive Development,” Personnel, Vol. 28 (1952), pp. 304–318.
Downward communication
Most downward communication involves one of the following kinds of information:
• 
Instructions related to particular job tasks. Example (supervisor to subordinate): “The store will close Monday for inventory. 
All employees are expected to participate.”
• 
Explanations about the relationship between two or more tasks. Example: “While taking inventory, employees need to see what things 
are missing. Most of that might be attributable to shoplifting.”
• 
Explanations of the organization’s procedures and practices. Example: “Start counting things on the high shelves and work your 
way down.”
• 
A manager’s feedback about a subordinate’s performance. Example: “It’s best not to try to count too fast.”
• 
Attempts to encourage a sense of mission and dedication to the organization’s goals. Example: “By keeping tabs on our inventory, 
we can keep our prices down and maintain our reputation of giving good value.”
Upward communication
Most upward communication involves the following kinds of information:
• 
Reports of progress on current projects. Example: “We shut down the store yesterday to take inventory.”
• 
Reports of unsolved problems requiring help from people higher up. Example: “We can’t make our merchandise count jibe with the 
stock reports.”
• 
New developments affecting the work unit. Example: “Getting help from the other stores really speeded things up this year.”
• 
Suggestions for improvements. Example: “The stores should loan each other staff every time they take inventory.”
• 
Reports on employee attitudes and efficiency. Example: “The staff likes it when they go to another store and sometimes they pick 
up some new ways of doing things.”
2. Horizontal Communication: Within & between Work Units 
Horizontal 
communication flows within and between work units; its main purpose is coordination. 
As a manager, you will spend perhaps as much as a third of your time in this form of 
communication—consulting with colleagues and coworkers at the same level as you 
within the organization. In this kind of sideways communication, you will be sharing 
information, coordinating tasks, solving problems, resolving conflicts, and getting the 
support of your peers. Horizontal communication is encouraged through the use of 
committees, task forces, and matrix structures.
Horizontal communication can be impeded in three ways: (1) by specialization that 
makes people focus just on their jobs alone; (2) by rivalry between workers or work 
units, which prevents sharing of information; and (3) by lack of encouragement from 
management.

484 
PART 5 
Leading
3. External Communication: Outside the Organization 
External communi-
cation flows between people inside and outside the organization. These are other 
stakeholders: customers, suppliers, shareholders or other owners, and so on. Compa-
nies have given this kind of communication heightened importance, especially with 
customers or clients, who are the lifeblood of any company.
Informal Communication Channels
Informal communication channels develop outside the formal structure and do not 
follow the chain of command—they skip management levels and cut across lines of 
authority.
Two types of informal channels are (1) the grapevine and (2) management by 
wandering around.
The Grapevine 
The grapevine is the unofficial communication system of the infor-
mal organization, a network of gossip and rumor of what is called “employee lan-
guage.” Research shows that the grapevine (1) is faster than formal channels, (2) is 
about 75% accurate, and (3) is used by employees when they are insecure, threatened, 
or faced with organizational change.11 Of course, employee language—otherwise 
known as “gossip”—can be notoriously misleading and a great reducer of morale in a 
dysfunctional company.12
Management by Wandering Around 
Management by wandering around 
(MBWA)—also known as management by walking around—is the term used to de-
scribe a manager’s literally wandering around his or her organization and talking with 
people across all lines of authority.13 Management by wandering around helps to 
reduce the problems of distortion that inevitably occur with formal communication 
flowing up a hierarchy. MBWA allows managers to listen to employees and learn 
about their problems as well as to express to employees what values and goals are 
important. ●
MBWA. Management by 
wandering around is sort of 
the reverse of employees 
exchanging informal views 
with top managers at the 
watercooler. That is, by 
wandering around the 
organization, top managers 
can stop and talk to nearly 
anyone—and thus perhaps 
learn things that might be 
screened out by the formal 
up-the-organization reporting 
process. If top managers can 
do MBWA, do you think mid-
level managers can as well?

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
485
PRACTICAL ACTION
How to Streamline Meetings
When Steve Jobs was CEO of Apple, he used to hold 
marathon Monday meetings. The reason, he said, was “I 
want [Apple employees] making good or better decisions 
than I would. So the way to do that is have them know 
everything, not just in their part of the business but in 
every part of the business. So . . . we review the whole 
business.”14
By contrast when Larry Page took over as CEO of Google, 
he announced that meetings should be run more 
efficiently—like those in a hungry start-up instead of 
a 31,000-person company. Thus, meetings can be only 
50 minutes long, to allow for a 10-minute bathroom break. No 
more than 10 people should attend, and every person should 
give input. Every meeting must have one clear decision 
maker, otherwise the meeting shouldn’t happen. If a decision 
can’t be made without a meeting, then the meeting should 
be scheduled immediately.15
Which form do you prefer, Apple’s or Google’s?
What to Do as a Meeting Participant
It is frustrating to be a victim of a poorly run meeting. In fact, 
workers reportedly judge nearly 50% of their meetings to be a 
waste of time.16 In one survey, 50% of workers at big compa-
nies (and 26% at smaller ones) said they had attended a meet-
ing where at least one participant fell asleep.17 Problem 
meetings can result from a lack of focus, nobody watching the 
clock, and no leader to keep the meeting on track.18 Or manag-
ers may discourage conflict, which ignores crucial issues and 
makes meetings boring.19
What can you do as a participant to make meetings run 
better?
• Pull discussions back on point: As a participant, you can 
always pull an off-track conversation back by saying, for 
example, “We were discussing next year’s budget, but now 
we seem to be discussing the shortfalls of last year.” Or 
you can try making a summary of a series of comments to 
prevent others from covering the same ground again.
• Help the leader create the agenda: If you’re constantly 
exposed to ineffective meetings, you can also offer your 
assistance to the meeting leader in creating an agenda, 
with time frames attached for each item.
What to Do as a Meeting Leader
If you’re leading meetings, here are some good ways to 
streamline them:20
• Eliminate unnecessary meetings and meeting attendance: 
Don’t call a meeting if the same result can be accomplished 
in some other way: text message, e-mail, phone call, memo, 
or one-on-one visit. Invite only people who need to attend, 
and tell them they need stay for only those parts that concern 
them. Hold the meeting in a place where distractions will be 
minimal. Incidentally, removing chairs so that people have 
to stand will make them more engaged and less territorial 
about their ideas, according to some research.21
• Distribute meeting agenda in advance: Do your home-
work and prepare a list of meeting objectives, topics to be 
covered (the most important ones first), and the number of 
minutes allowed for discussion. Distribute the agenda a 
day or more in advance, and tell participants what informa-
tion they should bring. Even for informal meetings, phone 
conversations, and one-on-one appointments, you should 
make a list of items to cover.
• Stay in control of the meeting: Start on time and stay 
within the time frame of the agenda items. (Coffee breaks, 
lunchtime, or quitting time provide built-in limits.) Announce 
politely at the start of the meeting that you value everyone’s 
time and so you will intervene if discussion becomes off-
point. Reserve judgments and conclusions until after dis-
cussion so that everyone will feel free to give their input.
Don’t allow a few members to monopolize the discus-
sion. Encourage silent members to participate. Try to reach 
a decision or make an assignment for every item. Use two 
pieces of paper, one for general notes, the other for tasks 
and assignments. Summarize the highlights at the end of 
the meeting. Map out a timetable for actions to be taken.
• Do follow-up: After the meeting, type up tasks and as-
signments for distribution. Set a date for a follow-up meet-
ing to assess progress.
YOUR CALL
What can you add to these suggestions to make meetings run 
better? For more about running meetings, go to EffectiveMeet-
ings.com (www.effectivemeetings.com).

15.3 Barriers to Communication
What are the important barriers I need to be aware of, so I can improve my 
communication skills?
THE BIG PICTURE
We describe three barriers to communication. Physical barriers include sound, time, and space. Semantic bar-
riers include unclear use of words and jargon. Personal barriers include variations in communication skills, 
trustworthiness and credibility, stereotypes and prejudices, and faulty listening skills. We also describe how 
misunderstandings can arise from nonverbal communication and gender-related communication differences.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
How hard is it to place an order in a fast-food drive-through lane? Maybe not always 
so easy.
A Georgia fast-food worker urges customers to “please have a general idea of what you 
want before you reach the speaker” (because the company has employees on a timer). She 
also asks that you “speak clearly (but don’t yell!) into the speaker. Also, although it may 
seem cute to you, I can barely understand your 4-year-old when she asks me for her kid-
die meal.” Further, “if you can’t hear yourself over your car radio, I can’t either.”22
Customers have their own complaints. “How are we supposed to have any idea of 
what to order when we don’t see the menu until we pull up to the window?” asks 
one.23 Says another, “Those of us at the other end of the speaker often cannot under-
stand a word being said, either because the speaker isn’t working properly, because the 
order-taker has a thick accent, or the person is speaking too fast.”24
All these are examples of communication barriers—a barrier being anything inter-
fering with accurate communication between two people. Some barriers occur within 
the communication process itself, as shown below. (See Table 15.2.)
It’s more practical, however, to think of barriers as being of three types: (1) physical 
barriers, (2) semantic barriers, and (3) personal barriers.
486 
PART 5 
Leading
TABLE 15.2 
Some Barriers that Happen within the Communication Process
All it takes is one blocked step in the communication process for communication to fail. Consider the following.
• 
Sender barrier—no message gets sent. Example: If a manager has an idea but is afraid to voice 
it because he or she fears criticism, then obviously no message gets sent.
• 
Encoding barrier—the message is not expressed correctly. Example: If your vocabulary is 
lacking or English is not your first language, you may have difficulty expressing to a supervisor, 
coworker, or subordinate what it is you mean to say.
• 
Medium barrier—the communication channel is blocked. Example: When someone’s phone 
always has a busy signal or a computer network is down, these are instances of the 
communication medium being blocked.
• 
Decoding barrier—the recipient doesn’t understand the message. Example: Perhaps you’re 
afraid to show your ignorance when someone is throwing computer terms at you and says that 
your computer connection has “a bandwidth problem.”
• 
Receiver barrier—no message gets received. Example: Because you were talking to a coworker, 
you weren’t listening when your supervisor announced today’s work assignments.
• 
Feedback barrier—the recipient doesn’t respond enough. Example: You give some people 
street directions, but since they only nod their heads and don’t repeat the directions back to you, 
you don’t really know whether you were understood.

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
487
Without walls. Supposedly businesses 
that have open floor plans with cubicles 
instead of private offices function better 
because people can more easily talk 
across the shoulder-high partitions or can 
move their chairs together for a meeting. But 
do you think the absence of floor-to-ceiling 
physical barriers might, in fact, lead to 
other kinds of barriers—such as others’ 
talking making it hard to hear while you’re 
on the phone?
1. Physical Barriers: Sound, Time, Space, & So On
Try shouting at someone on the far side of a construction site—at a distance of sev-
eral yards over the roar of earth-moving machinery—and you know what physical 
barriers are. Other such barriers are time-zone differences, telephone-line static, and 
crashed computers. Office walls can be physical barriers, too, which is one reason 
for the trend toward open-floor plans with cubicles instead of offices in many work-
place settings.25
2. Semantic Barriers: When Words Matter
When a supervisor tells you, “We need to get this done right away,” what does it 
mean? Does “We” mean just you? You and your coworkers? Or you, your coworkers, 
and the boss? Does “right away” mean today, tomorrow, or next week? These are ex-
amples of semantic barriers. Semantics is the study of the meaning of words.
As global communications have become so important, so have semantic difficulties, 
which we may often encounter when dealing with other cultures (as we discussed in 
Chapter 4). When talking on the phone with Indians working in call centers in India, 
for example, we may find their pronunciation unusual. Perhaps that is because, accord-
ing to one Indian speech-voice consultant, whereas “Americans think in English, we 
think in our mother tongue and translate it while speaking.”26
In addition, as our society becomes more technically oriented, semantic meaning 
becomes a problem because jargon develops. Jargon is terminology specific to a 
particular profession or group. (Example: “The HR VP wants the RFP to go out ASAP.” 
Translation: “The vice president of human resources wants the request for proposal to 
go out as soon as possible.”) Another problem is the use of buzzwords, such as “lever-
age,” “interface,” or “circle back”—annoying words primarily designed to impress 

488 
PART 5 
Leading
rather than inform. (Example: “Could you interface with that team on its ad campaign 
that’s gone viral, and then circle back with me? If we can leverage similar assets, we’ll 
have a game changer.”)27 As a manager in a specialized field, you need to remember 
that what are ordinary terms for you may be mysteries to outsiders.
3. Personal Barriers: Individual Attributes 
that Hinder Communication
“Is it them or is it me?”
How often have you wondered, when someone has shown a surprising response to 
something you said, how the miscommunication happened? Let’s examine nine per-
sonal barriers that contribute to miscommunication.
Variable Skills in Communicating Effectively 
As we all know, some people 
are simply better communicators than others. They have the vocabulary, the writing 
ability, the speaking skills, the facial expressions, the eye contact, the dramatic ability, 
the “gift of gab,” the social skills to express themselves in a superior way. Conversely, 
other people don’t have these qualities. But better communication skills can be 
learned.28 Nondefensive communication is a key skill to develop.
Using evaluative or judgmental comments such as “Your work is terrible” or 
“You’re always late for meetings” spur defensiveness, which can lead to defensive 
communication—either aggressive, attacking, angry communication or passive, with-
drawing communication. The better alternative is nondefensive communication—
communication that is assertive, direct, and powerful.
Former judge and TV news anchor Catherine Crier’s rules for nondefensive com-
munication are (1) define the situation, (2) clarify the person’s position, (3) acknowl-
edge the person’s feelings, and (4) bring the focus back to the facts.29 Such positive 
steps—aided by the avoidance of absolutist, accusatory phrases such as “You always 
. . . ” and “You never . . . ”—help bolster the ongoing feedback process so essential to 
true understanding in communication.
Companies tend to develop work environments that can support either defensive or 
nondefensive communication. Given that we want you to learn how to promote nondefen-
sive communication, we encourage you to complete Self-Assessment 15.2. It assesses 
whether a current or past work environment is supportive of nondefensive communication.
Does Your Organization Have a Supportive or 
Defensive Communication Climate?
The following survey was designed to assess the supportive 
and defensive communication climate of your organization. Go 
to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 
15.2. When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Where does the work environment stand in terms of 
having a supportive or defensive communication climate?
2. 
Based on your survey scores, what advice would you give 
to management in order to promote a more supportive 
communication climate? Be specific.
3. 
Considering your project teams at school, what can you 
do to create a more supportive communication climate in 
these teams?
SELF-ASSESSMENT 15.2
®
Variations in How Information Is Processed & Interpreted 
Zheng Yu, a 
young woman from China teaching her native language to students in Lawton, Oklahoma, 
was explaining a vocabulary quiz when a student interrupted: “Sorry, I was zoning 
out. What are we supposed to be doing?” Zheng repeated the instructions, but she 

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
489
was taken aback. “In China,” she said afterward, “if you teach the students and they 
don’t get it, that’s their problem. Here if you don’t get it, you teach it again.”30
Are you from a working-class or privileged background? Are you from a particular 
ethnic group? Are you better at math or at language? Are you from a chaotic household 
filled with alcoholism and fighting, which distracts you at work? Because people use 
different frames of reference and experiences to interpret the world around them, they 
are selective about what things have meaning to them and what don’t. All told, these 
differences affect what we say and what we think we hear.
Variations in Trustworthiness & Credibility 
Without trust between you and the 
other person, communication is apt to be flawed. Instead of communicating, both of you 
will be concentrating on defensive tactics, not the meaning of the message being ex-
changed. How will subordinates react to you as a manager if your predecessors in your 
job lied to them? They may give you the benefit of a doubt, but they may be waiting for 
the first opportunity to be confirmed in the belief that you will break their trust.31
Oversized Egos 
Our egos—our pride, our self-esteem, even arrogance—are a fifth 
barrier. Egos can cause political battles, turf wars, and the passionate pursuit of power, 
credit, and resources. Egos influence how we treat each other as well as how receptive 
we are to being influenced by others. Ever had someone take credit for an idea that 
was yours? Then you know how powerful ego feelings can be.
Big egos are certainly a factor when managers tune out workers’ ideas, a frequent 
employee complaint—and often they’re right, according to some research.32 “People 
in powerful positions, such as managers, tend to dismiss others’ advice when making 
decisions,” says one summary.33 Indeed, people with high levels of power—motivated 
by feelings of competitiveness—tend to discount advice from experts and novices 
equally. (Individuals with neutral and low levels of power weigh advice from experts 
and experienced advisors more heavily than advice from novices.) Researchers found 
that women were more likely than men to take others’ advice.
Faulty Listening Skills 
When you go to a party, do people ever ask questions of 
you and about who you are and what you’re doing? Or are they too ready to talk about 
themselves? And do they seem to be waiting for you to finish talking so that they can 
then resume saying what they want to say? (But here’s a test: Do you actually listen 
when they are talking?)
Tendency to Judge Others’ Messages 
Suppose another student in this class 
sees you reading this text and says, “I like the book we’re reading.” You might say, “I 
agree.” Or you might say, “I disagree—it’s boring.” The point is that we all have a 
natural tendency, according to psychologist Carl Rogers, to judge others’ statements 
from our own point of view (especially if we have strong feelings about the issue).34
Inability to Listen with Understanding 
To really listen with understanding, you 
have to imagine yourself in the other person’s shoes. Or, as Rogers and his coauthor put it, 
you have to “see the expressed idea and attitude from the other person’s point of view, to 
sense how it feels to him, to achieve his frame of reference in regard to the thing he is talk-
ing about.”35 When you listen with understanding, it makes you feel less defensive (even 
if the message is criticism) and improves your accuracy in perceiving the message.
Stereotypes & Prejudices 
We discussed stereotyping in Chapter 11. A stereotype 
consists of oversimplified beliefs about a certain group of people. There are, for instance, 
common stereotypes about old people, young people, males, and females. Wouldn’t you 
hate to be categorized according to just a couple of exaggerated attributes—by your age 
and gender, for example? (“Young men are reckless.” “Old women are scolds.” Yes, 
some young men and some old women are this way, but it’s unrealistic and unfair to tar 
every individual in these groups with the same brush.)
We consider matters of gender communication later in this chapter.

490 
PART 5 
Leading
Bored or tired? People’s 
behavior doesn’t always reflect 
what’s going on around them. It 
may reflect what’s going on 
inside of them. Perhaps this 
man on the right was up late 
the night before with a sick 
child or working to meet a 
project deadline. Even so, when 
speaking, you need to watch 
your audience for their reactions.
Nonverbal Communication 
Do your gestures and facial expressions contradict 
your words? This is the sort of nonverbal communication of which you may not even 
be aware. We discuss this subject in more detail next.
Nonverbal Communication: How Unwritten & 
Unspoken Messages May Mislead
“The best waiters know what type of service you prefer before you tell them,” says 
one report. It’s called “having eyes” for a table or “feeling” or “reading” the table—
noting diners’ nonverbal communication: body language, eye contact, expressions, 
moods.36 
Nonverbal communication consists of messages sent outside of the written or spo-
ken word. Says one writer, it includes such factors as “use of time and space, distance 
between persons when conversing, use of color, dress, walking behavior, standing, 
positioning, seating arrangement, office locations, and furnishings.”37 Perhaps 65% of 
every conversation is partially interpreted through nonverbal communication, accord-
ing to some experts.38 Others estimate nonverbal communication is responsible for as 
much as 93%–95% of a message.39 
Given the prevalence of nonverbal communication and its impact on organizational 
behavior (such as hiring decisions, perceptions of others, and getting one’s ideas ac-
cepted by others), it is important that you become familiar with the various sources of 
nonverbal communication.40 Indeed, this is particularly so when you are dealing with 
people of other cultures around the world, as we saw back in Chapter 4 (Section 4.5) 
in our discussion of cultural differences.41
Six ways in which nonverbal communication is expressed are through (1) eye 
contact, (2) facial expressions, (3) body movements and gestures, (4) touch, (5) set-
ting, and (6) time. (Some lists add interpersonal space, which we discussed in 
Chapter 4.)
1. Eye Contact 
Eye contact serves four functions in communication: (1) It signals 
the beginning and end of a conversation; there is a tendency to look away from others 
when beginning to speak and to look at them when done. (2) It expresses emotion; for 
instance, most people tend to avoid eye contact when conveying bad news or negative 
feedback. (3) Gazing monitors feedback because it reflects interest and attention. 
(4) Depending on the culture, gazing also expresses the type of relationship between 
the people communicating. For instance, Westerners are taught at an early age to look 
at their parents when spoken to. However, Asians are taught to avoid eye contact with 
a parent or superior in order to show obedience and subservience.42
2. Facial Expressions 
Probably you’re accustomed to thinking that smiling repre-
sents warmth, happiness, or friendship whereas frowning represents dissatisfaction or 
anger. But these interpretations of facial expressions 
don’t apply across all cultures.43 A smile, for example, 
doesn’t convey the same emotions in different countries.
3. Body Movements & Gestures 
An example of a 
body movement is leaning forward; an example of a ges-
ture is pointing. Open body positions, such as leaning 
backward, express openness, warmth, closeness, and 
availability for communication. Closed body positions, 
such as folding one’s arms or crossing one’s legs, repre-
sent defensiveness. Body movements can be extremely 
subtle; for instance, when we say, “I’m looking forward 
to . . . ,” guess which direction we tend to lean (if only 
very slightly)?44

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
491
Some body movements and gestures are associated more with one sex than the 
other, according to communication researcher Judith Hall. For instance, women nod 
their heads and move their hands more than men do. Men exhibit large body shifts and 
foot and leg movements more than women do.45
We need to point out, however, that interpretations of body language are subjective, 
hence easily misinterpreted, and highly dependent on the context and cross-cultural 
differences.46 You’ll need to be careful when trying to interpret body movements, es-
pecially when you’re operating in a different culture.
4. Touch 
Norms for touching vary significantly around the world. For example, as 
we noted in Chapter 4, in the Middle East it is normal for two males who are friends to 
walk together holding hands—not commonplace behavior in the United States. In 
Latin America, there may be effusive hugging and kissing during a business deal.47
Men and women interpret touching differently, with women tending to do more 
touching during conversations than men do.48 If women touch men, it is viewed as sex-
ual; the same interpretation is made when men touch other men.49 Yet even handshakes 
and embracing seem to be changing, with the male handshake now evolving into a range 
of more intimate gestures—“the one-armed hug, the manly shoulder bump, the A-frame 
clasp with handshake in the middle, the mutual back-slap,” as one article puts it.50 Good 
teams tend to use touch more than bad teams do, according to some research.51
5. Setting 
How do you feel when you visit someone who sits behind a big desk and 
is backlit by a window so her face is obscured? What does it say when someone comes 
out from behind his desk and invites you to sit with him on his office couch? The loca-
tion of an office (such as corner office with window versus interior office with no 
window), its size, and the choice of furniture often express the accessibility of the 
person in it.
6. Time 
When your boss keeps you waiting 45 minutes for an appointment with 
him, how do you feel? When she simply grunts or makes one-syllable responses to 
your comments, what does this say about her interest in your concerns? As a manager 
yourself, you should always give the people who work for you adequate time. You 
should also talk with them frequently during your meetings with them so they will 
understand your interest.
The table below gives some suggestions for better nonverbal communication skills. 
(See Table 15.3.)
TABLE 15.3
Toward Better Nonverbal 
Communication Skills
You can practice these skills by 
watching TV with the sound off 
and interpreting people’s 
emotions and interactions.
Source: Adapted from P. Preston, “Nonverbal Communication: Do You Really Say What You Mean?” Journal of 
Healthcare Management, March–April 2005, pp. 83–86.
DO . . . 
DON’T . . .
Maintain eye contact 
Look away from the speaker
Lean toward the speaker 
Turn away from the speaker
Speak at a moderate rate 
Speak too quickly or slowly
Speak in a quiet, reassuring tone 
Speak in an unpleasant tone
Smile and show animation 
Yawn excessively
Occasionally nod head in agreement 
Close your eyes
Be aware of your facial expressions 
Lick lips, bite nails, play with your hair

492 
PART 5 
Leading
How useful do you think these specific styles are in a managerial context? (Recall 
the discussion of men and women with reference to leadership in Chapter 14.)
Author Judith Tingley suggests that women and men should learn to “genderflex”—
temporarily use communication behaviors typical of the other gender to increase the 
potential for influence.54 For example, a female manager might use sports analogies to 
motivate a group of males.
Deborah Tannen, by contrast, recommends that everyone become aware of how dif-
fering linguistic styles affect our perceptions and judgments. A linguistic style is a 
person’s characteristic speaking patterns—pacing, pausing, directness, word choice, 
and use of questions, jokes, stories, apologies, and similar devices. For example, in a 
meeting, regardless of gender, “those who are comfortable speaking up in groups, who 
need little or no silence before raising their hands, or who speak out easily without 
TABLE 15.4 
Communication Differences
How do men and women differ?
Source: Derived from D. Tannen, “The Power of Talk: Who Gets Heard and Why,” Harvard Business Review, September–October 1995; and D. Tannen, 
You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversation (New York: Ballantine Books, 1990).
LINGUISTIC CHARACTERISTIC 
MEN 
WOMEN
Taking credit 
Greater use of “I” statements (e.g., “I did 
Greater use of “We” statements (e.g., “We
 
this” and “I did that”); more likely to boast  
did this” and “We did that”); less likely to
 
about their achievements 
boast about their achievements
Displaying confidence 
Less likely to indicate that they are  
More likely to indicate a lack of certainty
 
uncertain about an issue 
about an issue
Asking questions 
Less likely to ask questions (e.g., asking  
More likely to ask questions
 
for directions)
Conversation rituals 
Avoid making apologies because it puts  
More frequently say “I’m sorry”
 
them in a one-down position
Giving feedback 
More direct and blunt 
More tactful; tend to temper criticism 
 
 
with praise
Giving compliments 
Stingy with praise 
Pay more compliments than men do
Indirectness 
Indirect when it comes to admitting fault  
Indirect when telling others what to do
 
or when they don’t know something
Communication Differences between Men & Women
Do men dominate the top rungs of business in part because they exaggerate more? 
Men are said to be “overconfident” when recalling their past accomplishments—and 
are able to convince their peers to make them leaders—whereas women recall their 
accomplishments more accurately, putting them at a competitive disadvantage. At least 
that’s what one study suggests.52
Men are also eight times as likely as women to bargain over starting pay. Indeed, 
says one account, “Women often are less adroit at winning better salaries, assignments, 
and jobs—either because they don’t ask or because they cave in when they do.”53 In 
other words, women need to hone their negotiation skills, or else they will fall behind.
Some possible general differences in communication between genders are summa-
rized below. (See Table 15.4.) Note, however, that these don’t apply in all cases, which 
would constitute stereotyping.

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
493
Exchange of views? Men 
and women have different 
communication styles. How 
effective do you think you 
are at communicating with 
the opposite sex?
waiting to be recognized are more apt to be heard,” she says. “Those who refrain from 
talking until it’s clear that the previous speaker is finished, who wait to be recognized, 
and who are inclined to link their comments to those of others will do fine at a meeting 
where everyone else is following the same rules but will have a hard time getting heard 
in a meeting with people whose styles are more like the first pattern.”55
Do Female Executives Have an Edge in Business? 
Women & Communication
Women in business have the edge in two ways, says Chris Clarke, 
head of an executive search firm with offices in more than 
40 countries. “There is increasing evidence,” he says, “that women 
are superior at multitasking, which is needed to handle business 
complexities, and that they are better at relationships, which is 
important in developing effective teams.”56 For instance, the so-
cial-media style of young women (and increasingly women over 
40, too) is use of highly expressive language, showing a greater 
emphasis on relationships and connecting with others.57
Overcommunicating. There is another way that women also 
have an edge, suggests a BusinessWeek article: Instead of tightly 
controlling information, they are more willing to share it.58 For in-
stance, one study found that management teams with a high pro-
portion of women monitored feedback more closely and also 
promoted more interpersonal communication and employee in-
volvement in decision making.59
A representative of this viewpoint is Anu Shukla, who sold 
her Internet marketing company for $390 million and made 65 
of her 85 employees millionaires. “It’s better to overcommuni-
cate,” she says. As an example, she made it her policy to share 
information with all her employees rather than to impart it to 
selected employees on a need-to-know basis.
His & Her Styles? Anne Cummings, professor of business admin-
istration at the University of Minnesota at Duluth, suggests there 
are “masculine” and “feminine” styles in business, in which men 
tend to be more task oriented and assertive and to take greater 
intellectual risks whereas women tend to be more relationship 
oriented and “democratic” and to be more efficient at solving 
problems.60 (Of course, all this behavior operates on a continuum, 
and most people have a multitude of styles.)
YOUR CALL
Do you think a woman can be successful by taking on the 
“masculine” style? Can a man be successful taking on the 
“feminine” style?
EXAMPLE
Learning “Soft Skills” 
Today there are executive-training pro-
grams designed to teach men the value of emotion in relationships—
the use of “soft skills” to communicate, build teams, and develop 
flexibility. “The nature of modern business requires what’s more typi-
cal to the female mold of building consensus as opposed to the top-
down male military model,” says Millington F. McCoy, managing 
director of a New York executive search firm.
Interestingly, although men hold most of the top corporate jobs, 
when they want the advice of an executive coach—a trained listener 
to help them with their goals and personal problems—they usually 
turn to a woman. And, in fact, females always want another female 
as a coach. As a result, 7 out of 10 graduates of Coach U, the largest 
training school for executive coaches, are women. Because good coaches, says 
Coach U’s CEO Sandy Vilas (who is male), are intuitive communicators and have 
done a lot of personal development work, “that profile tends to fit women better.” 
Says Susan Bloch, who heads an executive coaching practice, “When a man is asked 
to coach another, they have a tendency to compete. Man to man, they have to show 
each other how great they are.”61 ●

15.4 Communication in the Information Age
How do contemporary managers use information technology to communicate more 
effectively?
THE BIG PICTURE
We discuss digital communication technology and workplace behavior, including the characteristics of the 
“Always On” (Millennial or Internet) generation. We also describe three technologies that are altering the 
communication process: videoconferencing, telecommuting, and teleworking. Finally, we discuss some 
difficulties of the digital age: security problems, privacy concerns, e-mail overload, and cell-phone abuse.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
The use of computers and information technology, which has so dramatically affected 
many aspects of the workplace, has taken us beyond communicating into multicom-
municating. Multicommunicating represents “the use of technology to participate in 
several interactions at the same time,” in one explanation.62 Examples would be an-
swering e-mail messages during a lecture, and texting during a dinner conversation or 
while participating in a group conference call. Although multicommunicating some-
times enables us to get more things done in a shorter amount of time, there are times 
and places when it also can create miscommunication and lead to stress and hurt feel-
ings.63 For example, texting and checking your-email while working with colleagues 
can be seen as not only annoying but insulting.64
Digital Communication Technology & 
Workplace Behavior65
Multicommunicating is an example of how the worldwide digital communication rev-
olution affects how we act and interact in workplace settings—both positively and 
negatively. The universal digital language of 1s and 0s gives us immediate access to 
unprecedented amounts of information and globe-spanning opportunities.
However, the very act of using technologies such as e-mail, texting, Facebook, and 
Twitter may influence the content of our communications. For example, researchers 
found that peers rate each other differently depending on the medium they use, with 
people being “far more likely to trash their colleagues via e-mail than when filling out 
a paper form,” according to a Fortune writer.66 Moreover, faster, far-flung digital 
communication doesn’t necessarily mean better communication. In one organization, 
for example, employees with the most extensive personal digital networks were found 
to be 7% more productive than their colleagues, but those with the most cohesive 
face-to-face networks were even more productive—30% more, in fact. Research on 
high-performing teams similarly found that effective teams had more face-to-face 
than digital encounters.67
The “Always On” Generation
With the rise of the Internet has also come the rise of the “Always On” generation—or 
the Net Generation, Gen Y, the Millennials—88 million people born 1977–1997, the 
largest such cohort in U.S. history. The Always On generation is accustomed to spend-
ing 8 hours a day or more looking at various screens—on cell phones, on computers, 
on TVs—constantly busy with text messaging, e-mail, and the Internet.68 This genera-
tion is much more likely (83%) to sleep with their cell phone next to their bed com-
pared with Gen X (born 1965–1980) at 68% and Baby Boomers (born 1945–1964) at 
50%.69 Millennials are the most avid users of Facebook, with a median number of 
friends of 250, compared to 200 for Gen X.70
494 
PART 5 
Leading

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
495
Hard on the heels of the Millennials is today’s young “iGeneration,” for whom tech-
nology is “simply a part of their DNA,” as one child psychologist observed.71 Indeed, 
if you are an 18- to 24-year-old, you generally watch the smallest amount of live TV 
(3½ hours a day) compared with any other age group, but you spend the most time text 
messaging (19 minutes a day) and watch the most online video (5½ minutes a day).72 
The average teenager now sends a median of 60 texts a day (up from 50 in 2009).73
In a few years, Millennials (Net Gen, Gen Y) will account for nearly half the em-
ployees in the world, and in some companies they already constitute a majority.74 Their 
outlook, therefore, is having a profound impact on the workplace, “bringing new ap-
proaches to collaboration, knowledge sharing, and innovation in businesses and gov-
ernments,” says University of Toronto professor Don Tapscott, author of Grown Up 
Digital.75 Tapscott and his fellow researchers have identified eight norms for this gen-
eration. (See Table 15.5.)
Source: Adapted from discussion in D. Tapscott, Grown Up Digital: How the Net Generation Is Changing Your World (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009), 
pp. 73–96, and from A. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organizational Behavior, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2013), p. 421.
TABLE 15.5 
Eight Norms of the Millennial or Internet Generation
 1. Freedom—the desire to experience new and different things. This norm, which takes precedence over long-term commitments, 
is expressed in a desire for flexible work hours and locations, to have a say in how things are done, and for freedom of choice.
 2. Customization—the desire to have personalized products and choices. Customization covers everything from ring tone choices 
to Facebook layouts to lifestyle choices.
 3. Scrutiny—not taking “facts” and authority figures at face value. Knowing that there is both treasure and trash on the Internet, 
this generation has learned to be skeptical, to check things out, to ask probing questions. Candor and straight talk are favored.
 4. Integrity—trust in people, products, and employers is important. This generation cares about honesty, transparency, and keeping 
commitments—although they are elastic when it comes to pirating music and practicing plagiarism.
 5. Collaboration—relationships are of key importance. Members of this generation value volunteering, know how to work and play with 
others, and are eager to offer opinions and suggestions.
 6. Entertainment—keep things moving and interesting. A job should be both challenging and fun, not a life sentence. For this 
multitasking generation, the Internet is not only a productivity tool and information source but also a personal communication 
device and “fun tool of choice.”
 7. Speed—instant feedback is expected. Used to instant-feedback video games and nanosecond answers from Google, Millennials 
prefer rapid-fire texting, instant messaging, and Tweeting to the slower e-mail. This leads them to urge faster decision making and 
feedback on job performance.
 8. Innovation—impatience for new and different user experiences. In the workplace, the traditional hierarchy is rejected in favor 
of work processes that encourage collaboration and creativity.
What kind of attitudes, preferences, and expectations do Millennials have that em-
ployers have to take into account in managing them? Millennials exhibit a thirst for 
instant gratification and quick fixes and problems with focus and diminished attention 
spans, says one study.76 They also “place a strong emphasis on finding work that’s 
personally fulfilling,” says one article. “They want work to afford them the opportunity 
to make new friends, learn new skills, and connect to a larger purpose.”77 At least as 
important as compensation are six types of rewards, expressed in order as high-quality 
colleagues, flexible work arrangements, prospects for advancement, recognition from 
one’s company or boss, a steady rate of advancement and promotion, and access to 
new experiences and challenges.78 To deal with this cohort of employees, IBM advises 
managers giving feedback to be clear, keep it loose, promote a dialogue, and keep 
notes to make feedback sessions more constructive.79

496 
PART 5 
Leading
Videoconferencing. In this 
arrangement, people in different 
locations can interact while 
viewing each other on a large 
screen. Videoconferencing 
offers considerable savings 
in time and money over the 
cost of travel. Do you think you 
would feel inhibited working 
with people in this way?
Digital Communication & the New 
Workplace: Videoconferencing, 
Telecommuting, & Teleworking
Digital communication has significantly altered the traditional link-
ages between work, place, and time. Let’s consider videoconferenc-
ing, telecommuting, and telework.
Videoconferencing 
 Fueled by recession-induced cutbacks in 
travel budgets, many corporations turned to videoconferencing, also 
known as teleconferencing, using video and audio links along with computers to allow 
people in different locations to see, hear, and talk with one another.80
Videoconferencing does not beat face-to-face meetings for opening a relationship 
with a prospective client or closing a decision. Indeed, one study found that when a 
company reduces its travel budget for personal meetings, it loses both revenue and 
profits. In fact, if a company completely eliminated business travel, corporate profits 
could drop 17% in the first year, the study found, and it would take more than three 
years for profits to reach the same level as before.81 Still, meetings via videoconferenc-
ing certainly are better than no meetings at all.
Many organizations set up special videoconferencing rooms or booths with spe-
cially equipped television cameras. Some of the more sophisticated equipment is 
known as telepresence technology, high-definition videoconference systems that sim-
ulate face-to-face meetings between users. Whereas traditional videoconferencing 
systems can be set up in a conventional conference room, telepresence systems require 
a specially designed room with multiple cameras and high-definition video screens, 
simulating “the sensation of two groups of people at identical tables facing each other 
through windows,” according to one report.82
Clearly, telepresence technology can be quite expensive. Other equipment enables 
people to attach small cameras and microphones to their desks or computer monitors. 
This enables employees to conduct long-distance meetings and training classes with-
out leaving their office or cubicle.83
Telecommuting 
As we stated in Chapter 12, telecommuting involves doing work that 
is generally performed in the office away from the office, using a variety of information 
technologies. Employees typically receive and send work from home via phone and fax or 
by using a modem to link a home computer to an office computer. Among the benefits are 
(1) reduction of capital costs, because employees work at home; (2) increased flexibility 
and autonomy for workers; (3) competitive edge in recruiting hard-to-get employees; 
(4) increased job satisfaction and lower turnover; (5) increased productivity; and (6) ability to 
tap nontraditional labor pools (such as prison inmates and homebound disabled people).84
About 24% of rural businesses and 35% of nonrural businesses in the United States cur-
rently allow employees to telecommute or telework.85 Telecommuting is more common for 
jobs that involve computer work, writing, and phone or brain work that requires concentra-
tion and limited interruptions. Although telecommuting represents an attempt to accom-
modate employee needs and desires, it requires adjustments and is not for everybody.86 
People who enjoy the social camaraderie of the office setting, for instance, probably won’t 
like it. Others lack the self-motivation needed to work at home.87 However, people like 
Sylvia Marino of Mill Valley, California, who for many years has been telecommuting 
350 miles away with Santa Monica–based Edmunds.com, which provides information to 
car buyers, find it a great way to sustain a career and still be with their children.88
Teleworking 
Recently, the term telework (or virtual office) has been adopted to 
replace the term “telecommuting” because it encompasses not just working from 
home but working from anywhere: “a client’s office, a coffee shop, an airport lounge, 

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
497
a commuter train,” in one description. “With cellphones, broadband at home, Wi-Fi, 
virtual private networks, and instant messaging becoming ubiquitous, telework has 
become easier than ever.”89 Some of those who lack a conventional office may sign up 
for shared, or “coworking,” spaces, where they socialize around a coffeepot.90 
Whatever the arrangement, employees in different locations and time zones can work 
simultaneously (called synchronous communication) and team members can work on 
the same project at different times (asynchronous communication).
The Downside of the Digital Age
It’s fair to say that the digital age has introduced almost as many difficulties as effi-
ciencies into people’s lives. Describing them all would fill a book in itself, but here let 
us concentrate on just a few that managers have to struggle with. Some difficulties are 
those we mentioned earlier, such as the lack of focus brought on by the constant dis-
traction of available electronic gadgets. Other problems are with security, privacy, 
e-mail overkill, and cell-phone abuse.
Security: Guarding against Cyberthreats 
Security is defined as a system of 
safeguards for protecting information technology against disasters, system failures, 
and unauthorized access that result in damage or loss. Security is a continuing chal-
lenge, with computer and cell-phone users constantly having to deal with threats rang-
ing from malicious software (malware) that tries to trick people into yielding 
passwords, Social Security numbers, and financial information to deviant programs 
(viruses) that can destroy or corrupt data.91 According to the Norton Cyber Crime Re-
port for 2013, the cost per cybercrime victim shot up to $298, a 50% increase over 
2012, with the total cost of those crimes amounting to $113 billion.92
The key to protecting digital communication systems against fraud, hackers, iden-
tity theft, and other threats is prevention. The table below presents some ways to pro-
tect yourself. (See Table 15.6.)
TABLE 15.6
Protecting against Security 
& Privacy Breaches on the 
Internet
Source: Derived from B. K. Williams and S. C. Sawyer, Using Information Technology: A Practical Introduction, 11th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill 
Education, 2015), pp. 94, 100, 101, 357, 478.
• 
Don’t use passwords that can be easily guessed. Use weird combinations of letters, numbers, punctuation, and mix uppercase and 
lowercase, along with special characters such as !, #, and %.
• 
Don’t use the same password for multiple sites. Avoid using the same password at different sites, since if hackers or scammers 
obtain one account, they potentially have your entire online life.
• 
Don’t reveal sensitive information on social networking sites. Even people who set their profiles to Facebook’s strictest privacy 
settings may find sensitive information leaked all over the web.
• 
Be careful about free and illegal downloads. File-sharing programs often contain spyware, as do sites containing free and illegal 
songs, movies, and TV shows.
• 
Be mindful of liability issues. Employers routinely monitor employee e-mail for offensive messages or risky material that may expose 
them to lawsuits.
• 
Keep antivirus software updated. The antivirus software on your computer won’t protect you forever. Visit the antivirus software 
maker’s website and enable the automatic update features.
Privacy: Keeping Things to Yourself 
Privacy is the right of people not to re-
veal information about themselves. Threats to privacy can range from name migra-
tion, as when a company sells its customer list to another company, to online 
snooping, to government prying and spying. A potentially devastating violation of 

498 
PART 5 
Leading
privacy is identity theft, in which thieves hijack your name and identity and use your 
good credit rating to get cash or buy things.
In some cases, Internet users are their own worst enemies, posting compromising 
information about themselves on social networking sites that may be available to, say, 
potential employers. Supposedly such websites have various options whereby users 
can choose who is and is not allowed access to their personal information, but Face-
book, for one, came in for a good deal of criticism because it altered its privacy con-
trols in such a way as to expose many of its members’ personal information online.93
Interestingly, however, 18- to 29-year-olds have been found to be more likely than 
older users of social networks to keep a keen eye on their online profiles and who can 
access them—just the opposite of what many people expected.94
E-Mail: Productivity Enhancer or Time Waster? 
 There were 182 billion 
messages a day sent worldwide in 2013, up from 144 billion in 2012, and new ac-
counts are expected to grow 6% a year.95 Think it will ever go away?
People tend to have a love-hate relationship with e-mail. We love that we can send 
and receive e-mail 24/7 from practically anywhere. But we hate the fact that the aver-
age worker receives 200 e-mails a day, according to some research.96 (But most people 
say they can’t deal with more than 50 messages in a day.97) Some other disadvantages 
of e-mail are that (1) there has been a decrease in all other forms of communication 
among coworkers—including greetings and informal conversations; (2) emotions of-
ten are poorly communicated or miscommunicated via e-mail messages; and (3) the 
greater the use of e-mail, the less connected coworkers reportedly feel.98
The table below provides some practical tips for handling e-mail. (See Table 15.7.)
TABLE 15.7
Tips for Better 
E-Mail Handling
Sources: D. Halpern, “Dr. Manners on E-Mail Dos and Don’ts,” Monitor of Psychology, April 2004, p. 5; P. R. Brown, “Same Office, Different Planets,” The 
New York Times, January, 26, 2008, p. 135; D. Newlund, “E-Mail’s High Cost,” The Arizona Republic, July 20, 2011, p. CL1; and B. K. Williams and S. C. 
Sawyer, Using Information Technology, 11th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2015), p. 81.
• 
Treat all e-mail as confidential. Pretend every message is a postcard that can be read by anyone. (Supervisors may legally read 
employee e-mail.)
• 
Be careful with jokes and informality. Nonverbal language and other subtleties are lost, so jokes may be taken as insults or criticism.
• 
Avoid sloppiness, but avoid criticizing others’ sloppiness. Avoid spelling and grammatical errors, but don’t criticize errors in 
others’ messages.
• 
When replying, quote only the relevant portion. Edit long e-mail messages you’ve received down to the relevant paragraph 
and put your response immediately following.
• 
Not every topic belongs on e-mail. Complicated topics may be better discussed on the phone or in person to avoid misunderstandings.
Smartphones: Use & Abuse
Cell phones are now mostly smartphones that can text, access e-mail and web pages, 
view TV programs, and so on. They are so widespread that the majority of respondents 
in one survey said they would sooner give up their landline phones, TVs, the Internet, 
and e-mail than surrender their mobile phones.99 And as smartphones develop more fea-
tures and make available more applications (“apps”), their importance will only increase.
Smartphone problems range from merely annoying (loud ring tones and conversa-
tions in public places) to unethical and illegal (sending pornographic photos and pho-
tographing restricted areas of materials) to deadly (distracting drivers from the road). 
A survey carried out in the United Kingdom among 1,000 people found that 77% think 
social skills now are worse than they were 20 years ago, and 72% think mobile phones 
have encouraged rudeness.100 Phone use by car drivers makes even young people drive 
erratically, moving and reacting more slowly and increasing their risk of accidents.101

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
499
Some tips for handling smartphones are shown in the table at right. (See Table 15.8.)
Social Media: Pros & Cons
Social media are Internet-based and mobile technologies used to generate interactive 
dialogue with members of a network. Two-thirds of online adults in the United States 
use social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, or LinkedIn—
mainly, they say, to stay in touch with current friends (67%) and family members 
(62%) and to connect with old friends with whom they’ve lost touch (50%).102 Social 
media also is being used in business—sometimes well, sometimes not so much.103
Enhanced Business Productivity with Social Media 
Procter and Gamble, 
the world’s largest and most profitable consumer products company, has certainly dis-
covered the benefits of social media, devoting nearly a third of its marketing budget to 
the technology. Indeed, “digital media in many cases is proving to be a faster and 
cheaper way for P&G’s brands to reach consumers,” reports The Wall Street Journal, 
“and feedback is also faster.”104
Social media also stimulates employee productivity by offering them opportunities for 
more creativity and collaboration and more job satisfaction and better work–life balance, re-
sulting in increased performance and retention.105 On the other hand, if not managed effec-
tively, social media can create many legal, financial, and personnel risks.106 For instance, each 
employee that plays fantasy football loses about one hour a week of work time.107 Social 
media can lead to hiring discrimination (by unwittingly revealing religious affiliation or sex-
ual orientation), excessive self-promotion, and decision making based on political stances.108
How often do you use social media while at work? Do you think it is helping or 
hindering your performance? You can find out by completing Self-Assessment 15.3.
TABLE 15.8
Five Rules for Using 
Smartphones
 1. Keep your voice down; 
no need to SHOUT.
 2. Don’t force the public 
to have to listen to your 
phone conversations.
 3. During meetings and 
public performances, 
shut off the ringer; set 
the phone on “vibrate.”
 4. Don’t text during meetings 
or other conversations.
 5. Don’t dial or text while 
driving.
To What Extent Are You Effectively Using 
Online Social Networking at Work?
The following survey was designed to assess how well you 
are using social networking in your job. Go to connect
.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 15.3. When 
you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
To what extent is social media helping or hurting your 
performance at work?
2. 
Based on your survey scores, what can you do to more 
effectively use social media at work? Be specific.
3. 
What policies might companies install to ensure that 
social media is used in a productive manner? Explain.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 15.3
®
The essence of social media is connectivity. If deployed effectively, social media 
enables businesses to do the following:
■ 
Connect with key stakeholders. The use of social media allows you to con-
nect in real time and over distances with many customers, suppliers, employees, 
potential talent, and other key stakeholders.
■ 
Connect with varied sources of expertise inside the organization. We’ve 
seen such connectivity demonstrated in virtual teams, redefining conventional 
organizational boundaries and drawing on different sources of talent, knowl-
edge, and experience throughout the organization.
■ 
Connect with varied sources of expertise outside the organization. Social 
media can cross organizational boundaries and connect with outsiders to help 
in problem solving. An example is crowdsourcing—obtaining services, ideas, 
or content by soliciting contributions from a large group of people, especially 
the online community of Facebook and Twitter users. A variant is crowdfund-
ing, raising money via online sources.

500 
PART 5 
Leading
EXAMPLE
Crowdsourcing: Using Facebook & Twitter to Develop New Ideas
Crowdsourcing is being applied in many fields, and not just 
Wikipedia.109 Owngig.com uses it to connect musicians and 
their fans to help organize private concerts. Open-innovation 
company InnoCentive.com uses it to solve scientific and tech-
nological problems; companies can put a problem up on the 
site and offer a cash prize for the solution, which is solved by 
an outsider about 30% of the time.110
Using Facebook to Design a Beer. Boston-based brewer Sam 
Adams joined with social media enthusiast Guy Kawasaki for a 
Facebook crowdsourcing campaign that asked fans what a good 
beer should taste like. By voting on yeast, hops, malt, color, and 
the like, fans essentially helped create a new recipe that Sam 
Adams brought out as B’Austin in March 2012.111
Using Twitter to Improve Weapons Systems. The Pentagon has 
set aside $32 million to develop “fun-to-play” computer games 
based on Twitter crowdsourcing that can refine the way weapons 
systems are tested to ensure they are free from software errors 
and security bugs.112
YOUR CALL
What are the pros and cons of using crowdsourcing to develop 
a product?
The Downside of Social Media 
We already alluded to problems of privacy and 
security associated with information technology in general, and these certainly apply 
to social media. Some other drawbacks:
■ 
Distraction. “How have e-mail, social media, and other tools designed to 
organize information morphed into their own kind of relentless taskmasters?” 
asks one business journalist.113 Productivity guru David Allen, however, ar-
gues that technology isn’t the problem; it’s just that people let themselves be 
distracted because they’re not clear about their own goals.
■ 
Leaving wrong impression. Ill-advised tweets can lead to unpleasant con-
sequences, as happened to musician Courtney Love, who was sued for defa-
mation as a result of making derogatory statements about a designer in her 
Twitter feed. Twitter users need to think twice before spontaneously making 
an announcement or spontaneously responding.114
■ 
Replacing real conversation. “Human relationships are rich; they’re messy 
and demanding,” says psychologist Sherry Turkle. “We have learned the habit 
of cleaning them up with technology.” But the little “sips” of online connec-
tion do not substitute for face-to-face conversation. “We think constant con-
nection will make us feel less lonely,” she says. “The opposite is true.”115
Some recommendations for using Facebook are shown below. (See Table 15.9.) ●
TABLE 15.9
Using Facebook in Your 
Professional Life
Sources: Excerpted and adapted from M. Ramsay, “Social Media Etiquette: A Guide and Checklist to the Benefits and Perils of Social Marketing,” 
Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, Vol. 16, No. 4 (2010), pp. 257–261; and A. Kinicki and M. Fugate, Organizational Behavior: Key 
Concepts, Skills & Best Practices, 5th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012), p. 334.
• 
Brand the product or organizational profile, but go light on sales messages. Follow the service standards of your organization.
• 
Use language relevant to your particular audience members and communicate with, not at, them. Show appreciation for them.
• 
Remember all wall posts are public. Don’t write anything not intended for public consumption.
• 
All updates should be relevant.
• 
Take customer-sensitive issues off Facebook, into a private sphere, online or offline.
• 
Ask questions on the wall posts, but follow up and respond to any feedback received.

Understand me. What’s the 
recipe for effective listening—
for really finding out what 
someone has to say? Probably it 
is listen, watch, write, think, 
question. What do you do to 
fight flagging concentration if 
you’re tired or bored? You 
suppress negative thoughts, 
ignore distractions about the 
speaker’s style of delivery or 
body language, and encourage 
the speaker with eye contact, an 
interested expression, and an 
attentive posture. This will make 
you more involved and 
interested in the subject matter.
15.5 Improving Communication Effectiveness
How can I be a better listener, reader, writer, and speaker?
THE BIG PICTURE
We describe how you can be a more effective listener, as in learning to concentrate on the content of a mes-
sage. We also describe how to be an effective reader. We offer four tips for becoming a more effective writer. 
Finally, we discuss how to be an effective speaker, through three steps.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
The principal activities the typical manager performs have to do with communica-
tion—listening, 40%; talking, 35%; reading, 16%; and writing, 9%.116 Listening and 
speaking often take place in meetings (see the Practical Action box “How to Streamline 
Meetings” earlier in this chapter), although they are not the only occasions. Human 
resource managers consider interpersonal communication skills the most important 
factor in advancing their careers, according to one survey.117 Let’s see how you can be 
more effective at the essential communication skills.
Being an Effective Listener
Is listening something you’re good at? Then you’re the exception. Generally, people 
comprehend only about 35% of a typical verbal message, experts say.118 Two-thirds 
of all employees feel management isn’t listening to them.119 Interestingly, the aver-
age speaker communicates 125 words per minute, while we can process 500 words 
per minute.
Poor listeners use this information-processing gap to daydream. They think about 
other things, thus missing the important parts of what’s being communicated. Good 
listeners know how to use these gaps effectively, mentally summarizing the speaker’s 
remarks, weighing the evidence, and listening between the lines. Listening skills, 
incidentally, are particularly important when you’re communicating in the global 
culture.
Actively listening, truly listening, involves more than hearing, which is merely the 
physical component. Active listening is the process of actively decoding and interpreting 
verbal messages. Active listening requires full attention and processing of informa-
tion, which hearing does not.
What’s Your Listening Style—or Styles? 
To begin to improve your active 
listening skills, you should first try to determine your two or three dominant listening 
styles, of the following five styles:120
 1. Appreciative style—listening to be amused.
An appreciative listener tends to listen for 
pleasure, doing easy listening and tending to 
tune out when there’s no amusement or hu-
mor in what he or she is listening to.
 2. Empathic style—tuning into the speaker’s 
emotions. An empathic listener focuses on 
the speaker’s feelings, concentrating on what 
he or she sees as well as says and reading peo-
ple’s body language and reactions.
 3. Comprehensive style—focusing on the 
speaker’s logic. A comprehensive listener 
tries to determine the rationale of the speak-
er’s argument, preferring logical presentations 
 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
501

502 
PART 5 
Leading
without interruptions, focusing on relationships among ideas, relating mes-
sages to his or her own experiences, waiting until all the information is avail-
able before expressing opinions.
 4. Discerning style—focusing on the main message. A discerning listener tries 
to determine the speaker’s main message and important points, often taking 
copious notes and concentrating hard on what the speaker says. Discerning 
listeners are good listeners and like information that flows evenly.
 5. Evaluative style—challenging the speaker. An evaluative listener listens 
analytically, all the while formulating challenges to the speaker’s points, ask-
ing lots of questions (perhaps to the point of being interruptive), and some-
times tuning out the speaker and missing data. If evaluative listeners receive 
too much illogical information, they often leave.
Do you think that you are an effective listener? Do you have a sense for what may 
be your bad listening habits? You can find out by completing Self-Assessment 15.4.
Assessing Your Listening Style
The following survey was designed to assess the overall 
strength of your listening skills. Go to connect.mheducation
.com and take Self-Assessment 15.4. When you’re done, 
answer the following questions:
1. 
Is your listening style detached, passive, or involved? 
Based on your survey scores, what can you do to become 
more of an involved listener? Be specific.
2. 
Think of two ways you can practice better listening in 
your teams at work or school. Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 15.4
®
Concentrate on the Content of the Message 
 Effective listening is a learned 
skill, but it takes energy and desire to develop it. Basically, however, it comes down to 
pay attention to the content of the message. Following are some suggestions for in-
creasing your listening skills, which you can practice in your college lectures and 
seminars. (See Table 15.10.)
TABLE 15.10
Tips for Effective Listening
Sources: Based on J. Keyser, “Active Listening Leads to Business Success,” T+D, July 2013, pp. 26–28; and B. Brooks, “The Power of Active Listening,” 
The American Salesman, December 2010, pp. 28–30.
 1. Show respect. Give everyone the opportunity to explain their ideas without interrupting. Actively try to help the sender convey his 
or her message.
 2. Listen from the first sentence. Turn off your internal thoughts and whatever you were thinking about prior to the interaction.
 3. Be mindful. Stay in the moment and focus on the sender. Don’t try to figure out what the speaker is going to say.
 4. Keep quiet. You have two ears and one mouth; use them accordingly. Try to use the 80/20 rule: your conversational partner should 
speak 80% of the time, and you should speak 20%.
 5. Ask questions. Asking questions clarifies what is being said and demonstrates that you are listening.
 6. Paraphrase and summarize. Paraphrasing amounts to repeating back to someone what you just heard them say. Summarizing is 
used to integrate or consolidate an entire conversation. Both of these techniques enhance communications accuracy because they 
help to ensure the messages are being understood correctly.
 7. Remember what was said. Either take notes or make an effort to log critical information into your mental computer.
 8. Involve your body. Use nonverbal cues to demonstrate interest and involvement.

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
503
Speed-read this? Maybe you 
could—if it’s easy or familiar 
material. But lots of things 
managers are required to read 
take patient study. How are you 
going to manage such reading 
day after day?
Being an Effective Reader
Reading shares many of the same skills as listening. You need to concen-
trate on the content of the message, judge the content and not the deliv-
ery, and concentrate on the main ideas. But because managers usually 
have to do so much reading, you also need to learn to apply some other 
strategies.
Realize that Speed Reading Doesn’t Work 
Perhaps you’ve 
thought that somewhere along the line you could take a course on speed 
reading. By and large, however, speed reading isn’t effective. Psycholo-
gists have found that speed reading or skimming may work well with 
easy or familiar reading material, but it can lead to problems with dense 
or unfamiliar material. For instance, in one study, when questioned 
about their reading of difficult material, average readers got half the 
questions right, while speed readers got only one in three.121
Do Top-Down Reading—SQ3R 
“The key to better reading is to be 
a productive rather than a passive reader,” writes Alesandrini. “You’ll 
get more out of what you read if you literally produce meaningful 
connections between what you already know and what you’re 
reading.”122 This leads to what she calls a “top-down” strategy for reading, a variant on 
the SQ3R (Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review) method we discussed in the box at 
the end of Chapter 1. The top-down system is shown below. (See Table 15.11.)
TABLE 15.11 
Five Steps to Better Reading
Source: Derived from K. Alesandrini, Survive Information Overload (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1992), pp. 191–202.
 1. Rate reasons to read. Rate your reasons for reading (“Why should I read this? Will reading it contribute to my goals?”).
 2. Question and predict answers. Formulate specific questions you want the reading to answer. This will give you reasons for reading—to 
get answers to your questions.
 3. Survey the big picture. Survey the material to be read so you can get a sense of the whole. Take a few minutes to get an overview so 
that you’ll be better able to read with purpose.
 4. Skim for main ideas. Skimming the material is similar to surveying, except it’s on a smaller scale. You look for the essence of each 
subsection or paragraph.
 5. Summarize. Summarize as you skim. Verbally restate or write notes of the main points, using your own words. Visualize or sketch the main 
points. Answer your initial questions as you skim the material.
Being an Effective Writer
Writing is an essential management skill, all the more so because e-mail and texting has 
replaced the telephone in so much of business communication. In addition, downsizing 
has eliminated the administrative assistants who used to edit and correct business 
correspondence, so even upper-level executives often do their own correspondence 
now.123 A lot of students, however, don’t get enough practice in writing, which puts 
them at a career disadvantage. Most will have to be able to write standout job-seeking 
cover letters to accompany their resumes and later to write winning business proposals.124 
Taking a business writing class can be a real advantage. (Indeed, as a manager, you may 
have to identify employees who need writing training.)

504 
PART 5 
Leading
Following are some tips for writing more effectively. These apply particularly to 
memos and reports but are also applicable to e-mail messages.
Don’t Show Your Ignorance 
E-mail correspondence and texting have made peo-
ple more relaxed about spelling and grammar rules. Although this is fine among friends, 
as a manager you’ll need to create a more favorable impression in your writing. Besides 
using the spelling checkers and grammar checkers built in to your word processing 
software, you should reread, indeed proofread, your writing before sending it on.
Some other tips are shown at left. (See Table 15.12.)
Understand Your Strategy before You Write 
Following are three strategies for 
laying out your ideas in writing.
 1. Most important to least important. This is a good strategy when the action 
you want your reader to take is logical and not highly political.
 2. Least controversial to most controversial. This builds support gradually and 
is best used when the decision is controversial or your reader is attached to a 
particular solution other than the one you’re proposing.
 3. Negative to positive. This strategy establishes a common ground with your 
reader and puts the positive argument last, which makes it stronger.125
Start with Your Purpose 
Often people organize their messages backward, put-
ting their real purpose last, points out Alesandrini. You should start your writing by 
telling your purpose and what you expect of the reader.
Write Simply, Concisely, & Directly 
Keep your words simple and use short 
words, sentences, and phrases. Be direct instead of vague, and use the active voice rather 
than the passive. (Directness, active voice: “Please call a meeting for Wednesday.” 
Vagueness, passive voice: “It is suggested that a meeting be called for Wednesday.”)
Telegraph Your Writing with a Powerful Layout 
Make your writing as easy to 
read as possible, using the tools of highlighting and white space.
■ 
Highlighting. Highlighting consists of using boldface and italics to empha-
size key concepts and introduce new concepts, and bullets—small circles or 
squares like the ones in the list you’re reading—to emphasize list items. 
(Don’t overuse any of these devices, or they’ll lose their effect. And particu-
larly don’t use ALL CAPITAL LETTERS for emphasis, except rarely.)
■ 
White space. White space, which consists of wide margins and a break be-
tween paragraphs, produces a page that is clean and attractive.126
Being an Effective Speaker
Speaking or talking covers a range of activities, from one-on-one conversations, to 
participating in meetings, to giving formal presentations. In terms of personal oral 
communication, most of the best advice comes under the heading of listening, since 
effective listening will dictate the appropriate talking you need to do.
However, the ability to talk to a room full of people—to make an oral presenta-
tion—is one of the greatest skills you can have. A study conducted by AT&T and 
Stanford University found that the top predictor of success and professional upward 
mobility is how much you enjoy public speaking and how effective you are at it.127
The biggest problem most people have with public speaking is controlling their 
nerves, since 46% of adults say the activity they dread most—exceeding houseclean-
ing, 43%, and visiting the dentist, 41%—is public speaking (called glossophobia).128 
Author and lecturer Gael Lindenfield suggests that you can prepare your nerves by 
TABLE 15.12
Five Rules for Business 
Writing, Both Online & Offline
DON’T . . .
 1. begin an e-mail with 
“Hey.”
 2. use abbreviations.
DO . . .
 3. spell words correctly.
 4. use complete sentences.
 5. use proper capitalization 
and punctuation.
Source: Derived from J. R. Fine, 
“Enhancing Gen Y Communication 
Skills,” Society for Human Resource 
Management, March 13, 2009.

 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
505
practicing your speech until it’s near perfect, visualizing yourself performing with 
brilliance, getting reassurance from a friend, and getting to the speaking site early and 
releasing physical tension by doing deep breathing. (And staying away from alcohol 
and caffeine pick-me-ups before your speech.129) Some people find they do better if 
they stay away from their notes and just speak from the heart.130
As for the content of the speech, some brief and valuable advice is offered 
by speechwriter Phil Theibert, who says a speech comprises just three simple rules: 
(1) Tell them what you’re going to say. (2) Say it. (3) Tell them what you said.131
1. Tell Them What You’re Going to Say 
The introduction should take 5%–15% 
of your speaking time, and it should prepare the audience for the rest of the speech. 
Avoid jokes and such tired phrases as “I’m honored to be with you here today. . . .” 
Because everything in your speech should be relevant, try to go right to the point. For 
example:
“Good afternoon. The subject of identity theft may seem far removed from the 
concerns of most employees. But I intend to describe how our supposedly 
private credit, health, employment, and other records are vulnerable to theft 
by so-called identity thieves and how you can protect yourself.”
2. Say It 
The main body of the speech takes up 75%–90% of your time. The most 
important thing to realize is that your audience won’t remember more than a few 
points anyway. Thus, you need to decide which three or four points must be remem-
bered.132 Then cover them as succinctly as possible.
Be particularly attentive to transitions during the main body of the speech. Listen-
ing differs from reading in that the listener has only one chance to get your meaning. 
Thus, be sure you constantly provide your listeners with guidelines and transitional 
phrases so they can see where you’re going. Example:
“There are five ways the security of your supposedly private files can be 
compromised. The first way is . . . ”
3. Tell Them What You Said 
The end might take 5%–10% of your time. Many 
professional speakers consider the conclusion to be as important as the introduction, 
so don’t drop the ball here. You need a solid, strong, 
persuasive wrap-up.
Use some sort of signal phrase that cues your listen-
ers that you are heading into your wind-up. Examples:
“Let’s review the main points . . .”
“In conclusion, what CAN you do to protect against 
unauthorized invasion of your private files? I point 
out five main steps. One . . .”
Give some thought to the last thing you will say. It 
should be strongly upbeat, a call to action, a thought for 
the day, a little story, a quotation. Examples:
“I want to leave you with one last thought . . .”
“Finally, let me close by sharing something that 
happened to me . . .”
“As Albert Einstein said, ‘Imagination is more 
important than knowledge.’”
Then say “Thank you” and stop talking. ●
Predictor for success. 
Enjoying public speaking and 
being good at it are the top 
predictors of success and 
upward mobility. Do you think 
you could develop these skills?

Key Terms Used in This Chapter
active listening 501
communication 478
crowdsourcing 499
decoding 479
defensive communication 488
downward communication 483
encoding 479
external communication 484
feedback 479
formal communication 
channels 482
grapevine 484
horizontal communication 483
identity theft 498
informal communication 
channels 484
jargon 487
linguistic style 492
management by wandering 
around (MBWA) 484
media richness 481
medium 479
message 479
multicommunicating 494
noise 480
nondefensive communication 488
nonverbal communication 490
paraphrasing 479
privacy 497
receiver 479
security 497
semantics 487
sender 479
social media 499
stereotype 489
telepresence technology 496
upward communication 483
Key Points
15.1 The Communication Process: 
What It Is, How It Works
• Communication is the transfer of information 
and understanding from one person to 
another. The process involves sender, 
message, and receiver; encoding and 
decoding; the medium; feedback; and 
dealing with “noise.”
• The sender is the person wanting to share 
information. The information is called a 
message. The receiver is the person for 
whom the message is intended. Encoding is 
translating a message into understandable 
symbols or language. Decoding is 
interpreting and trying to make sense of the 
message. The medium is the pathway by 
which a message travels. Feedback is the 
process in which a receiver expresses his or 
her reaction to the sender’s message.
• The entire communication process can be 
disrupted at any point by noise, defined as 
any disturbance that interferes with the 
transmission of a message.
• For effective communication, a manager 
must select the right medium. Media 
richness indicates how well a particular 
medium conveys information and promotes 
learning. The richer a medium is, the better 
it is at conveying information. Face-to-face 
presence is the richest; an advertising flyer 
would be one of the lowest. A rich medium 
is best for nonroutine situations and to 
avoid oversimplification. A lean medium is 
best for routine situations and to avoid 
overloading.
15.2 How Managers Fit into the 
Communication Process
• Communication channels may be formal or 
informal.
• Formal communication channels follow the 
chain of command and are recognized as 
official. Formal communication is of three 
types: (1) Vertical communication is the flow 
of messages up and down the organizational 
hierarchy. (2) Horizontal communication 
flows within and between work units; its 
main purpose is coordination. (3) External 
communication flows between people inside 
and outside the organization.
• Informal communication channels develop 
outside the formal structure and do not follow 
the chain of command. Two aspects of 
informal channels are the grapevine and 
management by wandering around. (1) The 
grapevine is the unofficial communication 
system of the informal organization. The 
grapevine is faster than formal channels, is 
about 75% accurate, and is used by 
employees to acquire most on-the-job 
information. (2) In management by wandering 
around (MBWA), a manager literally wanders 
around his or her organization and talks with 
people across all lines of authority; this reduces 
distortion caused by formal communication.
15.3 Barriers to Communication
• Barriers to communication are of three types: 
(1) Physical barriers are exemplified by walls, 
background noise, and time-zone differences. 
(2) Semantics is the study of the meaning 
506 
PART 5 
Leading

of words. Jargon, terminology specific to 
a particular profession or group, can be 
a semantic barrier. (3) Personal barriers 
are individual attributes that hinder 
communication.
• Nine such personal barriers are (a) variable 
skills in communicating effectively, 
(b) variations in frames of reference and 
experiences that affect how information is 
interpreted, (c) variations in trustworthiness 
and credibility, (d) oversized egos, (e) faulty 
listening skills, (f) tendency to judge others’ 
messages, (g) inability to listen with 
understanding, (h) stereotypes (oversimplified 
beliefs about a certain group of people) and 
prejudices, and (i) nonverbal communication 
(messages sent outside of the written or 
spoken word, including body language).
• Six ways in which nonverbal communication 
is expressed are through (1) eye contact, 
(2) facial expressions, (3) body movements 
and gestures, (4) touch, (5) setting, and 
(6) time.
15.4 Communication in the 
Information Age
• A modern-day trend is multicommunicating, 
the use of technology to participate in 
several interactions at the same time. The 
universal language of 1s and 0s gives us 
immediate access to unprecedented 
amounts of information; however, faster, 
far-flung digital communication does not  
necessarily mean better communication.
• With the rise of the Internet has come the 
rise of the “Always On” generation (Net 
Generation, Gen Y, the Millennials), 
88 million people born 1977–1997, who 
are accustomed to digital communication 
and who in a few years will account for 
nearly half the employees in the world. 
Their outlook is having a profound impact 
on the workplace, bringing new approaches 
to collaboration, knowledge sharing, and 
innovation. This generation puts a strong 
emphasis on finding work that’s personally 
fulfilling, craves stimulation, and seeks 
high-quality colleagues and flexible work 
arrangements.
• Digital communication has altered traditional 
links between work, place, and time, as seen 
in videoconferencing (teleconferencing) and 
telepresence technology (high-definition 
videoconferencing systems that simulate 
face-to-face meetings between users); 
telecommuting, involving performing office 
work at home; and teleworking, involving 
performing office work nearly anywhere.
• The downside of the digital age involves 
problems with security, safeguards for 
protecting information technology against 
disasters, system failures, and unauthorized 
access; privacy, the right of people not to 
reveal information about themselves, 
particularly identify theft, in which thieves 
highjack a person’s name and identity and 
use his or her good credit rating to get cash 
or buy things; e-mail productivity problems; 
and cellphone use and abuse.
• Social media—Internet-based and mobile 
technologies (Facebook, Twitter) used to 
generate interactive dialogue with members 
of a network—enable businesses to connect 
in real time and over distances with many 
customers, suppliers, and employees. Social 
media are also used in crowdsourcing—
obtaining needed services, ideas, or content 
by soliciting contributions from a large group 
of people.
15.5 Improving Communication 
Effectiveness
• People tend to favor only a few of five 
listening styles—appreciative, empathic, 
comprehensive, discerning, and evaluative. 
Active listening, the process of actively 
decoding and interpreting verbal messages, 
requires full attention and processing 
of information. To become a good listener, 
you should concentrate on the content 
of the message, not delivery; ask questions 
and summarize the speaker’s remarks; 
listen for ideas; resist distractions and 
show interest; and give the speaker a 
fair hearing.
• To become a good reader, you need to first 
realize that speed reading usually doesn’t 
work. You should also be savvy about how 
you handle periodicals and books, transfer 
your reading load to some of your employees, 
and ask others to use e-mails and reports to 
tell you what they want you to do. A top-
down reading system that’s a variant on the 
SQ3R system (survey, question, read, recite, 
review) is also helpful.
• To become an effective writer, you can follow 
several suggestions. Use spelling and 
grammar checkers in word processing 
software. Use three strategies for laying out 
your ideas in writing: go from most important 
topic to least important; go from least 
controversial topic to most controversial; and 
go from negative to positive. When 
organizing your message, start with your 
purpose. Write simply, concisely, and 
directly. Telegraph your writing through use 
of highlighting and white space.
• To become an effective speaker, follow three 
simple rules. Tell people what you’re going to 
say. Say it. Tell them what you said.
 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
507

 1. Explain the communications process.
 2. What are the extremes of media richness?
 3. Explain the differences between formal and 
informal communication channels.
 4. What are the three types of barriers to 
communication and examples of each?
 5. Explain multicommunicating.
 6. What are some ways digital communication is 
altering traditional communication?
 7. What is the downside of the digital age?
 8. Explain how social media can be a benefit in 
business.
 9. Explain the five listening styles and how to be a 
good listener.
 10. What are some tips for becoming a good reader?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
Hootsuite Uses Social Media to Manage 
Aspects of the Human Resources Function
Ambrosia Humphrey’s passion and drive are hard to 
miss—especially for the CEO with whom she had to 
share a desk when she began working at social media 
management company Hootsuite.
Humphrey, now vice president of talent at the 
Vancouver-based company, says she and CEO Ryan 
Holmes both have “disruptive” personalities and like 
finding new ways to do things. . . .
Hootsuite offers online dashboards in 15 languages 
to help companies manage and analyze their social 
media accounts, including Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, 
Google Plus and others. . . .
Naturally, Hootsuite has folded media into its HR 
efforts for recruiting, onboarding, recognition, perfor-
mance management and brand management. The com-
pany uses the private social network Yammer for 
internal communications and a social platform called 
7Geese for performance management.
The effect of social media on Humphrey’s own 
workplace is undeniable.
Shortly after Steve Johnson, Hootsuite’s chief reve-
nue officer, joined the company as its 26th employee in 
2011, Humphrey decided to hold a recruiting fair with 
just five days to plan. Johnson was worried they’d have 
an empty room, but Humphrey kicked her social media 
machine into high gear and the place was packed. . . .
Humphrey is a realist about the fact that it’s not 
possible to control exactly how and when each em-
ployee will use social media. She has built an HR team 
of 15, and her group is vastly outnumbered by employ-
ees with multiple social media accounts of their own. 
Each staff member receives some social media training 
and is then trusted to act responsibly.
“We’re a social organization,” Humphrey says. “In 
my reality, if people aren’t happy, they tweet about it. 
That’s a PR problem. I would rather have an ongoing 
dialogue with people. There’s no need to be disgrun-
tled and push it out somewhere else.”
She strives to make every HR initiative transparent 
so that employees don’t share their grievances with the 
rest of the world, 140 characters at a time.
Training begins with social media certification 
through Hootsuite University, which educates individ-
uals on what social media can do to help them in their 
job, how it can affect their careers, and how it can pro-
vide product training.
Humphrey follows the mantra “tweet to love not 
war” and sees herself as an ambassador of her com-
pany. Employees are encouraged to use the hashtag 
#hootsuitelife to present their perspectives on what it’s 
like to work at the company. Postings include photos 
of rooftop meetings, links to media rankings of Hoot-
suite as a top workplace, and employee kudos to each 
other. Together, the postings give people a feel for the 
quirkiness of life at the company.
Schmidt sees #hootsuitelife as a perfect example of 
how Humphrey is willing to take risks that other HR 
leaders won’t. “It’s about empowering your employ-
ees,” he says. “All employees have the opportunity to 
be great brand ambassadors.”
Culture is one of Humphrey’s top priorities, and 
Hootsuite’s social media efforts are part of a larger 
commitment to transparency. Humphrey cites “Ask 
Me Anything” all-staff meetings with the CEO, “hack-
athons” where staff assemble to tackle problems (they 
teamed up to create a recruitment video one day), and 
a “working out loud” philosophy where people like to 
show their work and get feedback.
In a company blog, Humphrey pointed out that 
transparency fueled by social media can give compa-
nies the same kind of feedback from employees that 
they find to be so valuable when it comes to customers. 
Management in Action
508 
PART 5 
Leading

“Thanks to social media, feedback no longer needs to 
be a horoscope delivered too late; it’s about active 
listening for both employee and organizational 
empowerment,” she wrote. . . .
Like many people, Humphrey has found that social 
media can sometimes blur the lines between one’s per-
sonal and professional lives. . . . Having her engage-
ment make the local evening news and trend locally on 
Twitter was a touch mortifying, she admits—even for 
someone known to love transparency and social media.
Source: Excerpted from T. Lytle, “Social Work: Hootsuite’s VP of Talent 
Takes Social Media to the Next Level,” HR Magazine, August 2014, pp. 
40–42. Copyright © 2014, Society for Human Resource Management, 
Alexandria, VA. Used with permission. All rights reserved.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. To what extent is Hootsuite’s use of social media 
consistent with recommendations about matching 
the richness of media to the situation at hand?
 2. How does Hootsuite’s use of social media tend to 
eliminate barriers to communication? Explain.
 3. Which of the downsides to social media are occur-
ring at Hootsuite? Explain.
 4. What are the primary benefits of social media at 
Hootsuite?
 5. What does this case teach you about the use of social 
media in today’s organizations? Explain.
Should Professors’ Tweets Be Part of Their 
Academic Freedom to Comment on 
Controversial Topics?
Two professors experienced negative consequences 
because of the content of their tweets. Professor 
Steven Salaita, professor of indigenous studies, “wrote 
dozens of inflammatory tweets condemning Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Israel’s mili-
tary assaults in Gaza,” according to The Wall Street 
Journal. He engaged in these writings after quitting a 
tenured job at Virginia Tech but before his job offer 
from the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana 
was formally approved. He had accepted an offer from 
the university. The university subsequently did not ap-
prove his job offer. This decision has rankled academic 
free-speech advocates. According to the Journal, 
a representative from the “Illinois branch of the 
American Association of University Professors said if 
the school voided a job offer due to tweets about the 
Palestinian-Israel conflict it ‘would be a clear violation 
of Professor Salaita’s academic freedom.’”
The second incident involved a journalism profes-
sor at the University of Kansas. According to the 
Journal, he was “temporarily suspended after he at-
tacked the National Rifle Association in a tweet about 
the Washington Navy Yard shooting.” He had tweeted 
“the blood is on the hands of the #NRA. Next time, let 
it be YOUR sons and daughters. Shame on you. May 
God damn you.”
Source: Excerpted from D. Belkin, “Tweets on Israel Cost Professor a 
New Job,” The Wall Street Journal, August 14, 2014, p. A6.
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
What do you think should be done with professors 
who tweet on controversial issues?
 1. While these two professors may have shown bad 
judgment, they should not be severely punished. Ac-
ademic freedom allows professors to comment on 
controversial issues and it is a violation of this right 
to revoke a job offer or suspend someone for their 
tweets on such matters.
 2. They both got what they deserved. Academic free-
dom doesn’t allow people to make outlandish com-
ments. Professors, like any professional employees, 
should know that they represent their employer at all 
times. Offensive comments make for bad publicity.
 3. If the tweets were made on personal devices, then the 
professors should not be penalized. Instead, sanc-
tions should be applied if the tweets were made on 
university equipment.
 4. Invent other options.
Legal/Ethical Challenge
 
Interpersonal & Organizational Communication 
CHAPTER 15 
509

PART 6 
CONTROLLING
Control Systems & Quality 
Management
Techniques for Enhancing Organizational 
Effectiveness
16
Major Questions You Should Be Able to Answer
16.1 Control: When Managers Monitor Performance
Major Question: Why is control such an important managerial 
function?
16.2 Levels & Areas of Control
Major Question: How do successful companies implement 
controls?
16.3 The Balanced Scorecard, Strategy Maps, & 
Measurement Management
Major Question: How can three techniques—balanced 
scorecard, strategy maps, and measurement management—
help me establish standards and measure performance?
16.4 Some Financial Tools for Control
Major Question: Financial performance is important to 
most organizations. What are the financial tools I need 
to know about?
16.5 Total Quality Management
Major Question: How do top companies improve the quality 
of their products or services?
16.6 Managing Control Effectively
Major Question: What are the keys to successful control, 
and what are the barriers to control success?
16.7 Managing for Productivity
Major Question: How do managers influence productivity?

What’s Ahead in This Chapter
forecast
The final management function, control, is monitoring performance, comparing it with 
goals, and taking corrective action as needed. We define managing for performance and 
explain its importance. We then identify six reasons controlling is needed, explain the 
steps in the control process, and describe three types of control managers use. Next we 
cover levels and areas of control and financial tools for control. We discuss total quality 
management (TQM). We describe the four keys to successful control and five barriers to 
successful control. We conclude by considering how to achieve higher productivity.
How, as a manager, can you increase work productivity—
get better results with what you have to work with?
In this chapter we discuss control techniques for 
achieving better results. What are other ways for im-
proving productivity? Following are some suggestions:1
Establish Base Points, Set Goals, 
& Measure Results
To be able to tell whether your work unit is becoming 
more productive, you need to establish systems of mea-
surement. You can start by establishing the base point, 
such as the number of customers served per day, quan-
tity of products produced per hour, and the like. You can 
then set goals to establish new levels that you wish to at-
tain, and institute systems of measurement with which to 
ascertain progress. Finally, you can measure the results 
and modify the goals or work processes as necessary.
Use New Technology
Clearly, this is a favorite way to enhance perfor-
mance. With a word processor, you can produce 
more typed pages than you can with a typewriter. 
With a computerized database, you can store and 
manipulate information better than you can using a 
box of file cards. Still, computerization is not a 
 cure-all; information technology also offers plenty of 
opportunities for simply wasting time.
Improve Match between Employees & Jobs
You can take steps to ensure the best fit between 
employees and their jobs, including improving 
employee selection, paying attention to training, 
redesigning jobs, and providing financial incentives 
that are tied to performance.
Encourage Employee Involvement & Innovation
Companies improve performance by funding research 
and development (R&D) departments. As a manager, 
you can encourage your employees, who are closest 
to the work process, to come up with suggestions for 
improving their own operations. And, of course, you 
can give workers a bigger say in doing their jobs, al-
low employee flextime, and reward people for learning 
new skills and taking on additional responsibility.
Encourage Employee Diversity
By hiring people who are diverse in gender, age, race, 
and ethnicity, you’re more likely to have a workforce 
with different experiences, outlooks, values, and skills. 
By melding their differences, a team can achieve 
results that exceed the previous standards.
Redesign the Work Process
Some managers think performance can be enhanced 
through cost cutting, but this is not always the case. 
It may be that the work process can be redesigned to 
eliminate inessential steps.
For Discussion Some observers think the pressure 
on managers to perform will be even more intense 
than before, because the world is undergoing a trans-
formation on the scale of the industrial revolution 
200 years ago as we move further into an information-
based economy.2 In what ways do you think you’ll 
have to become a champion of adaptation?
the manager’s toolbox
Improving Productivity: Going beyond Control 
Techniques to Get the Best Results

16.1 
Control: When Managers Monitor Performance
Why is control such an important managerial function?
THE BIG PICTURE
Controlling is monitoring performance, comparing it with goals, and taking corrective action. This section de-
scribes six reasons why control is needed and four steps in the control process.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Control is making something happen the way it was planned to happen. Controlling is 
defined as monitoring performance, comparing it with goals, and taking corrective action 
as needed. Controlling is the fourth management function, along with planning, organizing, 
and leading, and its purpose is plain: to make sure that performance meets objectives.
■ 
Planning is setting goals and deciding how to achieve them.
■ 
Organizing is arranging tasks, people, and other resources to accomplish the 
work.
■ 
Leading is motivating people to work hard to achieve the organization’s 
goals.
■ 
Controlling is concerned with seeing that the right things happen at the right 
time in the right way.
All these functions affect one another and in turn affect an organization’s perfor-
mance and productivity. (See Figure 16.1.)
512 
PART 6 
Controlling
Planning
You set goals
& decide
how to
achieve
them.
Organizing
You arrange
tasks,
people,
& other
resources to
accomplish
the work.
Leading
You motivate
people to
work hard
to achieve
the organiza-
tion’s goals.
Controlling
You monitor
performance,
compare it
with goals,
& take
corrective
action as
needed.
For
effective
performance
FIGURE 16.1 
Controlling for effective performance
What you as a manager do to get things done, with controlling shown in relation to the three other management functions. (These are not 
lockstep; all four functions happen concurrently.)
Why Is Control Needed?
Lack of control mechanisms can lead to problems for both managers and companies. 
For example, in 2012 the CEO of Yahoo!, Scott Thompson, is discovered to have falsi-
fied his resume by claiming to have a computer science degree—and 11 days later he 
is out, bringing turmoil to an already troubled company.3 The senior banker of J.P. 
Morgan Chase, Ina Drew, contracts Lyme disease and is frequently out of the office 
when traders begin making more and more risky bets, culminating in a loss of at least 
$3 billion and public demands for greater bank regulation.4 California-based Pacific 
Gas & Electric Co. accidentally overpressurizes pipelines on its gas system more than 
120 times since its 2010 San Bruno explosion that killed eight people, raising risks of 
another disaster.5 Could greater control have helped avoid or reduce the consequences 
of these situations? Of course.
There are six reasons why control is needed.

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
513
1. To Adapt to Change & Uncertainty 
Markets shift. Consumer tastes change. 
New competitors appear. Technologies are reborn. New materials are invented. Gov-
ernment regulations are altered. All organizations must deal with these kinds of envi-
ronmental changes and uncertainties. Control systems can help managers anticipate, 
monitor, and react to these changes.6
Example: As is certainly apparent by now, the issue of global warming has created a lot 
of change and uncertainty for many industries. The restaurant industry in particular is feel-
ing the pressure to become “greener,” since restaurants are the retail world’s largest energy 
user, with a restaurant using five times more energy per square foot than any other type of 
commercial building.7 Nearly 80% of what commercial food service spends annually for 
energy use is lost in inefficient food cooking, holding, and storage. In addition, a typical 
restaurant generates 100,000 pounds of garbage per location per year. Thus, restaurants are 
being asked to reduce their “carbon footprints” by instituting tighter controls on energy use.8
2. To Discover Irregularities & Errors 
Small problems can mushroom into big 
ones. Cost overruns, manufacturing defects, employee turnover, bookkeeping errors, 
and customer dissatisfaction are all matters that may be tolerable in the short run. But 
in the long run, they can bring about even the downfall of an organization.
Example: You might not even miss a dollar a month looted from your credit card 
account. But an Internet hacker who does this with thousands of customers can under-
mine the confidence of consumers using their credit cards to charge online purchases 
at Amazon.com, Priceline.com, and other web retailers. Thus, a computer program 
that monitors Internet charge accounts for small, unexplained deductions can be a 
valuable control strategy.
3. To Reduce Costs, Increase Productivity, or Add Value 
Control systems 
can reduce labor costs, eliminate waste, increase output, and increase product delivery 
cycles. In addition, controls can help add value to a product so that customers will be 
more inclined to choose them over rival products.
Example: As we have discussed early in the book (and will again in this chapter), 
the use of quality controls among Japanese car manufacturers resulted in cars being 
produced that were perceived as being better built than American cars. Another ex-
ample: 3M Co.’s system for creating plastic picture-hanging hooks used to be split 
between four states and take 100 days; after reworking the system to get rid of “hair-
balls,” as the former CEO called them, now all production takes place at one hub and 
takes a third as much time.9
4. To Detect Opportunities 
Hot-selling products. Competitive prices on materi-
als. Changing population trends. New overseas markets. Controls can help alert man-
agers to opportunities that might have otherwise gone unnoticed.
Example: A markdown on certain grocery-store items may result in a rush of cus-
tomer demand for those products, signaling store management that similar items might 
also sell faster if they were reduced in price.
5. To Deal with Complexity 
Does the right hand know what the left hand is do-
ing? When a company becomes larger or when it merges with another company, it may 
find it has several product lines, materials-purchasing policies, customer bases, and 
worker needs.  Controls help managers coordinate these various elements.
Example: Many companies, such as fast-food chains, use “robo-scheduling” software 
that analyzes sales data to predict how many workers are needed at any given time. This 
control device may be good for the companies, but, points out one writer, it causes “havoc 
in employees’ lives: giving only a few days’ notice of working hours, sending workers 
home early when sales are slow, and shifting hours significantly from week to week.”10 In 
2014, Starbucks revised how it sets baristas’ scheduling, but other chains still require low-
wage workers to have “open availability,” meaning they must be able to work anytime 
they are needed, or be “on call,” meaning they find out only the morning they are needed.

514 
PART 6 
Controlling
FIGURE 16.2
Six reasons why 
control is needed
1. …adapt to
 
change &
 
uncertainty
Control
helps an
organization…
2. …discover
 
irregularities
 
& errors
3. …reduce costs,
 
increase
 
productivity,
 
or add value
4. …detect
 
opportunities                        
6. …decentralize
 
decision making
 
& facilitate
 
teamwork
6. …deal with
 
complexity
6. To Decentralize Decision Making & Facilitate Teamwork 
Controls allow 
top management to decentralize decision making at lower levels within the organiza-
tion and to encourage employees to work together in teams.
Example: At General Motors, former chairman Alfred Sloan set the level of return 
on investment he expected his divisions to achieve, enabling him to push decision-
making authority down to lower levels while still maintaining authority over the 
sprawling GM organization.11 Later GM used controls to facilitate the team approach 
in its joint venture with Toyota at its California plant.
The six reasons are summarized below. (See Figure 16.2.)
Steps in the Control Process
Control systems may be altered to fit specific situations, but generally they follow the 
same steps. The four control process steps are (1) establish standards; (2) measure 
performance; (3) compare performance to standards; and (4) take corrective action, if 
necessary. (See Figure 16.3.)
Step 1.
Establish
standards.
Step 2.
Measure
performance.
Step 3.
Compare
performance
to standards.
Step 4.
Take
corrective
action, if
necessary.
Feedback
If yes, take
corrective
action;
perhaps
revise
standards.
If no,
continue
work
progress &
recognize
success.
FIGURE 16.3
Steps in the control process
Paying attention to the feedback 
is particularly important 
because of its dynamic nature.
Let’s consider these four steps.
1. Establish Standards: “What Is the Outcome We Want?” 
A control stan-
dard, or performance standard or simply standard, is the desired performance level for 
a given goal. Standards may be narrow or broad, and they can be set for almost 
anything, although they are best measured when they can be made quantifiable.

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
515
Nonprofit institutions might have standards for level of charitable contributions, 
number of students retained, or degree of legal compliance. For-profit organizations 
might have standards of financial performance, employee hiring, manufacturing de-
fects, percentage increase in market share, percentage reduction in costs, number of 
customer complaints, and return on investment. More subjective standards, such as 
level of employee morale, can also be set, although they may have to be expressed more 
quantifiably as reduced absenteeism and sick days and increased job applications.
One technique for establishing standards is to use the balanced scorecard, as we 
explain later in this chapter.
2. Measure Performance: “What Is the Actual Outcome We Got?” 
The 
second step in the control process is to measure performance, such as by number of 
products sold, units produced, or cost per item sold. 
Example: Hyundai has a quality goal signified by GQ 3-3-5-5. The goal represents 
the company’s desire, expressed in 2010, to finish in the top three in quality ratings 
provided by J.D. Power’s dependability survey within three years, and to be among the 
top five quality automakers within five years.12 (Unfortunately, in 2014, no Hyundai 
cars had yet made the J.D. Power dependability list for three-year-old vehicles.13)
Performance measures are usually obtained from three sources: (1) written reports, 
including computerized printouts; (2) oral reports, as in a salesperson’s weekly recita-
tion of accomplishments to the sales manager; and (3) personal observation, as when a 
manager takes a stroll on the factory floor to see what employees are doing.
As we’ve hinted, measurement techniques can vary for different industries, such 
as for manufacturing industries versus service industries. We discuss this further 
later in the chapter.
3. Compare Performance to Standards: “How Do the Desired & Actual 
Outcomes Differ?” 
The third step in the control process is to compare measured 
performance against the standards established. Most managers are delighted with per-
formance that exceeds standards, which becomes an occasion for handing out bonuses, 
promotions, and perhaps offices with a view. For performance that is below standards, 
they need to ask: Is the deviation from performance significant? The greater the differ-
ence between desired and actual performance, the greater the need for action.
How much deviation is acceptable? That depends on the range of variation built in 
to the standards in step 1. In voting for political candidates, for instance, there is sup-
posed to be no range of variation; as the expression goes, “every vote counts” (al-
though the 2000 U.S. presidential election was an eye-opener for many people in this 
regard). In political polling, however, a range of 3%–4% error is considered an accept-
able range of variation. In machining parts for the spacecraft Orion (NASA’s sched-
uled successor to the space shuttle), the range of variation may be a good deal less 
tolerant than when machining parts for a power lawnmower.
The range of variation is often incorporated in computer systems into a principle 
called management by exception. Management by exception is a control principle that 
states that managers should be informed of a situation only if data show a significant 
deviation from standards.
4. Take Corrective Action, If Necessary: “What Changes Should We Make 
to Obtain Desirable Outcomes?” 
This step concerns feedback—modifying, if 
necessary, the control process according to the results or effects. This might be a dy-
namic process that will produce different effects every time you put the system to use.
There are three possibilities here: (1) Make no changes. (2) Recognize and rein-
force positive performance. (3) Take action to correct negative performance.
When performance meets or exceeds the standards set, managers should give re-
wards, ranging from giving a verbal “Job well done” to more substantial payoffs such 
as raises, bonuses, and promotions to reinforce good behavior.

516 
PART 6 
Controlling
When performance falls significantly short of the standard, managers should care-
fully examine the reasons why and take the appropriate action. Sometimes it may turn 
out the standards themselves were unrealistic, owing to changing conditions, in which 
case the standards need to be altered. Sometimes it may become apparent that employ-
ees haven’t been given the resources for achieving the standards. And sometimes the 
employees may need more attention from management as a way of signaling that their 
efforts have been insufficient in fulfilling their part of the job bargain. ●
EXAMPLE
Steps in the Control Process: What’s Expected of UPS Drivers?
UPS, which employs 99,000 U.S. drivers, has established Inte-
grad, an 11,500-square-foot training center 10 miles outside 
Washington, D.C. There trainees practice UPS-prescribed “340 
Methods” shown to save seconds and improve safety. Gradu-
ates of the training, who are generally former package sorters, 
are eligible to do a job that pays an average of $74,000 annu-
ally.14 (Because about 30% of driver candidates flunk training 
based on books and lectures, UPS now uses videogames, a 
contraption that simulates walking on ice, and an obstacle 
course around an artificial village.)
Establishing Standards. UPS establishes certain standards 
for its drivers that set projections for the number of miles 
driven, deliveries, and pickups. For instance, drivers are taught 
to walk at a “brisk pace” of 2.5 paces per second, except under 
icy or other unsafe conditions. However, because conditions 
vary depending on whether routes are urban, suburban, or ru-
ral, standards vary for different routes.15
Measuring Performance. Every day, UPS managers look at a 
computer printout showing the miles, deliveries, and pickups a 
driver attained during his or her shift the previous day. In general, 
drivers are expected to make five deliveries in 19 minutes.
Comparing Performance to Standards. UPS managers compare 
the printout of a driver’s performance (miles driven and number of 
pickups and deliveries) with the standards that were set for his or 
her particular route. For instance, the printout will show whether 
drivers took longer than the 15.5 seconds allowed to park a truck 
and retrieve one package from the cargo. A range of variation may 
be allowed to take into account such matters as winter or summer 
driving or traffic conditions that slow productivity.
Taking Corrective Action. When a UPS driver fails to perform ac-
cording to the standards set for him or her, a supervisor then rides 
along and gives suggestions for improvement. If drivers are unable 
to improve, they are warned, then suspended, and then dismissed.
YOUR CALL
The UPS controls were devised by industrial engineers based 
on experience. Do you think the same kinds of controls could 
be established for, say, filling out tax forms for H&R Block?
Small business. How important 
is it for small businesses to 
implement all four steps of the 
control process? Do you think 
that employees in small 
companies—such as a garden 
pots store—typically have 
more or less independence 
from managerial control than 
those in large companies do?

16.2 Levels & Areas of Control
How do successful companies implement controls?
THE BIG PICTURE
This section describes three levels of control—strategic, tactical, and operational—and six areas of control: 
physical, human, informational, financial, structural (bureaucratic and decentralized), and cultural.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
How are you going to apply the steps of control to your own management area? Let’s 
look at this in three ways: First, you need to consider the level of management at which 
you operate—top, middle, or first level. Second, you need to consider the areas
that you draw on for resources—physical, human, information, and/or financial. Finally, 
you need to consider the style or control philosophy—bureaucratic, market, or clan, as 
we will explain.
Levels of Control: Strategic, Tactical, & Operational
There are three levels of control, which correspond to the three principal managerial 
levels: strategic planning by top managers, tactical planning by middle managers, and 
operational planning by first-line (supervisory) managers and team leaders.
1. Strategic Control by Top Managers 
Strategic control is monitoring perfor-
mance to ensure that strategic plans are being implemented and taking corrective ac-
tion as needed. Strategic control is mainly performed by top managers, those at the 
CEO and VP levels, who have an organizationwide perspective. For example, former 
Ford Motor Company CEO Alan Mulally (who retired in 2014) brought the company 
back from the financial brink by instituting a weekly meeting with senior managers. 
Each manager presented a report on his or her areas, coded in green, yellow, or red to 
indicate whether business was on target or needed improvement.16
2. Tactical Control by Middle Managers 
Tactical control is monitoring perfor-
mance to ensure that tactical plans—those at the divisional or departmental level—are 
being implemented and taking corrective action as needed. Tactical control is done 
mainly by middle managers, those with such titles as “division head,” “plant manager,” 
and “branch sales manager.” Reporting is done on a weekly or monthly basis.
3. Operational Control by First-Line Managers 
Operational control is 
monitoring performance to ensure that operational plans—day-to-day goals—are being 
implemented and taking corrective action as needed. Operational control is done 
mainly by first-line managers, those with titles such as “department head” or “supervisor.” 
It also includes team leaders. Reporting is done on a daily basis.
Considerable interaction occurs among the three levels, with lower-level managers 
providing information upward and upper-level managers checking on some of the 
more critical aspects of plan implementation below them.
Six Areas of Control
The six areas of organizational control are physical, human, informational, financial, 
structural, and cultural.
1. Physical Area 
The physical area includes buildings, equipment, and tangible 
products.
 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
517

518 
PART 6 
Controlling
EXAMPLE
Supply-Chain Journey: The Tale of a Couch
A Discovery Channel documentary about modern China, The 
People’s Republic of Capitalism, traces the supply-chain path 
of a sofa. (See Figure 16.4.) This was an expensive Pratt sofa 
made and sold by Ethan Allen, the American furniture maker 
headquartered in Danbury, Connecticut.
Many Miles to Make. Cotton grown in North Carolina is sent to a 
fabric plant in China, where it is designed and weaved. That ma-
terial is then shipped to an upholstery plant in Maiden, North 
Carolina, where factory workers using both handwork and com-
puter technology construct the covering and part of the frame for 
the couch.
A factory in China contributes part of the furniture’s wooden 
base, which is sent to the North Carolina plant, where workers 
assemble the complete couch. After the sofa is inspected for 
quality, it is packed up, put on a truck, and sent to Long Beach, 
California, where it is put on a ship to China.
How Much?! In China, furniture is distributed to one of Ethan 
Allen’s 14 store locations—in this particular case, a store in 
Chongquing. The store delivers the Pratt couch to a wealthy 
Chinese couple, who paid the equivalent of $40,000 U.S. for it 
(in the U.S., it would sell for $1,900).17
YOUR CALL
How difficult do you think it is to maintain control when operat-
ing supply chains over such long distances? Could this be a 
reason why some American managers have pulled manufac-
turing back from overseas?18
FIGURE 16.4
The links in a supply chain
2. Human Resources Area 
The controls used to monitor employees include per-
sonality tests and drug testing for hiring, performance tests during training, perfor-
mance evaluations to measure work productivity, and employee surveys to assess job 
satisfaction and leadership.
3. Informational Area 
Production schedules. Sales forecasts. Environmental im-
pact statements. Analyses of competition. Public relations briefings. All these are con-
trols on an organization’s various information resources.
4. Financial Area 
Are bills being paid on time? How much money is owed by cus-
tomers? How much money is owed to suppliers? Is there enough cash on hand to meet 
Examples: There are equipment controls to monitor the use of computers, cars, and 
other machinery. There are quality controls to make sure that products are being built 
according to certain acceptable standards. There are inventory-management controls to 
keep track of how many products are in stock, how many will be needed, and what their 
delivery dates are from the supply chain, the sequence of suppliers that contribute to 
creating and delivering a product, from raw materials to production to final buyers.
1. Raw materials
2. Suppliers’ plants
3. Manufacturers
4. Wholesalers
5. Retailers
6. Consumers

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
519
Bureaucratic control. In 
businesses such as construction 
of large subdivisions, tasks are 
explicit and certain, and 
employees are expected to 
perform them the same way 
each time. However, a small 
contractor, such as one building 
custom houses, need not be 
bureaucratic.
payroll obligations? What are the debt-repayment schedules? What is the advertising 
budget? Clearly, the organization’s financial controls are important because they can 
affect the preceding three areas.
5. Structural Area 
How is the organization arranged from a hierarchical or struc-
tural standpoint?19 Two examples are bureaucratic control and decentralized control.
■ 
Bureaucratic control. Bureaucratic control is an approach to organizational 
control that is characterized by use of rules, regulations, and formal authority to 
guide performance. This form of control attempts to elicit employee compli-
ance, using strict rules, a rigid hierarchy, well-defined job descriptions, and 
administrative mechanisms such as budgets, performance appraisals, and com-
pensation schemes (external rewards to get results). The foremost example of 
use of bureaucratic control is perhaps the traditional military organization.
 Bureaucratic control works well in organizations in which the tasks are 
explicit and certain. While rigid, it can be an effective means of ensuring that 
performance standards are being met. However, it may not be effective if peo-
ple are looking for ways to stay out of trouble by simply following the rules, 
or if they try to beat the system by manipulating performance reports, or if 
they try to actively resist bureaucratic constraints.
■ 
Decentralized control. Decentralized control is an approach to organiza-
tional control that is characterized by informal and organic structural arrange-
ments, the opposite of bureaucratic control. This form of control aims to get 
increased employee commitment, using the corporate culture, group norms, 
and workers taking responsibility for their performance. Decentralized con-
trol is found in companies with a relatively flat organization.
6. Cultural Area 
The cultural area is an informal method of control. It influences 
the work process and levels of performance through the set of norms that develop as a 
result of the values and beliefs that constitute an organization’s culture. If an organiza-
tion’s culture values innovation and collaboration, then employees are likely to be 
evaluated on the basis of how much they engage in collaborative activities and enhance 
or create new products. ●

16.3 The Balanced Scorecard, Strategy Maps, 
& Measurement Management
How can three techniques—balanced scorecard, strategy maps, and measurement 
management—help me establish standards and measure performance?
THE BIG PICTURE
To establish standards, managers often use the balanced scorecard, which provides four indicators for 
progress. A visual representation of the balanced scorecard is the strategy map. Measurement management 
techniques help managers make evidence-based judgments about performance.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Wouldn’t you, as a top manager, like to have displayed in easy-to-read graphics all the 
information on sales, orders, and the like assembled from data pulled in real-time from 
corporate software? The technology exists and it has a name: a dashboard, like the 
instrument panel in a car.
“The dashboard puts me and more and more of our executives in real-time touch 
with the business,” said Ivan Seidenberg, former CEO at Verizon Communications. “The 
more eyes that see the results we’re obtaining every day, the higher the quality of the 
decisions we can make.”20
Throughout this book we have stressed the importance of evidence-based manage-
ment—the use of real-world data rather than fads and hunches in making management 
decisions. When properly done, the dashboard is an example of the important tools that 
make this kind of management possible. Others are the balanced scorecard, strategy maps,
and measurement management, techniques that even new managers will find useful.
The Balanced Scorecard: A Dashboard-like View 
of the Organization
Robert Kaplan is a professor of accounting at the Harvard Business School and a lead-
ing authority on strategic performance measurement. David Norton is co-founder of 
Balanced Scorecard Collaborative. Kaplan and Norton developed what they call the 
balanced scorecard, which gives top managers a fast but comprehensive view of the 
organization via four indicators: (1) customer satisfaction, (2) internal processes, (3) in-
novation and improvement activities, and (4) financial measures.
“Think of the balanced scorecard as the dials and indicators in an airplane cockpit,” 
write Kaplan and Norton. For a pilot, “reliance on one instrument can be fatal. Similarly, 
the complexity of managing an organization today requires that managers be able to 
view performance in several areas simultaneously.”21 It is not enough, say Kaplan and 
Norton, to simply measure financial performance, such as sales figures and return on 
investment. Operational matters, such as customer satisfaction, are equally important.22
The Balanced Scorecard: Four “Perspectives” 
The balanced scorecard es-
tablishes (a) goals and (b) performance measures according to four “perspectives” or 
areas—financial, customer, internal business, and innovation and learning. (See 
Figure 16.5, opposite page.)
1. Financial Perspective: “How Do We Look to Shareholders?” Typical 
financial goals have to do with profitability, growth, and shareholder values. Financial 
measures such as quarterly sales have been criticized as being shortsighted and not re-
flecting contemporary value-creating activities. Moreover, critics say that traditional fi-
nancial measures don’t improve customer satisfaction, quality, or employee motivation.
520 
PART 6 
Controlling

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
521
4.  Innovation & Learning
Perspective
“Can we continue to improve 
and create value?”
Goals
Measures
Goals
Measures
Goals
Measures
Goals
Measures
3.  Internal Business
Perspective
“At what must we excel?”
2.  Customer Perspective
“How do customers see us?”
1.  Financial Perspective
“How do we look to
shareholders?”
FIGURE 16.5 
The balanced scorecard: four perspectives
However, making improvements in just the other three operational “perspectives” 
we will discuss won’t necessarily translate into financial success. Kaplan and Norton 
mention the case of an electronics company that made considerable improvements in 
manufacturing capabilities that did not result in increased profitability.
The hard truth is that “if improved [operational] performance fails to be reflected in 
the bottom line, executives should reexamine the basic assumptions of their strategy 
and mission,” say Kaplan and Norton. “Not all long-term strategies are profitable strat-
egies. . . . A failure to convert improved operational performance, as measured in the 
scorecard, into improved financial performance should send executives back to their 
drawing boards to rethink the company’s strategy or its implementation plans.”23
2. Customer Perspective: “How Do Customers See Us?” Many organi-
zations make taking care of the customer a high priority. The balanced scorecard trans-
lates the mission of customer service into specific measures of concerns that really 
matter to customers—time between placing an order and taking delivery, quality in 
terms of defect level, satisfaction with products and service, and cost.
Quiznos is a good example. The company uses a speed-dining approach to develop 
new products and test out different pricing strategies. The company invites groups of 
25 people to a location in which they move from station to station and try out new 
Source: Reprinted by permission of Harvard Business Review. Exhibit from “The Balanced Scorecard—Measures that Drive Performance,” by R.S. 
Kaplan and D.P. Norton, February 1992. Copyright © 1992 by the Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation; all rights reserved.

522 
PART 6 
Controlling
menu options. This technique has reduced the time from test kitchen to market to six 
months, as opposed to the one year needed by a key competitor.24
3. Internal Business Perspective: “What Must We Excel At?” This part 
translates what the company must do internally to meet its customers’ expectations. 
These are business processes such as quality, employee skills, and productivity.25
Top management’s judgment about key internal processes must be linked to mea-
sures of employee actions at the lower levels, such as time to process customer orders, 
get materials from suppliers, produce products, and deliver them to customers. Com-
puter information systems can help, for example, in identifying late deliveries, tracing 
the problem to a particular plant.
4. Innovation & Learning Perspective: “Can We Continue to Improve & 
Create Value?” Learning and growth of employees is the foundation for all other 
goals in the balanced scorecard. The idea here is that capable and motivated employ-
ees, who possess the resources and culture needed to get the job done, will provide 
higher quality products and services in a more efficient manner. Making this happen 
requires a commitment to invest in progressive human resource practices and technol-
ogy. An organization’s commitment to innovation and learning is often assessed via 
employee surveys like the one used in the self-assessment below.
To what extent was your current or past employer committed to the innovation and 
learning of its employees? You can find out by completing Self-Assessment 16.1.
Assessing the Innovation & Learning 
Perspective of the Balanced Scorecard
The following survey was designed to assess the innovation 
and learning perspective of the balanced scorecard. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 16.1. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Where does the company stand in terms of commitment to 
innovation and learning? Are you surprised by the results?
2. 
Use the three highest and lowest scores to identify the 
strengths and weaknesses of this company’s 
commitment to innovation and learning.
3. 
Based on your answer to question 2, provide three 
suggestions for what management could do to improve 
its commitment to innovation and learning.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 16.1
®
Strategy Map: Visual Representation 
of a Balanced Scorecard
Since they devised the balanced scorecard, Kapan and Norton have come up with an 
improvement called the strategy map.26 A strategy map is a visual representation of the 
four perspectives of the balanced scorecard that enables managers to communicate 
their goals so that everyone in the company can understand how their jobs are linked to 
the overall objectives of the organization. As Kaplan and Norton state, “Strategy maps 
show the cause-and-effect links by which specific improvements create desired out-
comes,” such as objectives for revenue growth, targeted customer markets, the role of 
excellence and innovation in products, and so on.
An example of a strategy map for a company such as Target is shown on the next 
page, with the goal of creating long-term value for the firm by increasing productivity 
growth and revenue growth. (See Figure 16.6, next page.) Measures and standards can 
be developed in each of the four operational areas—financial goals, customer goals, 
internal goals, and learning and growth goals—for the strategy.

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
523
Measurement Management: “Forget Magic”
“You simply can’t manage anything you can’t measure,” said Richard Quinn, then–
vice president of quality at the Sears Merchandising Group.27
Is this really true? Concepts such as the balanced scorecard seem like good ideas, but 
how well do they actually work?28 John Lingle and William Schiemann, principals in a 
New Jersey consulting firm specializing in strategic assessment, decided to find out.29
In a survey of 203 executives in companies of varying size they identified the orga-
nizations as being of two types: measurement-managed and non-measurement-managed. 
The measurement-managed companies were those in which senior management re-
portedly agreed on measurable criteria for determining strategic success, and man-
agement updated and reviewed semiannual performance measures in three or more of 
six primary performance areas. The six areas were financial performance, operating 
FIGURE 16.6 
The strategy map 
This example might be used for a retail chain such as Target or Walmart.
• Reducing expenses
• Increasing efficiency
• New markets
• New products
• Increasing value to
 existing customers
• New customers
Financial
Goals
Customer
Goals
Internal
Goals
Learning 
& Growth 
Goals
Long-Term Value
• Deepened
 relationship
 with existing
 customers
Increased
Customer Value
• Lower cost
• Higher quality
• Greater speed
Operational
Improvements
• Effective
 relationships
 with employees,
 suppliers,
 regulators, others
Good Corporate
Citizenship
Productivity
Growth
Revenue Growth
• Competitive pricing
• Product quality
• Speedy delivery
• New products/
 services
• New market
 segments
Innovation
Operational
Excellence
• Exceptional service
• Effective solutions
Customer Intimacy
Product
Leadership
• Product functionality
• Product features
• Product performance
 Improved Competence/
Skills of Workforce  
Effective Information/
Technology Systems
Supportive Values
& Practices
Source: From T. S. Bateman and S. A. Snell, Management Leading & Collaborating in a Competitive World 7E, 2007, p. 124. Reprinted with permission 
of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.

524 
PART 6 
Controlling
efficiency, customer satisfaction, employee performance, innovation/change, and 
community/environment.
The results: “A higher percentage of measurement-managed companies were iden-
tified as industry leaders,” concluded Lingle and Schiemann, “as being financially in 
the top third of their industry, and as successfully managing their change effort.” (The 
last indicator suggests that measurement-managed companies tend to anticipate the 
future and are likely to remain in a leadership position in a rapidly changing environ-
ment.) “Forget magic,” they say. “Industry leaders we surveyed simply have a greater 
handle on the world around them.”
Why Measurement-Managed Firms Succeed: Four Mechanisms of Success 
Why do measurement-managed companies outperform those that are less disciplined? The 
study’s data point to four mechanisms that contribute to these companies’ success:30
■ 
Top executives agree on strategy. Most top executives in measurement-
managed companies agreed on business strategy, whereas most of those in 
non-measurement-managed companies reported disagreement. Translating 
strategy into measurable objectives helps make them specific.
■ 
Communication is clear. The clear message in turn is translated into good 
communication, which was characteristic of managed-measurement organiza-
tions and not of non-measurement-managed ones.
■ 
There is better focus and alignments. Measurement-managed companies 
reported more frequently that unit (division or department) performance mea-
sures were linked to strategic company measures and that individual perfor-
mance measures were linked to unit measures.
■ 
The organizational culture emphasizes teamwork and allows risk taking. 
Managers in measurement-managed companies more frequently reported 
strong teamwork and cooperation among the management team and more 
willingness to take risks.
Four Barriers to Effective Measurement 
The four most frequent barriers to 
effective measurement, according to Lingle and Schiemann, are as follows:
■ 
Objectives are fuzzy. Company objectives are often precise in the financial 
and operational areas but not in areas of customer satisfaction, employee per-
formance, and rate of change. Managers need to work at making “soft” objec-
tives measurable.
■ 
Managers put too much trust in informal feedback systems. Managers tend 
to overrate feedback mechanisms such as customer complaints or sales-force 
criticisms about products. But these mechanisms aren’t necessarily accurate.
■ 
Employees resist new measurement systems. Employees want to see how 
well measures work before they are willing to tie their financial futures to 
them. Measurement-managed companies tend to involve the workforce in de-
veloping measures.
■ 
Companies focus too much on measuring activities instead of results. Too 
much concern with measurement that is not tied to fine-tuning the organiza-
tion or spurring it on to achieve results is wasted effort.
Are There Areas that Can’t Be Measured? 
It’s clear that some areas are easier to 
measure than others—manufacturing, for example, as opposed to services. We can under-
stand how it is easier to measure the output of, say, a worker in a steel mill than that of a 
bellhop in a hotel or a professor in a classroom. Nevertheless, human resource profession-
als are trying to have a greater focus on employee productivity “metrics.”31 In establishing 
quantifiable goals for “hard to measure” jobs, managers should seek input from the 
employees involved, who are usually more familiar with the details of the jobs.32 ●

Line items. Trucks at a Walmart 
warehouse. Clearly, the capital 
budget in large companies would 
be complex. What types of data 
would be needed to justify 
expansion of a company’s 
truck fleet?
Do you check your credit card statement line by line when it comes in? Or do you just 
look at the bottom-line amount owed and write a check?
Just as you should monitor your personal finances to ensure your survival and avoid 
catastrophe, so managers need to do likewise with an organization’s finances. Whether 
your organization is for-profit or nonprofit, you need to be sure that revenues are cov-
ering costs.
There are a great many kinds of financial controls, but here let us look at the follow-
ing: budgets, financial statements, ratio analysis, and audits. (Necessarily this is 
merely an overview of this topic. Financial controls are covered in detail in other busi-
ness courses.)
Budgets: Formal Financial Projections
A budget is a formal financial projection. It states an organization’s planned activities 
for a given period of time in quantitative terms, such as dollars, hours, or number of 
products. Budgets are prepared not only for the organization as a whole but also for the 
divisions and departments within it. The point of a budget is to provide a yardstick 
against which managers can measure performance and make comparisons (as with 
other departments or previous years).
Incremental Budgeting 
Managers can take essentially two budget-planning ap-
proaches. One of them, zero-based budgeting (ZBB), which forces each department to 
start from zero in projecting funding needs, is no longer favored. The other approach, 
the traditional form of budget, which is mainly used now, is incremental budgeting.
Incremental budgeting allocates increased or decreased funds to a department by 
using the last budget period as a reference point; only incremental changes in the bud-
get request are reviewed. One difficulty is that incremental budgets tend to lock de-
partments into stable spending arrangements; they are not flexible in meeting 
environmental demands. Another difficulty is that a department may engage in many 
16.4 Some Financial Tools for Control
Financial performance is important to most organizations. What are the financial tools 
I need to know about?
THE BIG PICTURE
Financial controls are especially important. These include budgets, financial statements, ratio analysis, 
and audits.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
525

526 
PART 6 
Controlling
activities—some more important than others—but it’s not easy to sort out how well 
managers performed at the various activities. Thus, the department activities and the 
yearly budget increases take on lives of their own.
Fixed versus Variable Budgets 
There are numerous kinds of budgets, and some 
examples are listed below. (See Table 16.1.) 
TABLE 16.1
Examples of Types of Budgets
TYPE OF BUDGET 
DESCRIPTION
Cash or cashflow budget 
 Forecasts all sources of cash income and cash 
expenditures for daily, weekly, or monthly period
Capital expenditures budget 
 Anticipates investments in major assets such as land, 
buildings, and major equipment
Sales or revenue budget 
 Projects future sales, often by month, sales area, or 
product
Expense budget 
 Projects expenses (costs) for given activity for given 
period
Financial budget 
 Projects organization’s source of cash and how it plans 
to spend it in the forthcoming period
Operating budget 
 Projects what an organization will create in goods or 
services, what financial resources are needed, and what 
income is expected
Nonmonetary budget 
 Deals with units other than dollars, such as hours 
of labor or office square footage
In general, however, budgets may be categorized as two types: fixed and variable.
■ 
Fixed budgets—where resources are allocated on a single estimate of 
costs. Also known as a static budget, a fixed budget allocates resources on 
the basis of a single estimate of costs. That is, there is only one set of ex-
penses; the budget does not allow for adjustment over time. For example, you 
might have a budget of $50,000 for buying equipment in a given year—no 
matter how much you may need equipment exceeding that amount.
■ 
Variable budgets—where resources are varied in proportion with various 
levels of activity. Also known as a flexible budget, a variable budget allows 
the allocation of resources to vary in proportion with various levels of activity. 
That is, the budget can be adjusted over time to accommodate pertinent 
changes in the environment. For example, you might have a budget that al-
lows you to hire temporary workers or lease temporary equipment if produc-
tion exceeds certain levels.
Financial Statements: Summarizing the 
Organization’s Financial Status
A financial statement is a summary of some aspect of an organization’s financial sta-
tus. The information contained in such a statement is essential in helping managers 
maintain financial control over the organization.
There are two basic types of financial statements: the balance sheet and the income 
statement.

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
527
The Balance Sheet: Picture of Organization’s Financial Worth for a 
Specific Point in Time 
A balance sheet summarizes an organization’s overall 
financial worth—that is, assets and liabilities—at a specific point in time.
Assets are the resources that an organization controls; they consist of current assets 
and fixed assets. Current assets are cash and other assets that are readily convertible to 
cash within one year’s time. Examples are inventory, sales for which payment has not 
been received (accounts receivable), and U.S. Treasury bills or money market mutual 
funds. Fixed assets are property, buildings, equipment, and the like that have a useful 
life that exceeds one year but that are usually harder to convert to cash. Liabilities are 
claims, or debts, by suppliers, lenders, and other nonowners of the organization against 
a company’s assets.
The Income Statement: Picture of Organization’s Financial Results for a 
Specified Period of Time 
The balance sheet depicts the organization’s overall 
financial worth at a specific point in time. By contrast, the income statement summa-
rizes an organization’s financial results—revenues and expenses—over a specified pe-
riod of time, such as a quarter or a year.
Revenues are assets resulting from the sale of goods and services. Expenses are the 
costs required to produce those goods and services. The difference between revenues 
and expenses, called the bottom line, represents the profits or losses incurred over the 
specified period of time.
Ratio Analysis: Indicators of an Organization’s 
Financial Health
The bottom line may be the most important indicator of an organization’s financial 
health, but it isn’t the only one. Managers often use ratio analysis—the practice of 
evaluating financial ratios—to determine an organization’s financial health.
Among the types of financial ratios are those used to calculate liquidity, debt 
management, asset management, and return. Liquidity ratios indicate how easily an 
organization’s assets can be converted into cash (made liquid). Debt management 
ratios indicate the degree to which an organization can meet its long-term financial 
obligations.
Asset management ratios indicate how effectively an organization is managing its 
assets, such as whether it has obsolete or excess inventory on hand. Return ratios—
often called return on investment (ROI) or return on assets (ROA)—indicate how 
effective management is in generating a return, or profits, on its assets.
Audits: External versus Internal
When you think of auditors, do you think of grim-faced accountants looking through a 
company’s books to catch embezzlers and other cheats? That’s one function of audit-
ing, but besides verifying the accuracy and fairness of financial statements, the audit 
also is intended to be a tool for management decision making. Audits are formal verifi-
cations of an organization’s financial and operational systems.
Audits are of two types—external and internal.
External Audits—Financial Appraisals by Outside Financial Experts 
An 
external audit is a formal verification of an organization’s financial accounts and state-
ments by outside experts. The auditors are certified public accountants (CPAs) who 
work for an accounting firm (such as PricewaterhouseCoopers) that is independent of 
the organization being audited. Their task is to verify that the organization, in prepar-
ing its financial statements and in determining its assets and liabilities, followed gener-
ally accepted accounting principles.

528 
PART 6 
Controlling
Accountants at the Academy 
Awards? No, these are the 2014 
Oscar winners. Matthew 
McConaughey was voted Best Actor 
for his role in Dallas Buyers Club, 
and Cate Blanchett was voted Best 
Actress for her role in Blue Jasmine. 
But every year since 1929 the secret 
ballots for Oscar nominees voted on 
by members of the Academy of 
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 
have been tabulated by 
accountants from the firm now 
known as PricewaterhouseCoopers. 
The accounting firm takes this 
event very seriously; secrecy is 
tight, and there is no loose gossip 
around the office water cooler. Two 
accountants tally the votes, stuff 
the winners’ names in the 
envelopes—the ones that will be 
handed to award presenters during 
the Academy Awards—and then 
memorize the winners’ names, just 
in case the envelopes don’t make 
it to the show. Accounting is an 
important business because 
investors depend on independent 
auditors to verify that a company’s 
finances are what they are 
purported to be.
Internal Audits—Financial Appraisals by Inside Financial Experts 
An 
internal audit is a verification of an organization’s financial accounts and statements by 
the organization’s own professional staff. Their jobs are the same as those of outside 
experts—to verify the accuracy of the organization’s records and operating activities. 
Internal audits also help uncover inefficiencies and thus help managers evaluate the 
performance of their control systems.
We would like to end this section on financial tools in a more personal manner by 
assessing your financial literacy. Self-Assessment 16.2 evaluates your knowledge in 
matters associated with interest-bearing accounts, investments, inflation, pensions, 
creditworthiness, and insurance. It’s a fun way to find out if your financial literacy is 
up to speed. ●
Assessing Your Financial Literacy
The following survey was designed to assess your financial literacy. 
Go to connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 16.2. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
Where do you stand in terms of financial literacy?
2. 
Look at the statements you got incorrect, and identify 
the specific aspects of financial knowledge that you 
may be lacking.
3. 
What can you do to improve your financial literacy? 
Be specific.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 16.2
®

16.5 Total Quality Management
How do top companies improve the quality of their products or services?
THE BIG PICTURE
Total quality management (TQM) is dedicated to continuous quality improvement, training, and customer 
satisfaction. Two core principles are people orientation and improvement orientation. Some techniques 
for improving quality are employee involvement, benchmarking, outsourcing, reduced cycle time, and 
statistical process control.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
529
The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Co., LLC, a luxury chain of 86 hotels in 29 countries that is 
an independently operated division of Marriott International, puts a premium on 
doing things right. First-year managers and employees receive 250–310 hours of 
training. The president meets each employee at a new hotel to ensure he or she un-
derstands the Ritz-Carlton standards for service. The chain has also developed a 
database that records the preferences of more than 1 million customers, so that each 
hotel can anticipate guests’ needs.33 (Attentive service may be helped by Ritz- 
Carlton’s employee policies: A 2014 survey rated it No. 2 among top companies for 
work-life balance.34)
Because of this diligence, the Ritz-Carlton has twice been the recipient (in 1992 and 
in 1999) of the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award. The award was created by 
Congress in 1987 to be the most prestigious recognition of quality—the total ability of 
a product or service to meet customer needs—in the United States. It is given annually 
to U.S. organizations in manufacturing, service, small business, health care, education, 
and nonprofit fields.35 (That the award actually means something is shown by a study 
that found that hospitals that received the honor significantly outperformed other hos-
pitals on nearly every count.36)
The Baldrige award is an outgrowth of the realization among U.S. managers in 
the early 1980s that three-fourths of Americans were telling survey takers that the 
label “Made in America” no longer represented excellence—that they considered 
products made overseas, especially Japan, equal or superior in quality to U.S.-made 
products. As we saw in Chapter 2, much of the impetus for quality improvements in 
Japanese products came from American consultants W. Edwards Deming and 
Joseph M. Juran. As we mentioned, two strategies for ensuring quality are quality 
control, the strategy for minimizing errors by managing each stage of production, 
and quality assurance, focusing on the performance of workers and urging them to 
strive for “zero defects.”
Deming Management: The Contributions of 
W. Edwards Deming to Improved Quality
Previously, Frederick Taylor’s scientific management philosophy, designed to maxi-
mize worker productivity, had been widely instituted. But by the 1950s, scientific man-
agement had led to organizations that were rigid and unresponsive to both employees 
and customers. W. Edwards Deming’s challenge, known as Deming management,
proposed ideas for making organizations more responsive, more democratic, and less 
wasteful. These included the following principles:
1. Quality Should Be Aimed at the Needs of the Consumer 
 “The con-
sumer is the most important part of the production line,” Deming wrote.37 Thus, the 
efforts of individual workers in providing the product or service should be directed 
toward meeting the needs and expectations of the ultimate user.
Quality award winner. The 
Pewaukee (Wisconsin) School 
District was one of the winners 
of the 2013 Malcolm Baldrige 
National Quality Award, the 
nation’s highest honor for 
organizational innovation and 
performance excellence, which 
is given to organizations both 
large and small, profit and 
nonprofit. “It may seem like 
Baldrige is all results and 
processes,” said the 
superintendent of the 
2,800-student school district. 
“But at the heart there’s a 
culture around continuous 
improvement [and] also around 
a passion for core values.” How 
do you think organizations instill 
this approach?

530 
PART 6 
Controlling
2. Companies Should Aim at Improving the System, Not Blaming Workers 
Deming suggested that U.S. managers were more concerned with blaming problems 
on individual workers rather than on the organization’s structure, culture, technology, 
work rules, and management—that is, “the system.” By treating employees well, lis-
tening to their views and suggestions, Deming felt, managers could bring about im-
provements in products and services.
3. Improved Quality Leads to Increased Market Share, Increased Com-
pany Prospects, & Increased Employment 
When companies work to improve 
the quality of goods and services, they produce less waste, fewer delays, and are more 
efficient. Lower prices and superior quality lead to greater market share, which in turn 
leads to improved business prospects and consequently increased employment.
4. Quality Can Be Improved on the Basis of Hard Data, Using the PDCA 
Cycle 
Deming suggested that quality could be improved by acting on the basis of 
hard data. The process for doing this came to be known as the PDCA cycle, a Plan-
Do-Check-Act cycle using observed data for continuous improvement of operations. 
(See Figure 16.7.) Like the steps in the control process in Figure 16.3 (page 514),  
step 3 (“Check”) is a feedback step, in which performance is compared to goals. 
Feedback is instrumental to control.
FIGURE 16.7
The PDCA cycle: 
Plan-Do-Check-Act
The four steps continuously 
follow each other, resulting in 
continuous improvement.
Source: From W. Edwards Deming. 
Out of the Crisis, Plan Do Study 
Act Cycle, page 88, © 2000 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, by permission of 
MIT Press.
1  PLAN desired and
important changes,
based on observed
data. Make pilot
test, if necessary.
3   CHECK or observe
what happened after
the change or during
the test.
4   ACT on lessons
learned, after study
of results. Determine
if predictions can be
made as basis for
new methods.
2   DO implement the
change or make a
small-scale test.
Core TQM Principles: Deliver Customer Value & 
Strive for Continuous Improvement
Total quality management (TQM) is defined as a comprehensive approach—led by top 
management and supported throughout the organization—dedicated to continuous 
quality improvement, training, and customer satisfaction.
In Chapter 2 we said there are four components to TQM:
 1. Make continuous improvement a priority.
 2. Get every employee involved.
 3. Listen to and learn from customers and employees.
 4. Use accurate standards to identify and eliminate problems.

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
531
These may be summarized as two core principles of TQM—namely, (1) people 
orientation—everyone involved with the organization should focus on delivering value 
to customers—and (2) improvement orientation—everyone should work on continu-
ously improving the work processes.38 Let’s look at these further.
1. People Orientation—Focusing Everyone on Delivering Customer 
Value 
Organizations adopting TQM value people as their most important 
resource—both those who create a product or service and those who receive it. Thus, 
not only are employees given more decision-making power, so are suppliers and 
customers.
This people orientation operates under the following assumptions.
■ 
Delivering customer value is most important. The purpose of TQM is to 
focus people, resources, and work processes to deliver products or services 
that create value for customers.
■ 
People will focus on quality if given empowerment. TQM assumes that 
employees (and often suppliers and customers) will concentrate on making 
quality improvements if given the decision-making power to do so. The rea-
soning here is that the people actually involved with the product or service are 
in the best position to detect opportunities for quality improvements.
■ 
TQM requires training, teamwork, and cross-functional efforts. Employ-
ees and suppliers need to be well trained, and they must work in teams. Team-
work is considered important because many quality problems are spread 
across functional areas. For example, if cell-phone design specialists conferred 
with marketing specialists (as well as customers and suppliers), they would 
find the real challenge of using a cell phone for older people is pushing 11 
tiny buttons to call a phone number.
Teams may be self-managed teams, as described in Chapter 13, with groups of 
workers given administrative oversight of activities such as planning, scheduling, 
monitoring, and staffing for their task domains. Sometimes, however, an organization 
needs a special-purpose team to meet to solve a special or onetime problem. The team 
then disbands after the problem is solved. These teams are often cross-functional, 
drawing on members from different departments. American medicine, for instance, is 
moving toward a team-based approach for certain applications, involving multiple 
doctors as well as nurse practitioners and physician assistants.39
2. Improvement Orientation—Focusing Everyone on Continuously Im-
proving Work Processes 
Americans seem to like big schemes, grand designs, 
and crash programs. Although these approaches certainly have their place, the lesson 
of the quality movement from overseas is that the way to success is through continu-
ous small improvements. Continuous improvement is defined as ongoing small, incre-
mental improvements in all parts of an organization—all products, services, functional 
areas, and work processes.40
This improvement orientation has the following assumptions.
■ 
It’s less expensive to do it right the first time. TQM assumes that it’s better 
to do things right the first time than to do costly reworking. To be sure, there 
are many costs involved in creating quality products and services—training, 
equipment, and tools, for example. But they are less than the costs of dealing 
with poor quality—those stemming from lost customers, junked materials, 
time spent reworking, and frequent inspection, for example.41
■ 
It’s better to do small improvements all the time. This is the assumption 
that continuous improvement must be an everyday matter, that no improve-
ment is too small, that there must be an ongoing effort to make things better a 
little bit at a time all the time.

532 
PART 6 
Controlling
■ 
Accurate standards must be followed to eliminate small variations. TQM 
emphasizes the collection of accurate data throughout every stage of the work 
process. It also stresses the use of accurate standards (such as benchmarking) 
to evaluate progress and eliminate small variations, which are the source of 
many quality defects.
■ 
There must be strong commitment from top management. Employees and 
suppliers won’t focus on making small incremental improvements unless 
managers go beyond lip service to support high-quality work, as do the top 
managers at Ritz-Carlton, Amazon.com, and Ace Hardware.
EXAMPLE
Is Chrysler’s New Quality Strategy Working?
When in 2009 Italian carmaker Fiat SpA took control of the Chrysler 
Group, the third of the Big Three U.S. auto companies, it gave quality 
control chief Doug Betts far-reaching authority. “Betts can shut 
the whole company down and nobody is going to overrule him, 
including me,” CEO Sergio Marchionne is reported to have said.42
Looking for One-Millimeter Defects. Chrysler is working hard to 
achieve what Ford and General Motors (following trail blazers 
Toyota and Honda) have already been doing—namely, raise qual-
ity and leave behind a reputation for lousy craftsmanship.43 This 
covers everything from safety to interior materials to how parts fit 
together. For instance, in 2011, the company spent $50,000 mod-
ifying a part involving a barely noticeable (one-millimeter) projec-
tion on a taillight of a Chrysler 300 prototype, enough to “catch a 
rag if someone was hand-washing” the car, Betts said.
Assembly plants were outfitted with special clean zones, where 
workers use devices (called Meisterbock gauges) that laser-scan 
the surface of a vehicle for defects as small as a few millimeters, 
which trigger adjustments at the plant or with suppliers.
Moving Up. In 2008, when Chrysler was controlled by private-
equity firm Cerberus Capital Management L.P., the company’s 
reputation was so bad that a review of the now-discontinued 
Sebring called it “almost certainly the worst car in the entire 
world.” Three years later, Consumer Reports gave Chrysler’s 
brands the highest reliability ratings in years, moving them from 
the bottom to the middle of the list.44 The ratings have held up for 
the next couple of years as well, especially for the Chrysler 300.
Still, there have been setbacks, with Chrysler recalling late 
model Dodge Charger and Chrysler 300 sedans because of 
stability control and brake-system problems. There have also 
been electrical problems on 2011 Chryslers, Dodge, and Jeep 
vehicles, such as stalling, failure to start, and headlights 
switching off at night.45
YOUR CALL
It’s easy for a company to lose its reputation. How long do you 
think it takes to get it back? Is Chrysler there yet, in your opinion?
Continuous improvement. 
Instead of making a walkway 
or street by laying bricks one 
at a time, how about using 
something like this? Dave Dyer 
of Swiss firm ABB Consulting 
points to this brick-laying 
machine as a great example of 
continuous improvement, one of 
the two core principles of TQM. 
The operators, he writes, “feed 
the bricks into the machine via 
gravity, there are no moving 
parts, and the path is laid as the 
machine moves. It’s amazing!” 
What examples of continuous 
improvement can you think of?

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
533
Applying TQM to Services
Manufacturing industries provide tangible products (think jars of baby food), ser-
vice industries provide intangible products (think child care services). Manufac-
tured products can be stored (such as dental floss in a warehouse); services 
generally need to be consumed immediately (such as dental hygiene services). Ser-
vices tend to involve a good deal of people effort (although there is some automa-
tion, as with bank automated teller machines). Finally, services are generally 
provided at locations and times convenient for customers; that is, customers are 
much more involved in the delivery of services than they are in the delivery of 
manufactured products.
Customer Satisfaction: A Matter of Perception? 
Perhaps you’re beginning 
to see how judging the quality of services is a different animal from judging the 
quality of manufactured goods, because it comes down to meeting the customer’s 
satisfaction, which may be a matter of perception. (After all, some hotel guests, 
restaurant diners, and supermarket patrons, for example, are more easily satisfied 
than others.)
Some people view college students as customers. Do you? For those schools that 
care about the quality of what they offer, it is important to assess student satisfaction 
with the college or university as a whole. If you are curious about your level of satis-
faction with your college or university, then complete Self-Assessment 16.3.
Assessing Your Satisfaction with Your College 
or University Experience
The following survey was designed to assess the extent to 
which you are satisfied with your college experience. Go to 
connect.mheducation.com and take Self-Assessment 16.3. 
When you’re done, answer the following questions:
1. 
What is your level of satisfaction? Are you surprised 
by the results?
2. 
Based on your scores, identify three things that your 
college or university might do to improve student 
satisfaction? Be specific.
3. 
Are students really customers? Explain your rationale.
SELF-ASSESSMENT 16.3
®
The RATER Scale 
How, then, can we measure the quality of a delivered service? 
For one, we can use the RATER scale, which enables customers to rate the quality of a 
service along five dimensions—reliability, assurance, tangibles, empathy, and respon-
siveness (abbreviated RATER)—each on a scale from 1 (for very poor) to 10 (for very 
good).46 The meanings of the RATER dimensions are as follows:
■ 
Reliability—ability to perform the desired service dependably, accurately, 
and consistently.
■ 
Assurance—employees’ knowledge, courtesy, and ability to convey trust and 
confidence.
■ 
Tangibles—physical facilities, equipment, appearance of personnel.
■ 
Empathy—provision of caring, individualized attention to customers.
■ 
Responsiveness—willingness to provide prompt service and help customers.

534 
PART 6 
Controlling
PRACTICAL ACTION
What Makes a Service Company Successful? Four Core Elements
With services now employing more than 75% of American 
workers, universities are bringing more research attention to 
what is being called “services science.” This is a field that uses 
management, technology, mathematics, and engineering ex-
pertise to improve the performance of service businesses, such 
as retailing and health care.47
Harvard Business School scholar Frances X. Frei has deter-
mined that a successful service business must make the right de-
cisions about four core elements and balance them effectively:48
The Offering: Which Features Are Given Top-Quality Treat-
ment? Which service attributes, as informed by the needs of 
customers, does the company target for excellence and which 
does it target for inferior performance? Does a bank, for example, 
offer more convenient hours and friendlier tellers (excellence) but 
pay less attractive interest rates (inferior performance)?
The Funding Mechanism: Who Pays for the Service? How 
should the company fund its services? Should it have the cus-
tomer pay for them? This can be done in a palatable way, as when 
Starbucks funds its stuffed-chair ambience by charging more for 
coffee. Or it can be done by making savings in service features, 
as when Progressive Casualty Insurance cuts down on frauds and 
lawsuits by deploying its own (rather than independent) represen-
tatives to the scene of an auto accident.
Or should the company cover the cost of excellence with 
operational savings, as by spending now to save later or having 
the customer do the work? Call centers usually charge for cus-
tomer support, but Intuit offers free support and has product-
development people, as well as customer-service people, field 
calls so that subsequent developments in Intuit software are 
informed by direct knowledge of customer problems. Other 
companies, such as most gas stations, save money by having 
customers pump their own gas.
The Employee Management System: How Are Workers 
Trained & Motivated? Service companies need to think about 
what makes their employees able to achieve excellence and 
what makes them reasonably motivated to achieve excellence. 
For instance, bank customers may expect employees to meet a 
lot of complex needs, but the employees aren’t able to meet 
these needs because they haven’t been trained. Or they aren’t 
motivated to achieve excellence because the bank hasn’t figured 
out how to screen in its hiring, as in hiring people for attitude first 
and training them later versus paying more to attract highly mo-
tivated people.
The Customer Management System: How Are Customers 
“Trained”? Like employees, customers in a service business 
must also be “trained” as well, as the airlines have done with 
check-in. At Zipcar, the popular car-sharing service, the company 
keeps its costs low by depending on customers to clean, refuel, 
and return cars in time for the next user. In training customers, 
service companies need to determine which customers they’re 
focusing on, what behaviors they want, and which techniques will 
most effectively influence customer behavior.
YOUR CALL
Pick a services company you’re familiar with, such as Dom-
ino’s Pizza, Starbucks, Amazon, REI, or the college book-
store. In integrating the four core features just discussed, a 
service company needs to determine the following: Are the 
decisions it makes in one area supported by those it makes 
in the other areas? Does the service model create long-term 
value for customers, employees, and shareholders? Is the 
company trying to be all things to all people or specific 
things to specific people? How do you think the company 
you picked rates?
Some TQM Tools & Techniques
Several tools and techniques are available for improving quality. We described bench-
marking in Chapter 10. Here we describe outsourcing, reduced cycle time, ISO 9000 
and ISO 14000, statistical process control, and Six Sigma.
Outsourcing: Let Outsiders Handle It 
Outsourcing (discussed in detail in 
Chapter 4) is the subcontracting of services and operations to an outside vendor. Usu-
ally this is done because the subcontractor vendor can do the job better or cheaper. Or, 
stated another way, when the services and operations are done in-house, they are not 
done as efficiently or are keeping personnel from doing more important things.
For example, despite its former well-known advertising campaign, “An American 
Revolution,” Chevrolet outsources the engine for its Chevrolet Equinox to China, 
where it found it could get high-quality engines built at less cost.49 And when IBM and 

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
535
other companies outsource components inexpensively for new integrated software sys-
tems, says one researcher, offshore programmers make information technology afford-
able to small and medium-size businesses and others who haven’t yet joined the 
productivity boom.50 (One American software developer was even caught outsourcing 
his own job to China, allowing people to assume the work was his.51)
Outsourcing is also being done by many state and local governments, which, under 
the banner known as privatization, have subcontracted traditional government services 
such as fire protection, correctional services, and medical services.
Reduced Cycle Time: Increasing the Speed of Work Processes 
Another 
TQM technique is the emphasis on increasing the speed with which an organization’s 
operations and processes can be performed. This is known as reduced cycle time, or 
reduction in steps in a work process, such as fewer authorization steps required to 
grant a contract to a supplier. The point is to improve the organization’s performance 
by eliminating wasteful motions, barriers between departments, unnecessary proce-
dural steps, and the like.
ISO 9000 & ISO 14000: Meeting Standards of Independent Auditors 
If 
you’re a sales representative for Du Pont, the American chemical company, how 
will your overseas clients know that your products have the quality they are expecting? 
If you’re a purchasing agent for an Ohio-based tire company, how can you tell if the 
synthetic rubber you’re buying overseas is adequate?
At one time, buyers and sellers simply had to rely on a supplier’s past reputation or 
personal assurances. In 1979, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 
based in Geneva, Switzerland, created a set of quality standards known as the 9000 
series—“a kind of Good Housekeeping seal of approval for global business,” in one 
description.52 There are two such standards:
■ 
ISO 9000. The ISO 9000 series consists of quality-control procedures compa-
nies must install—from purchasing to manufacturing to inventory to shipping—
that can be audited by independent quality-control experts, or “registrars.” 
The goal is to reduce flaws in manufacturing and improve productivity. Com-
panies must document the procedures and train their employees to use them. 
For instance, DocBase Direct is a web-delivered document and forms-
management system that helps companies comply with key ISO management 
standards, such as traceable changes and easy reporting.
 The ISO 9000 designation is now recognized by more than 100 coun-
tries around the world, and a quarter of the corporations around the globe 
insist that suppliers have ISO 9000 certification. “You close some expen-
sive doors if you’re not certified,” says Bill Ekeler, general manager of 
Overland Products, a Nebraska tool-and-die-stamping firm.53 In addition, 
because the ISO process forced him to analyze his company from the top 
down, Ekeler found ways to streamline manufacturing processes that im-
proved his bottom line.
■ 
ISO 14000. The ISO 14000 series extends the concept, identifying standards 
for environmental performance. ISO 14000 dictates standards for document-
ing a company’s management of pollution, efficient use of raw materials, and 
reduction of the firm’s impact on the environment.
Statistical Process Control: Taking Periodic Random Samples 
As the 
pages of this book were being printed, instruments called densitometers and colorim-
eters were used to measure ink density and trueness of color, taking samples of printed 
pages at fixed intervals. This is an ongoing check for quality control.
All kinds of products require periodic inspection during their manufacture: ham-
burger meat, breakfast cereal, flashlight batteries, wine, and so on. The tool often used 

536 
PART 6 
Controlling
for this is statistical process control, a statistical technique that uses periodic random 
samples from production runs to see if quality is being maintained within a standard 
range of acceptability. If quality is not acceptable, production is stopped to allow cor-
rective measures.
Statistical process control is the technique that McDonald’s uses, for example, to 
make sure that the quality of its burgers is always the same, no matter where in the 
world they are served. Companies such as Intel and Motorola use statistical process 
control to ensure the reliability and quality of their products.
Six Sigma & Lean Six Sigma: Data-Driven Ways to Eliminate Defects  
“The biggest problem with the management technique known as Six Sigma is this: It 
sounds too good to be true,” says a Fortune writer. “How would your company like a 
20% increase in profit margins within one year, followed by profitability over the 
long-term that is ten times what you’re seeing now? How about a 4% (or greater) an-
nual gain in market share?”54
What is this name, Six Sigma (which is probably Greek to you), and is it a path 
to management paradise? The name comes from sigma, the Greek letter that statis-
ticians use to define a standard deviation. The higher the sigma, the fewer the de-
viations from the norm—that is, the fewer the defects. Developed by Motorola in 
1985, Six Sigma has since been embraced by General Electric, Allied Signal, 
American Express, and other companies.55 There are two variations, Six Sigma and 
lean Six Sigma.
■ 
Six Sigma. Six Sigma is a rigorous statistical analysis process that reduces 
defects in manufacturing and service-related processes. By testing thousands 
of variables and eliminating guesswork, a company using the technique 
attempts to improve quality and reduce waste to the point where errors nearly 
vanish. In everything from product design to manufacturing to billing, the 
attainment of Six Sigma means there are no more than 3.4 defects per million 
products or procedures.
 “Six Sigma gets people away from thinking that 96% is good, to thinking 
that 40,000 failures per million is bad,” says a vice president of consulting 
firm A. T. Kearney.56 Six Sigma means being 99.9997% perfect. By contrast, 
Three Sigma or Four Sigma means settling for 99% perfect—the equivalent 
of no electricity for 7 hours each month, two short or long landings per day at 
each major airport, or 5,000 incorrect surgical operations per week.57
 Six Sigma may also be thought of as a philosophy—to reduce variation in 
your company’s business and make customer-focused, data-driven decisions. 
The method preaches the use of Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, and 
Control (DMAIC). Team leaders may be awarded a Six Sigma “black belt” 
for applying DMAIC.
■ 
Lean Six Sigma. More recently, companies are using an approach known as 
lean Six Sigma, which focuses on problem solving and performance improve-
ment—speed with excellence—of a well-defined project.58
 Xerox Corp., for example, has focused on getting new products to custom-
ers faster, which has meant taking steps out of the design process without loss 
of quality. A high-end, $200,000 machine that can print 100 pages a minute 
traditionally has taken three to five cycles of design; removing just one of 
those cycles can shave up to a year off time to market.59 The grocery chain 
Albertsons Inc. launched Six Sigma training to reduce customer dissatisfac-
tion and waste to the lowest level possible.60 Lean Six Sigma has also been 
used to improve communications from senior managers.61
Six Sigma and lean Six Sigma may not be perfect, since they cannot compensate for 
human error or control events outside a company.62 Still, they let managers approach 
problems with the assumption that there’s a data-oriented, tangible way to approach 
problem solving.63 ●

16.6 Managing Control Effectively
What are the keys to successful control, and what are the barriers to control success?
THE BIG PICTURE
This section describes four keys to successful control and five barriers to successful control.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
How do you as a manager make a control system successful, and how do you identify 
and deal with barriers to control? We consider these topics next.64
The Keys to Successful Control Systems
Successful control systems have a number of common characteristics: (1) They are 
strategic and results oriented. (2) They are timely, accurate, and objective. (3) They 
are realistic, positive, and understandable and they encourage self-control. (4) They 
are flexible.65
1. They Are Strategic & Results Oriented 
Control systems support strategic 
plans and are concentrated on significant activities that will make a real difference to 
the organization. Thus, when managers are developing strategic plans for achieving 
strategic goals, that is the point at which they should pay attention to developing con-
trol standards that will measure how well the plans are being achieved.
Example: Global warming is now shifting the climate on a continental scale, 
changing the life cycle of animals and plants, scientists say, and surveys show 
more Americans feel guilty for not living greener.66 A growing number of compa-
nies are discovering that embracing environmental safe practices is paying off in 
savings of hundreds of millions of dollars, as we saw with Subaru of Indiana in 
Chapter 3.67
 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
537
Charity control. Laura 
Arrillaga-Andreessen (shown here 
with husband Marc Andreessen, 
left, and Facebook CEO Mark 
Zuckerberg at a 2012 conference 
in Sun Valley, Idaho) is a Stanford 
University professor of 
philanthropy who aims to make 
giving not only more effective 
and wide ranging but also more 
accessible to people of all ages 
and income levels, including 
Millennials. Part of her vision is 
to enable donations through mobile 
microfinancing and smartphone 
money transfers. Do you think 
that philanthropy should be 
subject to the same planning-
organizing-leading-control ideas 
as other institutions?

538 
PART 6 
Controlling
2. They Are Timely, Accurate, & Objective 
Good control systems—like good 
information of any kind—should . . .
■ 
Be timely—meaning when needed. The information should not necessarily 
be delivered quickly, but it should be delivered at an appropriate or specific 
time, such as every week or every month. And it certainly should be often 
enough to allow employees and managers to take corrective action for any 
deviations.
■ 
Be accurate—meaning correct. Accuracy is paramount, if decision mistakes 
are to be avoided. Inaccurate sales figures may lead managers to mistakenly 
cut or increase sales promotion budgets. Inaccurate production costs may lead 
to faulty pricing of a product.
■ 
Be objective—meaning impartial. Objectivity means control systems are im-
partial and fair. Although information can be inaccurate for all kinds of reasons 
(faulty communication, unknown data, and so on), information that is not ob-
jective is inaccurate for a special reason: It is biased or prejudiced. Control 
systems need to be considered unbiased for everyone involved so that they will 
be respected for their fundamental purpose—enhancing performance.
3. They Are Realistic, Positive, & Understandable & Encourage Self-Control 
Control systems have to focus on working for the people who will have to live with 
them. Thus, they operate best when they are made acceptable to the organization’s 
members who are guided by them. Thus, they should . . .
■ 
Be realistic. They should incorporate realistic expectations. If employees feel 
performance results are too difficult, they are apt to ignore or sabotage the 
performance system.
■ 
Be positive. They should emphasize development and improvement. They 
should avoid emphasizing punishment and reprimand.
■ 
Be understandable. They should fit the people involved, be kept as simple as 
possible, and present data in understandable terms. They should avoid com-
plicated computer printouts and statistics.
■ 
Encourage self-control. They should encourage good communication and 
mutual participation. They should not be the basis for creating distrust be-
tween employees and managers.
4. They Are Flexible 
Control systems must leave room for individual judgment, 
so that they can be modified when necessary to meet new requirements.
Barriers to Control Success
Among the several barriers to a successful control system are the following:68
1. Too Much Control 
Some organizations, particularly bureaucratic ones, try to 
exert too much control. They may try to regulate employee behavior in everything 
from dress code to timing of coffee breaks. Allowing employees too little discretion 
for analysis and interpretation may lead to employee frustration—particularly among 
professionals, such as college professors and medical doctors. Their frustration may 
lead them to ignore or try to sabotage the control process.
2. Too Little Employee Participation 
As highlighted by W. Edwards Deming, 
discussed elsewhere in the book (Chapter 2), employee participation can enhance pro-
ductivity. Involving employees in both the planning and execution of control systems 
can bring legitimacy to the process and heighten employee morale.

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
539
Temptation. Because legal 
gambling is a heavy cash 
business, casinos need to 
institute special controls against 
employee theft. One of them 
is the “eye in the sky” over 
card and craps tables.
3. Overemphasis on Means Instead of Ends 
We said that control activi-
ties should be strategic and results oriented. They are not ends in themselves but 
the means to eliminating problems. Too much emphasis on accountability for 
weekly production quotas, for example, can lead production supervisors to push 
their workers and equipment too hard, resulting in absenteeism and machine 
breakdowns. Or it can lead to game playing—“beating the system”—as managers 
and employees manipulate data to seem to fulfill short-run goals instead of the 
organization’s strategic plan.
4. Overemphasis on Paperwork 
A specific kind of misdirection of effort is 
management emphasis on getting reports done, to the exclusion of other performance 
activity. Reports are not the be-all and end-all. Undue emphasis on reports can lead to 
too much focus on quantification of results and even to falsification of data.
Example: A research laboratory decided to use the number of patents the lab ob-
tained as a measure of its effectiveness. The result was an increase in patents filed but 
a decrease in the number of successful research projects.69
5. Overemphasis on One Instead of Multiple Approaches 
One control 
may not be enough. By having multiple control activities and information systems, an 
organization can have multiple performance indicators, thereby increasing accuracy 
and objectivity.
Example: An obvious strategic goal for gambling casinos is to prevent em-
ployee theft of the cash flowing through their hands. Thus, casinos control card 
dealers by three means. First, they require they have a dealer’s license before they 
are hired. Second, they put them under constant scrutiny, using direct supervision 
by on-site pit bosses as well as observation by closed-circuit TV cameras and 
through overhead one-way mirrors. Third, they require detailed reports at the end 
of each shift so that transfer of cash and cash equivalents (such as gambling chips) 
can be audited.70 ●

16.7 
Managing for Productivity
How do managers influence productivity?
THE BIG PICTURE
The purpose of a manager is to make decisions about the four management functions—planning, organizing, 
leading, and controlling—to get people to achieve productivity and realize results. Productivity is defined 
by the formula of outputs divided by inputs for a specified period of time. Productivity is important because 
it determines whether the organization will make a profit or even survive.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
In Chapter 1, we pointed out that as a manager in the 21st century you will operate in a 
complex environment in which you will need to deal with seven challenges—managing 
for (1) competitive advantage, (2) diversity, (3) globalization, (4) information technology, 
(5) ethical standards, (6) sustainability, and (7) your own happiness and life goals.
Within this dynamic world, you will draw on the practical and theoretical knowl-
edge described in this book to make decisions about the four management functions of 
planning, organizing, leading, and controlling.
The purpose is to get the people reporting to you to achieve productivity and realize 
results.
This process is diagrammed below, pulling together the main topics of this book. 
(See Figure 16.8.)
540 
PART 6 
Controlling
You as a
manager...
Competitive
advantage
Diversity
Globalization
Information
technology
Ethical
standards
Sustainability
Happiness &
meaningfulness
... to achieve
productivity
and realize
results.
Planning
Organizing
Leading
Controlling
…make
decisions
about
the four
manage-
ment
functions…
a complex
environment
and…
…must
operate in
What Is Productivity?
Productivity can be applied at any level, whether for you as an individual, for the work 
unit you’re managing, or for the organization you work for. Productivity is defined by 
the formula of outputs divided by inputs for a specified period of time. Outputs are all 
FIGURE 16.8
Managing for productivity 
& results

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
541
Competing internationally for 
productivity. This oil tanker 
represents the continual 
competition among companies 
and among nations to achieve 
productivity—“a matter of 
survival” for the United States, 
some leaders believe. Is our 
nation doing everything it could 
to be more productive? What 
about taking measures to reduce 
dependence on foreign oil?
the goods and services produced. Inputs are not only labor but also capital, materials, 
and energy. That is,
Productivity = Outputs
Inputs   or  
Goods + Services
Labor + Capital + Materials + Energy
What does this mean to you as a manager? It means that you can increase overall 
productivity by making substitutions or increasing the efficiency of any one element: 
labor, capital, materials, energy. For instance, you can increase the efficiency of labor 
by substituting capital in the form of equipment or machinery, as in employing a back-
hoe instead of laborers with shovels to dig a hole.71 Or you can increase the efficiency 
of materials inputs by expanding their uses, as when lumber mills discovered they 
could sell not only boards but also sawdust and wood chips for use in gardens. Or you 
can increase the efficiency of energy by putting solar panels on a factory roof so the 
organization won’t have to buy so much electrical power from utility companies.
Why Increasing Productivity Is Important
”Productivity growth is the elixir that makes an economy flourish,” says one business 
article.72 “Our society is wealthy,” says another, “precisely because it can churn out 
products like automobiles, flush toilets, and Google search algorithms at relatively low 
cost.”73 That is, the more goods and services that are produced and made easily avail-
able to us and for export, the higher our standard of living. Increasing the gross domes-
tic product—the total dollar value of all the goods and services produced in the United 
States—depends on raising productivity, as well as on a growing workforce.
The U.S. Productivity Track Record During the 1960s, productivity in the United 
States averaged a hefty 2.9% a year, then sank to a disappointing 1.5% right up until 1995. 
Because the decline in productivity no longer allowed the improvement in wages and liv-
ing standards that had benefited so many Americans in the 1960s, millions of people took 
second jobs or worked longer hours to keep from falling behind. From 1995 to 2000, how-
ever, during the longest economic boom in American history, the productivity rate jumped 
to 2.5% annually, as the total output of goods and services rose faster than the total hours 
needed to produce them. From the business cycle peak in the first quarter of 2001 to the 
end of 2007, productivity grew at an annual rate of 2.7%.74 Then came the recession year 
2008, when it fell to 2%. Then, from the fourth quarter of 2008 to the fourth quarter of 
2009, productivity rose 5.4%—“a turnaround unprecedented in modern history,” says 
Newsweek—and it also rose an impressive 4.1% in 2010.75 However, it has averaged only 
about 1.1% since 2011—less than half the historical rate since 1948 of 2.5%—as compa-
nies began to approach the limit of how much they could squeeze from the workforce.76
The Role of Information Technology 
Most economists seem to think the re-
cent productivity growth is the result of organizations’ huge investment in information 
technology—computers, the Internet, other telecommu-
nications advances, and computer-guided production 
line improvements.77 From 1995 to 2001, for example, 
labor productivity in services grew at a 2.6% rate (out-
pacing the 2.3% for goods-producing sectors), the result, 
economists think, of information technology.78 (Since 
2001, productivity has continued to advance in the 
service sectors in relation to the goods-producing 
sectors.79) In particular, many companies have imple-
mented enterprise resource planning (ERP) software 
systems, information systems for integrating virtually all 
aspects of a business, helping managers stay on top of 
the latest developments. ●

 Epilogue: The Keys to Your Managerial Success
What are eight keys to personal managerial success?
THE BIG PICTURE
As we end the book, this section describes some life lessons to take away.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
We have come to the end of the book, our last chance to offer some suggestions to take 
with you that we hope will benefit you in the coming years. Following are some life 
lessons pulled from various sources that can make you a “keeper” in an organization 
and help you be successful.
■ 
Find your passion and follow it. “The mission matters,” writes Gary Hamel, 
co-founder of the Management Innovation Lab. “People change for what they 
care about.” Employees aren’t motivated much by the notion of “increasing 
shareholder value” (or if they are, the result may be an environment in which 
greed overwhelms higher-minded goals). Says Hamel, “A company must for-
ever be on the way to becoming something more than it is right now.”80 And the 
same should apply to you. Find something you love to do, and do it vigorously.
■ 
Encourage self-discovery, and be realistic. To stay ahead of the pack, you 
need to develop self-awareness, have an active mind, and be willing to grow 
and change. Here’s a life lesson: “Be brutally honest with yourself about what 
you know, and ask what skills you need to take the next step.” This includes 
not just the tools of your trade—finance, technology, and so on—but most 
importantly people skills.
■ 
Every situation is different, so be flexible. No principle, no theory will ap-
ply under all circumstances. Industries, cultures, supervisors, customers will 
vary. If you’re the new kid in a new job, for instance, you should know that 
“culture is critical,” suggests Angeli R. Rasbury in Black Enterprise. A life 
lesson: “Before you can begin to set goals, know the organization in which 
you’re working. Learn how employees conduct business and view success, 
and how the company rewards achievement. An organization’s culture defines 
its management and business guidelines.”81 Another life lesson: “Remove ‘It’s 
not my job’ from your vocabulary.”
■ 
Fine-tune your soft skills—your people skills. The workplace is not an area 
where lone individuals make their silent contributions. Today we live and 
work in a team universe. If, as is the case with Whole Foods Market, getting 
and keeping a job depends on the reviews of your peers, with teammates vot-
ing on your fate, you can see that communication skills become ever more 
important. Recommendation: Get feedback on your interpersonal skills and 
develop a plan for improvement.
■ 
Learn how to develop leadership skills. Every company should invest in the 
leadership development of its managers if it is to improve the quality of its 
future leaders. But you can also work to develop your own leadership skills. 
An example and a life lesson: “Leaders who wait for bad news to come to 
them are taking a major risk, so learn to seek it out—as by encouraging em-
ployees to bring you news of potential problems and thanking them for it, not 
punishing them for their candor.”82 You can also pick up news about prob-
lems, potential and actual, by practicing “management by wandering around.” 
Another life lesson: “If you set the bar high, even if you don’t reach it, you 
end up in a pretty good place—that is, achieving a pretty high mark.”
542 
PART 6 
Controlling

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
543
■ 
Treat people as if they matter, because they do. If you treat employees and 
customers with dignity, they respond accordingly. The highly successful on-
line shoe retailer Zappos, for instance, “is fanatical about great service,” says 
the writer of a Harvard Business Publishing online blog, “not just satisfying 
customers, but amazing them,” as in promising delivery in four days and de-
livering in one. How? It’s all in the hiring, which Zappos does with great in-
tensity. After four weeks’ training, new call-center employees are offered 
$1,000 on top of what they have earned to that point if they want to quit—the 
theory being that people who take the money “obviously don’t have the com-
mitment” that Zappos requires of its employees. (About 10% of the trainees 
take the offer.)83 The life lesson: “Companies don’t engage emotionally with 
their customers—people do. If you want to create a memorable company, you 
have to fill your company with memorable people.”
■ 
Draw employees and peers into your management process. The old top-
down, command-and-control model of organization is moving toward a flat-
tened, networked kind of structure. Managers now work more often with 
peers, where lines of authority aren’t always clear or don’t exist, so that one’s 
persuasive powers become key. Power has devolved to front-line employees 
who are closest to the customer and to small, focused, self-managed teams 
that have latitude to pursue new ideas. The life lesson: “The best organiza-
tions will be those whose employees have the power to innovate, not just fol-
low orders from on high.”
■ 
Be flexible, keep your cool, and take yourself lightly. Things aren’t always 
going to work out your way, so flexibility is important. In addition, the more 
unflappable you appear in difficult circumstances, the more you’ll be admired 
by your bosses and coworkers. Having a sense of humor helps, since there 
are enough people spreading gloom and doom in the workplace. Life lesson: 
“When you’re less emotional, you’re better able to assess a crisis and develop 
a workable solution.”
We wish you the very best of luck. And we mean it!
Angelo Kinicki
Brian K. Williams

Key Terms Used in This Chapter
audits 527
balance sheet 527
balanced scorecard 520
budget 525
bureaucratic control 519
continuous improvement 531
control process steps 514
control standard 514
controlling 512
decentralized control 519
Deming management 529
enterprise resource planning 
(ERP) 541
external audit 527
financial statement 526
fixed budget 526
income statement 527
incremental budgeting 525
internal audit 528
ISO 9000 series 535
ISO 14000 series 535
lean Six Sigma 536
management by exception 515
operational control 517
PDCA cycle 530
RATER scale 533
ratio analysis 527
reduced cycle time 535
Six Sigma 536
special-purpose team 531
statistical process control 536
strategic control 517
strategy map 522
supply chain 518
tactical control 517
total quality management 
(TQM) 530
two core principles of TQM 531
variable budget 526
Key Points
16.1 Control: When Managers Monitor 
Performance
• Controlling is defined as monitoring 
performance, comparing it with goals, and 
taking corrective action as needed.
• There are six reasons why control is needed: 
(1) to adapt to change and uncertainty; (2) to 
discover irregularities and errors; (3) to 
reduce costs, increase productivity, or add 
value; (4) to detect opportunities; (5) to deal 
with complexity; and (6) to decentralize 
decision making and facilitate teamwork.
• There are four control process steps. (1) The 
first step is to set standards. A control 
standard is the desired performance level for a 
given goal. (2) The second step is to measure 
performance, based on written reports, oral 
reports, and personal observation. (3) The third 
step is to compare measured performance 
against the standards established. (4) The 
fourth step is to take corrective action, if 
necessary, if there is negative performance.
16.2 Levels & Areas of Control
• In applying the steps and types of control, 
managers need to consider (1) the level of 
management at which they operate, (2) the 
areas they can draw on for resources, and 
(3) the style of control philosophy.
• There are three levels of control, 
corresponding to the three principal 
managerial levels. (1) Strategic control, done 
by top managers, is monitoring performance 
to ensure that strategic plans are being 
implemented. (2) Tactical control, done by 
middle managers, is monitoring performance 
to ensure that tactical plans are being 
implemented. (3) Operational control, done 
by first-level or supervisory managers, is 
monitoring performance to ensure that day-
to-day goals are being implemented.
• Most organizations have six areas that they can 
draw on for resources. (1) The physical area 
includes buildings, equipment, and tangible 
products; these use equipment control, 
inventory-management control, and quality 
controls. (2) The human resources area uses 
personality tests, drug tests, performance tests, 
employee surveys, and the like as controls to 
monitor people. (3) The informational area uses 
production schedules, sales forecasts, 
environmental impact statements, and the like 
to monitor the organization’s various resources. 
(4) The financial area uses various kinds of 
financial controls, as we discuss in Section 
16.4. (5) The structural area uses hierarchical or 
other arrangements such as bureaucratic 
control, which is characterized by use of rules, 
regulations, and formal authority to guide 
performance, or decentralized control, which is 
characterized by informal and organic structural 
arrangements. (6) The cultural area influences 
the work process and levels of performance 
through the set of norms that develop as a result 
of the values and beliefs that constitute an 
organization’s culture.
16.3 The Balanced Scorecard, Strategy 
Maps, & Measurement Management
• To establish standards, managers often use 
the balanced scorecard, which provides a 
544 
PART 6 
Controlling

fast but comprehensive view of the 
organization via four indicators: (1) financial 
measures, (2) customer satisfaction, 
(3) internal processes, and (4) innovation 
and improvement activities.
• The strategy map, a visual representation of 
the four perspectives of the balanced 
scorecard—financial, customer, internal 
business, and innovation and learning—
enables managers to communicate their 
goals so that everyone in the company can 
understand how their jobs are linked to the 
overall objectives of the organization.
• Measurement-managed companies use 
measurable criteria for determining strategic 
success, and management updates and 
reviews three or more of six primary 
performance areas: financial performance, 
operating efficiency, customer satisfaction, 
employee performance, innovation/change, 
and community/environment.
• Four mechanisms that contribute to the 
success of such companies are top 
executives agree on strategy, communication 
is clear, there is better focus and alignments, 
and the organizational culture emphasizes 
teamwork and allows risk taking.
• Four barriers to effective measurement are 
objectives are fuzzy, managers put too much 
trust in informal feedback systems, 
employees resist new management systems, 
and companies focus too much on 
measuring activities instead of results.
• Some areas are difficult to measure, such as 
those in service industries.
16.4 Some Financial Tools for Control
• Financial controls include (1) budgets, 
(2) financial statements, (3) ratio analysis, 
and (4) audits.
• A budget is a formal financial projection. 
The most important budget-planning 
approach is incremental budgeting, which 
allocates increased or decreased funds to a 
department by using the last budget period as 
a reference point; only incremental changes in 
the budget request are reviewed. Budgets are 
either fixed, which allocate resources on the 
basis of a single estimate of costs, or variable, 
which allow resource allocation to vary in 
proportion with various levels of activity.
• A financial statement is a summary of some 
aspect of an organization’s financial status. 
One type, the balance sheet, summarizes an 
organization’s overall financial worth—assets 
and liabilities—at a specific point in time. The 
other type, the income statement, summarizes 
an organization’s financial results—revenues 
and expenses—over a specified period of time.
• Ratio analysis is the practice of evaluating 
financial ratios. Managers may use this tool 
to determine an organization’s financial 
health, such as liquidity ratios, debt 
management ratios, or return ratios.
• Audits are formal verifications of an 
organization’s financial and operational 
systems. Audits are of two types. An external 
audit is formal verification of an 
organization’s financial accounts and 
statements by outside experts. An internal 
audit is a verification of an organization’s 
financial accounts and statements by the 
organization’s own professional staff.
16.5 Total Quality Management
• Much of the impetus for quality improvement 
came from W. Edwards Deming, whose 
philosophy, known as Deming management, 
proposed ideas for making organizations more 
responsive, more democratic, and less wasteful.
• Among the principles of Deming 
management are (1) quality should be aimed 
at the needs of the consumer; (2) companies 
should aim at improving the system, not 
blaming workers; (3) improved quality leads 
to increased market share, increased 
company prospects, and increased 
employment; and (4) quality can be 
improved on the basis of hard data, using 
the PDCA, or plan-do-check-act, cycle.
• Total quality management (TQM) is defined as 
a comprehensive approach—led by top 
management and supported throughout the 
organization—dedicated to continuous 
quality improvement, training, and customer 
satisfaction. The two core principles of TQM 
are people orientation and improvement 
orientation.
• In the people orientation, everyone involved 
with the organization is asked to focus on 
delivering value to customers, focusing on 
quality. TQM requires training, teamwork, 
and cross-functional efforts.
• In the improvement orientation, everyone 
involved with the organization is supposed to 
make ongoing small, incremental improvements 
in all parts of the organization. This orientation 
assumes that it’s less expensive to do things 
right the first time, to do small improvements all 
the time, and to follow accurate standards to 
eliminate small variations.
• TQM can be applied to services using the 
RATER scale, which stands for reliability, 
assurance, tangibles, empathy, and 
responsiveness.
• Several techniques are available for improving 
quality. (1) Employee involvement can be 
implemented through self-managed teams, 
and special-purpose teams—teams that meet 
 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
545

UPS Relies on Sophisticated Control Systems 
to Manage Package Deliveries
Scott Abell is fretting about free-range turkeys. It’s No-
vember 20 [2013], and United Parcel Service will soon 
pick up 11,000 of them from a ranch in northern Cali-
fornia and ship them overnight to customers of 
Williams-Sonoma in time for Thanksgiving. Abell, a 
31-year veteran of UPS, is known inside the organiza-
tion as Mr. Peak. He plans next-day, two-day, and 
three-day shipments during the holidays, UPS’s busiest 
Management in Action
to solve a special or one-time problem. 
(2) Outsourcing is the subcontracting of 
services and operations to an outside vendor. 
(3) Reduced cycle time consists of reducing 
the number of steps in a work process. 
(4) Statistical process control is a statistical 
technique that uses periodic random 
samples from production runs to see if 
quality is being maintained within a standard 
range of acceptability.
16.6 Managing Control Effectively
• Successful control systems have four 
common characteristics: (1) They are strategic 
and results oriented. (2) They are timely, 
accurate, and objective. (3) They are realistic, 
positive, and understandable and they 
encourage self-control. (4) They are flexible.
• Among the barriers to a successful control 
system are the following: (1) Organizations 
may exert too much control. (2) There may 
be too little employee participation. (3) The 
organization may overemphasize means 
instead of ends. (4) There may be an 
overemphasis on paperwork. (5) There may 
be an overemphasis on one approach 
instead of multiple approaches.
16.7 Managing for Productivity
• A manager has to deal with six challenges—
managing for competitive advantage, diversity, 
globalization, information technology, ethical 
standards, sustainability, and his or her own 
happiness and meaningfulness.
• The manager must make decisions about the 
four management functions—planning, 
organizing, leading, and controlling—to get 
people to achieve productivity and realize 
results.
• Productivity is defined by the formula of 
outputs divided by inputs for a specified 
period of time. Productivity is important 
because it determines whether the 
organization will make a profit or even survive.
• Much of productivity growth is thought to 
result from the implementation of information 
technology, including enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) systems. Productivity 
depends on control.
 1. What is control, and what are six reasons control is 
needed?
 2. Explain the steps in the control process, and 
describe the three levels of control.
 3. Distinguish among the six areas of organizational 
control: physical, human, informational, financial, 
structural, and cultural.
 4. Explain the four indicators of the balanced 
scorecard, and state what a strategy map is.
 5. What are four mechanisms of success for 
measurement-managed firms and four barriers to 
effective measurement?
 6. Define incremental budgeting and give some 
examples of types of budgets.
 7. Explain the following financial tools used for 
control: financial statement, balance sheet, income 
statement, ratio analysis, and audits (both external 
and internal).
 8. Discuss total quality management, its two core 
principles, and the concept of continuous improvement.
 9. Explain the following TQM tools and techniques: 
reduced cycle time, the ISO 9000 series, the ISO 
14000 series, statistical process control, and Six 
Sigma and lean Six Sigma.
 10. What is the formula for defining productivity?
Understanding the Chapter: What Do I Know?
546 
PART 6 
Controlling

 
Control Systems & Quality Management 
CHAPTER 16 
547
time of the year. He starts drafting his plan in January 
and spends the rest of the year refining it. The turkeys 
are his first big test of the 2013 peak season, which 
starts in five days.
The birds are impressive: A 24-pounder sells for 
$185—plus shipping. UPS must handle them gently. 
The turkeys are not frozen but “meticulously chilled” 
at around 37F to keep them fresh. . . .
An athletic 53-year-old with wire-rimmed glasses, a 
neatly trimmed mustache, and carefully parted graying 
hair, Abell is unfailingly gracious, if a little high-strung. 
He has an elaborate delivery process in store for the “Wil-
lie Birds.” On November 25, three days before Thanksgiv-
ing, UPS drivers will pick them up at the ranch and 
transport them to two of the company’s large distribution 
centers. From there, they will be flown to UPS sorting fa-
cilities. The ones bound for the Southwest will be divvied 
up at UPS distribution in Ontario, California. The ones 
headed east of the Rockies will be processed at Worldport, 
an enormous operation near Abell’s office in Louisville. 
Then the turkeys will be jetted to local UPS hubs and 
handed over to drivers who will carry them to their final 
destinations. Ideally, this will all happen in 24 hours.
The flight of the Willie Birds has become a holiday 
ritual for UPS. Concerned about getting it right, Abell 
has even distributed pictures of Willie Bird boxes to the 
6,000 workers who sort packages daily at Worldport so 
they recognize them. The last thing Mr. Peak wants is 
for the birds to arrive spoiled. If they’re late, UPS has 
to reimburse the disappointed Thanksgiving diners.
Coordinating the most time-sensitive shipments 
during the most hectic time of year has always been a 
challenge for UPS, but the Internet has made Abell’s 
job more crucial than ever. It’s become so easy for 
people to shop via computers and smartphones that 
they frequently delay their purchases until the last 
minute. Mr. Peak’s job, in effect, is to fulfill the Inter-
net’s promise of instant gratification.
If Abell can’t come up with a viable scheme, UPS is 
in trouble. The company expects to ship more than 132 
million parcels globally during the week before Christ-
mas alone. If it can’t find space for them all, retailers will 
almost surely turn to FedEx. In addition, Abell must 
keep a lid on costs. In the past some investors have wor-
ried that UPS is too e-commerce focused. David Vernon, 
an analyst for AllianceBernstein, notes that it’s usually 
more profitable to carry large shipments to businesses 
than to transport books to the cozy homes of Internet 
shoppers. But he says UPS is managing to turn a profit 
on the latter with careful planning. “I think some of those 
fears are starting to recede,” he says.
Maintaining profitability is especially difficult dur-
ing peak season when UPS’s delivery expenses rise. 
This year, UPS is adding 55,000 part-time holiday 
workers, leasing 23 extra planes, and effectively build-
ing a second trucking fleet to handle the seasonal 
package flow. None of this is cheap. It’s up to Mr. Peak 
to plan accordingly.
Perhaps the biggest holiday challenge for UPS is 
satisfying Amazon.com, which doesn’t behave like a 
traditional retailer. In November, Amazon unveiled a 
plan to deliver packages on Sundays with the help of 
the U.S. Postal Service rather than UPS. In December, 
Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive officer, told 60 
Minutes the company was experimenting with deliver-
ing packages by drone. Many people snickered. UPS 
did not. Ross McCullough, vice president of corporate 
strategy, says UPS is studying drone delivery, too. “I 
believe these things will be part of the system in the 
future,” he says. “I don’t know when.” He says UPS is 
also weighing the potential use of driverless vehicles.
Then there are the factors Mr. Peak can’t control. 
This year there are only 26 shopping days between 
Thanksgiving and Christmas, compared with 32 last 
year. That means UPS has to shove what it describes as 
a record number of parcels through a smaller window. 
Winter storms can also upset Abell’s plans. “The big-
gest challenge is the weather. When you have a shorter 
season, you have less time for recovery,” says UPS 
CEO D. Scott Davis. “You just hope you don’t have 
ice storms.” It isn’t only that ice can ground UPS jets 
and halt its trucks. The company has found that when 
people are snowed in, they do more online shopping. 
So when UPS digs itself out, it has to deliver even 
more presents. Abell doesn’t know what to expect this 
year from the weather, but he is ready to sort boxes by 
hand himself if an emergency arises. “I hustled boxes 
before,” he says. “I can do it again.”. . .
In October, UPS and FedEx announced their holiday 
shipping forecasts. FedEx said it would carry more than 
85 million shipments in the first week of December. UPS 
predicted it would deliver 129 million packages that same 
week, easily topping its rival. And UPS will see a second 
holiday rush during the week before Christmas. . . .
Abell and his team meet with most of their 25 
largest customers to see how they feel about the way 
things went. They’re especially attentive to Nord-
strom. UPS develops an annual 50-page peak season 
plan solely for the store. Early in the season, the 
high-end retailer relies heavily on UPS’s trucks to de-
liver items within five days. But during the week be-
fore Christmas, Nordstrom runs out of time and has 
to start moving packages by jet. That means Abell 
has to schedule several daily flights in and out of the 
UPS hub in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, near Nordstrom’s 
distribution center. . . .
Armed with data from its largest clients, UPS creates 
a preliminary plan in March. It’s really 60 plans in one, 
taking into account how time-sensitive packages will 
flow through the system depending on the day of the 
week, how fast they must be delivered, and whether 
there are special customer requests. Over the next 

Should Companies Be Allowed to Administer 
Untested Drugs on People with Ebola?
The Ebola outbreak in West Africa has killed over 
1,000 people as of August 2014. The current out-
break started in Guinea in December 2013 and has 
spread to Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Nigeria and is 
expected to spread to other neighboring countries. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) “declared 
the outbreak a public health emergency of interna-
tional concern and called for an international re-
sponse,” says one report.84
Normally, drugs are not given to people until they 
have passed rigorous testing and verification. In this 
case, the WHO decided to allow the use of experimen-
tal drugs that have not been tested on humans. Marie 
Paule Kieny, assistant director-general of WHO, said 
that “we find ourselves facing a dilemma. Far too 
many lives are being lost right now.” She feels that it 
is okay in the current situation to use drugs that have 
shown some promise with animal research but have 
not been examined on humans. Others are questioning 
months the peak team revises it, producing two more 
versions, one in August and a final version in Septem-
ber. They will be circulated to the company’s 15 district 
managers who have their own gripes and suggestions. 
“That’s why peak planning goes on all year long,” says 
Marty Fry, one of Abell’s planners. . . .
But plans can be ephemeral. Abell grows slightly 
exasperated talking about a last-minute decision by 
one of his largest customers that will dump a huge 
number of packages into UPS’s network on the week-
end before Christmas. As a result, Abell spent five 
days developing a new plan allowing UPS to operate 
double shifts at Worldport during the final weekend 
before Christmas. By late November, Abell finally had 
all the pieces in place: the planes, the pilots, and the 
extra package handlers. . . .
 During the holidays, the peak planning team 
works closely with the UPS contingency department, 
located one floor below in the same building. The peak 
guys and their contingency peers have a complicated 
relationship: The contingency team responds when the 
peak team’s planning goes awry. Often because of the 
weather and the whims of customers, crises emerge. 
Among other things, the contingency department has 
18 planes positioned around the country that can take 
off at 30 minutes’ notice in emergencies to ensure that 
boxes are delivered on schedule. Until two years ago 
WHO’s decision about using experimental drugs to 
treat the Ebola outbreak.85
What is your view about the application of untested 
drugs on humans?
SOLVING THE CHALLENGE
 1. I think it is okay in very limited cases, and the Ebola 
outbreak is one of them. I also believe that patients 
need to be informed that they are being treated with 
untested drugs and that there are risks. People can 
make their own informed decisions.
 2. I do not think it’s a good idea because it creates a 
slippery slope of deciding when it is appropriate to 
use experimental drugs on people. Who makes the 
call?
 3. I don’t like the idea because it would motivate manu-
facturers to produce products before completing the 
proper amount of experimental testing.
 4. Invent other options.
the two groups operated in different buildings. Abell 
says he liked it that way.
Source: Excerpted from “He’ll Make Your Dreams Come True,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, December 23, 2013–January 5, 2014. Used with permission 
of Bloomberg L. P. Copyright (c) 2014. All rights reserved.
FOR DISCUSSION
 1. Which of the six reasons that control is needed are 
apparent in this case? Explain.
 2. To what extent does the process Scott Abell uses to 
manage shipments of packages during holiday peri-
ods follow the control process shown in Figure 16.3? 
Discuss.
 3. If you were charged with creating a balanced scorecard 
for Scott Abell, what SMART goals (see Chapter 5), 
would you use as standards to assess performance in 
the four categories in your scorecard? Develop one 
SMART goal for each scorecard category.
 4. To what extent does UPS use the PDCA process? 
Explain your rationale.
 5. Which of the keys to successful control systems are 
being used by UPS? Explain.
 6. What are the most important takeaways from this 
case? Discuss.
Legal/Ethical Challenge
548 
PART 6 
Controlling

A1
Appendix
The Project Planner’s Toolkit
Flowcharts, Gantt Charts, & Break-Even 
Analysis
 Major Question You Should Be Able to Answer
How can you use planning tools to enhance your performance and achieve 
utmost success?
THE BIG PICTURE
Three tools used in project planning, which was covered in Chapter 5, are flowcharts, 
Gantt charts, and break-even analysis.
?
MAJOR 
QUESTION
Project planning may begin (in the definition stage) as a back-of-the-envelope kind of 
process, but the client will expect a good deal more for the time and money being in-
vested. Fortunately, there are various planning and monitoring tools that give the plan-
ning and execution of projects more precision. Three tools in the planner’s tool-kit are 
(1) flowcharts, (2) Gantt charts, and break-even analysis.
Tool #1: Flowcharts—for Showing Event Sequences 
& Alternate Decision Scenarios
A flowchart is a useful graphical tool for representing the sequence of events 
required to complete a project and for laying out “what-if” scenarios. Flow-
charts have been used for decades by computer programmers and systems analysts 
to make a graphical “road map,” as it were, of the flow of tasks required. These 
professionals use their own special symbols (indicating “input/output,” “magnetic 
disk,” and the like), but there is no need for you to make the process complicated. 
Generally, only three symbols are needed: (1) an oval for the “beginning” and 
“end,” (2) a box for a major activity, and (3) a diamond for a “yes or no” decision. 
(See Figure A.1, next page.)
Computer programs such as iGrafx’s ABC FlowCharter are available for constructing 
flowcharts. You can also use the drawing program in word processing programs such 
as Microsoft Word.

A2 
APPENDIX 
The Project Planner’s Toolkit
Need
new company
ad?
Compare
prices per
1,000 people
reached
Update old
company
ads
Find ad
agency to
do ad
Find new ad
agency to
do ad
Is 
website ad
best?
Is 
price right?
Meet with
agency to
give info
about ad
Review
agency’s
work &
make changes
Approve final
ad & launch
rollout of ad
campaign
Start
Stop
Stop
Stop
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Is 
print ad
best?
No
Is 
TV ad
best?
No
FIGURE A.1 
Flowchart: website, print, or television?
Example of a flowchart for improving a company’s advertising
Benefits 
Flowcharts have two benefits:
■ 
Planning straightforward activities. A flowchart can be quite helpful for 
planning ordinary activities—figuring out the best way to buy textbooks or a 
car, for example. It is also a straightforward way of indicating the sequence of 
events in, say, thinking out a new enterprise that you would then turn into a 
business plan.

 
The Project Planner’s Toolkit 
APPENDIX 
A3
■ 
Depicting alternate scenarios. A flowchart is also useful for laying out 
“what-if” scenarios—as in if you answer “yes” to a decision question you 
should follow Plan A, if you answer “no” you should follow Plan B.
Limitations 
Flowcharts have two limitations:
■ 
No time indication. They don’t show the amounts of time required to accom-
plish the various activities in a project. In building a house, the foundation 
might take only a couple of days, but the rough carpentry might take weeks. 
These time differences can’t be represented graphically on a flowchart 
 (although you could make a notation).
■ 
Not good for complex projects. They aren’t useful for showing projects consisting 
of several activities that must all be worked on at the same time. An example would 
be getting ready for football season’s opening game, by which time the players have 
to be trained, the field readied, the programs printed, the band rehearsed, the ticket 
sellers recruited, and so on. These separate activities might each be represented on 
their own flowcharts, of course. But to try to express them all together all at once 
would produce a flowchart that would be unwieldy, even unworkable.
Tool #2: Gantt Charts—Visual Time Schedules 
for Work Tasks
We have mentioned how important deadlines are to making a project happen. Unlike a 
flowchart, a Gantt chart can graphically indicate deadlines.
The Gantt chart was developed by Henry L. Gantt, a member of the school of scien-
tific management (discussed in Chapter 2). A Gantt chart is a kind of time schedule—
a specialized bar chart that shows the relationship between the kind of work tasks 
planned and their scheduled completion dates. (See Figure A.2, below.)
A number of software packages can help you create and modify Gantt charts on 
your computer. Examples are CA-SuperProject, Microsoft Project, Primavera SureTrak 
Project Manager, and TurboProject Professional.
Stage of
development
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
1. Examine
 competitors’
 websites
Accomplished:
Planned:
2. Get information
 for your
 website
3. Learn Web-
 authoring
 software
4. Create
 (design) your
 website
5. “Publish”
 (put) website 
 online
||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
|||||||||||
|||||||||||
|||||||||
||||||||||||||||||||
||
||||||||||||||||
|||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||
FIGURE A.2 
Gantt chart for designing a website
This shows the tasks accomplished and the time planned for remaining tasks to build a company website.

A4 
APPENDIX 
The Project Planner’s Toolkit
Benefits 
There are three benefits to using a Gantt chart:
■ 
Express time lines visually. Unlike flowcharts, Gantt charts allow you to in-
dicate visually the time to be spent on each activity.
■ 
Compare proposed and actual progress. A Gantt chart may be used to com-
pare planned time to complete a task with actual time taken to complete it, so 
that you can see how far ahead or behind schedule you are for the entire proj-
ect. This enables you to make adjustments so as to hold to the final target dates.
■ 
Simplicity. There is nothing difficult about creating a Gantt chart. You  express 
the time across the top and the tasks down along the left side. As Figure A.2 
shows, you can make use of this device while still in college to help schedule 
and monitor the work you need to do to meet course requirements and dead-
lines (for papers, projects, tests).
Limitations 
Gantt charts have two limitations:
■ 
Not useful for large, complex projects. Although a Gantt chart can express the 
interrelations among the activities of relatively small projects, it becomes cum-
bersome and unwieldy when used for large, complex projects. More sophisti-
cated management planning tools may be needed, such as PERT networks.
■ 
Time assumptions are subjective. The time assumptions expressed may be 
purely subjective; there is no range between “optimistic” and “pessimistic” of 
the time needed to accomplish a given task.
Tool #3: Break-Even Analysis—How Many Items 
Must You Sell to Turn a Profit?
Break-even analysis is a way of identifying how much revenue is needed to cover 
the total costs of developing and selling a product. Let’s walk through the computa-
tion of a break-even analysis, referring to the illustration. (See Figure A.3.) We assume 
FIGURE A.3 
Break-even analysis
$3,000,000
$2,400,000
$1,200,000
$1,800,000
$600,000
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
Sales Units (of shirts or blouses)
50,000
60,000
70,000
Costs/Revenues
Variable costs
2
Break-even point
5
Total sales revenue
4
Fixed costs
1
Loss
6
Total costs
3
Profit
7

 
The Project Planner’s Toolkit 
APPENDIX 
A5
you are an apparel manufacturer making shirts or blouses. Start in the lower-right 
corner of the diagram on the previous page and follow the circled numbers as you read 
the descriptions below.
Benefits 
Break-even analysis has two benefits:
■ 
For doing future “what-if” alternate scenarios of costs, prices, and sales. 
This tool allows you to vary the different possible costs, prices, and sales 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Fixed costs (green area): Once you start up a business, whether you sell anything or 
not, you’ll have expenses that won’t vary much, such as rent, insurance, taxes, and 
perhaps salaries. These are called fixed costs, expenses that don’t change 
regardless of your sales or output. Fixed costs are a function of time—they are 
expenses you have to pay out on a regular basis, such as weekly, monthly, or yearly. 
Here the chart shows the fixed costs (green area) are $600,000 per year no matter how 
many sales units (of shirts or blouses) you sell.
Variable costs (blue area): Now suppose you start producing and selling a product, 
such as blouses or shirts. At this point you’ll be paying for materials, supplies, labor, 
sales commissions, and delivery expenses. These are called variable costs, expenses 
that vary directly depending on the numbers of the product that you produce and 
sell. (After all, making more shirts will cost you more in cloth, for example.) Variable 
costs, then, are a function of volume—they go up and down depending on the number 
of products you make or sell. Here the variable costs (blue area) are relatively small if 
you sell only a few thousand shirts but they go up tremendously if you sell, say, 70,000 
shirts.
Total costs (first right upward-sloping line—green plus blue area added together): The 
sum of the fixed costs and the variable costs equals the total costs (the green and blue 
areas together). This is indicated by the line that slopes upward to the right from 
$600,000 to $3,000,000.
Total sales revenue (second right upward-sloping line): This is the total dollars received 
from the sale of however many units you sell. The sales revenue varies depending on 
the number of units you sell. Thus, for example, if you sell 30,000 shirts, you’ll receive 
$1,800,000 in revenue. If you sell 40,000 shirts, you’ll receive somewhat more than 
$2,400,000 in revenue.
Break-even point (intersection of dashed lines): Finding this point is the purpose of this 
whole exercise. The break-even point is the amount of sales revenue at which there 
is no profit but also no loss to your company. On the graph, this occurs where the 
“Total sales revenues” line crosses the “Total costs” line, as we’ve indicated here where 
the dashed lines meet. This means that you must sell 30,000 shirts and receive 
$1,800,000 in revenue in order to recoup your total costs (fixed plus variable). Important 
note: Here is where pricing the shirts becomes important. If you raise the price per shirt, 
you may be able to make the same amount of money (hit your break-even point) by 
selling fewer of them—but that may be harder to do because customers may resist 
buying at the higher price.
Loss (red area): If you fail to sell enough shirts at the right price (the break-even point), 
you will suffer a loss. Loss means your total costs exceed your total sales revenue. 
As the chart shows, here you are literally “in the red”—you’ve lost money.
Profit (black area): Here you are literally “in the black”—you’ve made money. All the 
shirts you sell beyond the break-even point constitute a profit. Profit is the amount by 
which total revenue exceeds total costs. The more shirts you sell, of course, the 
greater the profit.
 
The kind of break-even analysis demonstrated here is known as the graphic 
method. The same thing can also be done algebraically.

A6 
APPENDIX 
The Project Planner’s Toolkit
quantities to do rough “what-if” scenarios to determine possible pricing and 
sales goals. Since the numbers are interrelated, if you change one, the others 
will change also.
■ 
For analyzing the profitability of past projects. While break-even analysis 
is usually used as a tool for future projects, it can also be used  retroactively to 
find out whether the goal of profitability was really achieved, since costs may 
well have changed during the course of the project. In addition, you can use it 
to determine the impact of cutting costs once profits flow.
Limitations 
Break-even analysis is not a cure-all.
■ 
It oversimplifies. In the real world, things don’t happen as neatly as this 
model implies. For instance, fixed and variable costs are not always so readily 
distinguishable. Or fixed costs may change as the number of sales units goes 
up. And not all customers may pay the same price (some may get discounts).
■ 
The assumptions may be faulty. On paper, the formula may work perfectly 
for identifying a product’s profitability. But what if customers find the prices 
too high? Or what if sales figures are outrageously optimistic? In the market-
place, your price and sales forecasts may really be only good guesses.
EXAMPLE
Break-Even Analysis: Why Do Airfares Vary So Much?
Why do some airlines charge four times more than others for 
a flight of the same distance?
There are several reasons, but break-even analysis enters 
into it.
United Airlines’ average cost for flying a passenger 1 mile in 
a recent year was 11.7 cents, whereas Southwest’s was 7.7 
cents. Those are the break-even costs. What they charged be-
yond that was their profit.
Why the difference? One reason, according to a study by 
the U.S. Department of Transportation, is that Southwest’s 
expenses are lower. United flies more long routes than 
short ones, so its costs are stretched out over more miles, 
making its costs for flying shorter routes higher than 
Southwest’s.
Another factor affecting airfares is the type of passengers 
flying a particular route—whether they are high-fare-paying 
business travelers or more price-conscious leisure travelers. 
Business travelers often don’t mind paying a lot (they are reim-
bursed by their companies), and those routes (such as Chicago 
to Cincinnati) tend to have more first-class seats, which drives 
up the average price. Flights to vacation spots (such as Las 
Vegas) usually have more low-price seats because people 
aren’t willing to pay a lot for pleasure travel. Also, nonstop flight 
fares often cost more than flights with connections.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN1
24. See J. Temple, “Mentoring to Nurture Tech Field’s Diversity,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, July 28, 2013, pp. D1, D5.
25. N. Carlson, “Google CEO Larry Page Is Becoming One of the Most 
Powerful People in Human History,” Business Insider, November 6, 
2013, www.businessinsider.com/google-ceo-larry-page-is-becoming-
one-of-the-most-powerful-people-in-human-history-2013-11 (ac-
cessed January 29, 2014).
26. M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience
(New York: HarperCollins, 1990); Beyond Boredom and Anxiety (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1975); Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of 
Discovery and Invention (New York: Harper Perennial, 1996); Finding 
Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life (New York: Ba-
sic Books, 1998); and Good Business: Leadership, Flow, and the Making 
of Meaning (New York: Penguin Books, 2003).
27. M. Wolff, “Uber: Tech Company of the Year,” USA Today, December 
23, 2013, pp. 1B, 3B.
28. E. Huet, “Uber, Lyft Battle to Win Ride-Sharing Recruiting Race,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, January 29, 2014, pp. C1, C3; and M. Caba-
natuan, “Ride Services’ Success Has Taxi Industry Reeling,” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, February 2, 2014, pp. A1, A12.
29. Cabanatuan, “Ride Services’ Success Has Taxi Industry Reeling.”
30. C. Said, “Disabled Cope with Scarcity of Ramp Taxis,” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, February 17, 2014, pp. A1, A13. See also B. Planthold, 
“Taxis Serve Everybody,” letter, San Francisco Chronicle, February 5, 
2014, p. A18.
31. D. Streitfield, “Rough Patch for Uber Services Challenge to Taxis,” The 
New York Times, January 27, 2014, pp. A1, B5; K. Williams and K. Alexan-
der, “Uber, Driver Sued over Girl’s Death,” San Francisco Chronicle, Janu-
ary 28, 2014, pp. A1, A6; and E. Huet, “Ridesharing Drivers Navigate the 
Pitfalls,” San Francisco Chronicle, January 29, 2014, pp. A1, A11.
32. P. Coy, M. Conlin, and M. Herbst, “The Disposable Worker,” Busi-
nessWeek, January 18, 2010, pp. 32–39.
33. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Foreign-Born Workers: Labor Force 
Characteristics—2012,” News Release, May 22, 2013, www.bls.gov/
news.release/pdf/forbrn.pdf (accessed January 29, 2014).
34. P. Taylor and D. Cohn, “A Milestone En Route to a Majority Minority 
Nation,” Pew Research, Social & Demographic Trends, November 7, 
2012, www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/11/07/a-milestone-en-route-to-
a-majority-minority-nation (accessed January 29, 2014).
35. U.S. Census Bureau, “2010 Census Shows 65 and Older Population 
Growing Faster Than Total U.S. Population,” Newsroom release, Novem-
ber 30, 2011, www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/2010_
census/cb11-cn192.html (accessed January 29, 2014); and U.S. 
Census Bureau, “Older Americans Month: May 2013,” U.S. Census Bu-
reau News, March 7, 2013, www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/pdf/
cb13ff-07_older2013.pdf (accessed January 29, 2014).
36. See, for instance, S. E. Page, The Difference: How the Power of Diver-
sity Creates Better Groups, Firms, Schools and Societies (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2007); C. Dreifus, “In Professor’s Model, Diver-
sity = Productivity,” The New York Times, January 8, 2008, p. D2; M. J. 
Pearsall, A. Ellis, and J. Evans, “Unlocking the Effects of Gender Faultlines 
on Team Creativity: Is Activation the Key?” Journal of Applied Psychology,
January 2008, pp. 225–234; A. Garnero and F. Rycx, “The Heterogeneous 
Effects of Workforce Diversity on Productivity, Wages, and Profits,” Discus-
sion Paper No. 7350, April 2013, Institute for the Study of Labor.(IZA), Bonn, 
http://ftp.iza.org/dp7350.pdf (accessed January 29, 2014); and “PwC’s 
Robert E. Moritz: ‘Diverse Teams Give You the Best Thinking,’” Knowl-
edge@Wharton, December 24, 2013, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.
edu/article/leadership-beyond-bottom-line (accessed January 29, 2014).
37. A. Simone, “The ‘How Are You?’ Culture Clash,” The New York 
Times, January 20, 2014, p. A15.
38. D. Tannen, “Greetings, from Around the World,” letter, The New York 
Times, January 24, 2014, p. A24.
39. T. L. Friedman, The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-first 
Century (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2005).
40. See N. Bloom and J. Van Reenan, “Why Do Management Practices 
Differ across Firms and Countries?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
Vol. 24, No. 1 (2010), pp. 203–224.
41. Forecast by eMarketer, reported in “Global E-Commerce Sales to 
Hit $1.5 Trillion, Driven by Growth in Emerging Markets,” RetailCustomer-
Experience.com, February 6, 2014, www.retailcustomerexperience.com/
CHAPTER 1
1. B. Vlasic, “New GM Chief Is Company Woman, Born to It,” The New 
York Times, December 11, 2013, pp. A1, A3.
2. Dave Cole, chairman of Auto Harvest, quoted in C. Woodyard, “Barra 
Came Up Through Ranks at GM,” USA Today, December 11, 2013, p. 2B.
3. R. Wright, “Barra to Steer GM on Steady Path,” The Financial Times, 
December 11, 2013, p. 18.
4. Ibid.
5. Rometty, quoted in C. Hymowitz and S. Frier, “IBM’s Rometty Breaks 
Ground as 100-Year-Old Company’s First Female Leader,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, October 26, 2011, www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-
10-25/ibm-names-rometty-to-succeed-palmisano-as-its-first-female-
chief-executive.html (accessed February 22, 2014).
6. Rometty, quoted in C. C. Miller, “For Incoming IBM Chief, Self-Confi-
dence Rewarded,” The New York Times, October 28, 2011, pp. B1, B10; 
and in J. B. Stewart, “Top Aide to a CEO: Her Husband,” The New York 
Times, November 5, 2011, pp. B1, B2.
7. R. Barker, “No, Management Is Not a Profession,” Harvard Business 
Review, July–August 2010, pp. 52–60.
8. M. P. Follett, quoted in J. F. Stoner and R. E. Freeman, Management, 
5th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992), p. 6.
9. J. Sharkey, “Airline Hits Sour Notes with the Wait Times on Customer 
Calls,” The New York Times, January 21, 2014, p. B4; and C. Elliott, “Maybe 
You Shouldn’t Accept Apology,” USA Today, February 10, 2014, p. 3B.
10. Survey of 12,000 consumers by Accenture, reported in C. Hill, 
“Customer Service Gets Even Worse,” MarketWatch, October 22, 2013, 
www.marketwatch.com/story/customer-service-gets-even-
worse-2013-10-22 (accessed February 15, 2014).
11. Associated Press, “Record Number of Flights Canceled in Brutal 
Winter,” San Francisco Chronicle, February 16, 2014, p. A12. See also 
M. C. White, “Airlines Cash In on Every Inch, Even the Jammed Bins 
Overhead,” The New York Times, October 12, 2013, pp. A1, A3.
12. J. Thomas, quoted in Elliott, “Maybe You Shouldn’t Accept Apology.” 
Thomas is co-author, with G. Chapman, of When Sorry Isn’t Enough: Mak-
ing Things Right with Those You Love (Chicago: Moody Publishers, 2013).
13. Mitch Robertson, reported in Elliott, “Maybe You Shouldn’t Accept 
Apology.”
14. “Get2Human.com (How to Get to a Human Quickly),” GetHuman.com, 
http://get2human.com/get2human_list.asp (accessed February 17, 2014).
15. G. Colvin, “Catch a Rising Star,” Fortune, February 6, 2006, 
pp. 46–50.
16. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Usual Weekly Earnings of Wage and 
Salary Workers, Fourth Quarter 2013,” News Release, January 22, 
2014, www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/wkyeng.pdf (accessed January 
28, 2014).
17. See also The Rising Cost of Not Going to College, Pew Research 
Center, February 2014, www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2014/02/SDT-
higher-ed-FINAL-02-11-2014.pdf (accessed February 17, 2014); and 
“Education: Is College Still Worth It?” The Week, January 24, 2014, p. 32.
18. GMI Ratings annual poll of executive compensation, reported in D. 
Rusche, “U.S. CEOs Break Pay Record as Top 10 Earners Take Home at 
Least $100m Each,” The Guardian, October 22, 2013, www.theguardian
.com/business/2013/oct/22/top-earning-ceos-100m-paychecks-
record (accessed January 28, 2014).
19. G. Ruel, 2013 CEO Pay Survey, GMI Ratings, http://go.gmiratings.
com/rs/gmiratings/images/GMIRatings_2013-CEOPaySurvey.pdf (ac-
cessed January 28, 2014).
20. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Top Executives,” Occupational Outlook 
Handbook, 2014–15 Edition, January 8, 2014, www.bls.gov/ooh/Man-
agement/Top-executives.htm (accessed January 28, 2014).
21. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Management Occupations,” Occupa-
tional Outlook Handbook, 2014–15 Edition, January 8, 2014, www.bls.
gov/ooh/management/home.htm (accessed January 28, 2014).
22. Survey by H. Park, J. M. Twenge, P. M. Greenfield, “The Great 
Recession: Implications for Adolescent Values and Behavior,” Social Psy-
chological and Personality Science, July 11, 2013, http://greenfieldlab.
psych.ucla.edu/Welcome_files/RecessionMtFSPPS-1.pdf (accessed 
January 29, 2014).
23. 2013 CareerBuilder survey, reported in D. Auerbach, “Mentors Helpful 
at Every Career Stage,” Reno Gazette-Journal, February 9, 2014, p. 10F.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN2
org/climate/2013/09/05/2500831/chamber-carbon-tax/# (accessed Feb-
ruary 22, 2014); and R. Nader, “Climate Disasters: Ending Congressional 
Stupor Now!” The Greanville Post, February 10, 2014, www.greanville-
post.com/2014/02/10/climate-disasters (accessed February 22, 2014).
59. J. Aaker, Stanford Graduate School of Business, quoted in C. B. 
Parker, “Stanford Research: The Meaningful Life Is a Road Worth Travel-
ing,” Stanford Report, January 1, 2014, http://news.stanford.edu/
news/2014/january/meaningful-happy-life-010114.html (accessed 
February 3, 2014). The study is R. F. Baumeister, K. D. Vohs, J. L. Aaker, 
and E. N. Garbinsky, “Some Key Differences between a Happy Life and 
a Meaningful Life,” Journal of Positive Psychology, Vol. 8, No. 6 (2013), 
pp. 505–516. See also E. E. Smith and J. L. Aaker, “Millennial Search-
ers,” The New York Times, December 1, 2013, pp. SR-1, SR-6.
60. See M. Seligman, Flourish (New York: Free Press, 2011).
61. S. Armour, “Who Wants to Be a Middle Manager?” USA Today, Au-
gust 13, 2007, pp. 1B, 2B ; A. Bryant, “I Never Wanted to Be a Manager. 
But I’ve Learned,” The New York Times, October 23, 2011, Business 
Section, p. 2; and “Boss’s Job Safe: Most Workers Don’t Want It,” HR 
Magazine, December 2011, p. 14.
62. O. Pollar, “Are You Sure You Want to Be a Manager?” San Francisco 
Examiner, October 4, 1998, p. J-3.
63. P. Drucker, reported in R. L. Knowdell, “A Model for Managers in the Fu-
ture Workplace: Symphony Conductor,” The Futurist, June–July 1998, p. 22.
64. The role of middle managers is discussed by C. R. Ren and C. Guo, 
“Middle Managers’ Strategic Role in the Corporate Entrepreneurial Pro-
cess: Attention-Based Effects,” Journal of Management, November 2011, 
pp. 1586–1610.
65. Saundra Pelletier, interviewed by A. Bryant, “Say Goodbye to 
Groundhog Days,” The New York Times, February 9, 2014, p. BU-2; and 
“Saundra Pelletier, Chief Executive Officer,” WomanCare Global, www.
womancareglobal.org/about-us/staff-board/senior-leadership-team/
saundra-pelletier (accessed February 22, 2014).
66. P. M. Blau and W. R. Scott, Formal Organizations (San Francisco: 
Chandler, 1962).
67. R. L. Zweigenhaft and G. W. Domhoff, The New CEOs: Women, Afri-
can American, Latino, and Asian American Leaders of Fortune 500 Com-
panies (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2011).
68. R. L. Katz, “Skills of an Effective Administrator,” Harvard Business 
Review, September–October, 1974, p. 94. Also see M. K. De Vries, “De-
coding the Team Conundrum: The Eight Roles Executives Play,” Organi-
zational Dynamics, Vol. 36, No. 1 (2007), pp. 28–44.
69. Vlasic, “New GM Chief Is Company Woman, Born to It.”
70. Dan Akerson, quoted in R. Wright and H. Foy, “GM Beats Rivals to 
Put Woman in Driving Seat,” Financial Times, December 11, 2013, p. 1.
71. Vlasic, “New GM Chief Is Company Woman, Born to It.”
72. Gary Cowger, who mentored Barra, quoted in D.-A. Durbin and T. 
Krishner, “Mary Barra, a Child of GM, Prepares to Lead It,” AP, December 
24, 2013, http://bigstory.ap.org/article/mary-barra-child-gm-prepares-
lead-it (accessed February 27, 2014).
73. Barra quoted in Vlasic, “New GM Chief Is Company Woman, Born to It.”
74. J. Bennett and S. Murray, Longtime Insider Is GM’s First Female 
CEO,” The Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2013, pp. A1, A10.
75. See M. C. White, “The Real Reason New College Grads Can’t Get Hired,” 
Time, November 10, 2013, http://business.time.com/2013/11/10/the-real-
reason-new-college-grads-cant-get-hired (accessed February 28, 2014).
76. Akerson, quoted in Vlasic, “New Chief Is CompanyWoman, Born 
to It.”
77. Vlasic, “New Chief Is CompanyWoman, Born to It.”
78. Durbin and Krishner, “Mary Barra, a Child of GM Prepares to Lead It.”
79. CEO recruiter, quoted in Colvin, “Catch a Rising Star.”
80. Colvin, “Catch a Rising Star.”
81. H. Mintzberg, The Nature of Managerial Work (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1973).
82. Ibid.
83. Ed Reilly, quoted in W. J. Holstein, “Attention-Juggling in the High-
Tech Office,” The New York Times, June 4, 2006, sec. 3, p. 9.
84. J. P. Kotter, “What Effective General Managers Really Do,” Harvard 
Business Review, March–April 1999, pp. 145–159.
85. J. J. Deal, “Always On, Never Done? Don’t Blame the Smartphone,” 
Center for Creative Leadership, August 2013, www.ccl.org/leadership/
pdf/research/AlwaysOn.pdf (accessed February 28, 2014).
article/227443/Global-e-commerce-sales-to-hit-1-5-trillion-driven-by-
growth-in-emerging-markets (accessed February 19, 2014).
42. See L. G. Crovitz, “Disruption Is the New Normal,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 6, 2014, p. A11; and R. Locker, “Pentagon Program to 
Watch for Disruptive Technology,” Reno Gazette-Journal, January 12, 
2014, p. 6, reprinted from USA Today.
43. See F. Bruni, “Sorry, Wrong In-Box,” The New York Times, Septem-
ber 1, 2011, p. A23; A. L. Penenberg, “They Have Hacked Your Brain,” 
Fast Company, September 2011, pp. 85–113, 124–125; J. Temple, 
“Data Explosion Revolutionizing Online World,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
October 19, 2011, pp. D1, D4; N. Singer, “Just Give Me the Right to 
Be Forgotten,” The New York Times, August 21, 2011, p. BUS-3; and 
“Ignore That Smartphone,” The Week, December 27, 2013, p. 21.
44. Data from consulting firm IDC, reported in Patrick Tucker, “Has Big 
Data Made Anonymity Impossible?” MIT Technology Review, May 7, 
2013, www.technologyreview.com/news/514351/has-big-data-made-
anonymity-impossible (accessed February 12, 2014). See also IBM 
Software, “IBM Big Data: Bringing Big Data to the Enterprise,” www-950
.ibm.com/events/wwe/grp/grp030.nsf/v17_additional?openform&semi
nar=7AFBY4ES&locale=en_ZZ (accessed February 12, 2014).
45. T. L. Friedman, “If I Had a Hammer,” The New York Times, January 
12, 2014, p. SR-11.
46. On the subject of driverless cars, see HIS Automotive study, re-
ported in C. Woodyard, “Self-Driving Cars to Fill Roads by 2030, Study 
Predicts,” USA Today, January 6, 2014, p. 2B; N. E. Boudette, “Audi, 
BMW Ease into Self-Driving Cars,” The Wall Street Journal, January 8, 
2014, p. B4; and K. Barry, “Cars Might Drive Better than People Can,” 
USA Today, January 10, 2014, p. 7D.
47. See C. B. Frey and M. A. Osborne, “The Future of Employment: How 
Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?” September 17, 2013, www.
oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employ-
ment.pdf (accessed February 28, 2014).
48. This happened with the Carnival Lines cruise ship Carnival Triumph in 
early 2013, which caught fire at sea after precautions were ignored about 
the risk of leaks from engine fuel hoses. See K. Stock, “Carnival Launches 
Radical Money-Back Guarantee,” San Francisco Chronicle, September 22, 
2013, p. D6; and Associated Press, “Filing Shows Carnival Knew of Fire 
Risk,” San Francisco Chronicle, December 19, 2013, p. A14.
49. D. Kushner, “The Dead End on Silk Road,” Rolling Stone, February 
13, 2014, pp. 52–59. See also L. Neumeister, “November Federal Trial 
Set in Silk Road Marketplace Case,” Reno Gazette-Journal, February 9, 
2014, p. 12F.
50. M. Kouchaki and I. H. Smith, “The Morning Morality Effect: The In-
fluence of Time of Day on Unethical Behavior,” Psychological Science, 
January 2014, pp. 95–102. See also N. L. Mead, R. F. Baumeister, F. 
Gino, M. E. Schweitzer, D. Ariely, “Too Tired to Tell the Truth: Self-Control 
Resource Depletion and Dishonesty,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, May 2009, pp. 594–597.
51. J. Roberts and D. Wasieleski, “Moral Reasoning in Computer-Based 
Task Environments: Exploring the Interplay between Cognitive and Tech-
nological Factors on Individuals’ Propensity to Break Rules,” Journal of 
Business Ethics, October 2012, pp. 355–376.
52. N. E. Ruedy, C. Moore, F. Gino, and M. E. Schweitzer, “The Cheater’s 
High: The Unexpected Affective Benefits of Unethical Behavior,” Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, October 2013, pp. 531–548.
53. See “Ethics Pays,” EthicalSystems.org, http://ethicalsystems.org/
content/ethics-pays (accessed February 21, 2014).
54. A. Tugend, “In Life and Business, Learning to Be Ethical,” The New 
York Times, January 11, 2014, p. B5.
55. A. E. Tenbrunsel, University of Notre Dame, quoted in ibid.
56. A. Gore, An Inconvenient Truth (Emmaus, PA: Rodale, 2006). See 
also A. Gore, The Future: Six Drivers of Global Change (New York: Ran-
dom House, 2013). For a more recent climate-change overview, see W. 
Nordhous, The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics in a 
Warming World (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013).
57. This definition of sustainability was developed in 1987 by the World 
Commission on Environment and Development.
58. J. Saseen, “Who Speaks for Business?” BusinessWeek, October 19, 
2009, pp. 22–24; Z. Beauchamp, “The Chamber of Commerce’s Surpris-
ing Comments on a Carbon Tax and How It Could Change the Game in 
Congress,” ClimateProgress, September 5, 2013, http://thinkprogress.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN3
16/u-s-callout-homejoy (both accessed February 28, 2014). See also 
“About Homejoy,” www.homejoy.com/about.
107. A. Cheung, quoted in Robehmed, “Hot Startup Homejoy Cleans Up 
America.”
108. For examples of some of these risks, see S. Schreter, “Major Risks 
for New Firms,” San Francisco Chronicle, January 18, 2014, pp. D1, D3, 
www.sfgate.com/default/article/Want-to-start-a-business-Consider-
these-risks-5153841.php (accessed February 28, 2014).
109. “M. Glassman, “Correlations: Job Creators No More,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, February 10–16, 2014, p. 18.
110. S. A. Shane, “How Start-Ups Really Create Jobs—and What This 
Means for Employment Growth,” The New York Times, October 19, 
2009, http://boss.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/10/19/how-start-ups-
really-create-jobs-and-what-this-means-for-employment-growth 
(accessed February 28, 2014).
111. A. Vance, “Time for Microsoft to Tap Its Inner Google,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, February 10–16, 2014, pp. 8–9. See also D. Clark, M. 
Langley, and S. Ovide, “Microsoft’s CEO Pick: From India to Insider,” The 
Wall Street Journal, February 1–2, 2014, pp. A1, A2.
112. R. Branson, “Richard Branson on Intrapreneurs,” Entrepreneur.
com, January 31, 2011, www.entrepreneur.com/article/218011 (ac-
cessed February 28, 2014). See also A. Bruzzese, “Entrepreneurialism 
at Work,” The Arizona Republic, January 15, 2014, p. CL-1.
113. N. Singer, “The Watchful Lab of Dr. Bell,” The New York Times, 
February 16, 2014, pp. BU-1, BU-4, BU-5
114. P. F. Drucker, Innovation and Entrepreneurship (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1986), pp. 27–28.
115. A. M. Webber, “Danger: Toxic Company,” Fast Company, November 
1998, pp. 152–161.
116. D. C. McClelland, The Achieving Society (New York: Van Nostrand, 
1961); D. C. McClelland, Human Motivation (Glenview, IL: Scott, Fores-
man, 1985); D. L. Sexton and N. Bowman, “The Entrepreneur: A Capable 
Executive and More,” Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 1 (1985), 
pp. 129–140; T. Begley and D. P. Boyd, “Psychological Characteristics 
Associated with Performance in Entrepreneurial Firms and Smaller 
Businesses,” Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 2 (1987), pp. 79–93; 
D. Hisrich, “Entrepreneurship/Intrapreneurship,” American Psychologist,
February 1990, p. 218; and C. R. Kuehl and P. A. Lambing, Small Busi-
ness: Planning and Management (Fort Worth, TX: Dryden Press, 1990).
117. “Who Are U.S. Entrepreneurs?” infographic based on 2012 Global 
Entreprepreneurship Monitor (GEM) United States Report, published by 
Babson College and Baruch College, www.babson.edu/news-events/
babson-news/PublishingImages/babson-gem-info-graphic-692.png 
(accessed February 28, 2014).
118. For more about measuring entrepreneurial orientation, see V. Taatila 
and S. Down, “Measuring Entrepreneurial Orientation of University 
Students,” Education + Training, Vol. 54, No. 8/9 (2012), pp. 744–760.
119. This box is adapted from B. K. Williams and S. C. Sawyer, Using 
Information Technology: A Practical Introduction, 11th ed. (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2015).
120. T. Schwartz, “The Personal Energy Crisis,” The New York Times, 
July 24, 2011, p. BU8.
121. W. Gallagher, cited in blog by J. Tierney, “Attention Must Be Paid—
but How?” The New York Times–Tierney Lab, May 4, 2009, http://tier-
neylab.blogs.nytimes.com/ (accessed February 28, 2014). Gallagher is 
author of Rapt (New York: The Penguin Press, 2009).
122. W. Gallagher, quoted in Tierney, “Attention Must Be Paid—but How?”
123. F. P. Robinson, Effective Study, 4th ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1970).
124. H. C. Lindgren, The Psychology of College Success: A Dynamic 
Approach (New York: Wiley, 1969).
125. R. J. Palkovitz and R. K. Lore, “Note Taking and Note Review: 
Why Students Fail Questions Based on Lecture Material,” Teaching of 
Psychology, Vol. 7 (1980), pp. 159–161.
CHAPTER 2
1. H. Ruchlis and S. Oddo, Clear Thinking: A Practical Introduction 
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1990), p. 109.
2. Ibid., p. 110.
3. C. S. Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success (New York: 
Ballantine Books, 2006), pp. 12–13.
86. S. M. MacDermid, M. D. Lee, and M. L. Buck, “Alternative Work 
Arrangements among Professionals and Managers: Rethinking Career 
Development and Success,” Journal of Management Development, 
Vol. 20, No. 4 (2001), pp. 305–317.
87. B. Groysberg and R. Abrahams, “Manage Your Work, Manage Your 
Life,” Harvard Business Review, March 2014, pp. 58–66.
88. N. Bowles, “Concept of Work/Life Balance on Its Way to Being 
Obsolete,” San Francisco Chronicle, November 2, 2013, pp. D1, D3.
89. J. Cooper-Kahn and L. Dietzel, “What Is Executive Functioning?” LD On-
line, 2008, www.ldonline.org/article/What_Is_Executive_Functioning%3F 
(accessed February 28, 2014). See also P. P. Zelazo, “Executive Function and 
Emotion Regulation: A Developmental Perspective,” Ph.D. paper presented 
May 2010 at the Annual International Trauma Conference, Boston, MA.
90. R. Hannaman, “Understanding Generation Z: The Workforce of the 
Future,” Nevada Appeal, December 25, 2011, p. C6. See also B. Tulgan 
and Rainmaker Thinking, Meet Generation Z: The Second Generation 
within the Giant “Millennial” Cohort, Rainmaker Thinking, Whitepaper, 
October 7, 2013, http://rainmakerthinking.com/assets/up-
loads/2013/10/Gen-Z-Whitepaper.pdf (accessed February 28, 2014).
91. A. Smith, L. Rainie, and K. Zickhur, “College Students and Technology,” Pew 
Research Internet Project, July 19, 2011, www.pewinternet.org/2011/07/19/
college-students-and-technology (accessed February 28, 2014).
92. B. R. McCoy, “Digital Distractions in the Classroom: Student Class-
room Use of Digital Devices for Non-class Related Purposes,” Journal of 
Media Education, October 2013, pp. 5–13.
93. Psychiatrist Edward M. Hallowell, quoted in A. Tugend, “Multitask-
ing Can Make You Lose . . . Um . . . Focus,” The New York Times, October 
25, 2008, p. B7. Hallowell is the author of CrazyBusy: Overstretched, 
Overbooked, and About to Snap! (New York: Ballantine, 2006).
94. W. Gallagher, quoted in book review, D. G. Myers, “Please Pay Atten-
tion,” The Wall Street Journal, April 20, 2009, p. A13. Gallagher is author 
of Rapt (New York: Penguin Press, 2009).
95. J. Tierney, “Ear Plugs to Lasers: The Science of Concentration,” The 
New York Times, May 5, 2009, p. D2.
96. See D. Goleman, “The Focused Leader,” Harvard Business Review, 
December 2013, pp. 50–60; and A. Beard, “Spotlight: Interview with 
Ellen Langer—Mindfulness in the Age of Complexity,” Harvard Business 
Review, March 2014, pp. 68–73.
97. P. Steel, “The Nature of Procrastination: A Meta-Analytic and Theo-
retical Review of Quintessential Self-Regulatory Failure,” Psychological 
Bulletin, January 2007, pp. 65–94. For one writer’s account of weaning 
himself off his smartphone, see T. Wayne, “The 7-Day Digital Diet,” The 
New York Times, February 8, 2014, pp. ST-1, ST-16.
98. J. White and J. Bennett, “Letter from GM CEO: ‘Deeply Regret’ Need to 
Recall 1.6 Million Cars,” The Wall Street Journal, March 4, 2014, http://
blogs.wsj.com/corporate-intelligence/2014/03/04/letter-from-gm-ceo-
deeply-regret-ne... (accessed March 5, 2014). Also see J. Bennett, “Recall 
Is First Big Test for GM Chief Barra,” The Wall Street Journal, March 5, 
2014, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB1000142405270230436070
4579419494191216588 (accessed March 5, 2014).
99. Definition by Paul Graham, head of business accelerator Y Combi-
nator, cited in N. Robehmed, “What Is a Startup?” Forbes, December 16, 
2013, www.forbes.com/sites/natalierobehmed/2013/12/16/what-is-a-
startup/print (accessed February 28, 2014).
100. M. Corona, “From Truckee to the World Stage,” Reno Gazette-
Journal, February 17, 2014, pp. 1A, 3A.
101. A. Gardella, “An Entrepreneur Who Wouldn’t Be Stopped by Any-
thing,” The New York Times, December 26, 2013, p. B3.
102. J. Wortham, “Search for a Niche, and You Might Find a Crowd,” 
The New York Times, February 9, 2014, p. BU-3.
103. C. Dunn, “Brother-and-Sister Brewer,” Fortune, November 18, 
2013, p. 22.
104. S. Finz, “How Smashburger May Find Its Niche,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, September 27, 2013, pp. C1, C5.
105. Adora Cheung, quoted in A. Swartz, “Bigger Market Opens for Home-
joy Service,” San Francisco Chronicle, November 27, 2013, pp. C1, C5.
106. T. Geron, “Startup Homejoy Works with Public Sector to Find Home 
Cleaners,” Forbes, September 3, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/tomio-
geron/2013/09/03/startup-homejoy-works-with-cities-to-find-workers; 
and N. Robehmed, “Hot Startup Homejoy Cleans Up America,” Forbes, 
December 16, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/natalierobehmed/2013/12/

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN4
blog/2006/10/26/interview-with-tim-westergren-ceo-of-pandora (ac-
cessed March 10, 2014). See also R. Walker, “The Song Decoders,” The 
New York Times Magazine, October 18, 2009, www.nytimes.
com/2009/10/18/magazine/18Pandora-t.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 
(accessed March 10, 2014).
26. “Pandora Announces February 2014 Audience Metrics,” Pandora 
news release, March 6, 2014, http://investor.pandora.com/phoenix.
zhtml?c=227956&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=1906773&highlight= (ac-
cessed March 10, 2014).
27. A. Fixmer, “Not Another Music Streaming Service!” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 27–February 2, 2014, pp. 18–19; and M. Wood, 
“Beats Hopes to Serve Up Music in a Novel Way,” The New York Times, 
March 13, 2014, p. B9.
28. S. F. Brown, “Wresting New Wealth from the Supply Chain,” For-
tune, November 9, 1998, pp. 204[C]–204[Z]. See also M. Maynard, 
“Toyota Shows Big Three How It’s Done,” The New York Times, January 
13, 2006, pp. C1, C4.
29. See P. Davidson, “Lean Manufacturing Helps Companies Survive,” 
USA Today, November 2, 2009, pp. 1B, 2B. See also B. R. Staats and D. 
M. Upton, “Lean Knowledge Work,” Harvard Business Review, October 
2011; and T. Agan, “The Secret to Lean Innovation Is Making Learning a 
Priority,” HBR Blog Network, January 23, 2014, http://blogs.hbr.
org/2014/01/the-secret-to-lean-innovation-is-making-learning-a-pri-
ority (accessed March 10, 2014).
30. V. Colliver, “Following ‘Toyota Way’ to Efficiency,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, October 9, 2013, pp. E1, E6.
31. N. D. Schwartz, “The Middle Class Is Steadily Eroding; Just Ask the 
Business World,” The New York Times, February 3, 2014, p. A1.
32. N. Howe, “Are Malls Becoming Extinct?” USA Today, December 17, 2014, 
p. 8A; D. FitzGerald and E. Glazer, “RadioShack Pulls Plug on 1,100 Stores,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 5, 2014, pp. B1, B2; C. Timberlake, “Ra-
dioShack Falls—Plans to Shut Over 1,000 Stores,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
March 5, 2014, p. C6; P. Davidson, “Staples to Close 225 Stores, Push Online 
Sales,” USA Today, March 7, 2014, p. 2B; and Reuters, “Citing Shift to Online 
Sales, Staples Says It Will Close Up to 225 Stores by the End of 2015,” p. B5.
33. A. R. Sorkin, “A Dose of Realism for the Chief of J.C. Penney,” 
The New York Times, November 13, 2012, pp. B1, B4; D. Mattioli, “For 
Penney’s Heralded Boss, the Shine Is Off the Apple,” The Wall Street 
Journal, February 25, 2013, pp. A1, A12; E. A. Harris, “J.C. Penney to 
Close 33 Stores and Cut 2,000 Jobs,” The New York Times, January 16, 
2014, p. B3; and J. Kell, “Penney to Close 33 Stores,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 16, 2014, pp. B2.
34. S. Kapner, “Macy’s Profit Rises Despite Low Sales,” The Wall Street 
Journal, February 26, 2014, p. B6. See also D. FitzGerald and S. Kapner, 
“For Some Retailers, Success Is Simply Staying Alive,” The Wall Street 
Journal, February 28, 2014, pp. B1, B2.
35. “CEO Terry Lundgren: A Focus on Turning ‘My Macy’s’ into Your 
Macy’s,” Knowledge@Wharton, November 11, 2009, http://knowledge.
wharton.upenn.edu/article/ceo-terry-lundgren-a-focus-on-turning-my-
macys-into-your-macys (accessed March 10, 2014).
36. C. DeRose and N. Tichy, “Macy’s Gets Personal to Compete with 
Web Sales,” Bloomberg Businessweek, February 7, 2013, www.busi-
nessweek.com/printer/articles/95702-macy-s-gets-personal-to-com-
pete-with-web-sales (accessed March 10, 2014).
37. J. Surowiecki, “The Next Level,” The New Yorker, October 18, 2010, 
p. 28.
38. Research report by the Society for Human Resource Management, 
2012 Employee Benefits: The Employee Benefits Landscape in a Recov-
ering Economy (Alexandria, VA: SHRM, 2012), www.shrm.org/research/
surveyfindings/articles/documents/2012_empbenefits_report.pdf (ac-
cessed March 10, 2014).
39. L. Petrecca, “Quirky Perks for Workers: Pet Insurance, Massages,” 
USA Today, December 30, 2011, p. 1A; B. Haislip, “Beer on Fridays. Pets 
in the Office. Weekly Yoga,” The Wall Street Journal, August 19 2013, 
p. R7; and A. Bruzzese, “The Little Things, Perks Can Keep Employees 
Happy,” Reno Gazette-Journal, September 7, 2013, p. 9A.
40. P. McCord, “How Netflix Reinvented HR,” Harvard Business Review, 
January–February 2014, pp. 70–76.
41. Daniel Pink, reported in L. Maw, “What We Really Want from Work,” 
Huffington Post, July 16, 2012, www.huffingtonpost.com/liz-maw/
work-culture_b_1676043.html (March 10, 2014).
4. Tom Peters, quoted in J. A. Byrne, “The Man Who Invented Manage-
ment,” BusinessWeek, November 28, 2005, www.businessweek.com/
stories/2005-11-27/the-man-who-invented-management (accessed 
March 5, 2014).
5. Byrne, “The Man Who Invented Management.” See also R. Karlgaard, “Peter 
Drucker on Leadership,” Forbes.com, November 19, 2004, www.forbes.
com/2004/11/19/cz_rk_1119drucker.html; B. J. Feder, “Peter F. Drucker, a 
Pioneer in Social and Management Theory, Is Dead at 95,” The New York 
Times, November 12, 2005, www.nytimes.com/2005/11/12/
business/12drucker.html; and P. Sullivan, “Management Visionary Peter 
Drucker Dies,” The Washington Post, November 12, 2005, www.washington-
post.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/11/11/AR2005111101938.html 
(all accessed March 5, 2014).
6. C. M. Christensen and M. E. Raynor, “Why Hard-Nosed Executives 
Should Care about Management Theory,” Harvard Business Review,
September 2003, pp. 67–74.
7. Ibid., p. 68.
8. R. Sadun and J. V. Reenen, “Does Management Work?” Harvard 
Business Review, November 2012, pp. 76–82. Researchers studied 
thousands of organizations and found that more successful companies 
employed the following three management practices: setting stretch 
goals, basing compensation and promotions on performance, and mon-
itoring results. A one-point increment on a five-point scale management 
practice scale resulted in improvements of 23% in productivity, 14% in 
market capitalization, and 1.4 % growth in annual sales.
9. G. Hamel, The Future of Management (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2007).
10. Valve Handbook for New Employees (Bellevue, WA: Valve Press, 
2012), p. 4, http://media.steampowered.com/apps/valve/Valve_New-
EmployeeHandbook.pdf (accessed March 10, 2014).
11. S. Knight, “Valve’s New Employee Handbook Is Chock-Full of Awe-
some, Read It Now,” TechSpot, April 23, 2012, www.techspot.com/
news/48303-valves-new-employee-handbook-is-chock-full-of-
awesome-read-it-now.html (accessed March 10, 2014).
12. T. Kastelle, “Hierarchy Is Overrated,” Harvard Business Review, HBR 
Blog Network, November 20, 2013, http://blogs.hbr.org/2013/11/hierar-
chy-is-overrated (accessed March 10, 2014).
13. For more on the history of management, see W. Kiechel III, “The Man-
agement Century,” Harvard Business Review, November 2012, pp. 62–75.
14. See N. Bloom, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, “Does Management 
Really Work?” Harvard Business Review, November 2012, pp. 76–82. 
The authors argue that organizations are more likely to succeed if they 
adopt good management’s basic features—targets, incentives, and 
monitoring—all components of the four principal functions of manage-
ment: planning, organizing, leading, and controlling.
15. B. Rice, “The Hawthorne Defect: Persistence of a Flawed Theory,” Psy-
chology Today, February 1982, pp. 70–74. See also S. Highhouse, “Appli-
cations of Organizational Psychology: Learning through Failure or Failure to 
Learn?” pp. 331–348 in L. L. Koppes, Historical Perspectives in Industrial 
and Organizational Psychology (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2007).
16. A. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psychological Review, 
July 1943, pp. 370–396.
17. D. McGregor, The Human Side of Enterprise (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1960).
18. Ben Waber, CEO of Sociometric Solutions, Boston, reported in R. 
Feintzeig, “Bosses Take a Stand on Where Workers Sit,” The Wall Street 
Journal, October 9, 2013, p. B8.
19. J. Wajcman and E. Rose, “Constant Connectivity: Rethinking Inter-
ruptions at Work,” Organization Studies, July 2011, pp. 941–961.
20. S. Shellenbarger, “The Biggest Distraction in the Office Is Sitting 
Next to You,” The Wall Street Journal, September 11, 2013, pp. D1, D3.
21. Sigal Barsade, quoted in Feintzeig, “Bosses Take a Stand on Where 
Workers Sit.”
22. A. Bruzzese, “Introverts and Extroverts Each Need Tolerance,” Reno 
Gazette-Journal, September 14, 2013, p. 11A.
23. Paul English, reported in Feintzeig, “Bosses Take a Stand on Where 
Workers Sit.”
24. B. Sisario, “The Sweet, Streaming Sound of Data,” The New York 
Times, March 7, 2014, pp. B1, B6.
25. Tim Westergren, quoted in N. Kaiser, “Interview with Tim Wester-
gren, CEO of Pandora,” nPost, October 26, 2006, www.npost.com/

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN5
Horizons, November–December 1995, pp. 13–20; and D. M. Noer, 
Breaking Free: A Prescription for Personal and Organizational Change
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1996).
58. Pfeffer and Sutton, “Profiting from Evidence-Based Management.”
59. L. Kwoh, “Memo to Staff: Take More Risks,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, March 20, 2013, p. B8.
60. R Jana, “Inspiration from Emerging Economies,” BusinessWeek,
March 23 and 30, 2009, p. 41.
61. P. M. Barrett, “Bad Sports,” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 3–9, 
2014, p. 51.
62. P. M. Barrett, “UNC Officials Apologize for a Huge Sports Scandal, 
While Attacking the Woman Who Brought It to Light,” Bloomberg Busi-
nessweek, February 3–9, 2014, p. 26.
63. See Barrett, “Bad Sports.”
CHAPTER 3
1. Marianne Jennings, professor of legal and ethical studies, W.P. Carey 
School of Business, Arizona State University, quoted in “College Cheat-
ing Is Bad for Business,” Knowledge@W.P. Carey, September 24, 2008, 
http://knowledge.wpcarey.asu.edu/article.cfm?articleid=1679 (ac-
cessed March 31, 2014).
2. B. Carey, “Stumbling Blocks on the Path of Righteousness,” The New 
York Times, May 5, 2009, p. D5.
3. M. H. Bazerman and A. E. Tenbrunsel, “Stumbling into Bad Behavior,” 
The New York Times, April 20, 2011, p. A2.
4. M. H. Bazerman and A. E. Tenbrunsel, Blind Spots: Why We Fail to Do 
What’s Right, and What We Can Do about It (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2011); and M. R. Banaji and A. G. Greenwald, Blindspot: 
Hidden Biases of Good People (New York: Delacorte Press, 2013).
5. Poll by Beneson Strategy Group for Common Sense Media, “35% of 
Teenagers Reports Using Cell Phones to Cheat,” reported in Common 
Sense Media, June 18, 2009, www.commonsensemedia.org/about-us/
press-room/hi-tech-cheating-poll (accessed March 31, 2014); and 
J. Tucker, “Tech-Savvy Students Invent New Ways to Cheat,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, June 19, 2009, pp. A1, A16.
6. B. Staples, “Cutting and Pasting: A Senior Thesis by (Insert Name),” 
The New York Times, July 12, 2010, www.nytimes.com/2010/07/13/
opinion/13tue4.html (accessed March 31, 2014).
7. See N. Angier, “Spite Is Good. Spite Works,” The New York Times, 
April 1, 2014, pp. D1, D3.
8. D. J. Palazzzo, Y.-J. Lee, R. Warnakulasooriya, and D. E. Pritchard, 
“Patterns, Correlates, and Reduction of Homework Copying,” Physical 
Review Special Topics, March 2010, http://prst-per.aps.org/abstract/
PRSTPER/v6/i1/e010104 (accessed March 31, 2014).
9. J. Wicks, quoted in G. Rifkin, “Making a Profit and a Difference,” The 
New York Times, October 5, 2006, p. C5.
10. Jon Miller, interviewed by W. Henisz, “Big Business and the New 
Norm: Doing Good at the Core, Not the Periphery,” Knowledge@
Wharton, March 21, 2014, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/
article/big-business-can-fix-world (accessed March 26, 2014). Miller 
is co-author, with Lucy Parker, of Everybody’s Business: The Unlikely 
Story of How Big Business Can Fix the World (London: Biteback 
Publishing, 2013).
11. For various definitions of Generation Y and Generation Z, see W. J. 
Schroer, “Generations X, Y, Z, and the Others,” The Social Librarian, www
.socialmarketing.org/newsletter/features/generation1.htm (accessed 
March 24, 2014); and A. Bruzzese, “Arrival of Generation Z Turns Work-
place Upside Down,” Reno Gazette-Journal, October 19, 2013, pp. 9A, 10A.
12. E. E. Smith and J. L. Aaker, “Millennial Searchers,” The New York 
Times, December 1, 2013, pp. SR-1, SR-6.
13. A. Levit and S. Licina, “How the Recession Shaped Millennial and 
Hiring Manager Attitudes about Millennials’ Future Careers,” 2011 report 
commissioned by the Career Advisory Board and conducted by Harris 
Interactive, www.careeradvisoryboard.org/public/uploads/2011/10/
Future-of-Millennial-Careers-Report.pdf (accessed March 27, 2014).
14. H. Park, J. M. Twenge, and P. M. Greenfield, “The Great Recession: 
Implications for Adolescent Values and Behavior,” Social Psychological 
and Personality Science, July 11, 2013, http://greenfieldlab.psych.ucla
.edu/Welcome_files/RecessionMtFSPPS-1.pdf (accessed March 27, 
2014). See also R. A. VanMeter, D. B. Grisaffe, L. B. Chonko, and 
42. “Happiness at Work” survey results, reported in R. E. Silverman, 
“Are You Happy at Work?” The Wall Street Journal, October 16, 2012, 
http://blogs.wsj.com/atwork/2012/10/16/are-you-happy-at-work (ac-
cessed March10, 2014). See also The Happiness at Work Survey, by 
Delivering Happiness at Work, www.happinessatworksurvey.com.
43. C. Zukin and M. Szeitner, Talent Report: What Workers Want in 
2012, Net Impact, May 2012, https://netimpact.org/learning-resources/
research/what-workers-want/talent-report-what-workers-want-
in-2012 (accessed March 10, 2014).
44. “The Top Gurus,” The Wall Street Journal, May 5, 2008, p. B6.
45. G. Hamel, with B. Breen, The Future of Management (Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press, 2007), p. 6.
46. G. Hamel, “Break Free!” Fortune, September 19, 2007, http://money.
cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2007/10/01/100352608/
index.htm (accessed March 14, 2014).
47. J. Pfeffer and R. I. Sutton, “Profiting from Evidence-Based Manage-
ment,” Strategy & Leadership, Vol. 34, No. 2 (2006), pp. 35–42. See also 
J. Pfeffer and R. I. Sutton, “Evidence-Based Management,” Harvard 
Business Review, January 2006, pp. 63–74; and J. Pfeffer and R. 
Sutton, “Trust the Evidence, Not Your Instincts,” The New York Times, 
September 4, 2011, p. BU-8. Pfeffer and Sutton are authors of Hard 
Facts, Danger Half-Truths, and Total Nonsense (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2006).
48. C. Hymowitz, “Executives Must Stop Jumping Fad to Fad and Learn 
to Manage,” The Wall Street Journal, May 15, 2006, p. B1. See also M. 
Miller, The Tyranny of Dead Ideas: Letting Go of the Old Ways of Thinking 
to Unleash a New Prosperity (New York: Times Books, 2009).
49. S. Cummings and T. Bridgman, “The Relevant Past: Why the History 
of Management Should Be Critical for Our Future,” Academy of Man-
agement Learning & Education, Vol. 10, No. 1 (2011), pp. 77–93.
50. D. M. Rosseau, “Is There Such a Thing as ‘Evidence-Based Man-
agement’?” Academy of Management Review, April 2006, pp. 256–269. 
Other debates about evidence-based management may be found in 
T. Reay, W. Berta, and M. Kazman Kohn, “Where’s the Evidence on 
Evidence-Based Management?” Academy of Management Perspectives, 
November 2009, pp. 5–18; R. Briner, D. Denyer, and D. M. Rousseau, 
“Evidence-Based Management: Concept Cleanup Time?” Academy of 
Management Perspectives, November 2009, pp. 19–32; and S. D. Char-
lier, K. G. Brown, and S. L. Rynes, “Teaching Evidence-Based Manage-
ment in MBA Programs: What Evidence Is There?” Academy of 
Management Learning & Education, Vol. 10, No. 2 (2011), pp. 222–236.
51. Pfeffer and Sutton, “Profiting from Evidence-Based Management.”
52. R. I. Sutton, interviewed in “Asked & Answered: Prove It,” Stanford Mag-
azine, May/June 2006, www.stanfordalumni.org/news/magazine/2006/
mayjun/dept/management.html (accessed March 14, 2014). Discussions 
about the need for an evidence-based process in medicine may be found in 
D. Sanghavi, “Plenty of Guidelines, but Where’s the Evidence?” The New York 
Times, December 9, 2008, p. D6; and R. Winslow, “Study Questions Evidence 
behind Heart Therapies,” The Wall Street Journal, February 25, 2009, p. D1.
53. D. Pound, “2014 Cadillac CTS 3.6 vs. 2014 Audi A6 3.0T, 2014 
BMW 535i xDrive, 2014 Mercedes-Benz E350,” Car and Driver, Novem-
ber 2013, www.caranddriver.com/comparisons/2014-cadillac-cts-
36-vs-audi-a6-bmw-535i-mercedes-e350-comparison-test-review 
(accessed March 15, 2014).
54. A. Garvin, “Building a Learning Organization,” Harvard Business Re-
view, July/August 1993, pp. 78–91; and R. Hodgetts, F. Luthans, and S. Lee, 
“New Paradigm Organizations: From Total Quality to Learning to World-
Class,” Organizational Dynamics, Winter 1994, pp. 5–19D. See also T. Kelly, 
“Measuring Informal Learning: Encourage a Learning Culture and Track It!” 
Trainingindustry.com, March 31, 2009, www.trainingindustry.com/articles/
measuring-informal-learning.aspx (accessed March 15, 2014).
55. A. S. Miner and S. J. Mezias, “Ugly Duckling No More: Pasts and 
Futures of Organizational Learning Research,” Organization Science, 
January–February 1996, pp. 88–99; and R. P. Mai, Learning Partner-
ships: How Leading American Companies Implement Organizational 
Learning (Chicago: Irwin, 1996).
56. B. Breen, “How EDS Got Its Groove Back,” Fast Company, Septem-
ber 2001, p. 106.
57. D. Ulrich, T. Jick, and M. Von Glinow, “High-Impact Learning: Build-
ing and Diffusing Learning Capability,” Organizational Dynamics, 
Autumn 1993, pp. 52–66; S. F. Slater, “Learning to Change,” Business 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN6
33. A. Damon, “The Producer,” Reno Gazete-Journal, January 26, 2014, 
pp. 1A, 8A; and A. Damon, “Lights! Camera! Incentives!” USA Today, 
January 28, 2014, p. 6B.
34. K. Shevory, “Twitter’s New Home Is Helping Revive a Seedy 
San Francisco Neighborhood,” The New York Times, November 2, 2013, 
pp. B1, B6; and J. Coté, “S.F. Tech Tax Program Grows Up,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, January 9, 2014, pp. A1, A7.
35. A. Satariano, “How Arizona Town Landed Apple,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, February 16, 2014, p. G3.
36. S. Eder, “For ESPN, Millions to Remain in Connecticut,” The New 
York Times, December 27, 2013, pp. A1, B12.
37. L. Story, “As Companies Seek Tax Deals, Governments Pay High 
Price,” The New York Times, December 1, 2012, www.nytimes
.com/2012/12/02/us/how-local-taxpayers-bankroll-corporations
.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 (accessed March 30, 2014). See also 
T. Moroney, “Putting a New Name on an Old Idea to Fix Inner Cities,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 27–February 2, 2014, pp. 25–26.
38. M. Gay, “Cities Move to Curb Carriages,” The Wall Street Journal, 
March 24, 2014, p. A3.
39. A. Higgins, “Facing Fury over Antigay Law, Stoli Says ‘Russian? Not 
Really,’” The New York Times, September 8, 2013, p. A1.
40. B. F. Rubin, “Lululemon’s Profit Improves, but Sales Challenges Per-
sist,” The Wall Street Journal, March 28, 2014, p. B2.
41. C. Jensen, “2nd Car Seat Maker Cites Buckle Flaw in a Recall,” The 
New York Times, April 5, 2014, p. B4.
42. A. Smith, “Alli Weight-Loss Drug Recalled for Tampering,” 
CNNMoney, March 27, 2014, http://money.cnn.com/2014/03/27/news/
companies/glaxosmithkline-alli-recall (accessed March 31, 2014).
43. A. Auriemma, “Chiefs at Big Firms Often Last to Know,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 3, 2014, pp. B1, B2.
44. C. Jensen, “In GM Recalls, Inaction and a Trail of Fatal Crashes,” 
The New York Times, March 3, 2014, pp. B1, B2. See also D. Ivory, R. R. 
Ruiz, and B. Vlasic, “Sending Alerts, GM Delayed Recall of Cars,” The 
New York Times, April 20, 2014, pp. News-1, News-15.
45. S. Hughes and J. Bennett, “Size, Cost of GM’s Recalls Mount,” The 
Wall Street Journal, April 1, 2014, pp. B1, B2.
46. B. Vlasic and H. Stout, “GM Turns to Hired Crisis Managers,” The 
New York Times, April 4, 2014, pp. B1, B4.
47. J. Nocera, “GM’s Cobalt Crisis,” The New York Times, April 8, 2014, p. A21.
48. N. Singer, “In Recall, Role Model Stumbles,” The New York Times, 
January 18, 2010, pp. B1, B2.
49. Wharton professor of legal studies and business ethics Amy Sepin-
wall, quoted in “The Price of the GM Recalls: Advice for Mary Barra,” 
Knowledge@Wharton, April 9, 2014, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn
.edu/article/price-gm-recalls-advice-mary-barra (accessed April 9, 2014).
50. “War on Poverty at 50—Progress, but Fight Goes On,” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, January 5, 2014, p. A6, reprinted from The New York 
Times. See also E. Porter, “In the War on Poverty, a Dogged Adversary,” 
The New York Times, December 18, 2013, pp. B1, B3.
51. Bureau of Labor Statistics, International Comparisons of Manufac-
turing Productivity and Unit Labor Cost Trends 2008, October 22, 2009, 
www.bls.gov/news.release/prod4.nr0.htm (accessed March 31, 2014); 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, reported in P. Wiseman, “Productivity Leaps 
at 6.2% Rate as Firms Wait to Hire,” USA Today, February 5, 2010, p. 3B; 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Productivity and Costs, Fourth Quarter and 
Annual Averages 2011, Revised,” Economic News Release, March 7, 
2012, www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/prod2_03072012.pdf (ac-
cessed March 31, 2014); and Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Productivity 
and Costs, Fourth Quarter and Annual Averages 2013, Revised,” Eco-
nomic News Release, March 6, 2014, www.bls.gov/news.release/
prod2.nr0.htm (accessed March 31, 2014).
52. D. Wessel, “The Factory Floor Has a Ceiling on Job Creation,” The 
Wall Street Journal, January 12, 2012, p. A6; and T. Aeppel, “Man vs. 
Machine, a Jobless Recovery,” The Wall Street Journal, January 17, 
2012, pp. B1, B6. See also T. L. Friedman, “Average Is Over,” The New 
York Times, January 28, 2012, p. A25, on the extension of technology 
into service jobs and possible further increased unemployment.
53. A New Direction: Our Changing Relationship with Driving and the 
Implications for America’s Future, U.S. Public Interest Research Group, 
Spring 2013, www.uspirg.org/sites/pirg/files/reports/A%20New%
20Direction%20vUS.pdf; Transportation in Transition: A Look at Changing 
J. A. Roberts, “Generation Y’s Ethical Ideology and Its Potential Workplace 
Implications,” Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 117 (2013), pp. 93–109.
15. “PG&E’s Shame,” editorial, San Francisco Chronicle, January 16, 
2012, p. A9.
16. J. Van Derbeken, “PG&E Incentive System Blamed for Leak Over-
sights,” San Francisco Chronicle, December 25, 2011, p. A1; and 
E. Nalder, “PG&E Diverted Safety Money for Profit, Bonuses,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, January 13, 2012, p. A1.
17. Audit by Overland Consulting, reported in Nalder, “PG&E Diverted 
Safety Money for Profit, Bonuses.”
18. Nalder, “PG&E Diverted Safety Money for Profit, Bonuses.” Overland 
Consulting proposed that PG&E could sustain penalties totaling $2.45 
billion. See arguments by ratepayer advocates T. Long, “PG&E’s Fear-
mongering Tactics,” San Francisco Chronicle, September 11, 2013, 
p. A10; and J. P. Como and T. Long, “PG&E Penalties Realistic, Benefit 
Ratepayers,” San Francisco Chronicle, February 6, 2014, p. A10.
19. J. Van Derbecken, “PG&E Faces Criminal Indictment in Disaster That 
Left 8 People Dead,” San Francisco Chronicle, April 3, 2014, pp. A1, A12.
20. On March 27, 2014, PG&E executives said they anticipated facing a 
criminal charge in connection with the San Bruno explosion, but denied 
that its employees willfully violated federal safety rules. See C. Sweet, 
“PG&E Expects Criminal Charges over Pipeline Explosion,” The Wall 
Street Journal, March 27, 2014, http://online.wsj.com/news/
articles/SB100014240527 0230468810457 9465780254871444? mg=
reno64-wsj&url=http%3A%2F%2 Fonline.wsj.com%2Farticle%
2FSB100014240527 02304688104579465780254871444.html (accessed 
March 30, 2014); and “Don’t Delay on PG&E Filing,” editorial, San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, March 31, 2014, p. A11.
21. J. Goodnight, quoted in D. A. Kaplan, “The Best Company to Work 
For,” Fortune, February 8, 2010, pp. 56–64.
22. “The Employee Ownership 100: America’s Largest Majority 
Employee-Owned Companies,” The National Center for Employee Owner-
ship, August 2013, www.nceo.org/articles/employee-ownership-100 
(accessed March 22, 2014).
23. M. Nissan, “The 15 Customers That Frustrate Americans the Most,” 
Business Insider, December 26, 2013, www.businessinsider.com/
companies-with-the-worst-customer-ratings-2013-12?op=1 (accessed 
March 22, 2014). See also A. Rawson, E. Duncan, and C. Jones, “The 
Truth about Customer Experience,” Harvard Business Review, Septem-
ber 2013, pp. 90–98.
24. Jeff Bezos, quoted in J. Nocera, “Put Buyers First? What a Con-
cept,” The New York Times, January 5, 2008, pp. B1, B9.
25. Shep Hyken, customer service consultant, quoted in K. Aho, “2013 
Customer Service Hall of Fame,” MSN Money, July 17, 2013, http://
money.msn.com/investing/2013-customer-service-hall-of-fame (ac-
cessed March 31, 2014).
26. Aho, “2013 Customer Service Hall of Fame,” reporting on Zogby 
Analytics national online survey of 150 companies.
27. For examples of stakeholder complaints, see S. Head, “Worse than 
Wal-Mart: Amazon’s Sick Brutality and Secret History of Ruthlessly In-
timidating Workers,” Salon, February 23, 2014, www.salon
.com/2014/02/23/worse_than_wal_mart_amazons_sick_brutality_
and_secret_history_of_ruthlessly_intimidating_workers (accessed 
March 31, 2014); and D. Streitfeld, “Complaints as Amazon Raises Cost 
of Prime,” The New York Times, March 14, 2014, pp. B1, B4.
28. J. Schmitt and K. Warner, The Changing Face of Labor, 1983–2008, 
Center for Economic Policy Research, November 12, 2009, www.cepr
.net/index.php/press-releases/press-releases/demographics-of-labor-
movement (accessed March 21, 2014).
29. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, “Union Mem-
bers Summary,” Economic News Release, January 24, 2014, www.bls
.gov/news.release/union2.nr0.htm (accessed March 21, 2014).
30. L. Weber, “Companies Say Goodbye to the ’Burbs,” The Wall Street 
Journal, December 5, 2013, pp. B1, B6. See also N. Shah, “Smallville, 
USA, Fades Further,” The Wall Street Journal, March 27, 2014, p. A3; 
and G. Toppo and P. Overberg, “See Ya, Suburbs: More Want to Live in 
the City,” USA Today, March 27, 2014, p. 3A.
31. “Town Is Reeling after New Factory Shuts Its Doors,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, November 8, 2013, p. D4, reprinted from The New York Times.
32. E. Schwartzel, “As Movie Production Scatters, So Do Tinseltown’s 
Hired Hands,” The Wall Street Journal, January 30, 2014, pp. A1, A10.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN7
69. P. Loftus, “Doctors Face New Scrutiny over Gifts,” The Wall Street 
Journal, August 23, 2013, pp. A1, A4; and J. Kassirer, “Will Doctors 
Think Twice in Bright Light of Sunshine?” San Francisco Chronicle, 
January 19, 2014, p. E5.
70. B. Kabanoff, “Equity, Equality, Power, and Conflict,” Academy of 
Management Review, April 1991, pp. 416–441. See also S. T. Hannah, 
B. J. Avolio, D. R. May, “Moral Maturation and Moral Conation: A Capac-
ity Approach to Explaining Moral Thought and Action,” Academy of Man-
agement Review, Vol. 36 (2011), pp. 633–685.
71. D. Fritzsche and H. Baker, “Linking Management Behavior to Ethical 
Philosophy: An Empirical Investigation,” Academy of Management Jour-
nal, March 1984, pp. 166–175.
72. “Chemicals in Our Water Are Affecting Humans and Aquatic 
Life in Unanticipated Ways,” Science Daily, February 21, 2008, www
.sciencedaily.com/-releases/2008/02/080216095740.htm; and J. P. 
Dietrich, A. L. Van Gaest, S. A. Strickland, and M. R. Arkoosh, “The 
Impact of Temperature Stress and Pesticide Exposure on Mortality and 
Disease Susceptibility of Endangered Pacific Salmon,” Chemosphere, 
February 19, 2014, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24559935 (both 
accessed March 31, 2014).
73. Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, “Workplace Privacy and Employee 
Monitoring,” revised January 2014, www.privacyrights.org/workplace-
privacy-and-employee-monitoring (accessed March 31, 2014).
74. D. Glovin, “Galleon Co-founder Gets 11-Year Term for Insider Trad-
ing,” San Francisco Chronicle, October 14, 2011, pp. D1, D6.
75. A. Stevenson and M. Goldstein, “Doctor Tells of Leaking Data 
to a ‘Friend’ at SAC,” The New York Times, January 18, 2014, 
pp. B1, B2.
76. D. R. Baker, “2 Men Accused of Cashing in on Wives’ Calls,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, April 1, 2014, pp. A1, A9.
77. B. Levisohn, “How to Make a Madoff,” BusinessWeek, December 
16, 2008, www.businessweek.com/investor/content/dec2008/
pi20081215_232943.htm?chan=investing_investing+index+page_
top+stories (accessed March 31, 2014). See also D. Gross, “Member-
ship Has Its Penalties,” Newsweek, January 12, 2009, p. 18; and 
M. Hosenball, “Made Money with Madoff? Don’t Count on Keeping It,” 
Newsweek, January 12, 2009, p. 9.
78. D. R. Henriques, “Madoff, Apologizing, Is Given 150 Years,” The 
New York Times, June 30, 2009, pp. A1, B4.
79. C. Krauss, “Financier Is Sentenced to 110 Years for Fraud,” The 
New York Times, June 15, 2012, p. B1; and S. Cohn, “”Five Years after 
Stanford Scandal, Many Victims Penniless,” CNBC, February 15, 2014, 
www.cnbc.com/id/101418516 (accessed March 31, 2014).
80. F. Norris, “Goodbye to Reforms of 2002,” The New York Times, 
November 6, 2009, pp. B1, B6.
81. See “Has Sarbanes-Oxley Failed?” The New York Times, July 24, 
2012, www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2012/07/24/has-sarbanes-
oxley-failed?action=click&module=Search&region=searchResults%23
0&version=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fquery.nytimes.com%2Fsearch%2Fs
itesearch%2F%23%2FSarbOx%2F (accessed March 31, 2014).
82. F. J. Evans, quoted in C. S. Stewart, “A Question of Ethics: How to 
Teach Them?” The New York Times, March 21, 2004, sec. 3, p. 11.
83. See “For the First Time in a Decade, Lying, Cheating, and Stealing 
among American Students Drops,” The Ethics of American Youth: 2012, 
biennial report card on American youth, Josephson Institute of Ethics, 
Los Angeles, November 20, 2012, http://charactercounts.org/pdf/
reportcard/2012/ReportCard-2012-PressRelease-HonestyIntegrity-
Cheating.pdf (accessed March 31, 2014).
84. D. A. Kaplan, “MBAs Get Schooled in Ethics,” Fortune, October 26, 
2009, p. 27.
85. Research by the Center for Academic Integrity, Kenan Institute for 
Ethics, Duke University, cited in H. Oh, “Biz Majors Get an F for Honesty,” 
BusinessWeek, February 6, 2006, p. 14.
86. D. L. McCabe, K. D. Butterfield, and L. K. Trevino, “Academic Dis-
honesty in Graduate Business Programs: Prevalence, Causes, and Pro-
posed Action,” Academy of Management Learning & Education, Vol. 5, 
No. 3 (2006), pp. 294–305.
87. L. Kohlberg, “Moral Stages and Moralization: The Cognitive Devel-
opmental Approach,” in T. Lickona, ed., Moral Development and Behav-
ior: Theory, Research, and Social Issues (New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1976), pp. 31–53; and J. W. Graham, “Leadership, Moral 
Travel Patterns in America’s Biggest Cities, U.S. Public Interest Research 
Group, December 2013; and M. Sivak, Has Motorization in the U.S. Peaked? 
Part 4: Households without a Light-Duty Vehicle, Report UMTRI-2014-5, 
University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, January 2014, 
http://usa.streetsblog.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/UMTRI-2014-5.pdf 
(all accessed March 24, 2014). See also blog post by D. Levinson, “What 
Happened to Traffic?” November 4, 2013, http://transportationist
.org/2013/11/07/what-happened-to-traffic (accessed March 24, 2014).
54. Various polls cited in S. Jayson, “Talkin’ ’bout Our Generations: 
Opinions on Social Issues Shift,” USA Today, February 26, 2014, p. 4B.
55. Associated Press, “Slumping Soda Sales Eat into Coca-Cola Profit,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, February 19, 2014, p. C6; and M. Esterl, “The Diet 
Soda Business Is in Free Fall,” The Wall Street Journal, April 1, 2014, p. B1.
56. Y. Alcindor, “Killer Diseases Creeping Back,” USA Today, April 7, 
2014, p. 1A; and Y. Alcindor, “Diseases Get Second Life,” USA Today, 
April 7, 2014, p. 5A.
57. Obesity report from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
reported in L. Szabo, “Obesity Rate for Young Children Plummets,” USA 
Today, February 26, 2014, p. 4B. See also M. Beck and A. Schatz, 
“American Eating Habits Take a Healthier Turn,” The Wall Street Journal, 
January 17, 2014, pp. A1, A4.
58. G. Toppo and P. Overberg, “1-Person Households Grow More Com-
mon,” USA Today, August 28, 2013, p. 3A; N. Shah, “‘Baby Bust’ Starts 
to Ease,” The Wall Street Journal, September 5, 2013, p. B3; and Pew 
Research Center tabulations of U.S. Census data, in “Fewer Putting a 
Ring on It,” USA Today, March 25, 2014, p. 1A.
59. R. Kochhar, “10 Projections for the Global Population in 
2050,” Pew Research Center report, February 3, 2014, www
.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/02/03/10-projections-for-the-global-
population-in-2050; and U.S. Census Bureau, “U.S. Census Bureau Pro-
jections Show a Slower-Growing, Older, More Diverse Nation a Half 
Century from Now,” news release, December 12, 2012, www.census
.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/population/cb12-243.htmlM (both 
accessed March 31, 2014).
60. Data from unnamed 2006 study cited in “Guilty as Charged,” The Econ-
omist, February 2, 2013, www.economist.com/news/leaders/21571141-
cheaper-legal-education-and-more-liberal-rules-would-benefit-americas-
lawyersand-their (accessed March 31, 2014).
61. “Google Pressed on Searches,” San Francisco Chronicle, April 1, 
2014, p. D2.
62. Data from Secretary of Education Arne Duncan, reported in D. Skor-
ton and G. Altschuler, “America’s Foreign Language Deficit,” Forbes, 
August 27, 2012, www.forbes.com/sites/collegeprose/2012/08/27/
americas-foreign-language-deficit (accessed March 31, 2014).
63. R. Dooley, “Why Your Next CEO Shouldn’t Be American,” Forbes, 
September 30, 2012, www.forbes.com/sites/rogerdooley/2012/10/30/
foreign-language-effect (accessed March 31, 2014). Dooley cites B. 
Keysar, S. L. Hayakawa, and S. G. An, “The Foreign-Language Effect: 
Thinking in a Foreign Tongue Reduces Decision Biases,” Psychological 
Science, April 18, 2012, http://psychology.uchicago.edu/people/faculty/
foreignLanguaeEffect.pdf (accessed March 31, 2014).
64. Survey of 764 employees by Stroz Friedberg, “On the Pulse: 
Information Security Risk in American Business,” January 2014, www
.strozfriedberg.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Stroz-Friedberg_
On-the-Pulse_Information-Security-in-American-Business.pdf 
(accessed March 31, 2014).
65. L. T. Hosmer, The Ethics of Management (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 
1987). See also S. Welch, “The Uh-Oh Feeling,” O Magazine, November 
2007, pp. 117–120. For more on money-and-ethics matters, see 
J. Fleming and L. Schwartz, Isn’t It Their Turn to Pick Up the Check? 
(New York: Free Press, 2008).
66. Study by LRN, consultant on corporate ethics, cited in “Corporate 
Ethics Affect Employee Productivity,” HR Magazine, July 2007, p. 16.
67. “Is Your Doctor on a Drug Maker’s Payroll?” editorial, USA Today, 
February 21, 2014, p. 6A. See also S. S. Wang, “Doctors, Device Makers: 
Close Ties,” The Wall Street Journal, March 14, 2014, p. B7.
68. S. Saul, “Unease on Industry’s Role in Hypertension Debate,” The 
New York Times, May 20, 2006, pp. A1, B9; C. Arnst, “Hey, You Don’t 
Look So Good,” BusinessWeek, May 8, 2006, pp. 30–32; and 
A. Schwarz, “The Selling of Attention Deficit Disorder,” The New York 
Times, December 15, 2013, pp. News-1, News-26, News-27.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN8
106. A. G. Robinson and D. M. Schroeder, “Greener and Cheaper,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 23, 2009, p. R4; and R. Farzad, “The Scrap-
piest Car Manufacturer in America,” Bloomberg Businessweek, June 6, 
2011, pp. 68–74.
107. D. Palmquist, “Conservancy Science at Dow’s Freeport, TX, Site,” 
The Nature Conservancy, www.nature.org/science-in-action/science-
features/dow-analyses.xml (accessed March 31, 2014).
108. Gretchen Daily, quoted in C. Lochhead, “Ecologists Try in Quiet 
Ways to Save the Planet,” San Francisco Chronicle, January 5, 2014, 
pp. A1, A8. Also see “What Is Natural Capital?” World Forum on Natural 
Capital, www.naturalcapitalforum.com/what-is-natural-capital 
(accessed March 31, 2014).
109. StEP Initiative—Solving the E-Waste Problem, “World E-Waste 
Map Reveals National Volumes, International Flows,” December 21, 
2013, StEP Secretariat, United Nations University, Bonn, www.step-
initiative.org/index.php/newsdetails/items/world-e-waste-map-reveals-
national-volumes-international-flows.html (accessed March 31, 2014).
110. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, United Nations, “Cli-
mate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability—Summary for 
Policymakers,” March 31, 2014, http://ipcc-wg2.gov/AR5/images/
uploads/IPCC_WG2AR5_SPM_Approved.pdf (accessed March 31, 2014).
111. See account of this report in J. Gillis, “U.N. Says Lag in Confronting 
Climate Woes Will Be Costly,” The New York Times, January 17, 2014, p. A8.
112. A. Brown, “Forbes Billionaires: Full List of the World’s 500 Rich-
est People,” Forbes, March 3, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/
abrambrown/2014/03/03/forbes-billionaires-full-list-of-the-worlds-
500-richest-people (accessed March 31, 2014). For more on the Gates 
foundation, see C. Dreifus, “A Partnership Built on Change,” The 
New York Times, October 8, 2013, pp. D1, D5.
113. T. Egan, “Billionaires and Boasts,” The New York Times, January 
23, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/01/24/opinion/egan-billionaires-
and-boasts.html?ref=gatesbillandmelindafoundation&_r=0 (accessed 
March 31, 2014). See also B. Kowitt, “The Young Buffetts,” Fortune, 
October 7, 2013, p. 22.
114. A.-A. Jarvis, “Pulling Off an Impressive Feet,” Newsweek, July 
3–10, 2006, p. 64. See also shareyoursoles.org, the charity’s website.
115. A. Fox, “Corporate Social Responsibility Pays Off,” HR Magazine,
August 2007, pp. 43–47; and A. C. Brooks, “Handsome Is as Handsome 
Gives,” The Wall Street Journal, November 26, 2013, p. A13. For an ex-
planation of methodologies for rating corporate social responsibility, see 
M. A. Delmas, D. Etzion, and N. Nairn-Birch, “Triangulating Environmen-
tal Performance: What Do Corporate Responsibility Ratings Really Cap-
ture?” The Academy of Management Perspective, Vol. 27, No. 3 (2013), 
pp. 255–267. See also F. P. Morgeson, H. Aguinis, D. A. Waldman, and D. 
S. Siegel, “Extending Corporate Social Responsibility Research to the 
Human Resource Management and Organizational Behavior Domains: A 
Look to the Future,” Personnel Psychology, Vol. 66 (2013), pp. 805–824.
116. R. Gildea, “Consumer Survey Confirms Corporate Social Action 
Affects Buying Decisions,” Public Relations Quarterly, Winter 1994, 
pp. 20–21.
117. Caravan survey from Opinion Research developed by LRN of 2,037 
adults, reported in “Ethics vs. Price,” USA Today, June 14, 2006, p. 1B.
118. D. H. Pink, Drive: The Surprising Truth about What Motivates Us 
(New York: Riverhead, 2010).
119. N. T. Washburn, “Why Profit Shouldn’t Be Your Top Goal,” Harvard 
Business Review, December 2009, p. 23.
120. See M. E. Ormiston and E. M. Wong, “License to Ill: The Effects of 
Corporate Social Responsibility and CEO Moral Identity on Corporate 
Social Irresponsibility,” Personnel Psychology, Vol. 66 (2013), pp. 861–893; 
and H. Wang and J. Choi, “A New Look at the Corporate Social–Financial 
Performance Relationship: The Moderating Roles of Temporal and Inter-
domain Consistency in Corporate Social Performance,” Journal of 
Management, February 2013, pp. 416–441.
121. S. M. Gully, J. M. Phillips, W. G. Castellano, K. Han, and A. Kim, “A 
Mediated Moderation Model of Recruiting Socially and Environmentally 
Responsible Job Applicants,” Personnel Psychology, Vol. 66 (2013), 
pp. 935–973.
122. Results can be found in “Tarnished Employment Brands Affect 
Recruiting,” HR Magazine, November 2004, pp. 16, 20.
123. 2003 National Business Ethics Survey, cited in The Hidden Costs 
of Unethical Behavior (Los Angeles: Josephson Institute of Ethics, 2004), 
Development and Citizenship Behavior,” Business Ethics Quarterly,
January 1995, pp. 43–54. See also S. J. Reynolds and T. L. Ceranic, 
“The Effects of Moral Judgment and Moral Identity on Moral Behavior: 
An Empirical Examination of the Moral Individual,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, November 2007, pp. 1610–1624.
88. Adapted in part from W. E. Stead, D. L. Worrell, and J. Garner Stead, “An 
Integrative Model for Understanding and Managing Ethical Behavior in Busi-
ness Organizations,” Journal of Business Ethics, March 1990, 
pp. 233–242. Also see D. Lange, “A Multidimensional Conceptualization of Or-
ganizational Corruption Control,” Academy of Management Review, July 2008, 
pp. 710–729; J. DesJardins, An Introduction to Business Ethics, 3rd ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2009); and M. J. Pearsall and A. P. J. Ellis, “Thick as Thieves: 
The Effects of Ethical Orientation and Psychological Safety on Unethical Team 
Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 96 (2011), pp. 401–411.
89. Society for Human Resource Management Weekly Survey, 2005, 
cited in J. Thilmany, HR Magazine, September 2007, pp. 105–112.
90. T. R. Mitchell, D. Daniels, H. Hopper, J. George-Falvy, and G. R. Ferris, 
“Perceived Correlates of Illegal Behavior in Organizations,” Journal of 
Business Ethics, April 1996, pp. 439–455. See also M. W., “Ethics Train-
ing Works,” Training, November 2005, p. 15; L. Paine, R. Deshpandé, 
J. D. Margolis, and K. E. Bettcher, “Up to Code: Does Your Company’s 
Conduct Meet World-Class Standards?” Harvard Business Review,
December 1, 2005, pp. 122–135; and J. Brockner, “Why It’s So Hard to 
Be Fair,” Harvard Business Review, March 1, 2006, pp. 122–132.
91. “Whistle-blower Law Protects Outside Consults, Too,” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, March 5, 2014, p. A6.
92. R. Pear, “Whistleblowers Likely to Get Stronger Federal Protec-
tions,” The New York Times, March 15, 1999, pp. A1, A17.
93. T. Herman, “Tipster Rewards Require Patience,” The Wall Street 
Journal, December 26, 2007, p. D3.
94. Ethics Resource Center, National Business Ethics Survey of the U.S. 
Workforce, 2013 (Arlington, VA: Ethics Resource Center, 2014).
95. A. Tugend, “Opting to Blow the Whistle or Choosing to Walk Away,” 
The New York Times, September 21, 2013, p. B5.
96. K. Eagan, J. B. Lozano, S. Hutado, and S. Tran, The American Fresh-
man: National Norms, Fall 2013 (Los Angeles: Higher Education Re-
search Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, 2013).
97. A. B. Carroll, “Managing Ethically with Global Stakeholders: A Pres-
ent and Future Challenge,” Academy of Management Executive, May 
2004, p. 118. Also see B. W. Husted and D. B. Allen, “Corporate Social 
Responsibility in the Multinational Enterprise: Strategic and Institutional 
Approaches,” Journal of International Business Studies,
November 2006, pp. 838–849.
98. M. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1962). See also S. Gallagher, “A Strategic Response to 
Friedman’s Critique of Business Ethics,” Journal of Business Strategy,
January 2005, pp. 55–60.
99. P. Samuelson, “Love That Corporation,” Mountain Bell Magazine,
Spring 1971.
100. Sustainable Company/Sustainable World: Salesforce.com Sustainabil-
ity Report FY2012, Salesforce.com, San Francisco, www2.sfdcstatic.com/
assets/pdf/misc/SustainabilityReport.pdf (accessed March 31, 2014). See 
also J. Temple, “Salesforce’s Philosophy: Share,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
November 18, 2013, pp. A1, A9; and J. Garofoli, “Big Push for Tech to Fight 
Poverty,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 7, 2014, pp. A1, A11.
101. J. Krosnick and B. MacInnis, “The American Public’s Preference for 
Preparing for the Possible Effects of Global Warming: Impact of Communica-
tion Strategies,” October 2013, Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment, 
https://woods.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/files/Climate-Messaging-
Research-Brief-2013-10.pdf (accessed March 31, 2014).
102. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, United Nations, Cli-
mate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis—Summary for Policy-
makers, September 28, 2013, www.climatechange2013.org/images/
report/WG1AR5_SPM_FINAL.pdf (accessed March 31, 2014).
103. Definitions adapted from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
“Climate Change: Basic Information,” March 18, 2014, www.epa.gov/
climatechange/basics (accessed March 31, 2014).
104. C. Davenport, “Threat to Bottom Line Spurs Action on Climate,” 
The New York Times, January 24, 2014, pp. A1, A21.
105. H. L. Sirkin, “Business No Longer Sees Red over Being Green,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, November 29, 2013, p. D2.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN9
CHAPTER 4
1. K. Reinhard, quoted in S. McCartney, “Teaching Americans How to 
Behave Abroad,” The Wall Street Journal, April 11, 2006, pp. Dl, D4. See 
also R. Yu, “Cultural Training Has Global Appeal,” USA Today, December 
22, 2009, p. 3B.
2. DDB Worldwide survey, cited in J. Clark, “That ‘Ugly American’ Image 
Is Getting a Makeover Guide,” USA Today, April 28, 2006, p. 9D.
3. World Citizens Guide, Business for Diplomatic Action, May 2006, 
www.worldcitizensguide.org/index2.html (accessed April 15, 2014).
4. T. Lowry and F. Balfour, “It’s All about the Face-to-Face,” Business-
Week, January 28, 2008, pp. 48, 50.
5. E. Schmitt, “A Man Does Not Ask a Man about His Wife,” The New 
York Times, January 8, 2006, sec. 4, p. 7.
6. D. K. Tatlow, “Cautious Chinese Gain Comfort with Hugs,” The New 
York Times, May 9, 2014, p. A6.
7. For examples of correct business card etiquette in China, see G. 
Stoller, “Cultural Studies Pay in China,” USA Today, December 30, 2013, 
p. 4B.
8. T. Rivas, “Name Game Hits a Global Roadblock,” The Wall Street 
Journal, May 30, 2006, p. B5.
9. B. Morris, “The Pepsi Challenge: Can This Snack and Soda Giant Go 
Healthy?” Fortune, March 3, 2008, pp. 55–66.
10. L. Nardon and R. M. Steers, “The New Global Manager: Learning 
Cultures on the Fly,” Organizational Dynamics, January–March 2008, 
pp. 47–59.
11. R. Simmermaker, How Americans Can Buy American: The Power of 
Consumer Patriotism, 3rd ed. (Orlando, FL: Rivercross Publications, 2010).
12. Roger Simmermaker, quoted in W. T. Price, “Exploring Financial Vi-
ability of Buying American Products,” Reno Gazette-Journal, September 
10, 2011, pp. 6A, 8A.
13. G. Hale and B. Hobijn, “The U.S. Content of ‘Made in China,’” FRBSF 
Economic Letter, August 8, 2011, Federal Reserve Bank of San Fran-
cisco, www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-25.
html (accessed April 15, 2014).
14. Data compiled by the International Comparison Programme of the 
World Bank, reported in C. Giles, “China to Overtake U.S. as Top Eco-
nomic Power This Year,” Financial Times, April 30, 2014, p. 1.
15. International Monetary Fund, October 2013, in “Richest Countries in 
the World,” December 5, 2013, www.mapsofworld.com/world-top-ten/
world-top-ten-richest-countries-map.html (accessed April 15, 2014).
16. “2014 Index of Economic Freedom,” The Heritage Foundation 
in partnership with The Wall Street Journal, www.heritage.org/index/
ranking (accessed April 15, 2014).
17. See the related discussion in J. McGregor and S. Hamm, “Manag-
ing the Global Workforce,” BusinessWeek, January 28, 2008, p. 34; 
C. Boles, “Last Call? Gates Pushes Globalism in Remarks,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 13, 2008, p. B3; and M. Herbst, “Guess Who’s Getting the 
Most Work Visas,” BusinessWeek, March 17, 2008, pp. 62, 64.
18. Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, cited in 
A. Dunkin, “Smart, Useful—and They Won’t Put a Sag in Your Suit,” 
BusinessWeek, May 30, 1994, p. 141.
19. The World in 2013: ICT Facts and Figures, International Tele-
communications Union, Geneva,  www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/
Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2013-e.pdf (accessed June 20, 2014).
20. Ibid.
21. See J. Quittner, “Tim Berners-Lee,” Time, March 29, 1999, pp. 193–194.
22. “Quarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales 4th Quarter 2013,” U.S. Cen-
sus Bureau News, February 18, 2014, www.census.gov/retail/mrts/
www/data/pdf/ec_current.pdf (accessed April 17, 2014).
23. R. M. Kantor, quoted in K. Maney, “Economy Embraces Truly Global 
Workplace,” USA Today, December 31, 1998, pp. 1B, 2B.
24. Kris Gopalakrishnan, interviewed in R. M. Smith, “A Titan of Global-
ism,” Newsweek, November 19, 2007, p. E26.
25. M. Dang, “Some Outsourced Jobs Returning to U.S.,” The Billfold, 
January 28, 2018, http://thebillfold.com/2014/01/some-outsourced-
jobs-returning-to-the-u-s (accessed April 15, 2014). See, for example, 
S. Clifford, “As Orders Pile Up, U.S. Seeks Textile Workers,” The New 
York Times, September 30, 2013, pp. A1, A12.
26. J. Rosen, “Foreign Influence Needn’t Be a Bad Thing,” USA Today, 
November 23, 2009, p. 8B. See also M. Maynard, The Selling of the 
p. 3, www.josephsoninstitute.org/pdf/workplace-flier_0604.pdf (ac-
cessed March 31, 2014). See also D. Turban and G. Greening, “Corpo-
rate Social Performance and Organizational Attractiveness 
to Prospective Employees,” Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 40, 
No. 3 (1997), pp. 658–672.
124. M. Baucus and D. Baucus, “Paying the Piper: An Empirical Exami-
nation of Longer-Term Financial Consequences of Illegal Corporate 
Behavior,” Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 40, No. 1 (1997), 
pp. 129–151.
125. 2003 survey by Wirthlin Worldwide, cited in The Hidden Costs of 
Unethical Behavior, p. 2.
126. 2000 National Business Ethics Survey, cited in The Hidden Costs 
of Unethical Behavior, p. 3.
127. “ACFE’s Highly-Anticipated Report to the Nation to Be Published in 
June,” preview of 2006 ACFE Report to the Nation on Occupational 
Fraud & Abuse, Association of Certified Fraud Examiners, www.acfe
.com/announcement-rttn-preview.asp (accessed March 31, 2014).
128. Ernst & Young survey 2002 and KPMG Fraud Survey 2003, both 
cited in The Hidden Costs of Unethical Behavior, p. 2.
129. 2003 survey by Wirthlin Worldwide, cited in The Hidden Costs of 
Unethical Behavior, p. 2.
130. J. Chakravarthy, E. deHaan, and S. Rajgopal, “Reputation Repair 
after a Serious Restatement,” The Accounting Review, 2013, in press. 
See also Stanford Graduate School of Business, “How Corporations Can 
Regain Financial Value after Scandal,” Science Daily, January 15, 2014, 
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/01/140115172643.htm (ac-
cessed March 31, 2014). But also see M. Orlitzky, “Corporate Social 
Responsibility, Noise, and Stock Market Volatility,” The Academy of 
Management Perspectives, Vol. 27, No. 3 (2013), pp. 238–254.
131. A discussion of ethics and financial performance is provided by 
R. M. Fulmer, “The Challenge of Ethical Leadership,” Organizational 
Dynamics, August 2004, pp. 307–317.
132. C. M. Daily, D. R. Dalton, and A. A. Cannella Jr., “Corporate Gover-
nance: Decades of Dialogue and Data,” Academy of Management Re-
view, Vol. 28, No. 3 (2003), pp. 371–383; D. R. Dalton, M. A. Hitt, S. T. 
Certo, and C. M. Dalton, “The Fundamental Agency Problem and Its 
Mitigation,” Academy of Management Annals, Vol. 1, No. 1 (2007), 
pp. 1–64; and M. L. McDonald, P. Khanna, and J. D. Westphal, “Getting 
Them to Think Outside the Circle: Corporate Governance, CEOs’ External 
Advice Network, and Firm Performance,” Academy of Management 
Journal, Vol. 51 (2009), pp. 453–475. See also S. Schreter, “Tips on 
Creating a Helpful Board,” San Francisco Chronicle, January 25, 2014, 
pp. D1, D2.
133. C. Helman, “The Two Sides of Aubrey,” Forbes.com, October 24, 
2011, www.forbes.com/forbes/2011/1024/feature-aubrey-mcclendon-
hero-energy-chesapeake-risk-christopher-helman.html (accessed 
March 31, 2014).
134. M. Leder, “For Chesapeake’s Chief, Some Big Money in Maps,” 
New York Times DealBook, May 1, 2009, http://dealbook.nytimes
.com/2009/05/01/for-chesapeakes-chief-some-big-money-in-maps; and 
M. Leder, “Chesapeake’s McClendon Buys Back the Maps,” Footnoted.org, 
November 3, 2011, www.footnoted.com/buried-treasure/chesapeakes-
mcclendon-buys-back-the-maps (all accessed March 31, 2014).
135. Chesapeake Energy proxy filing notes, reported in Leder, “Chesa-
peake’s McClendon Buys Back the Maps.”
136. C. Helman, “In Legal Settlement, Chesapeake’s McClendon to Buy 
Back Antique Maps,” Forbes.com, November 3, 2011, www.okctalk
.com/showthread.php?t=28160&page=1 (accessed March 31, 2014).
137. Helman, “In Legal Settlement, Chesapeake’s McClendon to Buy 
Back Antique Maps”; and J. Polson, “Chesapeake CEO McClendon 
to Buy Back Maps, Ending Pay Suit,” Bloomberg, November 3, 
2011, www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-11-03/chesapeake-ceo-
mcclendon-to-buy-back-maps-ending-pay-dispute.html (accessed 
March 31, 2014).
138. C. Helman, “Man on Fire: Audrey McClendon Raises Billions to Fi-
nance His Redemption,” Forbes, February 27, 2014, www.forbes.com/
sites/christopherhelman/2014/02/27/man-on-fire-aubrey-mcclendon-
raises-billions-to-finance-his-redemption (accessed March 31, 2014).
139. R. Hurley, “Trust Me,” The Wall Street Journal, October 24, 2011, 
p. R4. Hurley is author of The Decision to Trust: How Leaders Can Create 
High-Trust Companies (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011).

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN10
43. Bob Moritz, interviewed by A. Bryant, “Want to Learn about Diversity? 
Become a Foreigner,” The New York Times, September 15, 2013, p. BU-2.
44. R. C. Carter, senior vice president for human resources at A&E Televi-
sion Networks, quoted in H. Chura, “A Year Abroad (or 3) as a Career 
Move,” The New York Times, February 26, 2006, www.nytimes
.com/2006/02/25/business/worldbusiness/25abroad
.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 (accessed June 20, 2014). For more about 
Americans working overseas, see N. Lakshman, “Subcontinental Drift,”
BusinessWeek, January 16, 2006, pp. 42–43; R. J. Newman, “Coming 
and Going,” U.S. News & World Report, January 23, 2006, pp. 50–52; 
T. C. Fishman, “Why the Jobs Are Going Over There,” USA Today, May 11, 
2011, http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/opinion/forum/2011-
05-17-Multinationals-send-jobs-overseas_n.htm (accessed June 20, 2014); 
and Schickler, quoted in K. Chu, “Americans Turn to Asia to Find Work.”
45. Scott DeCarlo, ed., “Global 2000: China Takes the Lead,” Forbes, 
April 17, 2013, www.forbes.com/global2000/#page:2_sort:3_
direction:desc_search:_filter:All%20industries_filter:All%20countries_
filter:All%20states (accessed April 15, 2014).
46. “Hilton Survey Looks at Millennial Business Travel Trends,” Interna-
tional Meetings Review, July 18, 2013, www.internationalmeetingsre-
view.com/research-education/hilton-survey-looks-millennial-
business-travel-trends-96305 (accessed April 24, 2014).
47. “Global Business Trends in the Third Millennium,” a Marist Institute 
for Public Opinion poll of 1,207 business travelers in the U.S., China, 
Germany, and the U.K., described in news release, Marriott News 
Center, “China Outpaces Europe and U.S. on Economic Optimism, 
Survey Says,” May 18, 2012, http://news.marriott.com/2010/05/
marist-pollmarriott-hotels-resorts-release-global-business-traveler-
survey.html (accessed April 24, 2014).
48. Paul Calello of Credit Suisse, quoted in Lowry and Balfour, “It’s All 
about the Face-to-Face.”
49. Don G. Lents, chairman of international law firm Bryan Cave, 
quoted in J. Sharkey, “E-Mail Saves Time, but Being There Says More,” 
The New York Times, January 26, 2010, p. B7.
50. Ty Morse, interviewed by J. Raymond, “To Asia and Back, Sleep Not 
an Option,” The New York Times, January 3, 2012, p. B6.
51. L. Bergson, “A Road Scholar’s Bag of Tricks,” BusinessWeek, Sep-
tember 29, 2003, www.businessweek.com/smallbiz/content/sep2003/
sb20030929_6259_sb002.htm?chan=search (accessed April 24, 2014).
52. Yu, “Cultural Training Has Global Appeal.”
53. Patrica Rossi, quoted in A. Bruzzese, “Business Traveler? Use 
Downtime to Make Contacts,” Reno Gazette-Journal, July 11, 2013, 
p. 5A.
54. N. Bloom and J. Van Reenen, “Why Do Management Practices Dif-
fer across Firms and Countries?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
Winter 2010, pp. 203–224.
55. G. Stoller, “Doing Business Abroad? Simple Faux Pas Can Sink You,”
USA Today, August 24, 2007, pp. 1B, 2B.
56. See S. Cerocke, “Some Business Functions Are Worth Outsourc-
ing,” Reno Gazette-Journal, December 12, 2013, p. 5A.
57. J. R. Hagerty, “U.S. Loses High-Tech Jobs as R&D Shifts Toward 
Asia,” The Wall Street Journal, January 18, 2012, pp. B1, B2.
58. T. C. Frohlich and M. B. Sauter, “Ten Classic American Brands That 
Are Foreign-Owned,” 24/7 Wall St., November 26, 2013, 
http://247wallst.com/special-report/2013/11/26/ten-classic-american-
brands-that-are-foreign-owned (accessed April 24, 2014).
59. D. A. Heenan and H. V. Perlmutter, Multinational Organization Devel-
opment (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1979). See also M. Javidan and 
D. Bowen, “The ‘Global Mindset’ of Managers,” Organizational Dynam-
ics, April 1, 2013, pp. pp. 145–155.
60. D. Jones, “Do Foreign Executives Balk at Sports Jargon?” USA 
Today, March 30, 2007, pp. 1B, 2B.
61. R. Kopp, “International Human Resource Policies and Practices in 
Japanese, European, and United States Multinationals,” Human Re-
source Management, Winter 1994, pp. 581–599. For more on ethno-
centrism, see C. Storti, “The Argument for Ethnocentrism,” Profiles in 
Diversity Journal, June 5, 2012, www.diversityjournal.com/9336-the-
argument-for-ethnocentrism; and D. Weinstein, “Exploring Ethnocen-
trism in Business Courses and Business,” Business and Management 
Research, September 10, 2013, www.sciedu.ca/journal/index.php/bmr/
article/download/3316/1964 (both accessed April 15, 2014).
American Economy: How Foreign Companies Are Remaking the Ameri-
can Dream (New York: Broadway Business, 2009).
27. G. Easterbrook, “The Boom Is Nigh,” Newsweek, February 22, 
2010, pp. 48–49. Easterbrook is the author of Sonic Boom: Globalization 
at Mach Speed (New York: Random House, 2009). See also 
P. Ghemawat, World 3.0: Global Prosperity and How to Achieve It (Boston: 
Harvard Business Review Press, 2011), who argues that globalization, 
when finally realized, will offer more benefits than threats; and 
M. Mandelbaum, The Road to Global Prosperity (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2014), who gives an account of globalization five years after the 
Great Recession began.
28. “Is Global Finance Sector a Force for Good or Ill?” The Wall Street 
Journal, November 28, 2007, p. B9; and P. Krugman, “Don’t Cry for Me, 
America,” The New York Times, January 18, 2008, p. A23. See also 
M. A. Kose, C. Otrok, and E. Prasad, “How Much Decoupling? How Much 
Converging?” Finance & Development, June 2008, pp. 36–40.
29. L. Uchitelle, “Another Shifting Industry,” The New York Times, 
January 19, 2010, pp. B1, B5.
30. J. Brustein, “App Economy Jobs Appear Destined to Go Overseas,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, September 15, 2013, p. D2.
31. P. Izzo, “Many Jobs Gone Forever, Economists Say,” The Wall Street 
Journal, February 12, 2010, p. A4; and D. Peck, “How a New Jobless Era 
Will Transform America,” The Atlantic, March 2010, pp. 42–56. See also 
D. H. Autor and D. Dorn, “How Technology Wrecks the Middle Class,” 
The New York Times, August 25, 2013, pp. SR-6, SR-7; S. Clifford, 
“Textile Plants Humming, but Not with Workers,” The New York Times, 
September 20, 2013, pp. A1, A20; S. Rattner, “The Myth of Industrial 
Rebound,” The New York Times, January 26, 2014, pp. SR-1, SR-8; and 
C. Kenney, “Factory Jobs Are Gone. Get Over It,” Bloomberg Business-
week, January 27–February 2, 2014, pp. 12–13.
32. Easterbrook, “The Boom Is Nigh.”
33. N. Negroponte, quoted in Maney, “Economy Embraces Truly Global 
Workplace.”
34. See D. Mattioli and S. Raice, “The Megadeal Makes a Comeback,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 28, 2014, online.wsj.com/news/articles/
SB10001424052702304163604579529591409595508 (accessed 
April 28, 2014).
35. H. Foy, “Hybrid Carmakers,” Financial Times, December 11, 2013, 
p. 9.
36. K. Silverstein, “Utility Mergers Rising but Picking Partners Is 
Tricky,” Forbes, November 14, 2012, www.forbes.com/sites/
kensilverstein/2014/04/13/coal-untouched-by-aprils-bloom; and 
“Energy M&A Trends in 2014,” UtilityWeek, March 7, 2014, www
.utilityweek.co.uk/news/energy-ma-trends-in-2014/985432#
.U1FZKI1OVaQ (both accessed April 15, 2014).
37. P. McDonald, quoted in M. L. Levin, “Global Experience Makes Can-
didates More Marketable,” The Wall Street Journal, September 11, 
2007, p. B6.
38. C. Johannsen, “Unemployed, Educated, and Indebted: More Millen-
nials Seeking Work Outside U.S.,” College USA Today, May 17, 2011, 
http://college.usatoday.com/2011/05/17/unemployed-educated-and-
indebted-more-millennials-seeking-work-beyond-u-s; R. Florida, “Why 
Americans Emigrate,” The New York Times, July 22, 2013, www
.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2012/01/08/is-the-us-still-a-land-of-
opportunity/why-americans-seek-opportunity-abroad; and A. Lam, “Go 
Far East, Young Man: Americans Abroad,” Huffington Post, January 7, 
2014, www.huffingtonpost.com/andrew-lam/go-far-east-young-
man-ame_b_4556047.html (all accessed April 15, 2014). See also 
P. Caligiuri, “Developing Culturally Agile Global Business Leaders,” 
Organizational Dynamics, July–September 2013, pp. 175–182.
39. P. Davidson, “U.S. Job Hunters Eye Other Nations’ Help Wanted 
Ads,” USA Today, November 16, 2009, p. 1B.
40. J. Schickler, quoted in K. Chu, “Americans Turn to Asia to Find 
Work,” USA Today, September 14, 2011, pp. 1B, 2B.
41. F. Bruni, “Traveling without Seeing,” The New York Times, 
September 3, 2013, p. A19.
42. J. Perlez and H. Gao, “Seeking Edge, Young Chinese Travel to U.S. 
for Summer,” The New York Times, August 30, 2013, pp. A4, A6; and 
R. Walberg, “Stepping Stone,” and D. Deveau, “The Great Advantage 
of Ethnic Diversity,” National Post (Canada), October 29, 2013, 
pp. SR1, SR2.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN11
80. L. Uchitelle, “College Degree Still Pays, but It’s Leveling Off,” The 
New York Times, January 17, 2005, pp. C1, C2. Also see “Making Col-
lege Pay,” editorial, The New York Times, February 12, 2014, p. A26.
81. M. Bartiromo, “Toys R Us Makes Play for Global Sales,” USA 
Today, December 19, 2011, p. 4B; S. Finz, “Gap Turning to Foreign 
Market,” San Francisco Chronicle, October 14, 2011, pp. D1, D6; 
“Tiffany Opens First Store in Russia,” Zacks, June 4, 2013, www.
zacks.com/stock/news/100746/Tiffany-Opens-First-Store-in-Russia 
(accessed April 4, 2014); and J. Jargon and D. Molinski, “Can Star-
bucks Sell Its Coffee in Colombia?” The Wall Street Journal, August 
27, 2013, p. B3.
82. J. Gopwani and M. Szczepanski, “Buick Remains Popular with China’s 
Upper-Middle Class,” Detroit Free Press, August 30, 2009, www
.allbusiness.com/automotive/motor-vehicle-models-new-
car/12783271-1.html; and W. E. Ning, “Spy Shots: Buick Anthem SUV 
Seen Testing in China,” CarNewsChina.com, April 7, 2014 (both 
accessed April 15, 2014).
83. K. Bradsher, “China’s Embrace of Foreign Cars,” The New York 
Times, April 9, 2014, pp. B1, B6.
84. K. Bradsher, “7 U.S. Solar Panel Makers File Case Accusing China of 
Violating Trade Rules,” The New York Times, October 20, 2011, pp. B1, 
B10. See also E. Wesoff, “Reports: Hint of a Settlement in the U.S.-
China Solar Panel Trade Case,” GreentechSolar, March 18, 2014, www
.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/Reports-Hints-of-a-Settlement-in-
the-US-China-Solar-Panel-Trade-Case (accessed April 15, 2014).
85. M. L. Wald and K. Bradsher, “4 U.S. Makers of Towers for Wind 
Turbines File Complaint over China’s Steel Subsidies,” The New York 
Times, December 30, 2011, p. B2.
86. S. Terlep, “Auto Makers Face Changes in China,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 6, 2012, p. B4.
87. A. Young, “$724,000 for a Ferrari? China’s Rich Are Getting Shafted 
Buying Luxury Cars, but Who’s Ripping Them Off?” International Busi-
ness Times, July 31, 2013, http://www.ibtimes.com/724000-ferrari-
chinas-rich-are-getting-shafted-buying-luxury-cars-whos-ripping-
them-1365037 (accessed April 15, 2014).
88. “China to Cancel Car Import Quota in 2005,” China Daily, 
February 13, 2004, www.chinadaily.com.cn/english/doc/2004-02/13/
content_305954.htm (accessed January 31, 2012).
89. M. Levi and E. Economy, “China Runs into Natural Resources Push-
back,” The Wall Street Journal, April 4, 2014, p. A11.
90. K. Maher and H. J. Pulizzi, “Chinese Slapped in Steel Dispute,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 31, 2009, p. A3; and R. G. Matthews, 
“U.S. Levies Antidumping Duty on Chinese Pipes,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, January 5, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424
052748704723104576062093718977006 (accessed April 15, 2014).
91. “Lift the Cuban Embargo,” editorial, The New York Times, Decem-
ber 13, 2013, p. A32.
92. A. Gomez, “Cuba Embargo? What Embargo?” USA Today, February 
14, 2014, p. 2A.
93. J. Borger, “The Iranian Oil Embargo: Does This Mean War?” The 
Guardian, January 23, 2012, www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/jan/23/
iran-oil-embargo-mean-war (accessed April 15, 2014); and R. Glad-
stone, “U.S. Warns against Business with Iran,” The New York Times, 
January 24, 2014, p. A6.
94. J. Bhagwati, Protectionism (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988).
95. “Trade Talks Produce a Deal,” editorial, The New York Times, 
December 13, 2013, p. A32.
96. C. H. Lin, “Role of Foreign Direct Investment in Telecommunication 
Industries: A Developing Countries’ Perspective,” Contemporary Man-
agement Research, March 2008, pp. 29–42; and M. A. Yusuf and 
K. Coghill, “Unilateral Liberalisation and WTO GATS Commitments: The 
Telecommunications Sector in Selected Countries,” Asian-Pacific 
Economic Literature, January 2010, pp. 43–64.
97. N. Lakhani, “World Bank’s Ethics under Scrutiny after Honduras 
Loan Investigation,” The Guardian, January 13, 2014, www.theguardian
.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/jan/13/world-bank-
ethics-scrutiny-honduras-loan-investigation (accessed April 15, 2014).
98. A. Lowrey, “World Bank, Rooted in Bureaucracy, Proposes a Sweep-
ing Reorganization,” The New York Times, October 7, 2013, p. B2; and 
J. Northam, “The World Bank Gets an Overhaul—and Not 
Everyone’s Happy,” Parallels, National Public Radio, March 13, 2014, 
62. C. Duhigg and K. Bradsher, “How U.S. Lost Out on iPhone Work,” 
The New York Times, January 22, 2012, News section, pp. 1, 22, 23.
63. W. J. Holstein, “Colonial Roots Have Spread Worldwide,” The New 
York Times, June 16, 2007, p. B3; and J. R. Hagerty, “Ethan Allen Turns 
the Tables in China,” The Wall Street Journal, January 2, 2013, http://
online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887323635504578213
620282829396 (accessed April 15, 2014).
64. Associated Press, “P&G Targets Developing Markets as U.S. 
Slows,” CourierJournal.com, January 27, 2012, www.courier-journal
.com/article/20120127/BUSINESS/301270094/P-G-targets-developing-
markets-U-S-slows; and M. Clark, “Procter & Gamble Expected to Re-
port Lower Profits in Second Quarter Due to Foreign Exchange and Un-
derperforming Beauty Products,” International Business Times, January 
23, 2014, http://www.ibtimes.com/procter-gamble-nyse-pg-expected-
report-lower-profits-second-quarter-due-foreign-exchange-1546028 
(both accessed April 15, 2014).
65. E. Byron, “P&G’s Global Target: Shelves of Tiny Stores,” The Wall 
Street Journal, July 16, 2007, pp. A1, A10. See also L. Wayne, “P. & G. 
Sees the World as Its Client,” The New York Times, December 12, 2009, 
pp. B1, B2.
66. W. M. Cox, “An Order of Prosperity, to Go,” The New York Times, 
February 17, 2010, p. A23.
67. N. D. Schwartz, “More Manufacturing Coming Back to the U.S.,” 
The New York Times, September 23, 2013, http://economix.blogs
.nytimes.com/2013/09/23/more-manufacturing-coming-back-to-the-
u-s/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0 (accessed April 15, 2014). But 
also see S. Rattner, “The Myth of Industrial Rebound,” The New York 
Times, January 25, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/01/26/opinion/sunday/
rattner-the-myth-of-industrial-rebound.html (accessed April 15, 2014).
68. B. Elbiri, “With a Following Abroad, Woody Allen Banks His 
Laughs in Euros,” Bloomberg Businessweek, July 31, 2013, www
.businessweek.com/articles/2013-07-31/woody-allens-blue-jasmine-
banks-its-laughs-in-euros (accessed April 15, 2014). See also N. Kulish 
and M. Cieply, “Around World in One Movie: Film Financing’s Global 
Future,” The New York Times, December 6, 2011, pp. A1, A3.
69. J. R. Hagerty and K. Linebaugh, “U.S.: A Cheaper Labor Pool,” The 
Wall Street Journal, January 6, 2012, pp. B1, B2.
70. C. Rampell, “Majority of New Jobs Pay Low Wages, Study Finds,” 
The New York Times, August 30, 2012, www.nytimes.com/2012/08/31/
business/majority-of-new-jobs-pay-low-wages-study-finds.html?_r=0 
(accessed April 15, 2014).
71. Forrester Research, cited in G. Epstein, “Static Disrupts the Bangalore 
Connection,” Barron’s Online, September 10, 2007, http://online.barrons
.com/article/SB118921200748221265.html (accessed April 15, 2014).
72. Forrester Research, “Losing Our Edge? Estimated Number of High-
Skilled U.S. Jobs Moving Offshore,” reported in K. Madigan, “Yes: This Is 
No Longer About a Few Low-Wage or Manufacturing Jobs. Now One Out 
of Three Jobs Is at Risk,” BusinessWeek, August 25, 2003, pp. 37–38.
73. B. Schlender, “Peter Drucker Sets Us Straight,” Fortune, January 
12, 2004, pp. 115–118. See also P. Engardio, “The Future of Outsourc-
ing,” BusinessWeek, January 30, 2006, pp. 50–58; E. White, 
“Smaller Companies Join the Outsourcing Trend,” The Wall Street Journal,
May 8, 2006, p. B3; and L. Buchanan, “The Thinking Man’s Outsourc-
ing,” Inc. Magazine, May 2006, pp. 31–33.
74. J. Thottam, “Is Your Job Going Abroad?” Time, March 1, 2004, 
pp. 26–34.
75. F. Levy, quoted in D. Wessel, “The Future of Jobs: New Ones Arise, 
Wage Gap Widens,” The Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2004, pp. A1, A5.
76. A. M. Chaker, “Where the Jobs Are,” The Wall Street Journal, March 
18, 2004, pp. D1, D3; J. Shinal, “Which Types of Jobs Will Be in De-
mand?” San Francisco Chronicle, March 25, 2004, pp. C1, C4; and 
D. Wessel, “The Future of Jobs: New Ones Arise, Wage Gap Widens,” The 
Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2004, pp. A1, A5. For some caveats about 
offshoring, see M. Bolch, “Going Global,” Training, January 2008, 
pp. 28–29; M. Weinstein, “On Target Offshore,” Training, January 2008, 
pp. 34–36; and M. Bandyk, “Now Even Small Firms Can Go Global,” 
U.S. News & World Report, March 10, 2008, p. 52.
77. E. A. Spiegel, “America Can ‘Insource’ Jobs through Innovation,” 
USA Today, January 25, 2012, p. 11A.
78. J. Spohrer, quoted in Shinal, “Which Types of Jobs Will Be in Demand?”
79. P. Drucker, quoted in Schlender, “Peter Drucker Sets Us Straight.”

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN12
P. W. Dorfman, M. S. de Luque, and R. J. House, “In the Eye of the Be-
holder: Cross Cultural Lessons in Leadership from Project GLOBE,” 
Academy of Management Perspectives, February 2006, pp. 67–90.
119. See J. Marcus and H. Le, “Interactive Effects of Levels of Individu-
alism–Collectivism on Cooperation: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Orga-
nizational Behavior, August 2013, pp. 813–834.
120. On this note, see B. S. Reiche, P. Cardona, Y.-T. Lee et al., “Why Do 
Managers Engage in Trustworthy Behavior? A Multilevel Cross-Cultural 
Study in 18 Countries,” Personnel Psychology, Vol. 67, No. 1 (2014), 
pp. 61–98.
121. A discussion of Japanese stereotypes in America can be found 
in L. Smith, “Fear and Loathing of Japan,” Fortune, February 26, 1990, 
pp. 50–57. See also V. Taras, P. Steel, and B. L. Kirkman, “Three 
Decades of Research on National Culture in the Workplace: Do the 
Differences Still Make a Difference?” Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 40 
(2001), pp. 189–198.
122. T. Neeley, “Global Business Speaks English,” Harvard Business 
Review, May 2012, pp. 116–124.
123. G. A. Michaelson, “Global Gold,” Success, March 1996, p. 16. En-
glish is increasingly becoming the language of business and more and 
more is being taught in foreign business universities. See D. Carvajal, 
“English as Language of Global Education,” The New York Times, April 
11, 2007, p. A21.
124. Harris Poll, National Foreign Language Center, reported in “Lingua 
Franca?” USA Today, February 23, 1999, p. 1A; and “How Many People 
in the World Speak English 2013?” Exploredia, February 25, 2011, 
http://exploredia.com/how-many-people-in-the-world-speak-
english-2013 (accessed April 15, 2014).
125. D. Einstein, “Free Translation Apps Can Turn Smart Phone into 
Interpreter,” San Francisco Chronicle, August 8, 2011, p. D1.
126. December 2011 Gallup poll, reported in C. Aylott, “Chinese Is 
Third Most-Offered Foreign Language in U.S. Schools,” Emerging 
Money, February 14, 2012, http://emergingmoney.com/china/chinese-
is-third-most-offered-foreign-language-in-u-s-schools (accessed April 
15, 2014).
127. Samir Khalaf, quoted in H. M. Fattah, “Why Arab Men Hold Hands,” 
The New York Times, May 1, 2005, sec. 34, p. 2.
128. “How Cultures Collide,” 1976.
129. Kari Heistad, CEO of Culture Coach International, quoted in 
E. Maltby, “Expanding Abroad? Avoid Cultural Gaffes,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 19, 2010, p. B5. See also L. Nardon, R. M. Steers, and 
C. J. Sanchez-Runde, “Seeking Common Ground: Strategies for En-
hancing Multicultural Communication,” Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 40 
(2011), pp. 85–95.
130. Neil Currie, quoted in K. Tyler, “Global Ease,” HR Magazine, May 
2011, pp. 41–48.
131. B. Stone, “What’s in a Name? For Apple, iPad Said More than In-
tended,” The New York Times, January 29, 2010, pp. A1, A3.
132. Michael Norman, senior vice president at Sibson Consulting, 
quoted in H. Seligson, “For American Workers in China, a Culture Clash,” 
The New York Times, December 24, 2009, pp. B1, B2.
133. K. Seong-Kon, writing in The Korea Herald, summarized in “A So-
ciety That Needs No Appointment,” The Week, May 29, 2009, p. 14.
134. E. T. Hall, The Hidden Dimension (New York: Doubleday, 1966).
135. Miguel Carbayo, quoted in J. Yardley, “Spain, Land of 10 P.M. Din-
ner, Ponders a More Standard Time,” The New York Times, February 18, 
2014, pp. A1, A12.
136. D. Roman, “In Spain, It Can Be a Pain to Keep Up with the Clock,” 
The Wall Street Journal, October 25, 2013, pp. A1, A12.
137. Nuria Chinchilla, quoted in Roman, “In Spain, It Can Be a Pain to 
Keep Up with the Clock.”
138. Ignacio Buqueras, quoted in Yardley, “Spain, Land of 10 P.M. Din-
ner, Ponders a More Standard Time.”
139. R. Levine, “Taking Time,” Huffington Post, September 17, 2012, 
www.huffingtonpost.com/project-compassion-stanford/time-
research_b_1879146.html (accessed April 17, 2014). Levine is the au-
thor of A Geography of Time (New York: Basic Books, 1997).
140. See S. Ricker, CareerBuilder.com, “Workplace Behaviors around 
the World,” Reno Gazette-Journal, November 10, 2013, p. 10D.
141. A. R. Sorkin, “A Financial Mirage in the Desert,” The New York 
Times, December 1, 2009, pp. B1, B5.
www.npr.org/blogs/parallels/2014/03/13/289819931/the-world-bank-
gets-an-overhaul-and-not-everyones-happy (accessed April 15, 2014).
99. A. Lowrey, “World Bank to Lift Lending to Developing Countries,” 
The New York Times, April 2, 2014, p. A3.
100. A. Lowrey, “International Monetary Fund Offers Short-Term Credit as 
Insurance for Nations,” The New York Times, November 23, 2011, p. B4.
101. Associated Press, “IMF Says Wealth Gaps Can Hurt Economic 
Growth,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 14, 2014, p. C3; E. Porter, “In 
New Tack, IMF Aims at Income Inequality,” The New York Times, April 9, 
2014, pp. B1, B2; and A. Lowrey, “After Slide, Rich Nations Now Lifting 
Growth, IMF Reports,” The New York Times, April 9, 2014, p. B2.
102. M. A. Villarreal and I. F. Fergusson, “NAFTA at 20: Overview and 
Trade Effects,” Congressional Research Service, April 11, 2014, www
.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R42965.pdf (accessed April 15, 2014).
103. M. Stevenson, Associated Press, “NAFTA Alters Mexico in 
20 Years, but Fails Many Economic Goals,” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
January 2, 2014, pp. 6A, 5A. This view is echoed in M. A. Sergie, 
“NAFTA’s Economic Impact,” Council on Foreign Relations, February 
14, 2014, www.cfr.org/trade/naftas-economic-impact/p15790 
(accessed April 15, 2014).
104. “NAFTA’s 20-Year Legacy and the Fate of the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership,” Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch, February 2014, www
.citizen.org/documents/NAFTA-at-20.pdf (accessed April 15, 2014).
105. Wharton management professor Mauro Guillen, reported in 
“NAFTA, 20 Years Later: Do the Benefits Outweigh the Costs?” Knowl-
edge@Wharton, February 19, 2014, https://knowledge.wharton.upenn
.edu/article/nafta-20-years-later-benefits-outweigh-costs (accessed 
April 15, 2014).
106. U.S. International Trade Commission data, reported in L. Wallach, 
“2013 Trade Data Show Why Tracking a TPP NAFTA Expansion Is a Very 
Bad Idea,” Huffington Post, April 13, 2014, www.huffingtonpost.com/
lori-wallach/2013-trade-data-show-why_b_4768931.html (accessed 
April 15, 2014).
107. K. Amadeo, “GDP per Capita,” About.com, March 16, 2014, http://
useconomy.about.com/od/glossary/g/Gdp-Per-Capita.htm (accessed 
April 15, 2014).
108. See, for example, Associated Press, “Report: Greenspan Says Euro 
Could Replace U.S. Dollar as Reserve Currency of Choice,” International 
Herald Tribune, September 17, 2007, www.iht.com/articles/
ap/2007/09/17/business/EU-FIN-MKT-Germany-Greenspan-Euro.php 
(accessed April 15, 2014).
109. See “Will an Integrated ASEAN Region Challenge China?” Knowl-
edge@Wharton, January 15, 2014, https://knowledge.wharton.upenn
.edu/article/will-an-integrated-asean-region-challenge-china (accessed 
April 15, 2014).
110. For more about Mercosur, see J. de Onis, “Protectionist Policies 
Stagnate Mercosur Countries,” World Affairs, October 7, 2013, www
.worldaffairsjournal.org/blog/juan-de-onis/protectionist-policies-
stagnate-mercosur-countries (accessed April 15, 2014).
111. J. Papier, “The Incredible Shrinking Dollar,” PWJohnson Wealth 
Management, www.pwjohnson.com/resources/articles/falling_dollar
.pdf (accessed April 15, 2014).
112. Cost of Living Comparison between Chicago (United States) and 
London (United Kingdom), Expatistan, April 15, 2014, www.expatistan
.com/cost-of-living/comparison/chicago/london (accessed April 15, 2014).
113. G. Stoller, “Cultural Studies Pay in China.”
114. Dean Foster, president of Dean Foster Associates, an intercultural 
consulting firm, quoted in T. Mohn, “Going Global, Going Stateside,” The 
New York Times, March 9, 2010, p. B8.
115. C. Sang-Hun, “In Korea, Spam Is the Stuff Gifts Are Made Of,” The 
New York Times, January 27, 2014, pp. A1, A7.
116. “How Cultures Collide,” Psychology Today, July 1976, p. 69.
117. See P. R. Harris and R. T. Moran, Managing Cultural Differ-
ences, 4th ed. (Houston: Gulf Publishing, 1996), pp. 223–228; and 
M. Hilling, “Avoid Expatriate Culture Shock,” HR Magazine, July 
1993, pp. 58–63.
118. M. Javidan and R. J. House, “Cultural Acumen for the Global Man-
ager: Lessons from Project GLOBE,” Organizational Dynamics, Spring 
2001, pp. 289–305; R. J. House, P. J. Hanges, M. Javidan, P. W. Dorfman, 
and V. Gupta, eds., Culture, Leadership, and Organizations: The GLOBE 
Study of 62 Societies (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2004); and M. Javidan, 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN13
ness Review, December 13, 2013, pp. 127–130; and L. D. Ordóñez, 
M. E. Schweitzer, A. D. Galinsky, and M. H. Bazerman, “Goals Gone Wild: 
The Systematic Side Effects of Over-Prescribing Goal Setting,” Working 
Knowledge, Harvard Business School, February 11, 2009, http://hbswk
.hbs.edu/item/6114.html (accessed May 27, 2014).
9. See C. Bentley, “‘I’m Going to Do It!’ versus Honoring Intention: How 
to Set Goals and Really Keep Them,” Business Strategy Series, Vol. 15, 
No. 4 (2012), pp. 193–195; and K. L. Milkman and K. G. Volpp, “How to 
Keep Your Resolutions,” The New York Times, January 5, 2014, p. SR-14.
10. Bentley, “‘I’m Going to Do It!’ versus Honoring Intention,” p. 195.
11. R. Kreitner, Management, 11th ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2008), 
p. 147.
12. J. Kellner, “17-Year-Old Entrepreneur Writes Own Business Plan,” 
Reno Gazette-Journal, January 29, 2007, p. 8E. Despite the newspa-
per’s headline, the story contains no details about a business plan.
13. F. Delmar and S. Shane, “Does Business Planning Facilitate the 
Development of New Ventures?” Strategic Management Journal, 
December 2003, pp. 1165–1185.
14. Study by Amar Bhide, cited in K. K. Spors, “Do Start-Ups Really 
Need Formal Business Plans?” The Wall Street Journal, January 9, 
2007, p. B9.
15. See also A. Benton, “Do Founders Need a Business Plan?” The Wall 
Street Journal, November 29, 2012, p. B6.
16. A. A. Thompson Jr. and A. J. Strickland III, Strategic Management: 
Concepts and Cases, 13th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2003).
17. D. J. Collis and M. G. Rukstad, “Can You Say What Your Strategy Is?” 
Harvard Business Review, April 2008, pp. 82–90.
18. See G. Hamel, with B. Breen, The Future of Management (Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press, 2007), p. 191; and C. Rampell, “How 
Industries Survive Change, If They Do,” The New York Times, November 
16, 2008, Week in Review section, p. 3. For a discussion of the effect of 
the Web on newspapers, see E. Alterman, “Out of Print,” The New 
Yorker, March 31, 2008, pp. 48–59; P. R. Kann, “Quality Reporting 
Doesn’t Come Cheap,” The Wall Street Journal, September 26, 2009, 
p. A15; R. Pérez-Peña, “Newspaper Circulation Falls by More Than 10%,” 
The New York Times, October 27, 2009, p. B3; B. Wyman, “What News-
papers Can Learn from Craigslist,” The Wall Street Journal, February 
13, 2010, p. A13; and B. Evangelista, “Internet Seen as Shaping Delivery, 
Sharing of News,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 1, 2010, pp. D1, D2.
19. A. Busch III, quoted in interview with G. Hamel, “Turning Your Busi-
ness Upside Down,” Fortune, June 23, 1997, pp. 87–88. See also 
D. Kesmodel, “Beer Distributors Want More Than One Best Bud,” The 
Wall Street Journal, February 6, 2006, pp. B1, B2.
20. L. G. Hrebiniak, “Obstacles to Effective Strategy Implementation,” 
Organizational Dynamics, February 2006, pp. 12–31.
21. See R. L. Martin, “The Big Lie of Strategic Planning,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, January–February 2014, pp. 79–84.
22. H. Mintzberg, “The Strategy Concept II: Another Look at Why Orga-
nizations Need Strategies,” California Management Review, Vol. 30, 
No. 1 (1987), pp. 25–32.
23. Hamel and Breen, The Future of Management, p. 33.
24. S. Nassauer, “Chili’s Intends to Set Its Tables with Computer 
Screens,” The Wall Street Journal, September 16, 2013, p. B3.
25. V. Yee, “Where Did You Want That Pizza? In the Park, between 
the Trees,” The New York Times, October 6, 2013, p. News-21; and 
J. Brustein, “People Want More Takeout, Ordered Online,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, February 24, 2014, pp. D1, D3.
26. S. Berfield, “New Vending Machines Offer Fresher Items,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, February 16, 2014, p. C3; and O. Kharif, “Personal-
ized Prices May Become the Norm,” San Francisco Chronicle, November 
24, 2013, p. D3.
27. See R. G. McGrath, “Transient Advantage,” Harvard Business 
Review, June 2013, pp. 61–70.
28. S. Banjo and D. FitzGerald, “As Shoppers Skip the Mall, Stores 
Search for Fresh Lures,” The Wall Street Journal, January 17, 1014, 
p. A1; and M. Anderson, “What Shopping Will Look Like in the Future,” 
Associated Press, Reno Gazette-Journal, May 25, 2014, p. 15F.
29. See M. Calia, “Sears Still Struggles Despite Focus Shift,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 23, 2014, p. B3; E. Glazer, “As RadioShack Rebuilds, 
500 Stores Will Get the Ax,” The Wall Street Journal, February 5, 2014, 
p. B1.
142. Results adapted from and value definitions quoted from S. R. 
Safranski and I.-W. Kwon, “Religious Groups and Management Value 
Systems,” in R. N. Farner and E. G. McGoun, eds., Advances in Interna-
tional Comparative Management, Vol. 3 (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1988), 
pp. 171–183.
143. Reuters, “Chavez Moves to Nationalize Food Companies,” CNBC
.com, March 5, 2009, www.cnbc.com/id/29523863 (accessed April 15, 
2014); and G. Gupta, “Venezuela Threatens ‘Parasite’ Businesses,” USA 
Today, November 12, 2013, p. 5B.
144. See “Corruption Worsens in Conflict Areas,” San Francisco Chron-
icle, December 4, 2013, p. A4, reprinted from Los Angeles Times.
145. I. Urbina, “In Buying Cheap Clothes, U.S. Flouts Own Counsel,” The 
New York Times, December 23, 2013, pp. A1, A6. See also, S. Clifford 
and S. Greenhouse, “Fast and Flawed Inspections of Factories Abroad,” 
The New York Times, September 2, 2013, pp. A1, B6.
146. P. Mozur, “Fight at Foxconn Highlights Unrest at Chinese Facto-
ries,” The Wall Street Journal, September 24, 2013, p. B5; E. Dou and 
P. Mozur, “iPhone Factory Deaths Dog Apple and Supplier Pegatron,” 
The Wall Street Journal, December 12, 2013, p. B6; and K. O’Keeffe, 
“Underage Garment Workers Dodge Rules in Cambodia,” The Wall 
Street Journal, December 30, 2013, pp. B1, B5.
147. J. Costanzo and A. von Koppenfels, “Counting the Uncountable: 
Overseas Americans,” Migration Information Source, May 17, 2013, 
www.migrationpolicy.org/article/counting-uncountable-overseas-
americans (accessed April 15, 2014).
148. R. Feintzeig, “After Stints Abroad, Re-Entry Can Be Hard,” The Wall 
Street Journal, September 18, 2013, p. B6.
149. J. S. Black and H. B. Gregersen, “The Way to Manage Expats,” 
Harvard Business Review, March–April 1999, p. 53.
150. Feintzeig, “After Stints Abroad, Re-Entry Can Be Hard.”
151. See A. Maingault, L. Albright, and V. Neal, “Policy Tips, Repatria-
tion, Safe Harbor Rules,” HRMagazine, March 2008, pp. 34–35.
152. S. Dallas, “Rule No. 1: Don’t Diss the Locals,” BusinessWeek, May 
15, 1995, p. 8. Also see M. A. Shaffer, D. A. Harrison, H. Gregersen, J. S. 
Black, and L. A. Ferzandi, “You Can Take It with You: Individual Differ-
ences and Expatriate Effectiveness,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
January 2006, pp. 109–125.
CHAPTER 5
1. D. H. Autor, “Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality 
among the ‘Other 99 Percent,’” Science, May 23, 2014, pp. 843–851.
2. Analysis of Labor Department statistics by the Economic Policy Insti-
tute, Washington, D.C., reported in D. Leonhardt, “Is College Worth It? 
Clearly Yes, New Data Says,” The New York Times, May 27, 2014, p. A3.
3. “The Rising Cost of Not Going to College,” Pew Research 
Center, Social & Demographic Trends, February 11, 2014, www
.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/02/11/the-rising-cost-of-not-going-to-
college (accessed May 27, 2014).
4. See E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, “Building a Practically Useful 
Theory of Goal Setting and Task Motivation,” American Psychologist,
September 2002, pp. 705–717.
5. B. Gleeson, “Setting Stretch Goals: All In, All the Time,” Inc., Decem-
ber 28, 2012, www.inc.com/brent-gleeson/setting-stretch-goals.html 
(accessed May 27, 2014).
6. C. Fussman, “What I’ve Learned: Richard Branson,” Esquire, Decem-
ber 31, 2001, www.esquire.com/features/what-ive-learned/ESQ0102-
JAN_BRANSON (accessed May 27, 2014).
7. S. B. Sitkin, K. E. See, C.C. Miller, M. W. Lawless, and A. M. Carton, 
“The Paradox of Stretch Goals: Organizations in Pursuit of the Seem-
ingly Impossible,” Academy of Management Review, Vol. 36, No. 3 
(2011), pp. 544–566; Z. Zhang and M. Jia, “How Can Companies De-
crease the Disruptive Effects of Stretch Goals? The Moderating Role of 
Interpersonal- and Informational-Justice Climates,” Human Relations, 
Vol. 66, No. 7 (2013), pp. 993–1020; and D. T. Welsh and L. D. Ordóñez, 
“The Dark Side of Consecutive High Performance Goals: Linking Goal 
Setting, Depletion, and Unethical Behavior,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, Vol. 123, Issue 2 (2014), pp. 79–89.
8. G. Kilduff, cited in A. Bruzzese, “Gain Some Confidence by Writing 
Down Your Goals,” Reno Gazette-Journal, November 9, 2013, p. 9A. See 
also A. Galinsky and G. J. Kilduff, “Be Seen as a Leader,” Harvard Busi-

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN14
.htm (accessed May 27, 2014). Parker is author of Do the Right Thing: 
How Dedicated Employees Create Loyal Customers and Large Profits
(Philadelphia: Wharton School Publishing, 2008). See also interview 
with founder and former CEO Herb Kelleher in J. Reingold, “Still Crazy 
after All These Years,” Fortune, January 14, 2013, pp. 92–97. 
50. Willie Wilson, quoted in J. Bailey, “On Some Flights, Millionaires 
Serve the Drinks,” The New York Times, May 15, 2006, pp. A1, A16.
51. G. Karp, “Southwest Airlines Struggles with Being on Time,” 
Chicago Tribune, February 13, 2014, http://articles.chicagotribune
.com/2013-12-26/business/ct-biz-1226-southwest-delays-
20131226_1_southwest-airlines-spirit-airlines-chicago-midway-
international-airport (accessed May 27, 2014); and J. Nicas and 
S. Carey, “Southwest Air Faces Grown-Up Woes,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, April 2, 2014, pp. A1, A14.
52. B. D. Bowen and D. E. Headley, “Áirline Quality Rating 2014,” April 
7, 2014, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, http://commons.erau
.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1000&context=aqrr (accessed May 
27, 2014).
53. Herb Kelleher, quoted in “How Herb Keeps Southwest Hopping,” 
Money, June 1999, pp. 61–62.
54. C. Jones, “Southwest Announces First International Flights,” 
USA Today, January 27, 2014, www.usatoday.com/story/
travel/flights/2014/01/27/southwest-launches-international-
services/4938011 (accessed May 29, 2014).
55. R. Jones and R. Wall, “Budget Airlines Now Take on Long Hauls,” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 30, 2014, p. B3.
56. Nicas and Carey, “Southwest Air Faces Grown-Up Woes.”
57. B. Kesling and D. Nissenbaum, “Goal to Slash Wait Times Was ‘Un-
realistic,’ Aide Said,” The Wall Street Journal, May 24–25, 2014, p. A4.
58. M. Barbaro, “Wal-Mart Sets Agenda of Change,” The New York 
Times, January 24, 2008, p. C3; and K. Ohannessian, “CEO Lee Scott 
Speaks about Wal-Mart’s New Strategies,” FastCompany.com, January 
24, 2008, http://blog.fastcompany.com/archives/2008/01/24/ceo_lee_
scott_speaks_about_walmarts_new_strategies.html (accessed May 
29, 2014).
59. A. S. Ross, “Wal-Mart’s Grand Green Alternative,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, February 28, 2010, pp. D1, D2.
60. L. Hardesty, “Walmart Will Increase Use of Renewables 600% 
over 2010 Levels,” Energy Manager Today, April 16, 2013, www
.energymanagertoday.com/walmart-will-increase-use-of-renewables-
600-over-2010-levels-091022/ (accessed May 29, 2014). See also CEO 
Michael Duke interviewed by G. Baker, “Wal-Mart’s Green Initiative: 
Status Report,” The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2014, p. R3.
61. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “National Top 100, Green 
Power Partnership,” April 21, 2014, www.epa.gov/greenpower/toplists/
top100.htm. (accessed May 29, 2014). See also “Walmart Beats Emis-
sions Goal a Year Early,” Environmental Leader, March 6, 2013; U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, www.environmentalleader.
com/2013/03/06/walmart-beats-emissions-goal-a-year-early (ac-
cessed May 29, 2014).
62. S. Mitchel, “Walmart’s Assault on the Climate,” Institute for Local 
Self-Reliance, November 2013, www.ilsr.org/wp-content/
uploads/2013/10/ILSR-_Report_WalmartClimateChange.pdf (accessed 
May 27, 2014).
63. Drucker, The Practice of Management.
64. See R. Liddell, “Employee-Crafted Goals Pay Off,” HR Magazine, 
July 2013, p. 63.
65. E. A. Lock and G. P. Latham, “Building a Practically Useful Theory of 
Goal Setting and Task Motivation,” American Psychologist, September 
2002, pp. 705–717.
66. The performance management process is discussed by H. Aguinis 
and C. Pierce, “Enhancing the Relevance of Organizational Behavior by 
Embracing Performance Management Research,” Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, January 2008, pp. 139–145.
67. R. Rodgers and J. E. Hunter, “Impact of Management by Objectives 
on Organizational Productivity,” Journal of Applied Psychology, April 
1991, pp. 322–336.
68. J. Tierney, “The Advantages of Closing a Few Doors,” The New York 
Times, February 26, 2008, pp. D1, D6.
69. D. Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our 
Decisions (New York: HarperCollins, 2008).
30. L. Stevens, “Retail Store Clerks Become Web Shippers,” The Wall 
Street Journal, December 10, 2013, p. B8; S. Kapner, “J. Crew Tailors 
New Stores to the Frugal,” The Wall Street Journal, May 2, 2014, p. B3; 
and L. Rupp, “Modesty is the New Abercrombie,” Bloomberg Business-
week, May 26–June 1, 2014, pp. 25–26.
31. Peter Agnefjäll, quoted in J. Hansegard and N. Rolander, “For IDEA, 
Online Isn’t the Main Showroom,” The Wall Street Journal, January 29, 
2014, p. B9.
32. D. Leider, “Purposeful Work,” Utne Reader, July–August 1988, 
p. 52, excerpted from On Purpose: A Journal about New Lifestyles & 
Workstyles, Winter 1986.
33. P. F. Drucker, The Practice of Management (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1954), p. 122.
34. T. A. Stewart, “A Refreshing Change: Vision Statements That Make 
Sense,” Fortune, September 30, 1996, pp. 195–196.
35. For application of vision to nonprofits, see A. Kilpatrick and L. Sil-
verman, “The Power of Vision,” Strategy & Leadership, February 2005, 
pp. 24–26. Also see J. Michalski, “BNSF’s Leadership Engine,” Organi-
zational Dynamics, Vol. 42, No. 1 (2013),  pp. 35–45.
36. See C. Christensen, “How Will You Measure Your Life?” Harvard 
Business Review, July–August 2010, pp. 46–51.
37. P. J. Below, G. L. Morrisey, and B. L. Acomb, The Executive Guide to 
Strategic Planning (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1987), p. 2.
38. R. L. Brandt, “Birth of a Salesman,” The Wall Street Journal, 
October 15–16, 2011, pp. C1, C2.
39. G. Bensinger, “Hurdles Surround Amazon’s Goal of Using Drones,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 3, 2013, p. B3; G. Manjoo, “Why Bezos’s 
Drone Is More than a Joke,” The Wall Street Journal, December 5, 2013, 
pp. B1, B7; G. Bensinger and L. Stevens, “Amazon Tests Own Delivery in 
Shot at Big Shippers,” The Wall Street Journal, April 25, 2014, pp. A1, A2; 
and E. C. Baig, “Amazon Skips Day of Rest,” USA Today, May 9, 2014, p. 1B.
40. C. Blaine, “Jeff Bezos Loses $2.8 Billion in a Day,” Forbes.com, 
April 25, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/charleyblaine/2014/04/25/jeff-
bezos-loses-2-8-billion-in-a-day (accessed May 27, 2014).
41. Bezos, quoted in J. B. Stewart, “At Amazon, Talking Long Term,” 
The New York Times, December 17, 2011, pp. B1, B7. See also M. Gottfried, 
“Amazon: It’s Not Just for Christmas,” The Wall Street Journal, February 
1–2, 2014, p. B14.
42. S. Woo and J. Letzing, “Amazon’s Spending Habit Hurts Profit,” The 
Wall Street Journal, February 1, 2012, pp. B1, B2. In a study of 280 
CEOs by research firm Oxford Economics, 7 in 10 CEOs investors’ em-
phasis on short-term rewards present an obstacle to long-term plan-
ning; see L. Kwoh, “More Revealing CEOs,” The Wall Street Journal, 
January 31, 2012, p. B6.
43. D. Kucera, “Why Amazon Is on a Warehouse Building Spree,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, August 29, 2013, www.businessweek.com/
articles/2013-08-29/why-amazon-is-on-a-warehouse-building-spree 
(accessed May 29, 2014).
44. J. Bosman, “The Bookstore’s Last Stand,” The New York Times, 
January 29, 2012, Business section, pp. 1, 4, 5. See also D. Streitfeld 
and M. Eddy, “As Publishers Fight Amazon, Books Vanish,” The New 
York Times, May 24, 2014, pp. A1, B2.
45. F. Manjoo, “Paranoia Feeds Amazon’s Growth,” The Wall Street 
Journal, November 14, 2013, pp. B1, B7; and M. Wolff, “Wolff: The World 
According to Amazon,” USA Today, April 6, 2014, www.usatoday.com/
story/money/columnist/wolff/2014/04/06/the-world-according-to-
amazon/7295109 (accessed May 29, 2014).
46. Stewart, “At Amazon, Talking Long Term.”
47. C. Jones, “Southwest Posts Record Profit,” USA Today, January 23, 
2014, www.usatoday.com/story/travel/flights/2014/01/23/southwest-
earnings/4777723 (accessed May 29, 2014).
48. “Southwest Airlines Fact Sheet,” Southwest.com, www.southwest
.com/about_swa/press/factsheet.html#About%20the%20Company 
(accessed May 27, 2014); M. Schlangenstein and M. J. Credeur, “South-
west to Unload AirTran’s Boeing 717 with Delta Leases,” Bloomberg
.com, May 22, 2012, www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-05-22/
southwest-agrees-to-sublease-88-boeing-717-jets-to-delta-air.html 
(accessed May 27, 2014).
49. James Parker, quoted in W. J. Holstein, “At Southwest, the Culture 
Drives Success,” BusinessWeek.com, February 21, 2008, www
.businessweek.com/managing/content/feb2008/ca20080221_179423

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN15
to Correct Engine Problems,” The New York Times, August 27, 2010, p. 
B2; M. Ramsey, “Toyota Fixes Five Million Recalled Cars,” The Wall 
Street Journal, October 5, 2010, p. B4; D. Leinwand and C. Woodyard, 
“No Flaws Found in Toyota Electronics,” USA Today, February 9, 2011, p. 
1B; and M. Ramsey, J. Mitchell, and C. Dawson, “U.S. Absolves Toyota 
Electronics,” The Wall Street Journal, February 9, 2011, pp. B1, B2.
19. R. Farzad and M. Arndt, “Stuck with Sears,” Bloomberg Business-
week, April 5, 2010, pp. 41–48; and A. Ahmed, “Sales Down, Sears to 
Shut 120 Stores,” The New York Times, December 28, 2011, pp. B1, B5.
20. D. Kaplan, “Starbucks: The Art of Endless Transformation,” Inc., 
June 2014, pp. 82–86, 128.
21. “Starbucks Company Statistics,” Statistics Brain, August 12, 2013, www.
statisticbrain.com/starbucks-company-statistics (accessed June 13, 2014).
22. C. C. Miller, “A Changed Starbucks; A Changed CEO,” The New York 
Times, March 12, 2011, www.nytimes.com/2011/03/13/
business/13coffee.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 (accessed June 13, 2014).
23. H. Schultz, quoted in J. H. Ostdick, “Rekindling the Heart & Soul of 
Starbucks,” Success, www.success.com/article/rekindling-the-heart-
soul-of-starbucks (accessed June 14, 2014).
24. J. Jargon, “Starbucks Buys Its First Coffee Farm,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 19, 2013; Associated Press, “La Boulange Items Boosting 
Starbucks,” San Francisco Chronicle, January 26, 2014, p. D6; J. 
Jargon, “Starbucks CEO to Focus on Digital,” The Wall Street Journal, 
January 30, 2014, p. B6; B. Gruley and L. Patton, “The Arabica Project,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, February 17–23, 2014, pp. 64–69; B. Horovitz, 
“Tea for Two: Starbucks, Oprah Team Up,” USA Today, March 20, 2014, 
p. 2B; and L. Patton, “”Starbucks to Bring Alcohol Sales to Thousands of 
Stores,” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 20, 2014, www.bloomberg.
com/news/2014-03-19/starbucks-to-bring-alcohol-sales-to-
thousands-of-stores.html (accessed June 14, 2014).
25. Kaplan, “Starbucks: The Art of Endless Transformation.”
26. B. Horowitz, “Why People Love to Love-Hate Starbucks,” USA 
Today, February 12, 2014, p. 2A.
27. The Forbes Funds, “Organizational Assessment,” http://forbesfunds
.org/tools/building-management-capacity/organizational-assessment 
(accessed May 21, 2014).
28. G. Toppo, “Libraries’ Choice: Change or Die,” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
June 7, 2014, pp. 1B, 2B, reprinted from USA Today.
29. See A. Kinicki, K. Jacobson, B. Galvin, and G. Prussia, “A Multilevel 
Systems Model of Leadership,” Journal of Leadership & Organizational 
Studies, May 2011, pp. 133–149.
30. Walt Disney, quoted in B. Nanus, Visionary Leadership: Creating a 
Compelling Sense of Direction for Your Organization (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1992), p. 28; reprinted from B. Thomas, Walt Disney: An 
American Tradition (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1976), p. 247.
31. B. Iyer and T. Davenport, “Reverse Engineering Google’s Innovation 
Machine,” Harvard Business Review, April 2008, pp. 59–68.
32. Nanus, Visionary Leadership, pp. 28–29.
33. The Forbes Funds, “Organizational Assessment.”
34. N. Wingfield, “A Tech Show Loses Clout as Industry Shifts,” The 
New York Times, January 8, 2012, www.nytimes.com/2012/01/09/
technology/consumer-electronics-show-loses-clout-as-industry-shifts.
html?_r=1&pagewanted=all (accessed May 24, 2014).
35. Toyota Motor president Akio Toyoda, quoted in A. Ohnsman, J. 
Green, and K. Inoue, “The Humbling of Toyota,” Bloomberg Business-
week, March 22 & 29, 2010, pp. 32–36.
36. M. Ramsey and C. Dawson, “Toyota, Honda Lose U.S. Edge,” The 
Wall Street Journal, November 15, 2010, pp. B1, B2.
37. A. Taylor III, “Toyota’s Comeback Kid,” Fortune, February 27, 2012, 
pp. 72–79; and C. Dawson, “Toyota Chief Grabs the Wheel to Turn Around 
Humbled Auto Giant,” The Wall Street Journal, July 13, 2014, pp. A1, A8.
38. H. Tabuchi, “Toyota Bounces Back with Help from Eager American 
Buyers and a Weak Yen,” The New York Times, May 9, 2013, p. B3; H. 
Tabuci, “Profit Is Up 70% at Toyota, Close to Its Old Milestone,” The New 
York Times, November 7, 2013, p. B3; and Y. Takahashi, “Toyota Predicts 
Record Net,” The Wall Street Journal, February 5, 2014, p. B7.
39. D. Wakabayashi, “‘Toyota Way’ Retains Management Followers,” 
The Wall Street Journal, February 26, 2010, p. B4.
40. Ohnsman, Green, and Inoue, “The Humbling of Toyota.”
41. Toyota top engineer Takeshi Uchiyamada, quoted in Taylor, 
“Toyota’s Comeback Kid,” p. 77.
70. Adapted from N. Wingfield, “At Apple, Secrecy Complicates Life but 
Maintains Buzz,” The Wall Street Journal, June 28, 2006, pp. A1, A11. See 
also “The World’s 50 Most Innovative Companies,” Fast Company, March 
2010, p. 53; A. Lashinsky, “The Secrets Apple Keeps,” Fortune, February 
6, 2012, pp. 84–94; and B. Evangelista, “New iPhones Reflect Strat-
egy Shift,” San Francisco Chronicle, September 11, 2013, pp. C1, C2. 
71. S. Elliott, “Apple Passes Coca-Cola as Most Valuable Brand,” The 
New York Times, September 30, 2013, p. B5.
72. A. Barr, “Apple Faces Crunch Time,” USA Today, December 24, 
2013, pp. 1B, 2B; A. Satariano, “Apple Feels Heat for Next iThingy,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, January 29, 2014, pp. C1, C7; J. Sommer, “Trying 
to See Apple from a Different Angle,” The New York Times, February 2, 
2014, p. BU-6; B. X. Chen, “For Hints at Apple’s Plans, Read Its Shopping 
List,” The New York Times, February 24, 2014, pp. B1, B6; and 
D. FitzGerald and D. Wakabayashi, “Apple Quietly Rebuilds New 
Networks,” The Wall Street Journal, February 4, 2014, p. B1.
CHAPTER 6
1. G. Hamel, “What Is Management’s Moonshot?” Management 2.0,
December 7, 2007, http://discussionleader.hbsp.com/hamel/2007/12/
what_is_managements_moonshot.html (accessed May 24, 2014). See 
also G. Hamel, “Moon Shots for Management,” Harvard Business 
Review, February 2009, pp. 91–98.
2. J. Best, Flavor of the Month: Why Smart People Fall for Fads (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2006).
3. J. Best, interviewed by A. Manser, “Flavor of the Month,” UDaily,
University of Delaware website, May 22, 2006, www.udel.edu/PR/
UDaily/2006/may/jbest052206.html (accessed May 24, 2014).
4. D. Rigby and B. Bilodeau, “Management Tools and Trends 2013,” 
Bain & Company, May 8, 2013, www.bain.com/publications/articles/
management-tools-and-trends-2013.aspx (accessed May 24, 2014). 
See also D. K. Rigby, “Management Tools 2013: An Executive’s Guide,” 
Bain & Company, www.bain.com/Images/MANAGEMENT_
TOOLS_2013_An_Executives_guide.pdf (accessed May 24, 2014).
5. G. Colvin, “The Most Valuable Quality in a Manager,” Fortune,
December 29, 1997, pp. 279–280. For examples of instances where 
companies suffered because managers did not make necessary painful 
decisions, see L. Feldman, “A Refresher Course for the Leaders of 
Companies in Pain,” The New York Times, May 22, 2014, p. B5.
6. J. Pfeffer and R. I. Sutton, “Profiting from Evidence-Based Management,” 
Strategy & Leadership, Vol. 34, No. 2 (2006), pp. 35–42.
7. J. Surowiecki, “The Return of Michael Porter,” Fortune, February 1, 
1999, pp. 135–138.
8. G. Colvin, “There’s No Quit in Michael Porter,” Fortune, October 29, 
2012, pp. 162–166.
9. M. E. Porter, “What Is Strategy?” Harvard Business Review, November–
December 1996, pp. 61–78. Porter has updated his 1979 paper on 
competitive forces in M. E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That 
Shape Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, January 2008, pp. 79–93.
10. Porter, “What Is Strategy?”
11. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy, “Frequently 
Asked Questions,” September 2012, www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/
FAQ_Sept_2012.pdf (accessed June 4, 2014).
12. J. A. Byrne, “Going Where the Money Is,” BusinessWeek, January 
26, 1998, p. 14, review of A. J. Slywotzky and D. J. Morrison, with B. 
Andelman, The Profit Zone (New York: Times Business, 1998).
13. D. Streitfeld, “Seeking the Captive Consumer,” The New York Times, 
February 13, 2012, pp. B1, B7.
14. Michael Gartenberg, Gartner analyst, quoted in Streitfeld, “Seeking 
the Captive Consumer.”
15. F. Manjoo, “Paranoia Feeds Amazon’s Growth,” The Wall Street 
Journal, November 14, 2013, pp. B1, B7.
16. Harold Pollack, quoted in S. Clifford and C. C. Miller, “Rooting for the 
Little Guy,” The New York Times, January 16, 2012, pp. B1, B2.
17. D. Darlin, “A New Weapon for Electronics Shoppers,” The New York 
Times, December 7, 2011, p. F5.
18. N. Shirouzu, “Toyoda Rues Excessive Profit Focus,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 2, 2010, p B3. Also see K. Linebaugh, D. Searcey, and N. 
Shirouzu, “Secretive Culture Led Toyota Astray,” The Wall Street Journal,
February 10, 2010, pp. A1, A6; N. Bunkley, “1.1 Million Toyotas Recalled 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN16
60. See Statista, “Toyota’s Share of the U.S. Car Market in 2011 and 
2015,” www.statista.com/statistics/250371/market-share-of-toyota 
(accessed May 24, 2014).
61. M. DeBord, “Toyota’s Blind Spot,” The New York Times, February 6, 
2010, p. A17.
62. See description of these governmental efforts in “5 Global Warming Con-
tingency Plans Being Made Now,” The Geneva Association, Toronto, March 7, 
2014, https://www.genevaassociation.org/media/869448/07032014_
listosaur_ocean-warming.pdf (accessed May 24, 2014).
63. See, for instance, observations by Fred Krupp, head of the 
Environmental Defense Fund, interviewed by J. Bussey, “A Blind Eye 
to Climate Change?” The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2014, p. R2.
64. National Climate Assessment, U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, DC, 2014, p. 1, http://nca2014.globalchange.gov/
report (accessed May 24, 2014). See also J. Gillis, “Wide Effects of 
Climate Change Seen across U.S.,” International New York Times, May 7, 
2014, pp. 1, 4; A. Mundy and C. M. Nelson, “Report Says Climate 
Change Hits Economy across Nation,” The Wall Street Journal, May 7, 
2014, p. A4; and J. Gillis, “In Price Tag on Carbon, Plans to Save the 
Planet,” The New York Times, May 30, 2014, pp. A1, A20, A21.
65. E. Porter, “For Insurers, No Doubts on Climate Change,” The New 
York Times, May 15, 2013, pp. B1, B2.
66. See account of report by United Nations Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change in J. Gillis, “Panel’s Warning on Climate Risk: Worst 
Is to Come,” The New York Times, March 31, 2014, pp. A1, A3.
67. C. McHale and S. Leurig, “Stormy Future for U.S. Property/Casualty 
Insurers: The Growing Costs and Risks of Extreme Weather Events,”
Ceres, Boston, September 2012, www.ceres.org/resources/reports/
stormy-future/view (accessed May 24, 2014).
68. W. Koch, “Insurers Not So Hot on Climate Change,” USA Today, 
March 8, 2013, p. 3B.
69. E. Mills, “Insurers as Partners in Inclusive Green Growth,” Laurence 
Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, prepared 
for the World Bank Group’s International Finance Corporation as input to 
the G20, Washington, D.C., 2013, http://evanmills.lbl.gov/pubs/pdf/Insurers-
as-partners-in-inclusive-green-growth.pdf (accessed May 24, 2014).
70. “5 Global Warming Contingency Plans Being Made Now.”
71. C. Goldwasser, “Benchmarking: People Make the Process,” 
Management Review, June 1995, p. 40. See also Cambridge Advanced 
Learners Dictionary (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 
http://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/british/
benchmark_2?q=benchmarking (accessed May 21, 2014).
72. H. Rothman, “You Need Not Be Big to Benchmark,” Nation’s Busi-
ness, December 1992, pp. 64–65.
73. M. E. Porter, Competitive Strategy (New York: The Free Press, 1980). 
See also Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy,” 2008.
74. P. L. Brown, “Surfers in Turmoil with the Loss of a Major Supplier,” 
The New York Times, December 30, 2006, p. A12; and M. Overfelt, 
“Rough Surf,” USA Today, February 17, 2006, http://money.cnn.com/
magazines/fsb/fsb_archive/2006/02/01/8368201/index.htm (accessed 
May 24, 2014).
75. R. Coelho, “Energy Self-Sufficiency in Brazil,” Advanced Biofuels 
USA, December 9, 2013, http://advancedbiofuelsusa.info/energy-self-
sufficiency-in-brazil (accessed May 24, 2014).
76. M. Krantz and J. Swartz, “IBM Shows Secret to Corporate Longev-
ity,” USA Today, June 16, 2011, pp. 1B, 3B; and S. Lohr, “Even a Giant 
Can Learn to Run,” The New York Times, January 1, 2012, p. BU-3.
77. S. Lohr, “IBM Poised for Growth, Chief Says,” The New York Times, 
May 12, 2014, pp. B1, B11; and N. Summers, “It’s Not Us, It’s You,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, May 26–June 1, 2014, pp. 58–63.
78. S. Elliott, “Still Ticking, Timex Nods to Heritage in a Fast World,” The 
New York Times, January 22, 2014, p. B6.
79. B. Fritz, “Redbox Tries to Break Out of Its Box as Sales Plateau,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 21, 2014, pp. B1, B4.
80. J. Greenberg, quoted in B. Horovitz, “Restoring the Golden Arch 
Shine,” USA Today, June 16, 1999, p. 3B.
81. D. Gannon, “Green Toys,” Inc., April 11, 2011, www.inc.com/best-
industries-2011/green-toys.html; and B. Yerak, “From Frozen Food 
to Green Toys,” Chicago Tribune, November 10, 2013, http://articles.
chicagotribune.com/2013-11-10/business/ct-biz-1110-green-toys--
20131110_1_toy-industry-osi-playthings/2 (both accessed May 24, 2014).
42. J. R. Healey, “J. D. Power: Most Reliable 3-Year-Old Cars,” USA 
Today, February 12, 2014, p. 2B.
43. Y. Takahashi, “Toyota Accelerates Its Cost-Cutting Efforts,” The Wall 
Street Journal, December 23, 2009, p. B4; C. Woodyard, “Toyota’s 
Reputation Needs Some TLC,” USA Today, December 31, 2009, pp. 1B, 2B; 
M. Maynard and H. Tabuchi, “Rapid Growth Has Its Perils, Toyota Learns,” 
The New York Times, January 28, 2010, pp. A1, B4 ; K. Linebaugh and N. 
Shirouzu, “Toyota Heir Faces Crisis at the Wheel,” The Wall Street Journal, 
January 28, 2010, pp. A1, A8; and M. Dolan, “Supplier Perplexed by 
Toyota’s Action,” The Wall Street Journal, January 28, 2010, p. A9.
44. Taylor, “Toyota’s Comeback Kid,” p. 75.
45. J. R. Healey and A. DeBarros, “Toyota Tops Speed Control 
Complaints,” USA Today, March 26, 2010, pp. 1B, 2B.
46. N. Bunkley, “Toyota Halts Production of 8 Models,” The New York 
Times, January 27, 2010, pp. B1, B2; J. R. Healey, “Toyota Halts U.S. 
Sales of 8 Models,” USA Today, January 27, 2010, p. 1A; and C. Said, 
“Reports on Priuses Add to Toyota’s Woes,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
February 4, 2010, pp. D1, D2.
47. Leinwand and Woodyard, “No Flaws Found in Toyota Electronics”; 
and Ramsey, Mitchell, and Dawson, “U.S. Absolves Toyota Electronics.”
48. James P. Womack, quoted in Maynard and Tabuchi, “Rapid Growth 
Has Its Perils, Toyota Learns.”
49. D. Q. Weber, “Toyota Agrees to $1.2 Billion Penalty Ending U.S. 
Probe,” Bloomberg.com, March 14, 2014, www.bloomberg.com/
news/2014-03-19/u-s-says-toyota-agrees-to-1-2-billion-settlement-
ending-probe.html (accessed May 24, 2014).
50. C. Trudell, “Toyota Recalls More Than 6 Million Vehicles Worldwide,” 
Bloomberg.com, April 9, 2014, www.google.com/search?q=Toyota+
Recalls+More+Than+6+Million+Vehicles+Worldwide&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-
8&aq=t&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&client=firefox-a&channel=
np&source=hp; and K. Stock, “Toyota’s Reputation Takes 6.4 Million 
Fresh Dents with Its Latest Sweeping Recall,” Bloomberg Business-
week, April 9, 2014, www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-04-09/
toyota-recall-toyotas-reputation-takes-another-6-dot-4-million-
dents-with-latest-sweeping-recall (both accessed May 24, 2014).
51. C. Woodyard, “Toyota PR Blitz Plays Catch-Up,” USA Today, February 
10, 2010, p. 2B; K. Linebaugh and D. Searcey, “Cause of Sudden Accel-
eration Proves Hard to Pinpoint,” The Wall Street Journal, February 25, 
2010, p. A7; and D. Searcey and K. Linebaugh, “Toyota Moves to Dis-
credit Its Critics,” The Wall Street Journal, March 6–7, 2010, pp. B1, B5.
52. C. Dawson, “Toyota Overhauls Vehicle R&D Efforts,” The Wall Street 
Journal, April 10, 2012, p. B6.
53. See, for example, B. Vlasic, “Toyota Moves to Revamp Its Lexus 
Luxury Line,” The New York Times, September 27, 2012, p. B2; and C. 
Woodyard and J. R. Healey, “Toyota Beefs Up Tundra for a Fight,” USA 
Today, February 8, 2013, pp. 1B, 2B.
54. N. Bunkley, “Ford and Toyota to Work Together on Hybrid System for 
Trucks,” The New York Times, August 23, 2011, p. B3; J. Bennett and M. 
Ramsey, “Putting Egos Aside, Ford, Toyota Pair Up for Hybrids,” The Wall 
Street Journal, August 23, 2011, pp. B1, B2; and E. Pfanner, “Toyota 
Shows Off a Sedan Powered by Hydrogen Fuel Cells,” The New York 
Times, November 21, 2013, pp. B1, B4.
55. J. R. Healey and F. Meier, “At General Motors, a History of Failures,” 
USA Today, June 6–8, p. 1A; J. Bennett and M. Ramsey, “GM Takes 
Blame, Vows Culture Shift,” The Wall Street Journal, June 6, 2014, pp. 
A1, A2; and B. Vlasic, “GM Inquiry Cites Years of Neglect over Fatal De-
fect,” The New York Times, June 6, 2014, pp. A1, B6.
56. D. Welch, K. Naughton, and B. Helm, “Detroit’s Big Chance,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, February 22, 2010, pp. 38–44.
57. Y. Kageyama, “Toyota Lifts Profit Forecast as Disaster Woes Fade,” 
HighBeam Research, February 7, 2012, www.highbeam.com/doc/1A1-
4ce3ead63a83407e8edd5037ad103572.html (accessed June 26, 2014).
58. C. Rogers, “Japanese Car Makers Lose Their Midsize Edge,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 6, 2013, pp. B1, B4.
59. “Best Days for Toyota’s U.S. Market Share Look Over for Now,” 
Reuters, June 12, 2013, www.reuters.com/article/2013/06/12/us-toyota-
usa-idUSBRE95B05920130612 ; and D. Ritter, “The Auto Industry’s 5 
Largest U.S. Market Share Shifts in 2013,” Wall St. CheatSheet, January 
25, 2014, http://wallstcheatsheet.com/stocks/the-auto-industrys-
5-largest-u-s-market-share-shifts-in-2013.html/?a=viewall (both ac-
cessed May 24, 2014).

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN17
15. Annamaria Lusardi, quoted in A. Tugend, “”Women Know More 
about Finances than They Get Credit For,” The New York Times, May 18, 
2013, p. B5.
16. “Fidelity Research Shows More Women Assuming Role as Family 
CEO, but Gap Remains for Many Couples in Sharing Responsibility for 
Management of Family Finances,” Fidelity.com, September 24, 2013, 
www.fidelity.com/inside-fidelity/individual-investing/fidelity-research-
shows-more-women (accessed June 9, 2014).
17. B. M. Barber and T. Odean, “Boys Will Be Boys: Gender, Overconfi-
dence, and Common Stock Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics, February 2001, pp. 261–292. See also N. Roussanov and P. G. Savor 
interview, “Risk and the Unmarried CEO,” Knowledge@Wharton, April 
21, 2014, https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/risk-single-ceo 
(accessed June 9, 2014); and N. Roussanov interviewed by T. Gutner, 
“Do You, CEO, Promise to Take Less Risk as Long as You’re the Boss?” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 28, 2014, p. R5. Their paper is 
N. Roussanov and P. G. Savor, “Marriage and Managers’ Attitudes to 
Risk,” December 14, 2013, http://sites.temple.edu/psavor/files/2013/08/
status_managers_draft_2013_12_13.pdf (accessed June 9, 2013).
18. D. Mitchell, “At Last, Buffett’s Key to Success,” The New York 
Times, April 5, 2008, p. B5. See also J. Clements, “He Invests, She In-
vests: Who Gets the Better Returns?” The Wall Street Journal, February 
6, 2008, p. D1; C. Benko and B. Pelstar, “How Women Decide,” Harvard 
Business Review, September 2013, pp. 78–84; and M. P. Dunleavey, 
“Mars, Venus, and the Handling of Money,” The New York Times, February 
23, 2014, p. BU-5.
19. R. Carden, “Behavioral Economics Show That Women Tend to Make 
Better Investments than Men,” The Washington Post, October 11, 2013, 
www.washingtonpost.com/business/behavioral-economics-show-that-
women-tend-to-make-better-investments-than-men/2013/10/10/5347
f40e-2d50-11e3-97a3-ff2758228523_story.html (accessed June 9, 
2014). Regarding risk, see J. P. Byrnes, D. C. Miller, and W. D. Schafer, 
“Gender Differences in Risk Taking: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological 
Bulletin, May 1999, pp. 367–383.
20. “The World’s Billionaires: #3 Warren Buffett,” Forbes.com, June 9, 
2014, www.forbes.com/profile/warren-buffett (accessed June 9, 2014).
21. A. Dvorkin, “The Real Secret behind Warren Buffet’s Success Is Fi-
nally Revealed,” Invest with Alex, March 20, 2014, www.investwithalex.
com/the-real-secret-behind-warren-buffetts-success-is-finally-
revealed (accessed June 9, 2014).
22. L. Lofton, Warren Buffett Invests Like a Girl (New York: HarperBusi-
ness, 2011).
23. A. Markels, “Built to Make Billions?” U.S. News & World Report, 
August 6, 2007, pp. 51–52.
24. A. Farnham, “Teaching Creativity Tricks to Buttoned-Down Execu-
tives,” Fortune, January 10, 1994, pp. 94–100.
25. I. DeBare, “The Business May Change, but the Values Are the 
Same,” San Francisco Chronicle, April 2, 2006, p. G5.
26. C. Hymowitz, “Everyone Likes to Laud Service to the Customer; Do-
ing It Is the Problem,” The Wall Street Journal, February 27, 2006, p. B1.
27. The Retail Customer Dissatisfaction Study 2006, conducted by the 
Jay H. Baker Retailing Initiative, Wharton, University of Pennsylvania, 
and the Verde Group, Toronto, reported in “Beware of Dissatisfied Cus-
tomers: They Like to Blab,” Knowledge@Wharton, http://knowledge.
wharton.upenn.edu/index (accessed June 24, 2014).
28. Hymowitz, “Everyone Likes to Laud Service.”
29. B. Kiviat, “The End of Customer Service,” Time, March 24, 2008, p. 42.
30. S. Holmes, “The 787 Encounters Turbulence,” BusinessWeek,
June 19, 2006, pp. 38–40. See also S. Holmes, “Cleaning Up Boeing,” 
BusinessWeek, March 13, 2006, pp. 63–68; and S. Holmes, “Boeing 
Straightens Up and Flies Right,” BusinessWeek, May 8, 2006, 
pp. 69–70.
31. For a discussion of the strategy behind the Dreamliner, see C. Mas-
ters, “How Boeing Got Going,” Time, September 10, 2007, pp. Global 
1–Global 6.
32. J. L. Lunsford, “Boeing, in Embarrassing Setback, Says 787 Dream-
liner Will Be Delayed,” The Wall Street Journal, October 11, 2007, 
pp. A1, A16.
33. R. Yu, “Boeing Again Delays Dreamliner’s Debut,” USA Today, Janu-
ary 17, 2008, p. 3B; and J. L. Lunsford, “Boeing Delays Dreamliner 
Delivery Again,” The Wall Street Journal, April 10, 2008, p. B3.
82. K. Stock, “Indian Motorcycles Finally Rev Up to Speed for Polaris,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 28, 2014, www.businessweek.com/
articles/2014-01-28/indian-motorcycles-finally-rev-up-to-speed-for-
polaris (accessed May 24, 2014).
83. L. Aguilar, “Auto Suppliers Branch Out to Other Sectors to Survive,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, February 16, 2010, p. D2; reprinted from the 
Detroit News.
84. B. W. Barry, “A Beginner’s Guide to Strategic Planning,” The 
Futurist, April 1998, pp. 33–36; from B. W. Barry, Strategic Planning 
Workbook for Nonprofit Organizations, revised and updated (St. Paul, 
MN: Amherst H. Wilder Foundation, 1997).
85. L. Bossidy and Ram Charan, with C. Burck, Execution: The 
Discipline of Getting Things Done (New York: Crown Business, 2002).
86. Results can be found in “Wanted: Employees Who Get Things 
Done,” HR Magazine, January 2008, p. 10.
87. Also see R. Kaplan and D. Norton, “Mastering the Management 
System,” Harvard Business Review, January 2008, pp. 66–77.
88. Execution is also discussed by C. Montgomery, “Putting Leadership 
Back into Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, January 2008, pp. 54–60; 
and J. Lorsch and R. Clark, “Leading from the Boardroom,” Harvard 
Business Review, April 2008, pp. 105–111.
CHAPTER 7
1.  M. H. Bazerman, Judgment in Managerial Decision Making, 7th ed. 
(New York: Wiley, 2008). See also D. E. Bell, H. Raiffa, and A. Tversky, 
eds., Decision Making: Descriptive, Normative, and Prescriptive Interac-
tions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
2. M. Easterby-Smith and M. A. Lyles, The Blackwell Handbook of Orga-
nizational Learning and Knowledge Management (Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishing, 2003).
3. B. Fischoff, “Hindsight ± Foresight: The Effect of Outcome Knowledge 
on Judgment under Uncertainty,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Perception and Performance, Vol. 1 (1975),  pp. 288–299.
4. B. Dobbin, “Snapshot of an Icon’s Fall,” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
October 6, 2011, pp. 5A, 6A; M. Spector and A. D. Mattioli, “Kodak: Tech 
Firms Hastened Slide,” The Wall Street Journal, January 20, 2012, 
pp. B1, B5; and M. Daneman, “Can Kodak Reinvent Itself After Bankruptcy?” 
Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, September 1, 2013, www.usatoday.
com/story/money/business/2013/09/01/can-kodak-reinvent-
itself/2752173 (accessed June 14, 2014).
5. Leo J. Thomas, quoted in “What’s Wrong with This Picture: Kodak’s 30-
Year Slide into Bankruptcy,” Knowedge@Wharton, February 1, 2012, 
https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/whats-wrong-with-this-
picture-kodaks-30-year-slide-into-bankruptcy (accessed June 14, 2014).
6. David A. Glocker, quoted in “What’s Wrong with This Picture,” 2012.
7. C. Burritt, “Kodak Trying to Bring Its Digital Revival into Focus,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, September 6, 2011, pp. D1, D3.
8. C. Terwiesch, quoted in “What’s Wrong with This Picture.”
9. G. S. Day, quoted in “What’s Wrong with This Picture.”
10. D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux, 2011), pp. 20–22.
11. Book review of Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, by J. Holt, 
“Two Brains Running,” The New York Times, November 25, 2011, http://
old.richarddawkins.net/articles/644039-two-brains-running (accessed 
June 9, 2014).
12. “Wean Wall Street Off Its Gambling Addictions,” editorial, USA To-
day, March 1, 2010, p. 15A.
13. Chip Heath, quoted in J. Rae-Dupree, “Innovative Minds Don’t Think 
Alike,” The New York Times, December 30, 2007, business section, p. 3. C. 
Heath and D. Heath are coauthors of Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Sur-
vive and Others Die (New York: Random House, 2007). For other writings 
pertaining to the curse of knowledge, see J. Fox, “Herd on the Street,” Time,
September 17, 2007, p. 59; D. Jones, “Even Good CEOs Pick the Wrong Di-
rection,” USA Today, November 7, 2007, pp. 1B, 2B; F. Norris, “Bank Profits 
Had Whiff of Suspicion,” The New York Times, November 16, 2007, pp. C1, 
C2; and P. L. Bernstein, “To Botch a Forecast, Rely on Past Experience,” The 
New York Times, December 30, 2007, business section, p. 4.
14. A. Lusardi and O. S. Mitchell, “Financial Literacy around the World: 
An Overview,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, October 
2011, pp. 497–508.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN18
58. Bill Gates, quoted in R. A. Guth, “Bill Gates Issues Call for Kinder 
Capitalism,” The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2008, pp. A1, A15. 
See also C. Boles, “Last Call? Gates Pushes Globalism in Remarks,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 13, 2008, p. B3; and M. J. Sandel, “What 
Isn’t for Sale?” The Atlantic, April 2012, pp. 62–66. Sandel is author of 
What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets (London: Penguin 
Books, 2012).
59. C. McNamara, “Complete Guide to Ethics Management: An Ethics 
Toolkit for Managers,” www.mapnp.org/library/ethics/ethxgde.htm (ac-
cessed June 14, 2014).
60. See D. Meinert, “Creating an Ethical Culture,” HR Magazine, April 
2014, pp. 23–27.
61. C. E. Bagley, “The Ethical Leader’s Decision Tree,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, February 2003, pp. 18–19.
62. Ibid., p. 19.
63. Ibid.
64. The website YourMorals.org studies morality and values, offering 
questionnaires for readers to fill out. Some of the results are described 
in J. Haidt, The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics 
and Religion (New York: Random House, 2012).
65. Masters, “How Boeing Got Going.”
66. J. Pfeffer and R. I. Sutton, “Profiting from Evidence-Based Manage-
ment,” Strategy & Leadership, Vol. 34, No. 2 (2006), pp. 35–42; and J. 
Pfeffer and R. I. Sutton, “Evidence-Based Management,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, January 2006, pp. 63–74. See also J. Pfeffer and R. Sutton, 
“Trust the Evidence, Not Your Instincts,” The New York Times, 
September 3, 2011, www.nytimes.com/2011/09/04/jobs/04pre.html?_
r=0 (accessed June 14, 2014). Pfeffer and Sutton have also produced a 
book, Hard Facts, Dangerous Half-Truths, and Total Nonsense: Profiting 
from Evidence-Based Management (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2006). For a discussion of the book, see C. Hymowitz, 
“Executives Must Stop Jumping Fad to Fad and Learn to Manage,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 15, 2006, p. B1.
67. Additional discussion of this topic may be found in T. Reay, W. Berta, 
and M. Kazman Kohn, “What’s the Evidence on Evidence-Based Man-
agement?” Academy of Management Perspectives, November 2009, 
pp. 5–18; and R. B. Briner, D. Denyer, and D. M. Rousseau, “Evidence-
Based Management” Concept Cleanup Time?” Academy of Manage-
ment Perspectives, November 2009, pp. 19–32.
68. Pfeffer and Sutton, “Profiting from Evidence-Based Management.”
69. J. Wortham, “In Tech, Starting Up by Failing,” The New York Times, 
January 18, 2012, pp. B1, B6. Fab.com had a meteoric rise, but recently 
has gone through a number of staff layoffs, as reported in M. Billings, 
“Fab.com Announces Layoffs of 80 to 90 Workers in New York,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 21, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/venturecapi-
tal/2014/05/21/fab-com-announces-layoffs-of-80-to-90-workers-in-
new-york (accessed June 14, 2014).
70. C. Garling, “Excessive Hype Does Promising Products No Favors,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, September 27, 2013, p. C5.
71. See A. Bryant, “Google’s Quest to Build a Better Boss,” The New 
York Times, March 12, 2011, www.nytimes.com/2011/03/13/
business/13hire.html?pagewanted=all (accessed June 14, 2014).
72. M. A. Thomas, “Office Depot to Close 400 U.S. Stores, Shares Jump,” 
Reuters, May 8, 2014, www.reuters.com/article/2014/05/06/us-office-
depot-results-idUSBREA450DC20140506 (accessed June 14, 2014).
73. Pfeffer and Sutton, “Evidence-Based Management,” pp. 66–67.
74. J. Pfeffer, “Lay Off the Layoffs,” Newsweek, February 15, 2010, 
pp. 32–37.
75. “U.S. Men & Women Agree Southwest Airlines, Google and Dove Are 
Most Desired Brands in 2012,” PR Newswire, February 17, 2012, www.
prnewswire.com/news-releases/us-men--women-agree-southwest-
airlines-google-and-dove-are-most-desired-brands-in-2012-
139506748.html (accessed June 14, 2014).
76. G. Loveman, “Diamonds in the Data Mine,” Harvard Business Re-
view, May 2003, pp. 109–113. See also T. Davenport, L. Prusak, and B. 
Strong, “Putting Ideas to Work,” The Wall Street Journal, March 10, 
2008, p. R11.
77. T. H. Davenport, “Competing on Analytics,” Harvard Business Re-
view, January 2006, pp. 99–107.
78. S. Baker, “How Much Is That Worker Worth?” BusinessWeek, March 
23 & 30, 2009, pp. 46–48.
34. C. Drew, “Another Flight Delay for Troubled Dreamliner,” The New 
York Times, June 24, 2009, p. B3; P. Sanders, D. Michaels, and A. Cole, 
“Boeing Delays New Jet Again,” The Wall Street Journal, June 24, 2009, pp. 
A1, A6; D. Reed, “Problems Pile Up on Boeing,” USA Today, August 6, 2009, 
pp. 1B, 2B; P. Sanders, “Boeing Settles in for a Bumpy Ride,” The Wall Street 
Journal, October 7, 2009, p. B1; D. Michaels and P. Sanders, “Dreamliner 
Production Gets Closer Monitoring,” The Wall Street Journal, October 7, 
2009, pp. B1, B2; and P. Sanders, “At Boeing, Dreamliner Fix Turns Up New 
Issue,” The Wall Street Journal, November 13, 2009, pp. B1, B2.
35. P. Sanders and D. Michaels, “Boeing Looks Beyond Dreamliner’s 
First Flight,” The Wall Street Journal, December 16, 2009, pp. B1, B2.
36. C. Jones, “New Era in Aircraft Arrives,” USA Today, October 21, 
2011, pp. 1B, 3B; and B. Mutzabaugh, “First Dreamliner Fliers Sing Its 
Praises,” USA Today, October 28, 2011, pp.1B, 2B.
37. M. I. Wald and J. Mouawad, “Boeing Acknowledges Tests Underes-
timated Battery Risks in 787,” The New York Times, April 24, 2013, 
p. B3; B. Jansen, “NTSB Urges More Tests on Boeing 787 Dreamliners,” 
USA Today, May 23, 2014, p. 3B; C. Drew, “787 Fire Inquiry Focuses on 
Transmitter,” The New York Times, July 16, 2013, pp. B1, B8; and B. 
Jansen, “Investigators Trace 787 Fire to Battery-Powered Device,” USA 
Today, July 19, 2013, p. 2B.
38. M. Negishi and D. Wakabayashi, “Boeing’s Grip Is Broken,” The Wall 
Street Journal, October 8, 2013, pp. B1, B2.
39. J. Ostrower, “New Boeing Woe: 787 Wing Defect,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 8–9, 2014, pp. B1, B4.
40. J. Ostrower, “Steady Demand for New Jets Lifts Boeing,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 24, 2014, p. B3.
41. J. Ostrower and D. Cameron, “Boeing Plays Down Turmoil,” The 
Wall Street Journal, January 30, 2014, p. B4.
42. J. Ostrower, “Dreamliner Cleared for Longer Range Flights,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 29, 2014, p. B4.
43. J. Ostrower, “Critical Mission for Boeing: Slashing Dreamliner 
Costs,” The Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2014, pp. B1, B2.
44. Estimates by Barclays Capital, reported in Ostrower, 2014.
45. J. Ostrower, “New Dreamliner Takes Flight,” The Wall Street Journal, 
September 18, 2013, p. B3; and J. Ostrower and D. Cameron, “Boeing 
Heads into a Crucial Turn,” The Wall Street Journal, May 19, 2014, p. B2.
46. Richard Aboulafia, vice president at the Teal Group, quoted in 
Ostrower, “New Dreamliner Takes Flight.”
47. H. A. Simon, Administrative Behavior, 3rd ed. (New York: Free Press, 
1996); and H. A. Simon, “Making Management Decisions: The Role of 
Intuition and Emotion,” The Academy of Management Executive, February 
1987, pp. 57–63.
48. E. Ert and E. Yechiam, “Why Smokers Still Smoke,” The New York 
Times, July 28, 2013, p.S R-12. See also E. Ert, E. Yechiam, and 
O. Arshavesky, “Smokers’ Decision Making: More than Mere Risk 
Taking,” PLoS One, July 2, 2013, www.plosone.org/article/
info:doi/10.1371/journal.pone.0068064 (accessed June 9, 2014).
49. J. Jargon, “Can M’m, M’m Good Translate?” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, July 9, 2007, p. A16; and N. Groom, “Campbell to Start Russia, 
China Soup Sales,” Reuters, July 9, 2007, www.reuters.com/
article/2007/07/09/campbellsoup-idUSN0928240820070709 (accessed 
June 9, 2014).
50. J. Wortham, “Once Just a Site with Funny Cat Pictures, and Now a 
Web Empire,” The New York Times, June 14, 2010, pp. B1, B8.
51. See also D. Kahneman and G. Klein, “Conditions for Intuitive Expertise: A 
Failure to Disagree,” American Psychologist, September 2009, pp. 515–526.
52. See C. C. Miller and R. D. Ireland, “Intuition in Strategic Decision 
Making: Friend or Foe in the Fast-Paced 21st Century?” Academy of 
Management Executive, February 2005, p. 20.
53. See E. Dane and M. G. Pratt, “Exploring Intuition and Its Role in 
Managerial Decision Making,” Academy of Management Review, January 
2007, pp. 33–54.
54. See D. Begley, “You Might Help a Teen Avoid Dumb Behavior by 
Nurturing Intuition,” The Wall Street Journal, November 3, 2006, p. B1.
55. Advice attributed to Sunny Vanderbeck of Satori Capital, Dallas, in V. 
Harnish, “Finding the Route to Growth,” Fortune, May 18, 2014, p. 45.
56. Courage and intuition are discussed by K. K. Reardon, “Courage as 
a Skill,” Harvard Business Review, March 2007, pp. 51–56.
57. M. B. Zuckerman, “Policing the Corporate Suites,” U.S. News & 
World Report, January 19, 2004, p. 72.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN19
Stereotyping,” Academy of Management Journal, December 1, 2011, 
pp. 1141–1158.
94. See Rowe and Mason, Managing with Style; M. J. Dollinger and W. 
Danis, “Preferred Decision-Making Styles: A Cross-Cultural Comparison,” 
Psychological Reports, 1998, pp. 755–761; and K. R. Brousseau, M. J. 
Driver, G. Hourihan, and R. Larsson, “The Seasoned Executive’s Decision-
Making Style,” Harvard Business Review, February 2006, p. 111, http://
custom.hbsp.com/custom/KORNFR0602F2006012769.pdf;jsessionid=B
BCU302NQJFKOAKRGWCB5VQBKE0YIIPS (accessed June 14, 2014).
95. C. E. Cryder, J. S. Lerner, J. J. Gross, and R. E. Dahl, “Misery Is Not 
Miserly: Sad and Self-Focused Individuals Spend More,” Psychological 
Science, June 1, 2008, pp. 525–530. See also S. Finkelstein, J. White-
head, and A. Campbell, “How Inappropriate Attachments Can Drive 
Good Leaders to Make Bad Decisions,” Organizational Dynamics, 
Vol. 38 (2009), pp. 83–92.
96. D. Gilbert, Stumbling on Happiness (New York: Vintage, 2007).
97. D. D. Wheeler and I. L. Janis, A Practical Guide for Making Decisions
(New York: Free Press, 1980), pp. 34–35; and I. L. Janis and L. Mann, 
Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict, Choice, and Com-
mitment (New York: The Free Press, 1977).
98. R. Beck, “The Difference a Year Made in Mortgage Mess,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, December 26, 2007, p. D2. See also S. Lohr, “Wall 
Street’s Math Wizards Forgot a Few Variables,” The New York Times, 
September 13, 2009, business section, p. 3; D. Leonhardt, “If Fed 
Missed Bubble, How Will It See the Next One?” The New York Times, 
January 6, 2010, pp. A1, A4; and J. Pressley, “They Did the Math—and 
Lost Billions,” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 1, 2010, p. 70.
99. Decision Research study, reported in J. Zweig, “This Is Your Brain on 
a Hot Streak,” The Wall Street Journal, February 11, 2012, pp. B1, B2.
100. S. S. Iyengar and M. Lepper, “When Choice Is Demotivating: Can 
One Desire Too Much of a Good Thing?” Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, Vol. 79 (2000), pp. 995–1006. Sheena Iyengar is author 
of The Art of Choosing (New York: Hachette Book Group, 2010).
101. P. Steel, “The Nature of Procrastination: A Meta-Analytic and The-
oretical Review of Quintessential Self-Regulatory Failure,” Psychological 
Bulletin, Vol. 133 (2007), pp. 65–94.
102. “Don’t Mention It: How ‘Undiscussables’ Can Undermine an Organi-
zation,” Knowledge@Wharton, December 20, 2011, http://knowledge.
wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=2921 (accessed June 14, 2014).
103. Gurnek Bains, CEO of YSC, London, quoted in C. Hymowitz, “Best 
Way to Save: Analyze Why Talent Is Going Out the Door,” The Wall Street 
Journal, September 24, 2007, p. B1.
104. A. Mani, S. Mullainathan, E.Shafir, and J. Zhao, “Poverty Impedes 
Cognitive Function,” Science, August 30, 2013, pp. 976–980. See also 
Sendhil Mullainathan, interviewed by D. Matthews, “Being Poor Changes 
Your Thinking about Everything,” The Washington Post, September 13, 
2013, www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/09/13/
being-poor-changes-your-thinking-about-everything (accessed June 9, 
2014). S. Mullainathan and E. Shafir are authors of Scarcity: Why Having 
Too Little Means So Much (New York: Times Books, 2013).
105. Eldar Shafir, quoted in “The Befuddling Effect of Poverty,” The 
Week, September 20, 2013, p. 19.
106. Wheeler and Janis, A Practical Guide for Making Decisions.
107. J. Wooden, quoted in M. D. White, “The Reinvention Imperative,” 
Harvard Business Review, November 2013, p. 42.
108. T. D. O’Connor Jr., quoted in K. Rosman, “In Digital Era, Paper 
Makers Manage to Fight, Not Fold,” The Wall Street Journal, March 8–9, 
2014, pp. A1, A10.
109. Rosman, “In Digital Era, Paper Makers Manage to Fight, Not Fold.”
110. D. Kahnemann and A. Tversky, “Judgment under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics and Biases,” Science, Vol. 185 (1974), pp. 1124–1131; A. 
Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Fre-
quency and Probability,” Cognitive Psychology, Vol. 5 (1975), pp. 207–
232; A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “The Belief in the Law of Numbers,” 
Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 76 (1971), pp. 105–110; C. R. Schwenk, 
“Cognitive Simplification Processes in Strategic Decision Making,” Stra-
tegic Management Journal, Vol. 5 (1984), pp. 111–128; K. McKean, 
“Decisions,” Discover, June 1985, pp. 22–31; J. Rockner, “The Escala-
tion of Commitment to a Failing Course of Action: Toward Theoretical 
Progress,” Academy of Management Review, Vol. 17 (1980), pp. 39–61; 
D. R. Bobocel and J. P. Meyer, “Escalating Commitment to a Failing 
79. S. Cacciola, “Eyes on Stats, Players Hire Help to Crunch Them,” The 
New York Times, May 28, 2014, pp. A1, A3. See also J. L. Hoover, “Justin 
Z Carving a Niche as a Basketball Guru,” The Network Journal, May 25, 
2011, http://www.tnj.com/entrepreneurs/justin-z-carving-niche-
basketball-guru (accessed June 14, 2014).
80. M. Lewis, Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game (New York: 
W.W. Norton, 2004). For comment on the Oakland A’s and Moneyball, see 
J. Manuel, “Majoring in Moneyball,” Baseball America Features, December 
23, 2003, www.baseballamerica.com/today/features/031223college
moneyball.html; J. Zasky, “Pay for Performance, Stupid,” Failure Maga-
zine, June 2003, http://failuremag.com/archives_business_sports_
money-ball.html; R. Van Zandt, “Billy Beane’s Perfect Draft: A Baseball 
Revolution?” BaseballEvolution.com, April 13, 2006, http://baseballevolution.
com/guest/richard/rvzbeanel.html; and “Moneyball: The Art of Winning 
an Unfair Game,” Wikipedia, July 12, 2006, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Moneyball (all accessed June 14, 2014). For more on the use of technol-
ogy and software in baseball, see A. Schwarz, “Digital Eyes Will Chart 
Baseball’s Unseen Skills,” The New York Times, July 10, 2009, pp. A1, 
A3; and R. Sandomir, “Bloomberg Technology Embraces Baseball,” The 
New York Times, December 6, 2009, Sports section, pp. 1, 6; J. Swartz, 
“Batting Cleanup for Giants: Technology,” USA Today, April 1, 2013, p. 3B; 
M. Futterman, “Deee-fense: Baseball’s Big Shift,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 2, 2014, pp. D1, D2; J. Shea, “Second to None,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, April 23, 2014, pp. N2, N6; P. White, “Batters Getting 
Battered,” USA Today, May 13, 2014, pp. 1C, 4C; and S. Kroner, “A Shift 
in Thinking,” San Francisco Chronicle, May 31, 2014, pp. B1, B8. For a 
discussion of the analytics of the Super Bowl–winning NFL team the 
New England Patriots, see C. Price, The Blueprint: How the New England 
Patriots Beat the System to Create the Last Great NFL Superpower (New 
York: Thomas Dunne/St. Martin’s Press, 2007).
81. Daryl Morley, quoted in M. Lewis, “The No-Stats All-Star,” The New 
York Times Magazine, February 15, 2009, pp. 26–33, 56, 63–64.
82. M. Veverka, “SAP Puts High-Tech into 49ers’ Playbook,” USA Today, 
April 30, 2013, pp. 1B, 2B.
83. Davenport, “Competing on Analytics.”
84. S. Elliott, “Delivering Something Extra,” The New York Times, 
September 29, 2009, p. B3.
85. H. Weinzierl, “New Digital Universe Study Reveals Big Data Gap: 
Less Than 1% of World’s Data Is Analyzed, Less Than 20% Is Protected,” 
EMC Newsroom, December 11, 2012, www.emc.com/about/news/
press/2012/20121211-01.htm (accessed June 14, 2014).
86. A. Brust, “Big Data: Defining Its Definition,” ZDNet, March 1, 2012, 
www.zdnet.com/blog/big-data/big-data-defining-its-definition/109 (ac-
cessed June 14, 2014).
87. S. Lohr, “Amid the Flood, a Catchphrase Is Born,” The New York 
Times, August 12, 2012, p. BU-3.
88. McKinsey Global Institute report, May 2011, quoted in J. Temple, 
“Big Data Can Lead to Big Breakthroughs in Research,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, December 9, 2011, www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/
c/a/2011/12/08/BUDC1M9I8A.DTL (accessed June 14, 2014). See also 
T. H. Davenport, “Keep Up with the Quants,” Harvard Business Review, 
July–August 2013, pp. 120–123; B. Roberts, “The Benefits of Big Data,” 
HR Magazine, October 2013, pp. 21–30; and G. Dutton, “What’s the Big 
Deal about Big Data?” Training, March/April 2014, pp. 16–19.
89. T. H. Davenport, “Analytics 3.0,” Harvard Business Review, December 
2013, pp. 65–72.
90. J. Markoff, “Government Aims to Build a ‘Data Eye in the Sky,’” The 
New York Times, October 10, 2011, www.nytimes.com/2011/10/11/
science/11predict.html?_r=1&pagewanted=all (accessed June 14, 
2014). See also A. Vance, “Data Analytics: Crunching the Future,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, September 8, 2011, www.businessweek.
com/magazine/data-analytics-crunching-the-future-09082011.html 
(accessed June 14, 2014); and Q. Hardy, “Bigger Patterns in Big Data,” 
The New York Times, February 20, 2012, p. B4.
91. Temple, “Big Data Can Lead to Big Breakthroughs in Research.”
92. The discussion of styles was based on material contained in A. J. 
Rowe and R. O. Mason, Managing with Style: A Guide to Understanding, 
Assessing and Improving Decision Making (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
1987), pp. 1–17.
93. A. M. Carton and A. S. Rosette, “Explaining Bias against Black Lead-
ers: Integrating Theory on Information Processing and Goal-Based 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN20
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, July 1996, 
pp. 1–15.
127. P. L. McLeod, R. S. Baron, M. W. Marti, and K. Yoon, “The Eyes Have 
It: Minority Influence in Face-to-Face and Computer-Mediated Group Dis-
cussions,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 82 (1997), pp. 706–718.
128. Results can be found in C. K. W. De Dreu and M. A. West, “Minority 
Dissent and Team Innovation: The Importance of Participation in Decision 
Making,” Journal of Applied Psychology, December 2001, pp. 1191–1201.
129. G. M. Parker, Team Players and Teamwork: The New Competitive 
Business Strategy (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1990).
130. These recommendations were obtained from Parker, Team Play-
ers and Teamwork.
131. A. F. Osborn, Applied Imagination: Principles and Procedures of 
Creative Thinking, 3rd ed. (New York: Scribner’s, 1979). For an example 
of how brainstorming works, see P. Croce, “Think Brighter,” FSB, January 
2006, p. 35.
132. M. Oppezzo and D. L. Schwartz, “Give Your Ideas Some Legs: The 
Positive Effect of Walking on Creative Thinking,” Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, April 21, 2014, advance online 
publication, http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0036577 (accessed June 12, 2014).
133. W. H. Cooper, R. Brent Gallupe, S. Pallard, and J. Cadsby, “Some 
Liberating Effects of Anonymous Electronic Brainstorming,” Small Group 
Research, April 1998, pp. 147–178.
134. See K. Eaton, “Finding the Right App to Unblock Those Creative 
Juices,” The New York Times, February 27, 2014, p. B9.
135. For more on brainstorming and sparking creativity, see also Kon 
Leong, inverviewed by A. Bryant, “The First Rule of Brainstorming: Sus-
pend Disbelief,” The New York Times, January 20, 2013, p. BU-2; “How 
Seemingly Irrelevant Ideas Lead to Breakthrough Innovation,” Knowledge@
Wharton, January 30, 2013, https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/
article/how-seemingly-irrelevant-ideas-lead-to-breakthrough-innovation 
(accessed June 12, 2014); S. Shellenbarger, “Tactics to Spark Creativity,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 3, 2013, pp. D1, D2; A. Gopnik, “For 
Innovation, Dodge the Prefrontal Police,” The Wall Street Journal, April 
6–7, 2013, p. C4; G. Lindsay, “Engineering Serendipity,” The New York 
Times, April 7, 2013, p. SR-12; “How to Come Up with a Great Idea,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2013, pp. R1, R2; D. Boyd and J. 
Goldenberg, “Think Inside the Box,” The Wall Street Journal, June 
15–16, 2013, pp. C1, C2; T. Parker-Pope, “Do Brain Workouts Work? 
Science Isn’t Sure,” The New York Times, March 11, 2014, p. D2; and 
S. Lewis, The Rise: Creativity, the Gift of Failure, and the Search for 
Mastery (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2014).
136. See N. C. Dalkey, D. L. Rourke, R. Lewis, and D. Snyder, Studies in 
the Quality of Life: Delphi and Decision Making (Lexington, MA: Lexing-
ton Books, 1972). An application of the Delphi technique can be found in 
T. Grisham, “The Delphi Technique: A Method for Testing Complex and 
Multifaceted Topics,” International Journal of Managing Projects in 
Business, Vol. 2, No. 1 (2009), pp. 112–130.
137. B. K. Williams and S. C. Sawyer, Using Information Technology: A 
Practical Introduction to Computers & Communications, 11th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2015), pp. 435–436.
138. David Dorfman, quoted in H. Lancaster, “How Life Lessons Have 
Helped a Successful Manager,” San Francisco Sunday Examiner & 
Chronicle, August 15, 1999, p. CL-33; reprinted from The Wall Street 
Journal.
139. J. S. Hammond, R. L. Keeney, and H. Raiffa, Smart Choices: A 
Practical Guide to Making Better Decisions (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 1999).
140. O. Pollar, “Six Steps for Making Tough Choices,” San Francisco 
Examiner & Chronicle, April 4, 1999, p. J-3.
141. Lorien Pratt and Mark Zangari, reported in “Making Good Deci-
sions,” The Straits Times, August 6, 2009, p. C26.
CHAPTER 8
1. J. Welch and S. Welch, “Dear Graduate. . . ,” BusinessWeek, June 19, 
2006, p. 100.
2. E. Holton, S. Naquin, and E. Holton, So You’re New Again: How to 
Succeed When You Change Jobs (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Pub-
lishers, 2001); M. Watkins, The First 90 Days: Critical Success Strate-
gies for New Leaders at All Levels (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Course of Action: Separating the Roles of Choice and Justification,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, June 1994, pp. 360–363; B. M. Shaw, 
“The Escalation of Commitment to a Course of Action,” Academy of 
Management Review, October 1981, pp. 577–587; M. Useem and J. 
Useem, “Great Escapes,” Fortune, June 27, 2005, pp. 97–102; K. 
Sengupta, T. Abdel-Hamid, and L. Van Wassenhove, “The Experience 
Trap,” Harvard Business Review, February 2008, pp. 94–101; M. Heilman 
and T. Okimoto, “Motherhood: A Potential Source of Bias in Employment 
Decisions,” Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2008, pp. 189–198; 
and R. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organizational Behavior, 10th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012), pp. 337–338.
111. “One Winner in $260 Million Powerball Jackpot,” Chicago Tribune, 
June 12, 2014, http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2014-06-12/news/
chi-powerball-jackpot-20140611_1_powerball-jackpot-winning-
ticket-largest-lottery-jackpot (accessed June 12, 2014).
112. D. Kahneman, “The Surety of Fools,” The New York Times Maga-
zine, October 19, 2011, pp. 30–33, 62.
113. S. Li, Y. Sun, and Y. Wang, “50% Off or Buy One, Get One Free? 
Frame Preference as a Function of Consumable Nature in Dairy Prod-
ucts,” Journal of Social Psychology, Vol. 147 (2007), pp. 413–421.
114. R. H. Thaler, “Paying a Price for the Thrill of the Hunt,” The New 
York Times, November 15, 2009, Business section, p. 5.
115. P. Slovic, “The Construction of a Preference,” American Psycholo-
gist, Vol. 50 (1995), pp. 364–371; K. J. Dunegan, “Framing, Cognitive 
Roles, and Image Theory: Toward an Understanding of a Glass Half Full,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 78 (1993), pp. 491–503; and K. F. E. 
Wong, M. Yik, and J. Y. Y. Kwong, “Understanding the Emotional Aspects 
of Escalation of Commitment: The Role of Negative Affect,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, March 2006, pp. 282–297.
116. G. W. Hill, “Group versus Individual Performance: Are n + 1 Heads 
Better Than 1?” Psychological Bulletin, May 1982, pp. 517–539. Also 
see W. T. H. Koh, “Heterogeneous Expertise and Collective Decision-
Making,” Social Choice and Welfare, April 2008, pp. 457–473.
117. N. F. R. Maier, “Assets and Liabilities in Group Problem Solving: 
The Need for Integrative Function,” Psychological Review, Vol. 74 
(1967), pp. 239–249.
118. Ibid.
119. For more about groupthink, see R. J. Shiller, “Challenging the 
Crowd in Whispers, Not Shouts,” The New York Times, November 2, 
2008, Business section, p. 5; J. Zweig, “How Group Decisions End Up 
Wrong-Footed,” The Wall Street Journal, April 25–26, 2009, p. B1; S. 
Cain, “The Rise of the New Groupthink,” The New York Times, January 
15, 2012, pp. WR1, WR6; and J. Lehrer, “Groupthink,” The New Yorker, 
January 30, 2012, pp. 22–27.
120. Methods for increasing group consensus were investigated by R. 
L. Priem, D. A. Harrison, and N. K. Muir, “Structured Conflict and Consensus 
Outcomes in Group Decision Making,” Journal of Management, December 
22, 1995, pp. 691–710.
121. See D. L. Gladstein and N. P. Reilly, “Group Decision Making under 
Threat: The Tycoon Game,” Academy of Management Journal, September 
1985, pp. 613–627.
122. These conclusions were based on the following studies: J. H. 
Davis, “Some Compelling Intuitions about Group Consensus Decisions, 
Theoretical and Empirical Research, and Interpersonal Aggregation Phe-
nomena: Selected Examples, 1950–1990,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, June 1992, pp. 3–38; and J. A. Sniezek, 
“Groups under Uncertainty: An Examination of Confidence in Group De-
cision Making,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses, June 1992, pp. 124–155.
123. M. W. Blenko, M. C. Mankins, and P. Rogers, “The Decision-Driven 
Organization,” Harvard Business Review, June 2010, pp. 55–62.
124. T. Rogers, “How to Design Small Decision Groups,” Amazing Ap-
plications of Probability and Statistics, www.intuitor.com/statistics/
SmallGroups.html (accessed June 12, 2014).
125. Supporting results can be found in J. R. Hollenbeck, D. R. Ilgen, D. J. 
Sego, J. Hedlund, D. A. Major, and J. Phillips, “Multilevel Theory of Team 
Decision Making: Decision Performance in Teams Incorporating Distrib-
uted Expertise,” Journal of Applied Psychology, April 1995, pp. 292–316.
126. See D. H. Gruenfeld, E. A. Mannix, K. Y. Williams, and M. A. 
Neale, “Group Composition and Decision Making: How Member Fa-
miliarity and Information Distribution Affect Process and Performance,” 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN21
20. T. Lee, “Google Redoes Rules to Keep Its ‘Googliness,’” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, June 21, 2014, pp. A1, A8. See also K. Auletta, Googled: 
The End of the World as We Know It (New York: Penguin Press, 2009).
21. D. Welch, D. Kiley, and M. Ihlwan, “My Way or the Highway at Hyundai,” 
BusinessWeek, March 17, 2008, pp. 48–51.
22. A Lucchetti and M. Langley, “Amid Turmoil, a Shake-up at Citi: 
Perform-or-Die Cultures Leaves Thin Talent Pool for Top Wall Street 
Jobs,” The Wall Street Journal, November 5, 2007, pp. A1, A16.
23. R. Foroohar, “GM CEO Pledges ‘New Industry Standard for Safety,’” 
Time, June 5, 2014, http://time.com/2826662/gm-ceo-mary-barra-
safety (accessed June 26, 2014).
24. I. C. Read, “Shape Your Culture, Shape Your Company’s Future,” 
LinkedIn Influencer, April 2, 2014, www.linkedin.com/today/post/
article/20140402135914-322581966-shape-your-culture-shape-your-
company-s-future?trk=mp-reader-card (accessed June 26, 2014).
25. “Pfizer: A Sudden Change at the Helm,” PharmExec.com, Decem-
ber 6, 2010, http://blog.pharmexec.com/2010/12/06/pfizer-a-sudden-
change-at-the-helm; P. Elkind and J. Reingold, with D. Burke, “Inside 
Pfizer’s Palace Coup,” Fortune, July 28, 2011, http://fortune.
com/2011/07/28/inside-pfizers-palace-coup; and L. Timmerman, “The 
Fall of Pfizer: How Big Is Too Big for Pharma Innovation?” Xconomy, 
August 29, 2011, www.xconomy.com/national/2011/08/29/the-fall-of-
pfizer-how-big-is-too-big-for-pharma-innovation (all accessed June 
26, 2014).
26. G. Harris, “Pfizer Pays $2.3 Billion to Settle Marketing Case,” The 
New York Times, September 3, 2009, http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/09/03/business/03health.html?_r=1&scp=1&sq=Pfizer%20
Fraud%20September%202009&st=cse (accessed June 20, 2014).
27. J. Kindler, quoted in R. M. Murphy, “Why Doing Good Is Good for 
Business,” Fortune, February 8, 2010, pp. 90–95.
28. B. Breen, “The Thrill of Defeat,” Fast Company, June 2004, pp. 
76–81. A comprehensive article about companies that cultivate cultures 
that embrace failure and learn from it is J. McGregor, “How Failure 
Breeds Success,” BusinessWeek, July 10, 2006, pp. 42–52.
29. J. McGregor, “The Chore Goes Offshore,” BusinessWeek, March 23 & 
30, 2009, pp. 50–51.
30. E. H. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership, 2nd ed. (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1992).
31. C. Suddath, “Inside the Elephant Room,” Bloomberg Businessweek,
December 16, 2012, pp. 84–85.
32. M. C. Imd, J. S. Harrison, R. E. Hoskisson, and K. J. Imd, “Walking 
the Talk: A Multistakeholder Exploration of Organizational Authenticity, 
Employee Productivity, and Post-Merger Performance,” Academy of 
Management Perspectives, Vol. 28, No. 1 (2014), pp. 38–56.
33. P. Babcock, “Is Your Company Two-Faced?” HR Magazine, January 
2004, p. 43.
34. Anastasia Kelly, former chief lawyer for AIG, quoted in interview with 
C. Loomis, “Inside the Crisis at AIG,” Fortune, March 1, 2010, pp. 47–54.
35. Nick Friedman, quoted in B. Haislip, “When Entrepreneurs Realize 
‘Anything Goes’ Has to Go,” The Wall Street Journal, June 12, 2014, p. R4.
36. T. E. Deal and A. A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures: The Rites and Ritu-
als of Corporate Life (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982), p. 22. See 
also T. E. Deal and A.A. Kennedy, The New Corporate Cultures: Revital-
izing the Workplace After Downsizing, Mergers, and Reengineering
(Cambridge, MA: Perseus, 2000).
37. L. Collins, “House Perfect,” The New Yorker, October 3, 2011, pp. 
54–65.
38. M. Moskowitz and R. Levering, “The 100 Best Companies to Work 
For,” Fortune, February 3, 2014, pp. 108–120.
39. Marc Benioff, interviewed by C. Rose, “Charlie Rose Talks to Marc 
Benioff,” Bloomberg Businessweek, December 5–December 11, 2011, p. 52. 
See also D. A. Kaplan, “Salesforce’s Happy Workforce,” Fortune, January 
19, 2012, http://fortune.com/2012/01/19/salesforces-happy-workforce; 
and A. Greenberg, “Salesforce.com Offers 5 Keys to Engagement,” Bene-
fitsPro.com, April 10, 2014, www.benefitspro.com/2014/04/10/salesforce-
com-offers-5-keys-to-engagement (both accessed June 20, 2014).
40. J. Garofoli, “Jobs Program Gets $6 Million,” San Francisco Chroni-
cle, June 25, 2014, pp. C1, C3.
41. Ingvar Kamprad, quoted in Collins, “House Perfect,” p. 60.
42. S. Bailey, “Benefits on Tap,” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 21–
March 27, 2011, pp. 96–97.
Press, 2003); J. S. Lublin, “How to Win Support from Colleagues at Your 
New Job,” The Wall Street Journal, November 25, 2003, p. B1; J. Burke, 
“Dip, Before Diving, into That New Job,” BusinessWeek Online, June 28, 
2004, www.businessweek.com/bschools/content/jun2004/bs20040628_
9967_bs001.htm (accessed June 17, 2014); L. Wolgemuth, “Breaking 
Out of the First-Job Trap,” U.S. News & World Report, March 24/March 
31, 2008, pp. 56, 58; and L. Buhl, “7 Deadly Sins for New Hires,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, April 4, 2010, p. E14.
3. M. Sunnafrank and A. Ramirez Jr., “At First Sight: Persistent Rela-
tional Effects of Get-Acquainted Conversations,” Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, June 1, 2004, pp. 361–379. See also J. Zaslow, 
“First Impressions Get Faster,” The Wall Street Journal, February 16, 
2006, p. D4.
4. Roger Ailes, CEO of Fox News, in “Your First Seven Seconds,” Fast 
Company, June–July 1998, p. 184.
5. J. Denrell, “Why Most People Disapprove of Me: Experience Sam-
pling in Impression Formation,” Psychological Review, October 2005, 
pp. 951–978. See also M. Krakovsky, “Researcher Disputes Notion You 
Have Only One Chance to Make a Good Impression,” Stanford Report,
August 18, 2004, http://news-service.stanford.edu/news/2004/au-
gust18/impressions-818.html (accessed June 17, 2014).
6. Thom Singer, quoted in A. Bruzzese, “You Must Keep Networking 
Even after You Get in the Door,” Reno Gazette-Journal, February 25, 
2010, p. 5A.
7. K. Madden, “Start New Job on the Right Foot,” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
March 18, 2012, p. 1-J.
8. L. P. Frankel, in “Your First Impression,” Fast Company, June–July 
1998, p. 188.
9. Survey by employment website Glassdoor, reported in L. Hill, “Only 
BFFs Need Apply,” Bloomberg Businessweek, January 7–13, 2013, pp. 
63–65.
10. See L. Hill, “Job Applicants’ Cultural Fit Can Trump Qualifications,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 3, 2013, www.businessweek.com/
articles/2013-01-03/job-applicants-cultural-fit-can-trump-qualifica-
tions (accessed June 20, 2014).
11. A. L. Kristof-Brown, R. D. Zimmerman, and E. C. Johnson, “Con-
sequences of Individuals’ Fit at Work: A Meta-Analysis of Person-
Job, Person-Organization, Person-Group, and Person-Supervisor 
Fit,” Personnel Psychology, Summer 2005, pp. 281–342. See also J. 
P Meyer, T. D. Hecht, H. Gill, and L. Toplonytsky, “Person-Organization 
(Culture) Fit and Employee Commitment under Conditions of Change: 
A Longitudinal Study,” Journal of Vocational Behavior, June 2010, 
pp. 458–473.
12. See L. Rivera, “Hiring as Cultural Matching: The Case of Elite Pro-
fessional Service Firms,” American Sociological Review, December 
2012, pp. 999–1022.
13. E. H. Schein, “Culture: The Missing Concept in Organization Stud-
ies,” Administrative Science Quarterly, June 1996, p. 236.
14. E. H. Schein, “The Role of the Founder in Creating Organizational 
Culture,” Organizational Dynamics, Summer 1983, pp. 13–28; E. H. 
Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1985); and E. H. Schein, “Organizational Culture,” American Psy-
chologist, Vol. 45 (1990), pp. 109–119.
15. T. L. Friedman, “Just Doing It,” The New York Times, April 18, 2010, 
Week in Review section, p. 10.
16. K. K. Reardon, The Secret Handshake: Mastering the Politics of the 
Business Inner Circle (New York: Doubleday, 2002) and It’s All Politics: 
Winning in a World Where Hard Work and Talent Aren’t Enough (New 
York: Currency/Random House, 2005).
17. K. K. Reardon, interviewed by J. Vishnevsky, “Ask the Expert: Kath-
leen Kelley Reardon,” U.S. News & World Report, July 25, 2005, p. EE10. 
See also C. Bush, “Learn How to Work with Others,” Arizona Republic, 
August 21, 2005, p. EC1.
18. A thorough description of the competing values framework is pro-
vided in K. S. Cameron, R. E. Quinn, J. Degraff, and A. V. Thakor, Creating 
Values Leadership (Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2006); and K. S. 
Cameron and R. E. Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing Organizational Cul-
ture (New York: Addison-Wesley, 1999).
19. J. M. O’Brien, “Zappos Knows How to Kick It,” Fortune, February 2, 
2009, pp. 55–60; and C. Palmeri, “Now for Sale, the Zappos Culture,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 11, 2010, p. 57.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN22
65. T. A. Stewart, “CEOs See Clout Shifting,” Fortune, November 6, 
1989, p. 66.
66. O. Pollar, “Don’t Overlook the Importance of Delegating,” San 
Francisco Examiner, August 8, 1999, p. J-3.
67. S. Stecklow, “Management 101,” The Wall Street Journal, Decem-
ber 9, 1994, p. B1.
68. Pollar, “Don’t Overlook the Importance of Delegating.”
69. C. M. Avery, M. A. Walker, and E. O’Toole, Teamwork Is an Indi-
vidual Skill: Getting Your Work Done When Sharing Responsibility (San 
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2001); S. Gazda, “The Art of Delegat-
ing: Effective Delegation Enhances Employee Morale, Manager 
Productivity, and Organizational Success,” HR Magazine, January 
2002, pp. 75–79; R. Burns, Making Delegation Happen: A Simple 
and Effective Guide to Implementing Successful Delegation (St. 
Leonards, Australia: Allen & Unwin, 2002); D. M. Genett, If You Want 
It Done Right, You Don’t Have to Do It Yourself! The Power of Effec-
tive Delegation (Sanger, CA: Quill Driver Books, 2003); R. Charan, 
“People Acumen,” Fast Company, December 2007, www.fastcompany.
com/articles/2007/12/ram-charan-acumen.html (accessed June 
22, 2014).
70. E. Raudsepp, “Why Supervisors Don’t Delegate,” Supervision, May 
1979, pp. 12–15; D. Anderson, “Supervisors and the Hesitate to Dele-
gate Syndrome,” Supervision, November 1992, pp. 9–11; Pollar, “Don’t 
Overlook the Importance of Delegating”; Avery et al., Teamwork Is an 
Individual Skill; Burns, Making Delegation Happen; and Genett, If You 
Want It Done Right, You Don’t Have to Do It Yourself!
71. C. C. Miller, “Google’s Chief Works to Trim a Bloated Ship,” The New 
York Times, November 10, 2011, pp. A1, A3. See also Lee, “Google Re-
does Rules to Keep Its ‘Googliness.’”
72. This section was adapted from R. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organizational 
Behavior, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2013), pp. 503–508.
73. “About Whole Foods Market,” company website, www.wholefoods-
market.com/company (accessed June 20, 2014).
74. “The World’s Most Admired Companies,” Fortune, March 17, 2014, 
pp. 123–130.
75. M. Moskowitz and R. Levering, “The 100 Best Companies to Work 
For,” Fortune, February 3, 2014, pp. 108–120.
76. C. Fishman, “Whole Foods Is All Teams,” Fast Company, Greatest 
Hits, Vol. 1 (1997), pp. 103–113. See also C. Fishman, “The Whole Foods 
Recipe for Teamwork,” FastCompany.com, December 18, 2007, www.
fastcompany.com/magazine/02/team2.html (accessed June 20, 2014); 
and G. Colvin, “Whole Foods’ Other CEO on Organic Growth,” Fortune, 
May 20, 2013, pp. 128–132.
77. G. Hamel, “Break Free,” Fortune, September 19, 2007, http://
money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2007/10/01/
100352608/index.htm (accessed June 20, 2014).
78. A. Gasparro, “Natural Grocers Lose Vigor,” The Wall Street Journal, 
April 10, 2014, pp. B1, B2; and B. Kowitt, “Whole Foods Takes Over 
America,” Fortune, April 28, 2014, pp. 70–77.
79. Adapted from “Boundaryless,” Encyclopedia of Small Business, ed. 
K. Hillstrom and L. C. Hillstrom (Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson Gale, 
2002; and Seattle, WA: eNotes.com, 2006), http://business.enotes.com/
small-business-encyclopedia/boundaryless (accessed June 20, 2014). 
Regarding the impact of web services on organizational boundaries, see 
R. D. Hof, “Web 2.0: The New Guy at Work,” BusinessWeek, June 19, 
2006, pp. 58–59.
80. N. Anand and R. L. Daft, “What Is the Right Organization Design?” 
Organizational Dynamics 36 (2007), pp. 329–344.
81. S. Siekman, “The Snap-Together Business Jet,” Fortune, January 
21, 2002, http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_
archive/2002/01/21/316585/index.htm (accessed June 20, 2014); and 
Anand and Daft, “What Is the Right Organization Design?” p. 336.
82. M. J. Mandel and R. D. Hof, “Rethinking the Internet,” Business-
Week, March 26, 2001, p. 118.
83. Adapted from “Virtual Organization,” Whatis.com, http://whatis.
techtarget.com/definition/0,,sid9_gci213301,00.html (accessed June 
20, 2014).
84. Anand and Daft, “What Is the Right Organizational Design?” p. 332.
85. See “Successfully Transitioning to a Virtual Organization,” SHRM 
Research Quarterly, First Quarter 2010, pp. 1–9.
86. M. Sappington, “When to Go Unvirtual,” Inc., April 2010, p. 73.
43. Results can be found in C. Hartnell, Y. Ou, and A. Kinicki, “Organiza-
tional Culture and Organizational Effectiveness: A Meta-Analytic Investi-
gation of the Competing Values Framework’s Theoretical Suppositions,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, July 2011, pp. 677–694.
44. The mechanisms are based on material contained in E. H. Schein, 
“The Role of the Founder in Creating Organizational Culture,” Organiza-
tional Dynamics, Summer 1983, pp. 13–28.
45. Jess Lee, interviewed by A. Bryant, “In a Corporate Culture, It’s a 
Gift to Be Simple,” The New York Times, November 22, 2013, p. B2.
46. Walmart’s values are stated on its corporate website, “About Wal-
Mart,” www.walmart.com/catalog/cata-log.gsp?cat=131473#null (ac-
cessed June 20, 2014)
47. David Cote, interviewed by A. Bryant, “Decisiveness Is a Double-
Edged Sword,” The New York Times, November 3, 2013, p. BU-2.
48. R. E. Silverman, “Bringing Happy Hour to the Office,” The Wall 
Street Journal, June 26, 2013, p. B8.
49. D. G. McNeil Jr., “Ally for the Poor in an Unlikely Corner,” The New 
York Times, February 9, 2010, pp. D1, D6. See also Access to Medicine 
Index 2012, Access to Medicine Foundation, November 2012, Haarlem, 
The Netherlands, http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/documents/
s19987en/s19987en.pdf (accessed June 21, 2014).
50. L. Feisher, “Booker Faces Storm, Critics,” The Wall Street Journal, 
December 30, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB100014240
52970203525404576050242601770616 (accessed June 26, 2014).
51. D. Moss, “Triage: Methodically Developing Its Employees,” HRMa-
gazine, July 2007, p 45.
52. J. S. Lublin, “This CEO Used to Have an Office,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 13, 2013, pp. B1, B8.
53. “Cost-Efficient, Open-Space Office Designs: Ditching Desks—and 
Privacy,” Knowledge@Wharton, June 19, 2013, https://knowledge.
wharton.upenn.edu/article/cost-efficient-open-space-office-designs-
ditching-desks-and-privacy (accessed June 20, 2014).
54. Moss, “Triage: Methodically Developing Its Employees.”
55. Rebecca Ratner, quoted in J. Larrere, “Develop Great Leaders,” 
Leadership Excellence, April 2010, p. 12.
56. Adam Nash, interviewed by A. Bryant, “Teaching All Employees to 
Keep Score,” The New York Times, June 13, 2014, p. B2.
57. D. MacMillan, “Survivor: CEO Edition,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
March 1, 2010, pp. 33–38.
58. C. I. Barnard, The Functions of the Executive (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1938), p. 73.
59. P. M. Blau and W. R. Scott, Formal Organizations (San Francisco: 
Chandler, 1962).
60. See B. Kellerman, “What Every Leader Needs to Know about Fol-
lowers,” Harvard Business Review, December 2007, pp. 84–91; M. 
Gottfredson, S. Schaubert, and H. Saenz, “The New Leader’s Guide to 
Diagnosing the Business,” Harvard Business Review, February 2008, 
pp. 63–73; “Timeless Leadership: A Conversation with David 
McCullough,” Harvard Business Review, March 2008, pp. 45–49; S. D. 
Friedman, “Be a Better Leader, Have a Richer Life,” Harvard Business 
Review, April 2008, pp. 112–118; and B. Reeves, T. W. Malone, and T. 
O’Driscoll, “Leadership’s Online Labs,” Harvard Business Review, May 
2008, pp. 58–66.
61. E. H. Schein, Organizational Psychology, 3rd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1980).
62. See J. P. Friesen, A. C. Kay, R. P. Eibach, and A. D. Galinsky, “Seeking 
Structure in Social Organization: Compensatory Control and the Psycho-
logical Advantages of Hierarchy,” Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, Vol. 106 (2014), pp. 590–609. This work on hierarchies existing 
within flat organizations is also described in M. Hutson, “Espousing 
Equality, but Embracing a Hierarchy,” The New York Times, June 22, 
2014, p. BU-3.
63. For an overview of the span of control concept, see D. D. Van Fleet 
and A. G. Bedeian, “A History of the Span of Management,” Academy of 
Management Review, July 1977, pp. 356–372.
64. Research by V. Smeets and F. Warzynski, “Too Many Theories, Too 
Few Facts? What the Data Tell Us about the Link between Span of Con-
trol, Compensation, and Career Dynamics,” Labour Economics, Special 
Issue on Firms and Employees, Vol. 15 (2008). Reported in G. Anders, 
“Overseeing More Employees—With Fewer Managers,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 24, 2008, p. B6.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN23
16. J. Welch, quoted in N. M. Tichy and S. Herman, Control Your Destiny or 
Someone Else Will: How Jack Welch Is Making General Electric the World’s 
Most Competitive Corporation (New York: Doubleday, 1993), p. 251.
17. L. Weber and R. Feintzeig, “Is It a Dream or a Drag? Companies 
without HR,” The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2014, pp. B1, B7.
18. See J. Slocum, D. Lei, and P. Butler, “Executing Business Strategies 
through Human Resource Management Practices,” Organizational Dy-
namics, April–June 2014, pp. 73–87; and S. Aryee, F. O. Walumbwa, E. 
Y. M. Seidu, and L. E. Otaye, “Impact of High-Performance Work Sys-
tems on Individual- and Branch-Level Performance: Test of a Multilevel 
Model of Intermediate Linkages,” Journal of Applied Psychology, March 
2012, pp. 287–300.
19. P. Capelli and A. Crocker-Hefter, “Distinctive Human Resources Are 
Firms’ Core Competencies,” Organizational Dynamics, Winter 1996, pp. 
7–22. See also R. R. Kehoe and P. M. Wright, “The Impact of High- 
Performance Human Resource Practices on Employees’ Attitudes and 
Behaviors,” Journal of Management, February 2013, pp. 366–391.
20. B. E. Becker, M. A. Huselid, and D. Ulrich, The HR Scorecard: Linking 
People, Strategy, and Performance (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 2001), p. 4.
21. Ibid. See also D. Stamps, “Measuring Minds,” Training, May 2000, 
pp. 76–85; C. A. Bartlett and S. Ghoshal, “Building Competitive 
 Advantage through People,” MIT Sloan Management Review, Winter 
2002, pp. 34–41; G. Gohlander, S. Snell, and A. Sherman, Managing 
Human Resources, 13th ed. (Mason, OH: South-Western Publishing, 
2004); and R. Rodriguez, “Meet the New Learning Executive,” HR Maga-
zine, April 2005, pp. 64–69.
22. S. Meisinger, “Taking the Measure of Human Capital,” HR Maga-
zine, January 2003, p. 10. See also R. J. Grossman, “Blind Investment,” 
HR Magazine, January 2005, pp. 40–47; and Unlocking the DNA of the 
Adaptable Workforce: The Global Human Capital Study 2008, IBM Global 
Services, www.935.ibm.com/services/us/gbs/bus/html/2008ghcs.html 
(accessed June 29, 2014).
23. On the subject of how to manage knowledge workers, see. R. L. 
Martin, “Rethinking the Decision Factory,” Harvard Business Review, 
October 1, 2013, pp. 96–104.
24. Inspired by P. S. Adler and S. Kwon, “Social Capital: Prospects for 
New Concept,” Academy of Management Review, January 2002, 
pp. 17–40. See also R. A. Baaron and G. D. Markman, “Beyond Social 
Capital: How Social Skills Can Enhance Entrepreneurs’ Success,” Acad-
emy of Management Executive, February 2000, pp. 106–116; D. Lidsky, 
“Winning the Relationship Game,” Fast Company, October 2004, 
pp. 113–115; J. Steinberg, “One Heart at a Time,” Fast Company,
 November 2004, p. 49; K. H. Hammonds, “A Lever Long Enough to Move 
the World,” Fast Company, January 2005, pp. 60–63; A. C. Inkpen and 
E. W. K. Tsang, “Social Capital, Networks, and Knowledge Transfer,” Acad-
emy of Management Review, January 2005, pp. 146–165; and L. Prusak 
and D. Cohen, “How to Invest in Social Capital,” BusinessWeek Online,
October 23, 2007, www.businessweek.com/-managing/content/oct2007/
ca20071023_070114.htm?chan=search (accessed July 5, 2014).
25. R. Levering and M. Moskowitz, “The 100 Best Companies to Work 
For,” Fortune, January 12, 2004, p. 68.
26. R. J. Mirabile, “The Power of Job Analysis,” Training, April 1990, 
pp. 70–74; and S. F. Mona, “The Job Description,” Association Manage-
ment, February 1991, pp. 33–37. See also C. Lagorio-Chafkin, “How to 
Write a Job Description,” Inc., April 1, 2010, www.inc.com/guides/2010/04/
writing-job-description.html; and L. Weber, “Help Wanted—on Writing 
Job Descriptions,” The Wall Street Journal, October 2, 2013, http:// 
online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB100014240527023036433045791077
93132873508 (both accessed June 29, 2014).
27. J. Welch and S. Welch, “Hiring Wrong—and Right,” BusinessWeek,
January 29, 2007, p. 102.
28. Dave Lefkow, CEO of TalentSpark, quoted in C. Winkler, “Quality 
Check,” HR Magazine, May 2007, pp. 93–98.
29. R. Zeidner, “People Promoted to the Top Jobs Measure Up,” HR Maga-
zine, April 2010, p. 20. The article reports on a study by Y. Zhang and N. 
Rajagopalan, “Once an Outsider, Always an Outsider? CEO Origin, Strategic 
Change, and Firm Performance,” Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 31 
(2010), pp. 969–989. See also M. Bidwell, “Paying More to Get Less: The 
Effects of External Hiring versus Internal Mobility,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly, December 27, 2011, http://asq.sagepub.com/content/56/3/369.
87. S. Monson, “Maid to Order,” Seattle Times, April 16, 2006, http://
seattletimes.com/html/businesstechnology/2002932996_hospitality16.
html (accessed June 23, 2014).
88. T. Burns and G. M. Stalker, The Management of Innovation (London: 
Tavistock, 1961). See also W. D. Sine, H. Mitsuhashi, and D. A. Kirsch, 
“Revisiting Burns and Stalker: Formal Structure and New Venture Per-
formance in Emerging Economic Sectors,” Academy of Management 
Journal, February 2006, pp. 121–132.
89. T. J. Peters and R. H. Waterman, In Search of Excellence (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1982).
90. A. Westervelt, “Creative Ways to Live under the Same Roof,” The 
Wall Street Journal, June 12, 2014, p. R4.
91. P. R. Lawrence and J. W. Lorsch, Organization and Environment
(Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1967).
92. A. D. Chandler Jr., Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of 
the Industrial Enterprise (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962).
93. “About IDEO,” company website, www.ideo.com/about (accessed 
June 26, 2014).
CHAPTER 9
1. See K. Tyler, “Generation Gaps,” HR Magazine, January 2008, 
pp. 69–72; and M. C. White, “The Real Reason New College Grads Can’t 
Get Hired,” Time, November 10, 2013, http://business.time.com/
2013/11/10/the-real-reason-new-college-grads-cant-get-hired (accessed 
July 1, 2014).
2. Annie Shanklin Jones of I.B.M., quoted in P. Korkki, “Please, No 
Board Shorts in the Boardroom,” The New York Times, May 24, 2009, 
p. BU-9.
3. A. Bruzzese, “Learn the Customs, Dress Code of Your New Corporate 
Culture,” Reno Gazette-Journal, April 17, 2009, p. 7A.
4. C. Larson, “The Chinese Take Their Etiquette Seriously,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, June 3–June 9, 2013, pp. 15–16.
5. D. Robinson, “Business Meal Manners,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
November 23, 2008, p. H2; D. Robinson, “Manners Matter at Work, Too,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, April 5, 2009, p. D7; J. Thompson, “How to Put 
Success on the Menu,” Reno Gazette-Journal, March 10, 2013, p. 7F; 
and S. Ricker, “Manners Make for Good Business,” Reno Gazette- 
Journal, April 13, 2014, p. 8D.
6. Online survey by Harris Interactive in the United States for Lookout, 
May 8–10, 2012, among 2,097 adults ages 18 and older, reported in 
“Mobile Mindset Study,” www.lookout.com/resources/reports/mobile-
mindset (accessed July 1, 2014).
7. Robert Half survey of 659 human resource managers, reported in 
“Do Breaches in Tech Etiquette Hurt Work Life?” USA Today, February 
19, 2014, p. 1B.
8. Jive/Harris survey of 1,098 employees, reported in “Most Annoying 
Smartphone Behaviors at Work,” USA Today, January 17, 2014, p. 1B.
9. B. Feiler, “Should You Google at Dinner?” The New York Times, Decem-
ber 12, 2010, p. ST-2; A. Bruzzese, “Put Down That Smartphone in Meet-
ings, at Lunch,” Reno Gazette-Journal, March 24, 2011, p. 8A; K. Komando, 
“Mind Your Tech Manners in the New Year Ahead,” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
December 29, 2013, p. 6F; and K. Komando, “Bad Tech Habits and How to 
Stop Them,” Reno Gazette-Journal, June 28, 2014, p. 8A.
10. Annual Social Recruiting Survey, September 5, 2013, by Jobvite, 
Burlingame, CA, http://recruiting.jobvite.com/company/press-
releases/2013/recruiters-increasingly-adopt-marketing-tactics-
2013-jobvite-social-recruiting-survey-shows (accessed July 2, 2014). 
See also B. Evangelisa, “Good Online Manners Key in Job Search,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, September 6, 2013, pp. C1, C4.
11. M. Moskowitz and R. Levering, “The 100 Best Companies to Work 
For,” Fortune, February 3, 2014, pp. 110–120.
12. A. Fisher, “How to Get Hired by a ‘Best’ Company,” Fortune, Febru-
ary 4, 2008, p. 96.
13. A. Lashinsky, “The Perks of Being a Googler,” Fortune, January 8, 
2007, http://money.cnn.com/galeries/2007/fortune/0701/gallery.
Google_perks (accessed June 29, 2014).
14. E. Schmidt, quoted in interview by A. Lashinsky, “Back2Back 
Champs,” Fortune, February 4, 2008, p. 70.
15. “2014 Financial Tables,” Google Investor Relations, http://investor.
google.com/financial/tables.html (accessed June 29, 2014).

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN24
June 16, 2002, sec. 3, p. 4. See also S. Armour, “Security Checks Worry 
Workers,” USA Today, June 19, 2004, p. 1B.
43. J. S. Lublin, “Job Hunters with Gaps in Their Resumes Need to 
Write Around Them,” The Wall Street Journal, May 6, 2003, p. B1.
44. M. Conlin, “Don’t Hedge Your Age,” BusinessWeek, October 6, 
2003, p. 14. See also C. Dahle, “A Nip and Tuck for the Resume,” The 
New York Times, April 17, 2005, sec. 3, p. 10.
45. B. Bergstein, “Ex-Wiki Exec’s Criminal History,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, December 27, 2007, pp. C1, C2.
46. D. Belkin, “More Job Seekers Scramble to Erase Their Criminal 
Past,” The Wall Street Journal, November 11, 2009, pp. A1, A16.
47. See E. Krell, “Unmasking Illegal Workers,” HR Magazine, December 
2007, pp. 49–52; and S. Berfield, “Illegals and Business: A Glimpse of 
the Future?” BusinessWeek, January 14, 2008, pp. 52–54.
48. W. M. Welch, “Employee Screenings See Growth,” USA Today, June 
24, 2009, p. 3A. The adverse effect of E-Verify on agricultural hiring is 
described in N. Leiber, “A Verification System for New Hires Backfires,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, October 24–October 30, 2011, p. 60.
49. L. Radnofsky and M. Jordan, “Illegal Workers Slip by System,” The 
Wall Street Journal, February 25, 2010, p. A6.
50. B. Braccio Hering, “Words to Use, Lose on Résumé,” Reno Gazette-
Journal, June 26, 2011, p. 1F; K. Madden, “Increase Job Search Suc-
cess,” Reno Gazette-Journal, August 14, 2011, p. 1F; D. Auerbach, 
“Error-Free Résumés, Cover Letters a Must,” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
October 23, 2011, p. 1F; and R. E. Silverman, “No More Résumés, Say 
Some Firms,” The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2012, p. B6.
51. L. Weber, “Your Resume vs. Oblivion,” The Wall Street Journal, 
January 24, 2012, pp. B1, B6.
52. L. Weber, “When the Going Gets Tough, Job Hunters Call in the 
Stunt Résumé,” The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2014, pp. A1, A6.
53. References are even a problem in faculty hiring in universities. See 
D. M. Barden, “The Unreliability of References,” The Chronicle of Higher 
Education, January 11, 2008, pp. C1, C4.
54. A. Bruzzese, “Don’t Let References Torpedo Your Job Chances,” 
Reno Gazette-Journal, January 26, 2012, pp. 5A, 6A.
55. A. Martin, “As a Hiring Filter, Credit Checks Draw Questions,” The 
New York Times, April 10, 2010, pp. B1, B4.
56. C. Choi, “Credit Reports: Who’s Looking at Yours, and Why?” Reno 
Gazette-Journal, April 12, 2010, p. 8A.
57. Based on P. Bathurst, “How to Avoid Those Fatal Interview Mis-
takes,” The Arizona Republic, March 9, 2008, p. EC1; “Preparation Key to 
Snaring Job,” The Arizona Republic, April 15, 2009, p. EC1; T. Musbach, 
“Common Interview Surprise: Inappropriate Questions,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, January 3, 2010, p. D1; J. S. Lublin, “The New Job Is in the 
Details,” The Wall Street Journal, January 5, 2010, p. D5; “4 Keys to Inter-
view Success,” The Arizona Republic, April 4, 2010, p. EC1; A. Bruzzese, 
“Market Yourself Like a Product to Get Employers’ Attention,” USA Today, 
December 2, 2011, www.usatoday.com/money/jobcenter/workplace/
bruzzese/story/2011-11-30/learn-to-market-yourself-to-get-job/
51482754/1 (accessed March 15, 2012); and K. Madden, “Proper Prepa-
ration Enhances Job Interviews,” Reno Gazette-Journal, February 25, 
2012, p. 1F. For a discussion of standard interview questions, see survey 
by jobs website Glassdoor.com, reported in “Job Interviews Touch on 
Weak Economy,” The Wall Street Journal, January 3, 2012, p. B7.
58. For some interview preparation tips, see A. Bruzzese, “Tips to Pre-
pare Well for Job Interview via Video,” Reno Gazette-Journal, January 
24, 2013, p. 6A; C. Wang, “Interview Anxiety Is Common,” The Arizona 
Republic, October 19, 2013, www.azcentral.com/business/jobs/
articles/20131014interview-anxiety-common.html (accessed July 5, 
2014); “Interview Pointers for Body Language,” The Arizona Republic, 
October 30, 2013, p. CL1; R. Walker, “How to Explain That Lost Job,” 
The New York Times, November 17, 2013, p. BU-7; D. Auerbach, “Nego-
tiate for a Better Starting Salary,” Reno Gazette-Journal, December 8, 
2013, p. 8F; and E. Bernstein, “What Verbal Tics May Be Saying about 
Us,” The Wall Street Journal, January 21, 2014, p. D3.
59. N. P. Podsakoff, S. W. Whiting, P.M. Podsakoff, and P. Mishra, “Ef-
fects of Organizational Citizenship Behaviors on Selection Decisions in 
Employment Interviews,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 96 (2011), 
pp. 310–326.
60. V. Oliver, “Blew the Job Interview? There’s Still Hope,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, July 11, 2014, p. C2.
abstract (accessed July 5, 2014); “Why External Hires Get Paid More, and 
Perform Worse, Than Internal Staff,” Knowledge@Wharton, March 28, 
2012, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=2961 
(accessed July 5, 2014); and P. Cappelli, M. Hamori, and R. Bonet, “Who’s 
Got Those Top Jobs?” Harvard Business Review, March 2014, pp. 75–79.
30. B. Tedeschi, “Searching for a Job? Try Looking at Your Hand-Held 
First,” The New York Times, May 19, 2011, p. B8; B. Evangelista, “More 
Job Seekers Turning to Online Social Networks,” San Francisco 
 Chronicle, November 17, 2011, p. D5; and R. S. Chauhan, M. Buckley, 
and M. Harvey, “Facebook and Personnel Selection: What’s the Big 
Deal?” Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 42 (2013), pp. 126–134.
31. B. Thorley, “How to Recruit Top Talent Employees through Social 
Networking,” The Kinesis Blog, March 3, 2014, www.kinesisinc.com/
social-media/how-to-recruit-top-talent-employees-through-social-net-
working (accessed July 5, 2014). See also E. Holcomb, “Job Hunting in 
the Age of LinkedIn,” The Wall Street Journal, January 29, 2014, p. A17; 
and K. Eaton, “Remember Want Ads for Jobs? Now You Find Them on a 
Phone,” The New York Times, January 30, 2014, p. B11.
32. Survey conducted by Potential Park Communications, Stockholm, 
reported in J. Walker, “Young Job Seekers Turn to Smartphones,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 7, 2012, p. B9. See also L. Weber, “Job Hunt 
Moves to Mobile Devices,” The Wall Street Journal, April 24, 2013, p. B8.
33. Respondents to the Society for Human Resource Management’s 
2007 E-Recruiting Survey reported that employee referrals generated 
the highest quality of job candidates and best return on investment for 
their organization. See T. Minton-Eversole, “E-Recruitment Comes of Age, 
Survey Says,” HR Magazine, August 2007, p. 34. Also see D. G. Allen and 
R. V. Mahto, “Web-Based Recruitment: Effects of Information, Organiza-
tional Brand, and Attitudes Toward a Web Site on Applicant Attraction,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, November 2007, pp. 1696–1708.
34. Minton-Eversole, “E-Recruitment Comes of Age, Survey Says.” Also 
see D. Kirkpatrick, “Web 2.0 Gets Over Its Goofing-Off Phase,” Fortune,
March 31, 2008, pp. 32–34; J. De Avila, “Beyond Job Boards: Targeting the 
Source,” The Wall Street Journal, July 2, 2009, pp D1, D5; M. Weinstein, 
“Virtual Handshake,” Training, September 2009, pp. 18–22; D. Koeppel, 
“HR by Twitter,” FSB, September 23, 2009, p. 57; J. Greer, “The Art of 
Self-Marketing Online,” U.S. News & World Report, May 2010, p. 30; 
 Tedeschi, “Searching for a Job? Try Looking at Your Hand-Held First”; 
Evangelista, “More Job Seekers Turning to Online Social Networks”; 
Walker, “Young Job Seekers Turn to Smartphones”; and D. Peck, “They’re 
Watching You at Work,” The Atlantic, December 2013, pp. 72–84.
35. P. McCord, “How Netflix Reinvented HR,” Harvard Business Review, 
January–February 2014, pp. 71–76. See also S. M. Gully, J. M. Phillips, W. 
G. Castellano, K. Han, and A. Kim, “A Mediated Moderation Model of 
 Recruiting Socially and Environmentally Responsible Job Applicants,” Per-
sonnel Psychology, Vol. 66, No. 4 (2013), pp. 935–974; A. C. Klotz, S. P. Da 
Motta Veiga, M. R. Buckley, and M. B. Gavin, “ The Role of Trustworthiness 
in Recruitment and Selection: A Review and Guide for Future Research,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 34, No. S1 (2013), pp. S104–
S119; K. Tyler, “New Kids on the Block,” HR Magazine, October 2013, 
pp. 35–40; and R. J. Thomas, “Building a Game-Changing Talent Strat-
egy,” Harvard Business Review, January–February 2014, pp. 63–68.
36. A. Bruzzese, “Lying on Résumé Is Treading on Dangerous Ground,” 
Reno Gazette-Journal, March 8, 2012, p. 5A.
37. Survey by InfoLink Screen Services, reported in H. B. Herring, “On 
Our Résumés, Couldn’t We All Have Gone to Yale?” The New York Times,
March 12, 2006, sec. 3, p. 2.
38. Survey by ResumeDoctor.com, reported in C. Soltis, “Eagle-Eyed 
Employers Scour Résumés for Little White Lies,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, March 21, 2006, p. B7.
39. Survey by Background Information Services, reported in M. Villano, 
“Served as King of England, Said the Résumé,” The New York Times,
March 19, 2006, sec. 3, p. 9.
40. C. W. Nevius, “If You Like Fiction, Read the Job Resumes,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, February 28, 2006, pp. B1, B2. See also D. Koep-
pel, “That Padded Résumé Won’t Help Break Your Fall,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, April 23, 2006, p. F5; reprinted from The New York Times.
41. A. Efrati and J. S. Lublin, “Resume Trips Up Yahoo Chief,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 5–6, 2012, pp. A1, A12.
42. Report by Automatic Data Processing, Roseland, NJ, cited in J. L. 
Seglin, “Lies Can Have a (Long) Life of Their Own,” The New York Times,

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN25
Republic, November 13, 2011, p. EC1; V. Kaskey, “5 Tips to Make 
a Great First Impression,” The Arizona Republic, November 6, 2011, 
p. EC1; A. Bruzzese, “Your First ‘Hello’ Can Make or Break a Job 
Search,” Reno Gazette-Journal, February 23, 2012, p. 6A.
75. H. Lancaster, “Making a Good Hire Takes a Little Instinct and a Lot 
of Research,” The Wall Street Journal, March 3, 1998, p. B1.
76. L. G. Otting, “Don’t Rush to Judgment,” HR Magazine, January 
2004, pp. 95–98.
77. M. P. Cronin, “This Is a Test,” Inc., August 1993, pp. 64–68. See also 
A. Fox, “Upon Further Assessment . . . ,” HR Magazine, August 2013, 
pp. 39–45; and B. Roberts, “Most Likely to Succeed,” HR Magazine, 
April 2014, pp. 69–71. For information on how blanket screening poli-
cies can cause a firm problems, see L. M. Sixel, “Flexibility Rules,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, January 25, 2014, pp. D1, D2.
78. J. S. Lublin, “What Won’t You Do for a Job?” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, June 2, 2009, pp. B7, B11.
79. M. J. Frase, “Smart Selections,” HR Magazine, December 2007, 
pp. 63–67.
80. M. Jordan, “Uncle Sam Wants You—Unless You’re 71% of Youths,” 
The Wall Street Journal, June 28–29, 2014, pp. A1, A5.
81. T. Gutner, “Applicants’ Personalities Put to the Test,” The Wall Street 
Journal, August 26, 2008, p. D4.
82. On the subject of job tryouts, see M. Mullenweb, “The CEO of Au-
tomattic on Holding ‘Auditions’ to Build a Strong Team,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, April 2014, pp. 39–42.
83. For more about skills testing, see J. T. Arnold, “Getting Facts Fast,” 
HR Magazine, February 2008, pp. 57–62.
84. J. Hodges, “a) Doctor b) Builder c) Cop d) HELP!” The Wall Street 
Journal, April 22, 2010, p. D2.
85. D. P. Shuit, “At 60, Myers-Briggs Is Still Sorting Out and Identifying 
People’s Types,” Workforce Management, December 2003, pp. 72–74.
86. See, for instance, “Are Resumes Passé? Enter the EQ Test,” Knowl-
edge@Wharton, June 18, 2014, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/
article/resumes-passe-enter-eq-test (accessed July 4, 2014).
87. Scott Erker, Development Dimensions International, reported in 
Gutner, “Applicants’ Personalities Put to the Test.”
88. “Personality Assessment Soars at Southwest,” Training, January 
2008, p. 14.
89. “Out of Sight, Yes. Out of Mind, No,” BusinessWeek, February 18, 
2008, p. 60.
90. Senior vice president of human resources Linda Matzigkeit, quoted 
in M. Bolch, “Nice Work,” HR Magazine, February 2008, pp. 78–81.
91. B. Rose, “Critics Wary as More Jobs Hinge on Personality Tests,” 
Chicago Tribune, October 31, 2004, p. 15.
92. S. Clifford, “The Science of Hiring,” Inc., August 2006, pp. 90–98.
93. V. Knight, “More Employers Are Using Personality Tests as Hiring 
Tools,” CareerJournal.com, March 21, 2006, www.careerjournal.com/
jobhunting/interviewing/20060321-knight.html (accessed July 5, 2014).
94. Society for Industrial & Organizational Psychology, www.siop.org/
workplace/employment%20testing/testtypes.aspx (accessed July 5, 
2014).
95. B. Roberts, “Your Cheating Heart,” HR Magazine, June 2011, 
pp. 55–60.
96. For a discussion of some of these tests, see P. Bathurst, “Pre-Job 
Tests Weed Out Imperfect Fits,” The Arizona Republic, January 28, 
2007, p. EC1.
97. D. Cadrain, “Are Your Employee Drug Tests Accurate ?” HR Magazine,
January 2003, pp. 41–45.
98. P. Korkki, “Workers May Lie about Drug Use, but Hair Doesn’t,” The 
New York Times, December 13, 2009, Business section, p. 2.
99. “S. Miller, “Satisfaction with Pay, Benefits Falling,” HR Magazine, 
January 2007, pp. 38–39. See also C. Palmeri, “Workers Say: ‘We Want 
an Upgrade,’” BusinessWeek, April 16, 2007, p. 11.
100. “How Effective Is Incentive Pay?” HR Magazine, January 2008, p. 12.
101. D. L. McClain, “Tricks for Motivating the Pay to Motivate the 
Ranks,” The New York Times, November 15, 1998, sec. 3, p. 5; S. 
Thurm, “‘Pay for Performance’ No Longer a Punchline,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 21, 2013, pp. B1, B6; S. Harris, “Retaining and Motivat-
ing Skilled Labor,” Training, July/August 2013, pp. 22–23; and A. R. 
Sorkin, “A Question of What’s a Reasonable Reward,” The New York 
Times, March 25, 2014, pp. B1, B5.
61. See “Carefully Chosen References Can Give You an Edge,” Arizona 
Republic, October 26, 2011, p. CL1.
62. Survey by Society for Human Resource Management, reported in 
J. Schramm, “Background Checking,” HR Magazine, January 2005, 
p. 128.
63. M. Korn, “Job Hunt? Dig Up Those SAT Scores,” The Wall Street 
Journal, February 26, 2014, pp. B1, B8.
64. J. Silver-Greenberg and M. Corkery, “Bank Account Screening Tool 
Is Scrutinized as Excessive,” The New York Times, June 16, 2014, 
pp. B1, B2.
65. A. Finder, “When a Risqué Online Persona Undermines a Chance for a 
Job,” The New York Times, June 11, 2006, pp. A1, A24; and S. E. Needleman, 
“Job Hunters, Beware,” The Wall Street Journal, February 2, 2010, p. D4.
66. A. Acquisti and C. Fong, “An Experiment in Hiring Discrimination via 
Online Social Networks,” Social Science Research Network, November 
21, 2013, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2031979 
(accessed July 5, 2014). See also M. Conlin, “You Are What You Post,” 
BusinessWeek, March 27, 2006, pp. 52–53; and L. Nicita, “Fired Before 
You’re Hired,” The Arizona Republic, July 28, 2007, pp. E1, E5.
67. Associated Press, “Job Seekers Asked for Facebook Keys,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, March 21, 2012, pp. D1, D2. For more about the 
effects of social media on hiring, see S. Hananel, “Facebook Tricky for 
Employers, Workers,” Reno Gazette-Journal, October 2, 2011, p. 5E; K. 
Weise, “Who Does Google Think You Are?” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
February 6–February 12, 2012, pp. 39–40; A. Townsend, “This Is Your 
Life,” Time, February 13, 2012, pp. 34–39; L. Kwoh, “Workplace Crystal 
Ball, Courtesy of Facebook,” The Wall Street Journal, February 21, 2012, 
p. B8; K. Pender, “Behavior on Social Networks Could Cost Students,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, March 6, 2012, pp. D1, D5; K. Trinko, “Keep 
Your Hands Off of My Facebook Password,” USA Today, March 14, 2012, 
p. 9A; and L. Andrews, I Know Who You Are and I Saw What You Did: 
Social Networks and the Death of Privacy (New York: Free Press, 2012).
68. M. Madden, Privacy Management on Social Media Sites, Pew Re-
search Center, Pew Internet & American Life Project, February 24, 2012, 
www.pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2012/PIP_Privacy_man-
agement_on_social_media_sites_022412.pdf (accessed July 5, 2014). 
See also J. Angwin, “Sites Are Accused of Privacy Failings,” The Wall 
Street Journal, February 13, 2012, pp. B1, B8: B. Evangelista, “Is It Time 
to Unfriend?” San Francisco Chronicle, February 25, 2012, pp. D1, D3; 
and B. Ortutay, “Profile Pruning,” Reno Gazette-Journal, February 28, 
2012, p. 6A.
69. S. E. Needleman, “The New Trouble on the Line,” The Wall Street 
Journal, June 2, 2009, pp. B7, B10; and K. Tyler, “Who You Gonna Call?” 
HR Magazine, April 2014, pp. 65–67.
70. D. S. Chapman, K. L. Uggerslev, and J. Webster, “Applicant Reac-
tions Face-to-Face and Technology-Mediated Interviews: A Field Inves-
tigation,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 88 (2003), pp. 944–953.
71. See J. Levashina and M. A. Campion, “Measuring Faking in the Em-
ployment Interview: Development and Validation of an Interview Faking 
Behavior Scale,” Journal of Applied Psychology, November 2007, 
pp. 1638–1656.
72. E. D. Pursell, M. A. Campion, and S. R. Gaylord, “Structured Inter-
viewing: Avoiding Selection Problems,” Personnel Journal, November 
1980; and J. Levashina, C. J. Hartwell, F. P. Morgeson, and M. A. Campion, 
“The Structured Employment Interview: Narrative and Quantitative 
 Review of the Research Literature,” Personnel Psychology, Vol. 67, No. 1 
(2014), pp. 241–293.
73. M. C. Blackman, “Personality Judgment and the Utility of the Un-
structured Employment Interview,” Basic and Applied Social Psychol-
ogy, Vol. 24 (2002), pp. 241–250. See also B. W. Swider, M. R. Barrick, T. 
B. Harris, and A. C. Stoverink, “Managing and Creating an Image in the 
Interview: The Role of Interviewee Initial Impressions,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, Vol. 96 (2011), pp. 1275–1288.
74. A. Arredondo, “Prepare Yourself for the Behavioral Interview,” The 
Arizona Republic, March 2, 2008, p. EC1; K. Weirick, “The Perfect Inter-
view,” HR Magazine, April 2008, pp. 85–88; and AllBusiness.com, “In-
terviewing Skills Will Help Land the Right Employee for Your Firm,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, April 9, 2008, p. C4; M. Weinstein, “You’re Hired!” 
Training, July/August 2011, pp. 34–37; A. Bryant, “A Deal-Breaker 
Question for Job Interviews,” The New York Times, August 28, 2011, 
p. BU-2; Y. Gonzalez, “Prepare for the Tough Questions,” The Arizona 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN26
121. S. A. Culbert and L. Rout, Get Rid of Performance Reviews! How 
Companies Can Stop Intimidating, Start Managing—and Focus on What 
Really Matters (New York: Business Plus, 2010).
122. See L. Kwoh, “Difficult Bosses Hurt Workers’ Motivation,” The Wall 
Street Journal, February 29, 2012, p. B8.
123. Reported by D. S. Perrin, in P. Downs, “Bringing Back Employee 
Reviews,” The New York Times, June 26, 2014, p, B5.
124. Aubrey Daniels, quoted in C. Suddath, “You Get a D+ in Teamwork,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, November 11–November 17, 2013, p. 91.
125. R. E. Silverman, “Work Reviews Losing Steam,” The Wall Street 
Journal, December 19, 2011, p. B7.
126. D. J. Cohen, “HR Metrics: A Must,” HR Magazine, February 2003, 
p. 136. On the subject of quantifying performance appraisals, see also 
K. Tyler, “Evaluating Values,” HR Magazine, April 2011, pp. 57–61.
127. The term “Munchausen at work” was created by Georgia Institute 
of Technology business professor Nathan Bennett. See N. Bennett, 
“Munchausen at Work,” Harvard Business Review, November 16, 2007, 
pp. 24–25
128. J. McGregor, “Job Review in 140 Keystrokes,” BusinessWeek, 
March 23 and 30, 2009, p. 58.
129. A meta-analysis of 24 360-degree feedback studies appears in J. 
W. Smither, M. London, and R. R. Reilly, “Does Performance Improve Fol-
lowing Multisource Feedback? A Theoretical Model, Meta-Analysis, and 
Review of Empirical Findings,” Personnel Psychology, Spring 2005, p. 33.
130. D. E. Coates, “Don’t Tie 360 Feedback to Pay,” Training, Septem-
ber 1998, pp. 68–78. See also A. S. Wellner, “Everyone’s a Critic,” Inc.,
July 2004, pp. 38, 41; and W. C. Byham, “Fixing the Instrument,” Train-
ing, July 2004, p. 50.
131. L. Kwoh, “‘Rank and Yank’ Retains Vocal Fans,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 31, 2012, p. B6.
132. S. Scherreik, “Your Performance Review: Make It Perform,” Busi-
nessWeek Online, December 17, 2001, www.businessweek.com/maga-
zine/content/01_51/b3762136.htm?chan=search (accessed July 5, 
2014); and J. McGregor, “The Struggle to Measure Performance,” Busi-
nessWeek Online, January 9, 2006, www.businessweek.com/magazine/
content/06_02/b3966060.htm?chan=search (accessed July 5, 2014). 
See also criticism of forced ranking in J. Pfeffer and R. I. Sutton, Hard 
Facts, Dangerous Half-Truths & Total Nonsense: Profiting from Evidence-
Based Management (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2006).
133. Study by the Institute for Corporate Productivity, reported in Kwoh, 
“‘Rank and Yank’ Retains Vocal Fans.”
134. S. Ovide and R. Feintzeig, “Microsoft Abandons Dreaded ‘Stack,’” The 
Wall Street Journal, November 13, 2013, pp. B1, B5; and P. Korkki, “Invasion 
of the Annual Reviews,” The New York Times, November 24, 2013, p. BU-8.
135. J. Welch, “‘Rank-and-Yank’? That’s Not How It’s Done,” The Wall 
Street Journal, November 15, 2013, p. A15.
136. L. A. Bossidy, “What Your Leader Expects of You,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, April 3, 2007, pp. 58–65.
137. W. Kirn, “More Than a Numbers Game,” The New York Times Mag-
azine, May 10, 2009, pp. 13–14.
138. For a discussion of workplace discipline, see L. E. Atwater, J. F. 
Brett, and A. C. Charles, “The Delivery of Workplace Discipline: Lessons 
Learned,” Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 36 (2007), pp. 392–403.
139. A. Sherman, “Do You Feel like You’ve Hit a Brick Wall at Work?” 
The Arizona Republic, March 21, 2010, p. C1.
140. M. Conlin, “When the Laid-Off Are Better Off,” BusinessWeek, 
November 2, 2009, p. 65.
141. D. Mattioli, “Layoff Sign: Boss’s Cold Shoulder,” The Wall Street 
Journal, October 23, 2008, p. D6.
142. A. Fisher, “Dumping Troublemakers, and Exiting Gracefully,” 
Fortune, February 15, 1999, p. 174.
143. C. Hymowitz, “Why Managers Take Too Long to Fire Employees,” 
San Francisco Examiner, February 21, 1999, p. J-2; reprinted from The 
Wall Street Journal.
144. For a discussion of the threat of litigation attending dismissals, 
see M. Orey, “Fear of Firing,” BusinessWeek, April 23, 2007, pp. 52–62.
145. R. Moss Kanter, “Show Humanity When You Show Employees the 
Door,” The Wall Street Journal, September 21, 1997, p. A22.
146. Ibid.
147. See J. Jargon and E. Morath, “As Wage Debate Rages, Owners 
Shuffle Costs,” The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2014, pp. B1, B4; and 
102. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employer Costs for Employee Com-
pensation—March 2014,” Economic News Release, June 11, 2014, 
www.bls.gov/news.release/ecec.nr0.htm (accessed July 5, 2014).
103. S. Shellenbarger, “Companies Are Finding It Really Pays to Be Nice 
to Employees,” The Wall Street Journal, July 22, 1998, p. B1. For more 
about The Jungle, see C. Phelps, “How Should We Teach ‘The Jungle’?” 
The Chronicle of Higher Education, March 3, 2006, pp. B10–B11.
104. R. Rigby, “Balloons and Buddies That Help New Recruits Fit In,” 
Financial Times, March 17, 2008, http://us.ft.com/ftgateway/superp-
age.ft?news_id=fto031720081550034310 (accessed July 5, 2014).
105. Brookings Institution, cited in Shellenbarger, “Companies Are 
Finding It Really Pays to Be Nice to Employees.”
106. MCI Communications surveys, reported in Shellenbarger, “Com-
panies Are Finding It Really Pays to Be Nice to Employees.”
107. G. R. Jones, “Organizational Socialization as Information Process-
ing Activity: A Life History Analysis,” Human Organization, Vol. 42, No. 4 
(1983), pp. 314–320.
108. The Global Workforce Study, by consultancy Towers Perrin, found 
that only 35% of employees surveyed around the world are engaged in 
their work, meaning they are willing to go the extra mile to help their 
companies succeed. See Towers Perrin, 2012 Global Workforce Study, 
July 2012, www.towerswatson.com/Insights/IC-Types/Survey- Research-
Results/2012/07/2012-Towers-Watson-Global-Workforce-Study (ac-
cessed July 5, 2014). Also see S. Meisinger, “Management Holds Key to 
Employee Engagement,” HR Magazine, February 2008, p. 8.
109. C. McNamara, “Employee Training and Development: Reasons and 
Benefits,” Free Management Library, 1999; www.managementhelp.org/
trng_dev/basics/reasons.htm (accessed July 5, 2014). See also “Train-
ing Top 125 2008,” Training, February 2008, pp. 76–111.
110. See “2013 Training Industry Report,” Training, November/Decem-
ber 2013, pp. 22–35.
111. R. Van Liew, quoted in “E-Learning’s Dirty Little Secret,” Training,
February 2006, p. 6. See also J. Gordon, “Seven Revelations about 
E-Learning,” Training, April 2006, pp. 28–31.
112. B. Muirhead, “Looking at Net Colleges,” letter, USA Today, Novem-
ber 12, 1999, p. 14A.
113. For a discussion from a training standpoint of how the brain learns, 
see A. Fox, “The Brain at Work,” HR Magazine, March 2008, pp. 37–42.
114. “What If You Held a Training Session and No One Showed Up?” 
Training, January 2006, p. 10.
115. Survey of workers at Ernst & Young, reported in B. Hite, “Employ-
ers Rethink How They Give Feedback,” The Wall Street Journal, October 
13, 2008, p. B5.
116. The High Cost of Doing Nothing: Quantifying the Impact of Leader-
ship on the Bottom Line (Escondido, CA: Ken Blanchard Companies, 
2009).
117. Adapted from A. J. Kinicki, K. J. L. Jacobson, S. J. Peterson, and G. E. 
Prussia, “Development and Validation of the Performance Management 
Behavior Questionnaire,” Personnel Psychology, Vol. 66 (2013), pp. 1–45.
118. H. Aguinis, H. Joo, and R. K. Gottfredson, “What Monetary 
Rewards Can and Cannot Do: How to Show Employees the Money,” 
Business  Horizons, Vol. 56 (2013), pp. 241–249. See also P. M Wright, T. 
M. Gardner, L. M. Moynihan, and M. R. Allen, “The Relationship be-
tween HR Practices and Firm Performance: Examining Causal Order,” 
Personnel Psychology, Summer 2005, pp. 409–446; E. McClean and C. 
J. Collins, “High- Commitment HR Practices, Employee Effort, and Firm 
Performance:  Investigating the Effects of HR Practices Across Em-
ployee Groups within Professional Services Firms,” Human Resource 
Management, May–June 2011, pp. 341–363; E. Marescaux and S. De 
Winne, “HR Practices and HRM Outcomes: The Role of Basic Need 
Satisfaction,” Personnel Review, Vol. 42, No. 1 (2013), pp. 4–27; and 
J. Slocum, D. Lei, and P. Buller,  “Executing Business Strategies through 
Human Resource Management Practices,” Organizational Dynamics, 
Vol. 43 (2014), pp. 73–87.
119. J. Gruss, “Burger Hustle,” Business Observer, November 2, 2012. 
See also T. Monaghan and R. Anderson, Pizza Tiger (New York: Random 
House, 1996).
120. S. A. Culbert, “Yes, Everyone Really Does Hate Performance Re-
views,” The Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2010, http://finance.yahoo.com/
career-work/article/109343/yes-everyone-really-does-hate-performance-
reviews (accessed July 5, 2014).

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN27
162. Survey in 2007 by Novations Group, Boston, reported in D. Stead, 
“Is the Workplace Getting Raunchier?” BusinessWeek, March 17, 2008, 
p. 19.
163. American Express analysis of Census Bureau data, reported in As-
sociated Press, “Women Start 1,288 Companies Each Day,” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, May 16, 2014, p. C2.
164. JMG Consulting LLC and Wyckoff Consulting LLC, “Venture Capi-
tal, Social Capital, and the Funding of Women-Led Businesses,” for SBA 
Office of Advocacy, April 2013, www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/files/
rs406tot%284%29.pdf (accessed July 5, 2014). See also J. Tozzi, 
 “Female-Led Companies Paid Off Well for VC Firms,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, April 22, 2013, pp. D1, D4.
165. See L. Petrecca, “And Now, a Word about Diversity,” USA Today, 
June 19, 2014, p. 3B; J. Guynn, “The Face of Facebook Is Male, White,” 
USA Today, June 26, 2014, p. 1B; J. Guynn and E. Weise, “Danger of 
Digital Divide,” USA Today, June 27, 2014, pp. 5B, 6B; and K. V. Brown, 
“Think Pink? That’s No Way to Get Women into Tech Jobs,” San  Francisco 
Chronicle, July 6, 2014, pp. A1, A12.
166. J. Guynn, “Sexism in Tech Buzz Gets Louder,” USA Today, July 2, 
2014, pp. 1B, 2B.
167. J. Garofoli, “‘Bro Culture’ Locks Many Minorities Out,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, February 7, 2014, pp. C1, C2.
168. E. M. Rusli, “Sexual Harassment Lawsuit Targets Tinder’s Culture,” 
The Wall Street Journal, July 2, 2014, p. B7; and N. Summers, “The 
Truth about Tinder Is Worse than You Think,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
July 5, 2014, p. D4.
169. Sean Rad, quoted in Summers, “The Truth about Tinder Is Worse 
than You Think.”
170. G. Bohlander, S. Snell, and A. Sherman, Managing Human Re-
sources, 12th ed. (Mason, OH: South-Western, 2001).
171. Bill Lepowsky, quoted in K. V. Brown, “Far beyond School Play-
ground, Bullying Common in Workplace,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
November 6, 2011, pp. A1, A10.
172. Jill Brooke, quoted in Brown, “Far Beyond School Playground, Bul-
lying Common in Workplace.” Brooke is author of The Need to Say No: 
The Importance of Setting Boundaries in Love, Life, & Your World—How 
to Be Bullish and Not Bullied (New York: Random House, 2013).
173. The 37% figure appeared in a 2007 survey by Zogby International, 
reported in T. Parker-Pope, “When the Bully Sits in the Next Cubicle,” 
The New York Times, March 25, 2008, p. D5. The 51% figure appeared 
in Society for Human Resource Management, “SHRM Survey Findings: 
Workplace Bullying,” February 28, 2012, www.shrm.org/research/ 
surveyfindings/articles/pages/workplacebullying.aspx (accessed July 3, 
2014).
174. Society for Human Resource Management, “SHRM Survey Find-
ings: Workplace Bullying.”
175. D. C. Treadway, B. A. Shaughnessy, J. W. Breland, J. Yang, and M. 
Reeves, “Political Skill and the Job Performance of Bullies,” Journal of 
Managerial Psychology, Vol. 28, No. 3 (2013), pp. 273–289.
176. Darren C. Treadway, quoted in R. E. Silverman, “Bullies Don’t Fin-
ish Last, Study Indicates,” The Wall Street Journal, July 3, 2013, p. B6.
177. See R. Feintzeig, “When Co-Workers Don’t Play Nice,” The Wall 
Street Journal, August 28, 2013, p. B6. Also see interview with psychia-
trist J. Foster, head of the Professionalism Program at Penn Medicine at 
Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, in “How Disruptive Behavior by 
Employees Can Devastate a Workplace,” Knowledge@Wharton, March 
27, 2013, https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/how-disruptive-
behavior-by-employees-can-devastate-a-workplace (accessed July 3, 
2014).
178. Gary Namie, quoted in Brown, “Far Beyond School Playground, 
Bullying Common in Workplace.”
179. A. Piore, “Kick Me or Don’t,” Bloomberg Businessweek, November 
26–December 2, 2012, pp. 94–95.
180. “Results of the 2007 WBI U.S. Workplace Bullying Survey,” Work-
place Bullying Institute, www.workplacebullying.org/wbiresearch/wbi-
2007 (accessed July 3, 2014).
181. H. Benson, “Porters Found Road to Success Aboard Nation’s 
‘Rolling Hotels,’” San Francisco Chronicle, February 11, 2009, 
pp. A1, A12.
182. S. Greenhouse, “Share of the Work Force in a Union Falls to a 
97-Year Low, 11.3%,” The New York Times, January 23, 2014, 
E. Morath, “New Tactics Emerge in Minimum-Wage Fight,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 21, 2014, pp. B1, B2.
148. S. G. Stolberg and R. Pear, “Obama Signs Health Care Overhaul 
Bill, with a Flourish,” The New York Times, March 23, 2010, www.
nytimes.com/2010/03/24/health/policy/24health.html (accessed July 
5, 2014); C. Martin, “In the Health Law, an Open Door for Entrepre-
neurs,” The New York Times, November 24, 2013, p. BU-3; H. Knight, 
“Health Efforts Work—Experts,” San Francisco Chronicle, November 
30, 2013, pp. A1, A9; and Associated Press, “Uninsured Rate De-
creases as Law Takes Effect,” San Francisco Chronicle, January 24, 
2014, p. A13. .
149. See S. E. Needleman, “More Programs to Halt Bias against Gays,” 
The Wall Street Journal, November 26, 2007, p. B3. A countertrend to 
age discrimination may be the result of baby boomers retiring, bringing 
an overall shortfall in workers; see M. Sedensky, “Oldies but Goodies,” 
Reno Gazette-Journal, September 14, 2013, pp. 11A, 12A.
150. S. Hananel, Associated Press, “Bullies Are Now under Attack,” 
Reno Gazette-Journal, March 2, 2013, pp. 7A, 8A.
151. J. Coffman, O. Gadiesh, and W. Miller, The Great Disappearing Act: 
Gender Parity Up the Corporate Ladder, World Economic Forum White 
Paper, survey by Bain & Co. and Harvard Business Review, January 30, 
2010, www.bain.com/bainweb/publications/publications_detail.
asp?id=27564&menu_url=publications%5Fresults%2Easp (accessed 
July 5, 2014).
152. Equilar Top 200 Highest Paid CEO Rankings, survey reported in C. 
C. Miller, “An Elusive Jackpot,” The New York Times, June 8, 2014, 
pp. BU-1, BU-5.
153. U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “EEOC Releases 
FY 2013 Enforcement and Litigation Data,” press release, February 5, 
2014, www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/2-5-14.cfm (accessed 
July 5, 2014).
154. J. Zumbrun, “In Equal-Pay Debate, Disparity Is in the Details,” The 
Wall Street Journal, April 11, 2014, p. A4; and C. C. Miller, “Pay Gap Is 
Because of Gender, Not Jobs,” The New York Times, April 24, 2014, 
p. B3. See also U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, 
Highlights of Women’s Earnings in 2012, Report 1045, October 2013, 
www.bls.gov/cps/cpswom2012.pdf (accessed July 5, 2014); and 
C. Goldin, “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter,” The Ameri-
can Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 4 (2014), pp. 1091–1119.
155. For a thorough discussion of affirmative action, see F. J. Crosby, A. 
Iyer, S. Clayton, and R. A. Downing, “Affirmative Action,” American 
 Psychologist, February 2003, pp. 93–115.
156. See H. J. Walker, H. S. Feild, W. F. Giles, J. B. Bernerth, and L. A. 
Jones-Farmer, “An Assessment of Attraction Toward Affirmative Action 
Organizations: Investigating the Role of Individual Differences,” Journal 
of Organizational Behavior, May 2007, pp. 455–507.
157. E. H. James, A. P. Brief, J. Dietz, and R. R. Cohen, “Prejudice Mat-
ters: Understanding the Reactions of Whites to Affirmative Action Pro-
grams Targeted to Benefit Blacks,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
December 2001, pp. 1120–1128.
158. For a thorough review of relevant research, see M. E. Heilman, 
 “Affirmative Action: Some Unintended Consequences for Working 
Women,” in B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings, eds., Research in Organiza-
tional Behavior, Vol. 16 (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1994), pp. 125–169.
159. M. Rotundo, D.-H. Nguyen, and P. R. Sackett, “A Meta-Analytic 
 Review of Gender Differences in Perceptions of Sexual Harassment,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, October 2001, pp. 914–922.
160. Most research on sexual harassment has focused on harassment 
inside organizations. For a discussion of harassment beyond the bound-
aries of the organization, see H. J. Gettman and J. J. Gelfand, “When the 
Customer Shouldn’t Be King: Antecedents and Consequences of Sexual 
Harassment by Clients and Customers,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
May 2007, pp. 757–770.
161. S. Armour, “More Men Say They Are Sexually Harassed at Work,” 
USA Today, September 17, 2004, p. 1B; C. A. Pierce and H. Aguinis, 
“Legal Standards, Ethical Standards, and Responses to Social–Sexual 
Conduct at Work,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 26 (2005), 
pp. 727–732; L. A. Baar, “Harassment Case Proceeds Despite Failure to 
Report,” HR Magazine, June 2005, p. 159; and S. Shellenbarger, 
 “Supreme Court Takes on How Employers Handle Worker Harassment 
Complaints,” The Wall Street Journal, April 13, 2006, p. D1.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN28
14. R. G. McGrath, “Transient Advantage,” Harvard Business Review, 
June 2013, pp. 62–70.
15. J. Nocera, “How Not to Stay on Top,” The New York Times, August 
20, 2013, p. A17.
16. Carolina Milanesi, research vice president with Gartner Group, 
quoted in Nocera, “How Not to Stay on Top.”
17. S. Ovide, “Deal Is Easy Part for Nokia, Microsoft,” The Wall Street 
Journal, September 4, 2013, pp. A1, A12; M. Scott, “Nokia Struggles to 
Project Bright Future without Its Phone Business,” The New York Times, 
January 24, 2014, p. B3; M. Scott, “Digital Mapping May Be Nokia’s 
Hidden Gem,” The New York Times, April 26, 2014, pp. B1, B2; and 
M. Scott, “Nokia Announces New Strategy, and a New Chief to Carry It 
Out,” The New York Times, April 29, 2014, www.nytimes.
com/2014/04/30/technology/nokia-announces-new-strategy-and-
chief-executive.html?_r=0 (accessed July 8, 2014).
18. T. Johnson, “Mexico Takes Flight as Hub for Aerospace Indus-
try,” McClatchy Newspapers, July 18, 2012, www.mcclatchydc.
com/2012/07/18/156657/mexico-takes-flight-as-hub-for.html (ac-
cessed July 8, 2014); F. Saliba, “Mexico Aims High with Investment 
in Burgeoning Aviation Industry,” The Guardian, June 25, 2013, 
www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/25/mexico-aviation-supply-
industry-growth (accessed July 8, 2014); and P. Gallant, “How Bom-
bardier’s Experiment Became Ground Zero for Mexico’s Economic 
Revolution,” Canadian Business, April 15, 2014, www.canadianbusiness.
com/global-report/how-bombardiers-experiment-became-
ground-zero-for-mexicos-economic-revolution (accessed July 8, 
2014).
19. P. Davidson, “Foreign Manufacturers Bringing Jobs to U.S.,” USA 
Today, May 15, 2013, www.usatoday.com/story/money/busi-
ness/2013/05/15/foreign-manufacturers-bringing-jobs-to-us/2070327 
(accessed July 8, 2014).
20. K. Bradsher, “China Drawing High-Tech Research from U.S.,” The 
New York Times, March 18, 2010, pp. A1, A14.
21. Albrecht, “Eight Supertrends Shaping the Future of Business.” 
See also T. O’Driscoll, “Join the Webvolution,” Training, February 2008, 
p. 24.
22. A. Toffler and H. Toffler, Revolutionary Wealth (New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 2006). Also see T. H. Davenport, L. Prusak, and B. Strong, “Put-
ting Ideas to Work,” The Wall Street Journal, March 10, 2008, p. R11.
23. See Capitalizing on Complexity: Insights from the Global Chief Ex-
ecutive Officer Study, International Business Machines, Somers, New 
York, 2010, http://public.dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/en/
gbe03297usen/GBE03297USEN.PDF; Leading Through Connections: 
Insights from the IBM Global CEO Study, International Business Ma-
chines, Somers, New York, 2012, www-935.ibm.com/services/us/en/c-
suite/ceostudy2012; and Fit for the Future: 17th Annual CEO Survey,
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2014, www.pwc.com/gx/en/ceo-sur-
vey/2014/assets/pwc-17th-annual-global-ceo-survey-jan-2014.pdf (all 
accessed July 8, 2014).
24. B. Tomson and M. Peters, “‘Pink Slime’ Defenders Line Up,” The Wall 
Street Journal, March 29, 2012, pp. B1, B2; and S. Strom, “After Public 
Outcry, Cargill Says It Will Label Products Made with a Beef Binder,” The 
New York Times, November 5, 2013, www.nytimes.com/2013/11/06/
business/after-public-outcry-cargill-says-it-will-label-products-made-
with-a-beef-binder.html?_r=0 (accessed July 8, 2014).
25. R. Gold, B. Casselman, and G. Chazan, “Oil Well Lacked Safeguard 
Device,” The Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2010, pp. A1, A8; S. Power 
and J. R. Emshwiller, “Investigators Focus on Failed Device,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 6, 2010, p. A5; and D. Vergano, “New Equipment 
Headed to Battle Oil Spill,” USA Today, May 6, 2010, p. 5A.
26. J. Scheck and S. Williams, “BP: The Makeover,” The Wall Street 
Journal, October 25, 2013, pp. B1, B2.
27. C. Robertson and J. Schwartz, “How a Gulf Settlement That BP 
Once Hailed Became Its Target,” The New York Times, April 27, 2014, 
News-1, News 20.
28. P. Robertson, D. Roberts, and J. Porras, “Dynamics of Planned Or-
ganizational Change: Assessing Empirical Support for a Theoretical 
Model,” Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 36, No. 3 (1993), 
pp. 619–634.
29. M. Whitman, quoted in Q. Hardy, “Shifting Tech Scene Unsettles Big 
Players,” The New York Times, August 22, 2013, pp. B1, B8.
www. nytimes.com/2013/01/24/business/union-membership-drops-
despite-job-growth.html?_r=0 (accessed July 5, 2014).
183. B. Strauss and S. Eder, “College Players Granted Right to Form 
Union,” The New York Times, March 27, 2014, pp. A1, A3. See also 
J. Nocera, “A Step Toward Justice in College Sports?” The New York 
Times, April 1, 2014, p. A21.
184. L. Uchitelle, “Unions Yield on Wage Scales to Preserve Jobs,” New 
York Times, November 19, 2010, www.nytimes.com/2010/11/20/busi-
ness/20/wages.html; and M. Maynard, “By Helping Detroit, Did the UAW 
Lose Its Future?” Forbes, February 17, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/
michelinemaynard/2014/02/17/by-helping-detroit-did-the-uaw-lose-
its-future (both accessed July 5, 2014).
185. G. Zoroya and C. MacLeod, “A World Apart, Meat Workers Share a 
Bond,” USA Today, June 26, 2013, pp. 1B, 2B.
CHAPTER 10
1. T. Peters, “A Brawl with No Rules,” Forbes ASAP, February 21, 2000, 
p. 155.
2. M. McGuinn, quoted in C. Hymowitz, “Task of Managing in Workplace 
Takes a Careful Hand,” The Wall Street Journal, July 1, 1997, p. B1.
3. S. Hamm, “Speed Demons,” BusinessWeek, March 27, 2006, 
pp. 68–75. See also J. McGregor, “The World’s Most Innovative Compa-
nies,” BusinessWeek, April 24, 2006, pp. 63–74.
4. Hymowitz, “Task of Managing in Workplace Takes a Careful Hand.”
5. M. Weinstein, “Innovate or Die Trying,” Training Magazine, May 
2006, pp. 38–44; D. Hall, “The Customer Is Clueless,” BusinessWeek 
SmallBiz, Spring 2006, p. 20; D. Brady, “Ideas That Bloom,” Business-
Week SmallBiz, Spring 2006, pp. 46–53; and P. Loewe and J. Dominiquini, 
“Overcoming the Barriers to Effective Innovation,” Strategy & Leader-
ship, Vol. 34, No. 1 (2006), pp. 24–31.
6. Anthony Creed, quoted in D. Kirkpatrick, “Throw It at the Wall and 
See If It Sticks,” Fortune, December 12, 2005, pp. 142–150.
7. Bruce Judson, quoted in J. M. Pethokoukis, “Bootstrapping Your Way 
into Business,” U.S. News & World Report, March 27, 2006, p. 58. See 
also M. Bandyk, “Launching a Start-Up? Here’s What Really Works,” U.S. 
News & World Report, February 18, 2008, p. 58.
8. K. Stebbins, “Take a Risk,” Northern Nevada Healthy Living, February 
2008, p. 1.
9. E. Hoffer, Ordeal of Change (New York: Harper & Row, 1963).
10. P. Drucker, “The Future That Has Already Happened,” The Futurist,
November 1998, pp. 16–18.
11. K. Albrecht, “Eight Supertrends Shaping the Future of Business,” 
The Futurist, September–October 2006, pp. 25–29; J. C. Glenn, “Scan-
ning the Global Situation and Prospects for the Future,” The Futurist,
January–February 2008, pp. 41–46; M. J. Cetron and O. Davies, “Trends 
Shaping Tomorrow’s World: Forecasts and Implications for Business, 
Government, and Consumers (Part One), The Futurist, March–April 
2008, pp. 35–52; M. J. Cetron and O. Davies, “Trends Shaping Tomor-
row’s World: Forecasts and Implications for Business, Government, and 
Consumers (Part Two), The Futurist, May–June 2008, pp. 35–50; 
M. Richarme, “Ten Forces Driving Business Futures,” The Futurist, 
July–August 2009, pp. 40–43; N. Easton, “Fortune’s Guide to the Future,” 
Fortune, January 16, 2012, pp. 45–57; J. Morgan, “Five Trends Shaping 
the Future of Work,” Forbes, June 20, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/ 
jacobmorgan/2013/06/20/five-trends-shaping-the-future-of-work 
 (accessed July 10, 2014); “The Future Issue,” Fortune, January 13, 
2014; and “The Future of Everything,” The Wall Street Journal, July 8, 
2014, pp. R1–R24.
12. C. Anderson, quoted in A. T. Saracevic, “Economic Theories in ‘The 
Long Tail’ Don’t Deserve Short Shrift,” San Francisco Chronicle, July 16, 
2006, pp. F1, F5. See also C. Anderson, The Long Tail: Why the Future of 
Business Is Selling Less of More (New York: Hyperion, 2006).
13. C. M. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technolo-
gies Cause Great Firms to Fail (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School 
Press, 1997). See also J. Howe, “The Disruptor,” Wired, March 2013, 
pp. 74–78; J. Lepore, “The Disruption Machine,” The New Yorker, June 23, 
2014, pp. 30–36; and “Has ‘Disruptive Innovation’ Run Its Course? Not 
Yet . . .,” Knowledge@Wharton, July 9, 2014, http://knowledge.wharton.
upenn.edu/article/disruptive-innovation-run-course-yet (accessed July 
10, 2014).

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN29
46. This three-way typology of change was adapted from discussion in 
P. C. Nutt, “Tactics of Implementation,” Academy of Management Jour-
nal, June 1986, pp. 230–261.
47. Radical organizational change is discussed by T. E. Vollmann, The 
Transformational Imperative (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 
1996); and J. A. Neal and C. L. Tromley, “From Incremental Change to 
Retrofit: Creating High-Performance Work Systems,” Academy of Man-
agement Executive, February 1995, pp. 42–53.
48. K. Lewin, Field Theory in Social Science (New York: Harper & Row, 
1951).
49. T. T. Lee, “Adopting a Personal Digital Assistant System: Applica-
tion of Lewin’s Change Theory,” Journal of Advanced Nursing, August 
2006, pp. 487–496; B. Garrett and G. Klein, “Value of Wireless Per-
sonal Digital Assistants for Practice: Perceptions of Advanced Practice 
Nurses,” Journal of Clinical Nursing, August 2008, pp. 2146–2154; 
and S. Bassendowski, P. Petrucka, L. Breitkreuz, J. Partyka, L. 
MacDougall, B. Hanson, and K. Ayers, “Integration of Technology to 
Support Nursing Practice: A Saskatchewan Initiative,” Online Journal 
of Nursing Informatics, June 2011, http://ojni.org/issues/?p=635 
(accessed July 8, 2014).
50. The role of learning within organizational change is discussed by C. 
Hendry, “Understanding and Creating Whole Organizational Change 
through Learning Theory,” Human Relations, May 1996, pp. 621–641; 
and D. Ready, “Mastering Leverage, Leading Change,” Executive Excel-
lence, March 1995, pp. 18–19.
51. These errors are discussed by J. P. Kotter, “Leading Change: The 
Eight Steps to Transformation,” in J. A. Conger, G. M. Spreitzer, and E. E. 
Lawler III, eds., The Leader’s Change Handbook (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1999), pp. 87–99.
52. The type of leadership needed during organizational change is dis-
cussed by S. Furst and D. M. Cable, “Employee Resistance to Organiza-
tional Change: Managerial Influence Tactics and Leader-Member 
Exchange,” Journal of Applied Psychology, March 2008, pp. 453–462; 
and D. M. Herold, D. B. Fedor, S. Caldwell, and Y. Liu, “The Effects of 
Transformational and Change Leadership on Employees’ Commitment 
to a Change: A Multilevel Study,” Journal of Applied Psychology, March 
2008, pp. 346–357.
53. Adapted from R. J. Campbell, “Change Management in Health 
Care,” The Health Care Manager, Vol. 27, No. 1 (2008), pp. 23–39.
54. See, for example, K. Belson, “NFL Concussion Suits May Be Test for 
Sport Itself,” The New York Times, December 30, 2011, pp. A1, B10.
55. R. J. Baron, “What’s Keeping Us So Busy in Primary Care? A Snap-
shot from One Practice,” New England Journal of Medicine, April 29, 
2010, pp. 1632–1636. See also S. Lohr, “Study Shows Extent of ‘Invisi-
ble Work’ by Family Doctors,” The New York Times, April 29, 2010, 
p. B3; and D. Beaulieu, “5 Ways the Affordable Care Act Will Transform 
Primary Care Practices,” Medical Economics, December 25, 2013, 
http://medicaleconomics.modernmedicine.com/medical-economics/
news/5-ways-affordable-care-act-will-transform-primary-care-
practices?page=full (accessed July 8, 2014).
56. M. Fugate, A. Kinicki, and C. L. Scheck, “Coping with an Organiza-
tional Merger over Four Stages,” Personnel Psychology, Winter 2002, 
pp. 905–928.
57. Eli Chait, quoted in S. Finz, “Crunching Dining Data,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, March 7, 2013, pp. C1, C5.
58. E. Chait, “Daily Deals vs. Happy Hours: The Impact of Internal Mar-
keting Promos,” Street Fight, November 16, 2012, http://streetfightmag.
com/2012/11/16/daily-deals-vs-happy-hours-the-impact-of-internal-
marketing-promos (accessed July 8, 2014).
59. “The Feedback Loop: More Data Doesn’t Always Mean Better Cus-
tomer Service,” Knowledge@Wharton, April 23, 2014, http://knowl-
edge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/feedback-loop-data-doesnt-always-
mean-better-customer-service (accessed July 8, 2014).
60. E. Chait, “The Best and Worst Days of 2012 for Restaurant Business,” 
Inside Scoop SF, December 18, 2014, http://insidescoopsf.sfgate.com/
blog/2012/12/18/the-best-and-worst-days-of-2012-for-restaurant-
business (accessed July 8, 2014).
61. See Q. Hardy, “Big Data’s Little Brother,” The New York Times, 
November 11, 2014, pp. B1, B4.
62. See “Change Management: The HR Strategic Imperative as a Busi-
ness Partner,” Research Quarterly, Fourth Quarter 2007, pp. 1–9; and 
30. Duncan Dickson, University of Central Florida, quoted in S. Sekusa, 
“Disney Gets Personal with New MyMagic+ System,” USA Today, January 
27, 2014, www.usatoday.com/story/dispatches/2014/01/27/disney-
mymagic-vacation-planning/4582957 (accessed July 8, 2014).
31. B. Barnes, “A Billion-Dollar Bracelet Is the Key to a Disney Park,” 
The New York Times, April 1, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/04/02/
business/billion-dollar-bracelet-is-key-to-magical-kingdom.html?_r=0 
(accessed July 8, 2014). See also C.J. Barker,”DisneyWorld 2014: More 
Magical than Ever,” New York Amsterdam News, May 15, 2014, http://
amsterdamnews.com/news/2014/may/15/disney-world-2014-more-
magical-ever (accessed July 8, 2014).
32. R. W. Neal, “Disney Invests $1 Billion to Wearable Technology: Will 
MyMagic+ Revolutionize the Magic Kingdom or Creep Out Guests?” In-
ternational Business Times, March 10, 2014, www.ibtimes.com/disney-
invests-1-billion-wearable-technology-will-mymagic-revolutionize-
magic-kingdom-or-creep-out (accessed July 8, 2014).
33. “Millennials: Portrait of Generation Next,” Pew Research Center, Feb-
ruary 24, 2010, http://pewresearch.org/millennials (accessed July 8, 
2014); K. K. Myers and K. Sadaghiani, “Millennials in the Workplace: 
A Communication Perspective on Millennials’ Organizational Relation-
ships and Performance,” Journal of Business Psychology, June 2010, 
pp. 225–238; L. S. Rikleen, “Creating Tomorrow’s Leaders: The Expanding 
Roles of Millennials in the Workplace,” Executive Briefing Series, Boston 
College Center for Work & Family, www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/centers/
cwf/pdf/BCCWF%20EBS-Millennials%20FINAL.pdf (accessed July 8, 
2014); and J. Mandese, “MTV Studies Millennials in the Workplace: Uses 
It to Transform Its Own, Maybe Even Yours,” Media Daily News, March 15, 
2012, www.mediapost.com/publications/ article/169980/mtv-studies-
millennials-in-the-workplace-uses-it.html (accessed July 8, 2014).
34. S. Adams, “New Survey: LinkedIn More Dominant than Ever among 
Job Seekers and Recruiters, but Facebook Poised to Gain,” Forbes, Feb-
ruary 5, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/susanadams/2013/02/05/new-
survey-linked-in-more-dominant-than-ever-among-job-seekers-and-
recruiters-but-facebook-poised-to-gain (accessed July 8, 2014).
35. L. Lim, “Plagiarism Plague Hinders China’s Scientific Ambition,” npr.
org, August 3, 2011, www.npr.org/2011/08/03/138937778/plagiarism-
plague-hinders-chinas-scientific-ambition (accessed July 8 2014).
36. T. Aeppel, “Show Stopper: How Plastic Cork Popped the Cork Mo-
nopoly,” The Wall Street Journal, May 1–2, 2010, pp. A1, A10.
37. C. Said, “Sharing Comes of Age,” San Francisco Chronicle, May 14, 
2014, pp. C1, C3.
38. Interview with Brian Chesky by A. Kessler, “The ‘Sharing Economy’ 
and Its Enemies,” The Wall Street Journal, January 18–19, 2014, p. A11.
39. C. Said, “Window into Airbnb’s Hidden Impact on S.F.,” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, June 15, 2014, pp. A1, A15. See also G. Bellafante, “In 
the Sharing Economy, Every Man and Woman a Hotelier,” The New York 
Times, July 6, 2014, p. News-18. 
40. See “The Sharing Economy: Why Even the Mainstream Wants a Piece 
of the Pie,” Knowledge@Wharton, November 27, 2013, https://www.
google.com/search?q=The+Sharing+Economy%3A+Why+Even+the+Main
stream+Wants+a+Piece+of+the+Pie&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&aq=t&rls=org.
mozilla:en-US:official&client=firefox-a&channel=np&source=hp (accessed 
July 8, 2014); and S. E. Needlema and A. Loten, “Startups Want to Be the 
Next Airbnb, Uber,” The Wall Street Journal, May 8, 2014, p. B4.
41. P. Dvorak, “Companies Seek Shareholder Input on Pay Practices,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 6, 2009, p. B4.
42. W. Loeb, “Successful Global Growers: What We Can Learn from 
Walmart, Carrefour, Tesco, Metro,” Forbes, March 7, 2013, http://www.
forbes.com/sites/walterloeb/2013/03/07/walmart-carrefour-tesco-
metro-successful-global-growers-what-can-we-learn-from-them (ac-
cessed July 8, 2014).
43. W. M. Welch, “Secondhand Shops at Forefront of Economic Pinch,” 
USA Today, April 22, 2010, p. 3A.
44. S. E. Needleman, “Business Owners Try to Motivate Employees,” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 14, 2010, p. B5.
45. V. Foley, director of Lee Hecht Harrison, quoted in E. Zimmerman, 
“As a New Manager, Get to Know Your Team,” The New York Times,
December 20, 2009, Business section, p. 9. See also “APA Survey Finds 
Feeling Valued Linked to Well-Being and Performance,” press release, 
American Psychological Association, March 8, 2012, www.apa.org/
news/press/releases/2012/03/well-being.aspx (accessed July 8, 2014).

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN30
89. D. Mattioli and K. Maher, “At 3M, Innovation Comes in Tweaks and 
Snips,” The Wall Street Journal, March 1, 2010, pp. B1, B4.
90. J. Denrell, “Vicarious Learning, Undersampling of Failure, and the 
Myths of Management,” Organizational Science, May–June 2003, 
pp. 227–243.
91. A. Feuer, “An Ex-Convict’s Start-up Is the Cellblocks’ Amazon.com, an 
‘Inmate Superstore,’” The New York Times, November 3, 2013, p. News-17.
92. L. A. Bettencourt, “The Customer-Centered Innovation Map,” Harvard 
Business Review, May 2008, p. 109.
93. L. Bossidy and Ram Charan, with C. Burck, Execution: The Disci-
pline of Getting Things Done (New York: Crown Business, 2002).
94. J. Collins, “How the Mighty Fall,” BusinessWeek, May 24, 2009, 
pp. 26–38. Collins is the author of How the Mighty Fall: And Why Some 
Companies Never Give In (New York: HarperCollins, 2009).
95. Adapted from R. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organizational Behavior, 
10th ed. (McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2013), pp. 546–548.
96. Adapted in part from J. D. Ford, L. W. Ford, and A. D’Amelio, “Resis-
tance to Change: The Rest of the Story,” Academy of Management 
 Review, April 2008, pp. 362–377.
97. See “Vulnerability and Resilience,” American Psychologist, January 
1996, pp. 22–28. See also T. Kiefer, “Feeling Bad: Antecedents and Con-
sequences of Negative Emotions in Ongoing Change,” Journal of Orga-
nizational Behavior, December 2005, pp. 875–897.
98. See R. Moss Kanter, “Managing Traumatic Change: Avoiding the 
‘Unlucky 13,’” Management Review, May 1987, pp. 23–24.
99. Details of this example are provided by B. Schlender, “Inside the 
Shakeup at Sony,” Fortune, April 4, 2005, pp. 94–104.
100. See S. E. Ante, “Hewlett-Packard Layoffs Reflect Effort to Keep 
Pace with Revenue Slide,” The Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com/articles,hewlett-packard-layoffs-reflect-effort.to-
keep-pace-with-rev (accessed July 20, 2014).
101. Ibid.
102. G Anders, “Meg Whitman Jolts HP as Its Reluctant Savior,” Forbes,
May 22, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/georgeanders/2013/05/22/
meg-whitman-jolts-hp-as-its-relucta... (accessed July 20, 2014).
103. Ibid.
104. Ante, “Hewlett-Packard Layoffs Reflect Effort to Keep Pace with 
Revenue Slide.”
105. Ibid.
106. Ibid.
107. See J. Bennett, “Barra Assures Owners GM’s Cars Are Safe,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 27, 2014, p. B3.
108. This case is based on J. Bennett and S. Hughes, “Panel Prods GM 
for Actions,” The Wall Street Journal, July 18, 2014, p. B3.
CHAPTER 11
1. The Millennials: Confident. Connected. Open to Change, Pew Research 
Center Publications, February 2010, www.pewresearch.org/millennials 
(accessed July 19, 2014); A. Lenhart, K. Purcell, A. Smith, and K. Zickuhr, 
Social Media & Mobile Internet Use among Teens and Young Adults, Pew 
Internet & AmericanLife Project, February 3, 2010, www.pewinternet.org/
Reports/2010/Social-Media-and-Young-Adults.aspx?r=1 (accessed July 
19, 2014); S. Jayson, “‘iGeneration’ Has No Off Switch,” USA Today, 
February 10, 2010, pp. 1D, 2D; K. Palmer, “Talking to Gen Y about the New 
Culture of Thrift,” U.S. News & World Report, March 2010, pp. 29–32; 
Survey of Young Americans’ Attitudes Toward Politics and Public Service, 
17th ed., March 9, 2010, Institute of Politics, Harvard University, www.iop.
harvard.edu/Research-Publications/Polling/Spring-2010-Survey 
 (accessed July 12, 2014); B. Kowske and R. Rasche, Attitude? What 
 Attitude? The Evidence Behind the Work Attitudes of Millennials, Kenexa 
High  Performance Institute, August 11, 2011, www.kenexa.com/
getattachment/9aafa3e9-ae99-4db1-8376-76449e41293e/Millennials.
aspx (accessed July 12, 2014); J. Mandese, “MTV Studies Millennials in 
the Workplace: Uses It to Transform Its Own, Maybe Even Yours,” Media-
DailyNews, March 12, 2012, www.mediapost.com/publications/arti-
cle/169980/mtv-studies-millennials-in-the-workplace-uses-it.html 
(accessed July 12, 2014); M. B. Miller, K. H. Hodge, A. Brandt, and E. A. 
Schneider, “The Young and the Restless: Gen Y’ers in the Workplace! Are 
You Prepared?” FDCC Quarterly, Spring 2013, pp. 226–250; and B. Drake, 
“6 New Findings about Millennials,” Pew Research Center, March 7, 2014, 
D. A. Garvin, A. C. Edmondson, and F. Gino, “Is Yours a Learning Organi-
zation?” Harvard Business Review, March 2008, pp. 109–116.
63. W. G. Dyer, Team Building: Current Issues and New Alternatives, 3rd 
ed. (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995).
64. See R. Rodgers, J. E. Hunter, and D. L. Rogers, “Influence of Top 
Management Commitment on Management Program Success,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, February 1993, pp. 151–155.
65. R. J. Schaffer and H. A. Thomson, “Successful Change Programs Begin 
with Results,” Harvard Business Review, January–February 1992, pp. 80–89.
66. P. J. Robertson, D. R. Roberts, and J. I. Porras, “Dynamics of Planned 
Organizational Change: Assess Empirical Support for a Theoretical 
Model,” Academy of Management Journal, June 1993, pp. 619–634.
67. C.-M. Lau and H.-Y. Ngo, “Organization Development and Firm Per-
formance: A Comparison of Multinational and Local Firms,” Journal of 
International Business Studies, First Quarter 2001, pp. 95–114.
68. A. G. Lafley, interviewed by R. O. Crockett in “How P&G Plans to 
Clean Up,” BusinessWeek, April 13, 2009, p. 44.
69. Lafley, quoted in Crockett, 2009.
70. A. G. Lafley, interviewed by K. Dillon, “‘I Think of My Failures as a 
Gift,’” Harvard Business Review, April 2011, pp. 68–74.
71. J. Welch and S. Welch, “Finding Innovation Where It Lives,” Busi-
nessWeek, April 21, 2008, p. 84.
72. This discussion is adapted from R. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organi-
zational Behavior, 10th ed. (McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2013), p. 526, which is 
based on S. Berkun, The Myths of Innovation (Sebastapol, CA: O’Reilly 
Media, Inc., 2007).
73. See D. Kiley and C. Matlack, “Fiat: On the Road Back to America,” 
BusinessWeek, April 20, 2009, p. 28.
74. R. Jana, “Inspiration from Emerging Economies,” BusinessWeek, 
May 12, 2008, pp. 54–55.
75. J. McGregor, “The World’s Most Innovative Companies,” Business-
Week, April 24, 2006, pp. 63–74.
76. E. Yoon and L. Deeken, “Why It Pays to Be a Category Creator,” 
Harvard Business Review, March 2013, pp. 21–23.
77. Analysis by Kauffman Foundation, reported by D. Archer, “Learn to 
Innovate by Thinking like an Entrepreneur,” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
November 8, 2009, p. 13A.
78. A. V. Bhidé, quoted in G. Gendron, “The Origin of the Entrepreneurial 
Species,” Inc., February 2000, pp. 105–114.
79. Maxine Clark, quoted in D. Eng, “Who Built Build-a-Bear?” Fortune, 
March 19, 2012, pp. 49–52.
80. S. A. Shane, The Illusions of Entrepreneurship: The Costly Myths 
That Entrepreneurs, Investors, and Policy Makers Live By (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 2008).
81. Scott Shane, interviewed by J. Tozzi, “The Entrepreneurship Myth,” 
BusinessWeek, January 23, 2008, www.businessweek.com/smallbiz/
content/jan2008/sb20080123_809271.htm?chan=search (accessed 
July 8, 2014).
82. R. Cohen, “Vive La Dolce Vita,” The New York Times, April 16, 2006, 
sec. 4, pp. 1, 4.
83. “The World’s Most Innovative Companies 2014,” Fast Company, 
February 20, 2014, www.fastcompany.com/section/most-innovative-
companies-2014 (accessed July 8, 2014).
84. B. Jaruzelski, R. Holman, and J. Loehr, “Highlights from the 2013 
Global Innovation 1000 Study: Navigating the Digital Future,” 2013, Booz 
& Company,www.strategyand.pwc.com/media/file/Strategyand_2013-
Global-Innovation-1000-Study-Navigating-the-Digital-Future_Media-
Report.pdf (accessed July 8, 2014).
85. “3M Celebrates Innovation Milestone: Receives 100,000th 
Patent,” The New York Times, May8, 2014, http://markets.on.nytimes.
com/research/stocks/news/press_release.asp?docTag=
201405072058BIZWIRE_USPRX____BW7039&feedID=600&press_
symbol=202757 (accessed July 8, 2014).
86. C. Wilson, “Post-it Notes Have Stuck Around for a Reason,” USA 
Today, April 21, 2010, p. 1D.
87. J. C. Collins and J. I. Porris, Built to Last: Successful Habits of Vi-
sionary Companies (New York: HarperBusiness, 1994). See also T. J. 
Martin, “Ten Commandments for Managing Creative People,” Fortune, 
January 16, 1995, pp. 135–136.
88. B. Hindo, “At 3M, a Struggle between Efficiency and Creativity,” 
BusinessWeek, June 2007, pp. 8IN–14IN.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN31
1982); also see N. Branden, Self-Esteem at Work: How Confident People 
Make Powerful Companies (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998).
16. P. G. Dodgson and J. V. Wood, “Self-Esteem and the Cognitive Ac-
cessibility of Strengths and Weaknesses after Failure,” Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, July 1998, pp. 178–197; and D. B. 
Fedor, J. M. Maslyn, W. D. Davis, and K. Mathieseon, “Performance Im-
provement Efforts in Response to Negative Feedback: The Roles of 
Source Power and Recipient Self-Esteem,” Journal of Management,
January–February 2001, pp. 79–97.
17. B. R. Schlenker, M. F. Weigold, and J. R. Hallam, “Self-Serving Attri-
butions in Social Context: Effects of Self-Esteem and Social Pressure,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, May 1990, pp. 855–863; 
and P. Sellers, “Get Over Yourself,” Fortune, April 2001, pp. 76–88.
18. D. A. Stinson, C. Logel, M. P. Zanna, J. G. Holmes, J. V. Wood, and 
S. J. Spencer, “The Cost of Lower Self-Esteem: Testing a Self- and Social-
Bonds Model of Health,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
March 2008, pp. 412–428.
19. J. W. McGuire and C. V. McGuire, “Enhancing Self-Esteem by 
 Directed-Thinking Tasks: Cognitive and Affective Positivity Asymmetries,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, June 1996, p. 1124.
20. For an overall view of research on locus of control, see P. E. Spec-
tor,” Behavior in Organizations as a Function of Employee’s Locus of 
Control,” Psychological Bulletin, May 1982, pp. 482–497. The relation-
ship between locus of control and other dimensions of personality is 
examined by R. E. Johnson, C. C. Rosen, and P. E. Levy, “Getting to the 
Core Self-Evaluation: A Review and Recommendations,” Journal of Or-
ganizational Behavior, April 2008, pp. 391–413.
21. J. D. Mayer, R. D. Roberts, and S. G. Barsade, “Human Abilities: 
Emotional Intelligence,” Annual Review of Psychology, January 2008, 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1082096 (accessed July 19, 2014).
22. See O. Ybarra, E. Kross, and J. Sanchez-Burks, “The ‘Big Idea’ That 
Is Yet to Be: Toward a More Motivated, Contextual, and Dynamic Model 
of Emotional Intelligence,” Academy of Management Perspective, Vol. 
28, No. 2 (2014), pp. 93 –107; and O. J. Sheldon, D. R. Ames, and 
D. Dunning, “Emotionally Unskilled, Unaware, and Uninterested in Learning 
More: Reactions to Feedback about Deficits in Emotional Intelligence,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 99, No. 1 (2014), pp. 125–137.
23. D. Goleman, “What Makes a Leader,” Harvard Business Review, 
November–December 1998, pp. 93–102.
24. See J. E. Stellar, V. M. Manzo, M. W. Kraus, and D. Keltner, “Class 
and Compassion: Socioeconomic Factors Predict Responses to 
 Suffering,” Emotion, December 12, 2011, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22148992 (accessed July 19, 2014).
25. The Personal Profile Analysis (PPA), by Thomas International, is de-
scribed in M. Weinstein, “Emotional Evaluation,” Training, July/August 
2009, pp. 20–23.
26. See A. Chapman, “Empathy, Trust, Diffusing Conflict and Handling 
Complaints,” Businessballs.com, www.businessballs.com/empathy.htm 
(accessed July 19, 2014).
27. Charlotte Beers, interviewed by A. Bryant, “The Best Scorecard Is 
the One That You Keep for Yourself,” The New York Times, April 1, 2012, 
p. BU-2.
28. See M. Rokeach, Beliefs, Attitudes, and Values (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1968), p. 168.
29. M. Rokeach, The Nature of Human Values (New York: Free Press, 
1973).
30. See “Survey: Work/Life Balance Off-Kilter in U.S.,” HR News, 
September 15, 2010, Society for Human Resource Management, www.
shrm.org/Publications/HRNews/Pages/WorkLifeOffKilter.aspx; D. Mein-
ert, “The Gift of Time,” HR Magazine, November 2011, p. 37; “Men, Too, 
Desire Work/Life Balance,” HR Disciplines, December 6, 2011, Society 
for Human Resource Management, www.shrm.org/hrdisciplines/bene-
fits/Articles/Pages/WorkLifeMen.aspx (both accessed July 19, 2014); 
and B. Groysberg and R. Abrahams, “Manage Your Work, Manage Your 
Life,” Harvard Business Review, March 2014, pp. 58–66.
31. M. Fishbein and I. Ajzen, Belief, Attitude, Intention and Behavior: An 
Introduction to Theory and Research (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley 
Publishing, 1975), p. 6.
32. See M. Reid and A. Wood, “An Investigation into Blood Donation In-
tentions Among Non-Donors,” International Journal of Nonprofit and 
Voluntary Sector Marketing, February 2008, pp. 31–43; and J. Ramsey, 
www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/03/07/6-new-findings-about-mil-
lennials (accessed July 19, 2014).
2. For a thorough discussion of personality psychology, see D. P. McAd-
ams and J. L. Pals, “A New Big Five: Fundamental Principles for an Inte-
grative Science of Personality,” American Psychologist, April 2006, 
pp. 204–217.
3. See S. A. Woods, F. Lievens, F. De Fruyt, and B. Wille, “Personality 
Across Working Life: The Longitudinal and Reciprocal Influences of Per-
sonality on Work,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 34, No. S1 
(2013), pp. S7–S25.
4. The landmark report is J. M. Digman, “Personality Structure: Emer-
gence of the Five-Factor Model,” Annual Review of Psychology, Vol. 41 
(1990), pp. 417–440. Also see C. Viswesvaran and D. S. Ones, “Mea-
surement Error in ‘Big Five Factors’ Personality Assessment: Reliability 
Generalization across Studies and Measures,” Education and Psycho-
logical Measurement, April 2000, pp. 224–235; P. Sackett and F. 
Lievens, “Personnel Selection,” Annual Review of Psychology, Vol. 59 
(2008), pp. 419–450; B. Wille, J. Hofmans, M. Feys, and F. De Fruyt, 
“Maturation of .Work Attitudes: Correlated Change with Big Five Person-
ality Traits and Reciprocal Effects over 15 Years,” Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, Vol. 35 (2014), pp. 507–529.
5. M. R. Barrick and M. K. Mount, “The Big Five Personality Dimensions 
and Job Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Personnel Psychology, Spring 
1991, pp. 1–26.
6. Barrick and Mount, 1991, p. 18; also see H. Moon, “The Two Faces of 
Conscientiousness: Duty and Achievement Striving in Escalation of 
Commitment Dilemmas,” Journal of Applied Psychology, June 2001, 
pp. 533–540; and M. R. Barrick, G. L. Stewart, and M. Piotrowski, “Per-
sonality and Job Performance: Test of the Mediating Effects of Motiva-
tion among Sales Representatives,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 
February 2002, pp. 43–51.
7. See F. P. Morgeson, M. A. Campion, R. L. Dipboye, J. R. Hollenbeck, K. 
Murphy, and N. Schmitt, “Reconsidering the Use of Personality Tests in 
Personnel Selection,” Personnel Psychology, Autumn 2007, pp. 683–
729; and D. Armstrong, “Malingerer Test Roils Personal-Injury Law,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 5, 2008, pp. A1, A13.
8. See, for example, V. Gecas, “The Social Psychology of Self-Efficacy,” 
in W. R. Scott and J. Blake, eds., Annual Review of Sociology, Vol. 15 
(Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews, 1989), pp. 291–316; C. K. Stevens, A. G. 
Bavetta, and M. E. Gist, “Gender Differences in the Acquisition of Salary 
Negotiation Skills: The Role of Goals, Self-Efficacy, and Perceived Con-
trol,” Journal of Applied Psychology, October 1993, pp. 723–735; and D. 
Eden and Y. Zuk, “Seasickness as a Self Fulfilling Prophecy: Raising 
Self-Efficacy to Boost Performance at Sea,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, October 1995, pp. 628–635.
9. J. Barling and R. Beattle, “Self-Efficacy Beliefs and Sales 
Performance,” Journal of Organizational Behavior Management, Spring 
1983, pp. 41–51.
10. A. D. Stajkovic and F. Luthans, “Self-Efficacy and Work-Related Per-
formance: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin, September 1998, 
pp. 240–261.
11. For more on learned helplessness, see M. J. Martinko and W. L. 
Gardner, “Learned Helplessness: An Alternative Explanation for Perfor-
mance Deficits,” Academy of Management Review, April 1982, 
pp. 195–204; and C. R. Campbell and M. J. Martinko, “An Integrative 
Attributional Perspective of Employment and Learned Helplessness: 
A Multimethod Field Study,” Journal of Management, No. 2, 1998, 
pp. 173–200.
12. W. S. Silver, T. R. Mitchell, and M. E. Gist, “Response to Successful 
and Unsuccessful Performance: The Moderating Effect of Self-Efficacy 
on the Relationship between Training and Newcomer Adjustment,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, April 1995, pp. 211–225.
13. See J. V. Vancouver, K. M. More, and R. J. Yoder, “Self-Efficacy and 
Resource Allocation: Support for a Nonmonotonic, Discontinuous 
Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2008, pp. 35–47.
14. The positive relationship between self-efficacy and readiness for 
retraining is documented in L. A. Hill and J. Elias, “Retraining Midcareer 
Managers: Career History and Self-Efficacy Beliefs,” Human Resource 
Management, Summer 1990, pp. 197–217.
15. V. Gecas, “The Self-Concept,” in R. H. Turner and J. F. Short Jr., eds., 
Annual Review of Sociology, Vol. 8 (Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews, 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN32
pp. 409–414; and M. C. Healy, M. Lehman, and M. A. McDaniel, “Age 
and Voluntary Turnover: A Quantitative Review,” Personnel Psychology,
Summer 1995, pp. 335–345.
49. Central Intelligence Agency, The World Factbook, 2014, https://
www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/us.html (ac-
cessed July 18, 2014).
50. L. A. Jacobsen, M. Kent, and M. Mather, “America’s Aging Popula-
tion,” Population Bulletin, February 2011, Population Reference Bureau, 
www.prb.org/pdf11/aging-in-america.pdf (accessed July 18, 2014).
51. K. Helliker, “The Doctor Is Still In: Secrets of Health from a Famed 
96-Year-Old Physician,” The Wall Street Journal, March 8, 2005, p. D1.
52. Statistics are reported in Table A-20, “Employed Persons by Occu-
pation, Race, Hispanic or Latino Ethnicity, and Sex,” February 2012, in 
Employment and Earnings, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, 2012, www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cpseea20.pdf (accessed 
July 18, 2014).
53. Data analysis by D. D. Kallick, Fiscal Policy Institute, reported in J. 
Preston, “Immigrants in Work Force: Study Belies Image,” The New York 
Times, April 16, 2010, pp. A1, A3.
54. J. C. Brigham, “Limiting Conditions of the ‘Physical Attractiveness 
Stereotype’: Attributions about Divorce,” Journal of Research and Per-
sonality, Vol. 14 (1980), pp. 365–375; H. Hatfield and S. Sprecher, Mir-
ror, Mirror . . . The Importance of Looks in Everyday Life (Albany, NY: 
State University of New York Press, 1986).
55. I. Waismel-Manor and Y. Tsfati, “Do Attractive Congresspersons Get 
More Media Coverage?” Political Communication, Vol. 28 (2011), 
pp. 440–463; and A. E. White, D. T. Kenrick, and S. L. Neuberg, “Beauty 
at the Ballot Box: Disease Threats Predict Preference for Physically At-
tractive Leaders,” Psychological Science, October 11, 2013, http://pss.
sagepub.com/content/24/12/2429 (accessed July 19, 2014). See also 
S. Roberts, “Study Says Looks Matter as TV Covers Congress,” The New 
York Times, January 6, 2012, p. A15; and A. E. White and D. T. Kenrick, 
“Why Attractive Candidates Win,” The New York Times, November 3, 
2013, p. SR-12.
56. M. M. Clifford and E. H. Walster, “The Effect of Physical Attractive-
ness on Teacher Expectation,” Sociology of Education, Vol. 46 (1973), 
pp. 248–258.
57. H. R. Varian, “Beauty and the Fattened Wallet,” The New York Times,
April 6, 2006, www.nytimes.com/2006/04/06/business/06scene.
html?ref=halrvarian; and J. T. Halford and S. H. C. Hsu, “Beauty Is 
Wealth: CEO Appearance and Shareholder Value,” Social Science Re-
search Network, December 5, 2013, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/pa-
pers.cfm?abstract_id=2357756 (both accessed July 19, 2014). See 
also A. R. Sorkin, “Never Mind the Resume : How Hot Is the CEO?” The 
New York Times, January 7, 2014, pp. B1, B4.
58. R.Adams, M. Keloharju, and S.Knüpfer, “Match Made at Birth? What 
Traits of a Million Swedes Tell Us about CEOs,” Social Science Research 
Network, May 13, 2014, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2436765 (accessed July 19, 2014).
59. D. S. Hamermesh and J. Abrevaya, “Beauty Is the Promise of Hap-
piness?” March 1, 2011. IZA Discussion Paper No. 5600, Institute for 
the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1801666 
(accessed July 19, 2014).
60. D. S. Hamermesh, “Ugly? You May Have a Case,” The New York 
Times, August 27, 2011, www.nytimes.com/2011/08/28/opinion/sun-
day/ugly-you-may-have-a-case.html (accessed July 19, 2014).
61. D. S. Hamermesh, Beauty Pays: Why Attractive People Are More 
Successful (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2011).
62. Hamermesh, quoted in S. Jayson, “The Ugly Truth: Good Looks 
Make You Richer, Happier,” USA Today, March 30, 2011, p. 2B.
63. M. M. Mobius and T. S. Rosenblat, “Why Beauty Matters,” American 
Economic Review, March 2006, pp. 222–235.
64. Varian, “Beauty and the Fattened Wallet.”
65. M. W. Howard and M. J. Kahana, “A Distributed Representation of 
Temporal Context,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, Vol. 46 (2002), 
pp. 269–299.
66. T. Odean and B. M. Barber, “All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention 
and News on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Inves-
tors,” The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 21, No. 2 (2008), pp. 785–
818. See also P. Sullivan, “Want an Active Investment Manager? Here’s 
What to Look For,” The New York Times, March 30, 2012, p. B8.
B. J. Punnett, and D. Greenidge, “A Social Psychological Account of Ab-
senteeism in Barbados,” Human Resource Management Journal, April 
2008, pp. 97–117.
33. B. M. Shaw and J. Ross, “Stability in the Midst of Change: A Dispo-
sitional Approach to Job Attitudes,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
 August 1985, pp. 469–480; see also J. Schaubroeck, D. C. Ganster, and 
B. Kemmerer, “Does Trait Affect Promote Job Attitude Stability?” Journal 
of Organizational Behavior, March 1996, pp. 191–196.
34. J. S. Becker, “Empirical Validation of Affect, Behavior, and Cognition 
as Distinct Components of Attitude,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, May 1984, pp. 1191–1205; the components or structure of 
attitudes is thoroughly discussed by A. P. Brief, Attitudes in and around 
Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998), pp. 49–84.
35. L. Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press, 1957).
36. R. Moss Kanter, “How Great Companies Think Differently,” Harvard 
Business Review, November 2011, pp. 66–78.
37. A. H. Tangari, J. Kees, J. C. Andrews, and S. Burton, “Can Corrective 
Ad Statements Based on U.S. v. Philip Morris USA Inc. Impact Consumer 
Beliefs about Smoking?” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing Vol. 29, 
No. 2 (2010), pp. 153–169.
38. Adapted from R. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organizational Behavior, 
10th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2013), Figure 7-1, p. 181.
39. Definition adapted from C. M. Judd and B. Park, “Definition and 
Assessment of Accuracy in Social Stereotypes,” Psychological Review,
January 1993, p. 110. See also D. T. Wegener, J. K. Clark, and R. E. Petty, 
“Not All Stereotyping Is Created Equal: Differential Consequences of 
Thoughtful versus Nonthoughtful Stereotyping,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, January 2006, pp. 42–59.
40. B. P. Allen, “Gender Stereotypes Are Not Accurate: A Replication of 
Martin (1987) Using Diagnostic vs. Self-Report and Behavioral Criteria,” 
Sex Roles, May 1995, pp. 583–600.
41. Work & Power Survey conducted by Elle and MSNBC.com, reported 
in E. Tahmincioglu, “Men Rule—At Least in Workplace Attitudes,” MS-
NBC, March 8, 2007, www.msnbc.msn.com/id/17345308/ns/business-
careers/t/men-rule-least-workplace-attitudes (accessed July 19, 2014); 
J. V. Sanchez-Hucles and D. D. Davis, “Women and Women of Color in 
Leadership,” American Psychologist, April 2010, pp. 171–181; and 
S. Bruckmuller and N. R. Brandscombe, “How Women End Up on the 
‘Glass Cliff,’” Harvard Business Review, January–February 2011, p. 26.
42. J. D. Olian, D. P. Schwab, and Y. Haberfeld, “The Impact of Applicant 
Gender Compared to Qualifications on Hiring Recommendations: A 
Meta-Analysis of Experimental Studies,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, April 1988, pp. 180–195; and K. P. Carson, 
C. L. Sutton, and P. D. Corner, “Gender Bias in Performance Appraisals: A 
Meta-Analysis,” paper presented at the 49th Annual Academy of Man-
agement Meeting, Washington, DC: 1989.
43. J. Landau, “The Relationship of Race and Gender to Managers’ Rat-
ings of Promotion Potential,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, July 
1995, pp. 391–400. See also I. H. Lang, “Have Women Shattered Corpo-
rate Glass Ceiling? No,” USA Today, April 15, 2010, p. 11A; and B. Wa-
ber, “Gender Bias by the Numbers,” Bloomberg Businessweek, February 
3–February 9, 2014, pp. 8–10.
44. R. A. Posthuma and M. A. Campion, “Age Stereotypes in the Work-
place: Common Stereotypes, Moderators, and Future Research Direc-
tions” Journal of Management, February 2009, pp. 158–188.
45. J. Levitz and P. Shishkin, “More Workers Cite Age Bias after Lay-
offs,” The Wall Street Journal, March 11, 2009, pp. D1, D2; and 
L. Wolgemuth, “When Age Bias Hinders the Job Hunt,” U.S. News & World 
Report, October 2009, p. 72.
46. S. R. Rhodes, “Age-Related Differences in Work Attitudes and Be-
havior: A Review and Conceptual Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin,
March 1983, p. 38; R. J. Grossman, “Invest in Older Workers,” HR Mag-
azine, August 2013, pp. 20 –25; and W. Lutz, “The Truth about Aging 
Populations,” Harvard Business Review, January–February 2014, p. 34.
47. See T.W.H. Ng and D. C. Feldman, “The Relationship of Age to Ten 
Dimensions of Job Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology, March 
2008, pp. 392–423; and R. J. Grossman, “Keep Pace with Older Work-
ers,” HR Magazine, May 2008, pp. 39–46.
48. J. J. Martocchio, “Age-Related Differences in Employee Absentee-
ism: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychology and Aging, December 1989, 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN33
plied Psychology, Vol. 96 (2011), pp. 677–695; and C. D’Angela, “In 
Post-Recession World, Recognition Boosts Recovery,” The Power of In-
centives: Special Advertising Supplement in HR Magazine, September 
2010, pp. 93–97.
83. See Kahn, “Psychological Conditions of Personal Engagement and 
Disengagement at Work.”
84. These five job dimensions are developed by researchers at Cornell 
University as part of the Job Descriptive Index. For a review of the de-
velopment of the JDI, see P. C. Smith, L. M. Kendall, and C. L. Hulin, The 
Measurement of Satisfaction in Work and Retirement (Skokie, IL: Rand 
McNally, 1969).
85. See A. J. Kinicki, F. M. McKee-Ryan, C. A. Schriesheim, and K. P. 
Carson, “Assessing the Construct Validity of the Job Descriptive Index: A 
Review and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology, February 
2002, pp. 14–32.
86. These figures come from the annual employee satisfaction survey by 
the Conference Board, reported in G. Levanon, “New Job Satisfaction Re-
port from The Conference Board,” The Conference Board, June 18, 2014, 
https://hcexchange.conference-board.org/blog/post.
cfm?post=3028&blogid=1. See also L. Weber “U.S. Workers Can’t Get No 
(Job) Satisfaction,” The Wall Street Journal, June 18, 2014, http://blogs.
wsj.com/atwork/2014/06/18/u-s-workers-cant-get-no-job-satisfaction 
(both accessed July 19, 2014).
87. Society for Human Resource Management, “Employee Job Satisfac-
tion and Engagement: The Road to Recovery,” 2014, www.nasrecruitment.
com/uploads/files/shrm-2014-employee-job-satisfaction-engagement-
survey-100.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
88. P. Davidson, “Overworked and Underpaid?” USA Today, April16, 
2012, pp. 1A, 2A.
89. The various models are discussed in T. A. Judge, C. J. Thoresen, J. 
E. Bono, and G. K. Patton, “The Job Satisfaction–Job Performance Rela-
tionship: A Qualitative and Quantitative Review,” Psychological Bulletin,
May 2001, pp. 376–407. See also Kreitner and Kinicki, Organizational 
Behavior, pp. 168–170.
90. Ibid. Also see M. Riketta, “The Causal Relation between Job Atti-
tudes and Performance: A Meta-Analysis of Panel Studies,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, March 2008, pp. 472–481.
91. Survey of adults conducted for Adecco Staffing North America, re-
ported in K. Gurchiek, “Good News for Moms Reconsidering Work,” HR 
Magazine, July 2006, p. 30.
92. See N. Podsakoff, J. A. LePine, and M. A. LePine, “Differential Chal-
lenge Stressor-Hindrance Stressor Relationships with Job Attitudes, Turn-
over Intentions, Turnover, and Withdrawal Behavior: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, March 2007, pp. 438–454; and M. Riketta, 
“Attitudinal Organizational Commitment and Job Performance: A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, March 2002, pp. 257–266.
93. See M. Riketta, “Attitudinal Organizational Commitment and Job 
Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Organizational Behavior,
March 2002, pp. 257–266.
94. Meta-analysis across results summarizing 27,500 people can be 
found in R. W. Griffeth, P. W. Hom, and S. Gaertner: “A Meta-Analysis of 
Antecedents and Correlates of Employee Turnover: Update, Moderator 
Tests, and Research Implications for the Next Millennium,” Journal of 
Management, Vol. 26 (2000), pp. 463–488.
95. See R. D. Hackett, “Work Attitudes and Employee Absenteeism: A 
Synthesis of the Literature,” Journal of Occupational Psychology, 1989, 
pp. 235–248.
96. Results can be found in M. R. Barrick and R. D. Zimmerman, “Re-
ducing Voluntary Turnover through Selection,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, January 2005, pp. 159–166.
97. Costs of turnover are discussed by R. W. Griffeth and P. W. Hom, 
Retaining Valued Employees (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001).
98. Y. Lermusiaux, “Calculating the High Cost of Employee Turnover,” 
HR.com, October 6, 2003, www.hr.com/SITEFORUM?&t=/Default/gatew
ay&i=1116423256281&application=story&active=no&ParentID=11192
78077613&StoryID=1119652547546&xref=http%3A//www.google.
com/url%3Fsa%3Dt%26rct%3Dj%26q%3D%26esrc%3Ds%26source%
3Dweb%26cd%3D1%26ved%3D0CB0QFjAA%26url%3Dhttp%253A%2
52F%252Fwww.hr.com%252Fhr%252Fcommunities%252Fstaffing_
and_recruitment%252Fcalculating_the_high_cost_of_employee_turn-
over_eng.html%26ei%3D08jKU4WIFqXUiwLX2YH4Dw%26usg%3DAFQj
67. Business manager Gopal Sharma, quoted in R. Subramanian, “Get 
Noticed by Your Bosses in Second Half for a Good Bonus,” The Economic 
Times (India), March 30, 2012, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/2012-03-30/news/31260832_1_bonuses-hr-manager-quantum 
(accessed July 19, 2014).
68. D. Sengupta, “Adobe Systems Set to Scrap Annual Appraisals, to 
Rely on Regular Feedback to Reward Staff,” The Economic Times 
(India), March 27, 2012, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
com/2012-03-27/news/31245058_1_adobe-systems-appraisal-feed-
back (accessed July 19, 2014).
69. S. J. Linton and L. E. Warg, “Attributions (Beliefs) and Job Satisfac-
tion Associated with Back Pain in an Industrial Setting,” Perceptual and 
Motor Skills, February 1993, pp. 51–62.
70. W. S. Silver, T. R. Mitchell, and M. E. Gist, “Responses to Successful 
and Unsuccessful Performance: The Moderating Effect of Self-Efficacy 
on the Relationship between Performance and Attributions,” Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes, June 1995, pp. 286–
299; and D. Dunning, A. Leuenberger, and D. A. Sherman, “A New Look 
at Motivated Inference: Are Self-Serving Theories of Success a Product 
of Motivational Forces?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
July 1995, pp. 58–68.
71. C. Forelle and S. Fidler, “Europe’s Original Sin,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 3, 2010, p. A1.
72. See D. Eden and Y. Zuk, “Seasickness as a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy: 
Raising Self-Efficacy to Boost Performance at Sea,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, October 1995, pp. 628–635. For a thorough review of re-
search on the Pygmalion effect, see D. Eden, Pygmalion in Manage-
ment: Productivity as a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy (Lexington, MA: 
Lexington Books, 1990), ch. 2.
73. L. Iorio, quoted in G. Dutton, “Yes! It’s Monday,” Training, July– 
August 2009, p. 32.
74. D. B. McNatt, “Ancient Pygmalion Joins Contemporary Manage-
ment: A Meta-Analysis of the Result,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 
April 2000, pp. 314–322. See also T. Inamori and F. Analoui, “Beyond 
Pygmalion Effect: The Role of Managerial Perception,” Journal of Man-
agement Development, Vol. 29 (2010), pp. 306–321.
75. These recommendations were adapted from J. Keller, “Have 
Faith—in You,” Selling Power, June 1996, pp. 84, 86; and R. W.  Goddard, 
“The Pygmalion Effect,” Personnel Journal, June 1985, p. 10.
76. See J. K. Harter, F. L. Schmidt, and T. L. Hayes, “Business-Unit-Level 
Relationship between Employee Satisfaction, Employee Engagement, 
and Business Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, April 2002, pp. 268–279. For another definition, see W. A. Kahn, 
“Psychological Conditions of Personal Engagement and Disengagement 
at Work,” Academy of Management Journal, December 1990, p. 75.
77. W. H. Macey, B. Schneider, K. M. Barbera, and S. A. Young, Employee 
Engagement: Tools for Analysis, Practice, and Competitive Advantage 
(West Sussex, United Kingdom: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), p. 20.
78. See W. H. Macey and B. Schneider, “The Nature of Employee En-
gagement,” Industrial and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on 
Science and Practice, 2008, pp. 3–30; and A. J. Wefald and R. G. 
Downey, “Job Engagement in Organizations: Fad, Fashion, or Folderol?” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, January 2009, pp. 141–145. A pro-
prietary measure of employee engagement is provided by Development 
Dimensions International, Inc.; see M. Phelps, “Is It Time to Rethink Em-
ployee Engagement?” DDI White Paper, www.ddiworld.com/products_
services/e3.asp (accessed July 19, 2014).
79. See 5 Rules for Talent Management in the New Economy, Towers 
Watson, May 2010, www.towerswatson.com/~/media/Pdf/Insights/IC-
Types/Survey-Research-Results/2010/05/Five_rules_talent-
mgmt_5-20-10.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
80. Results based on survey sent by the Hay Group and Bloomberg Busi-
nessweek.com to 1,863 global respondents in 1,109 organizations, re-
ported in R. Lash and C. Huber, “2009 Best Companies for Leadership,” 
Hay Group Webinar, February 18, 2010, www.rb.ru/dop_upload/file_2010-
02-26_17.49.48_presentation_final.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
81. See W. H. Macy and B. Schneider, “The Meaning of Employee Engage-
ment,” Industrial and Organizational Psychology, March 2008, pp. 3–30.
82. C. A. Hartnell, A. Y. Lou, and A. Kinicki, “Organizational Culture and 
Organizational Effectiveness: A Meta-Analytic Investigation of the Com-
peting Values Framework’s Theoretical Suppositions,” Journal of Ap-

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN34
2010, pp. 24–44; and J. Chamberlin, A. Novotney, E. Packard, and 
M. Price, “Enhancing Worker Well-Being,” Monitor on Psychology, May 
2008, pp. 26–29.
110. C. Kavanaugh, “‘Murder by Proxy,’” Royal Oak (Michigan) Daily 
Tribune, April 16, 2010, www.dailytribune.com/20100416/murder-by-
proxy (accessed July 19, 2014).
111. R. Brunswick, quoted in C. Hymowitz, “Bosses Have to Learn How 
to Confront Troubled Employees,” The Wall Street Journal, April 23, 
2007, p. B1.
112. Hymowitz, “Bosses Have to Learn How to Confront Troubled 
Employees.”
113. Study by the Migration Policy Institute, Washington, DC, reported 
in L. Burton, “Illegal Immigration Impact on Economy Small, Group 
Says,” San Francisco Chronicle, December 3, 2009, p. A24.
114. D. R. Hekman, K. Aquino, B. P. Owens, T. R. Mitchell, P. Schilpzand, 
and K. Leavitt, “An Examination of Whether and How Racial and Gender 
Biases Influence Customer Satisfaction,” Academy of Management 
Journal, Vol. 55 (2010), pp. 643–666.
115. Data from Economic Policy Institute, reported in J. R. Hagerty, 
“Young Adults See Their Pay Decline,” The Wall Street Journal, March 7, 
2012, p. A3. See also Drake, “6 New Findings about Millennials”; D. 
Horn, “Slow Start, Shaky Future for Millennials,” USA Today, March 16, 
2014, www.usatoday.com/story/money/personalfinance/2014/03/16/
millennials-financial-struggles/6464605 (accessed July 19, 2014).
116. S. E. Page, The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates 
Better Groups, Firms, Schools, and Societies (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2007). Page is also the author of Diversity and Com-
plexity (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2011).
117. S. E. Page, quoted in C. Dreifus, “In Professor’s Model, Diversity = 
Productivity,” The New York Times, January 8, 2008, p. D2. See also G. 
A. Van Kleef and C. K. W. De Dreu, “Bridging Faultlines by Valuing Diver-
sity: Diversity Beliefs, Information-Elaboration, and Performance in Di-
verse Work Groups,” Journal of Applied Psychology, September 2007, 
pp. 1189–1199. See also S. A. Hewlett, M. Marshall, and L. Sherbin, 
“How Diversity Can Drive Innovation,” Harvard Business Review, De-
cember 2013, p. 30; and M. P. Gregoire, interviewed by A. Bryant, “A 
Diverse Team Is a Creative Team,” The New York Times, January 12, 
2014, p. BU-2.
118. M. Loden, Implementing Diversity (Chicago: Irwin, 1996), pp. 14–15.
119. H. Collingwood, “Who Handles a Diverse Work Force Best?” Work-
ing Woman, February 1996, p. 25.
120. S. Ghumman and A. M. Ryan, “”Not Welcome Here: Discrimination 
Towards Women Who Wear the Muslim Headscarf,” Human Relations, 
May 2013, pp. 671–698.
121. B. Schlender, “Peter Drucker Takes the Long View,” Fortune, Sep-
tember 28, 1998, pp. 162–173.
122. B. Stokes, “The Countries That Will Be Most Impacted by Aging 
Population,” Pew Research Center, February 4, 2014, www.pewre-
search.org/fact-tank/2014/02/04/the-countries-that-will-be-most- 
impacted-by-aging-population (accessed July 19, 2014).
123. M. Toossi, “Labor Force Projections to 2022: A More Slowly Grow-
ing Workforce,” Monthly Labor Review, January 2012, www.bls.gov/
opub/mlr/2012/01/art3full.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
124. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Projections: 2012–2022 
Summary,” Economic News Release, December 19, 2013, www.bls.
gov/news.release/ecopro.nr0.htm (accessed July 19, 2014).
125. “Women’s Participation in Education and the Workforce,” Council 
of Economic Advisors, March 12, 2014, www.whitehouse.gov/sites/de-
fault/files/docs/womens_participation_in_education_and_the_work-
force.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
126. “Census Bureau Reports Women-Owned Firms Numbered 7.8 Mil-
lion in 2007, Generated Receipts of $1.2 Trillion,” news release, U.S. Cen-
sus Bureau, December 7, 2010, www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/
archives/business_ownership/cb10-184.html (accessed July 19, 2014).
127. “Women CEOs of the Fortune 1000,” Catalyst, July 14, 2014, 
www.catalyst.org/knowledge/women-ceos-fortune-1000 (accessed 
July 19, 2014).
128. J. Zumbrun, “In Equal-Pay Debate, Disparity Is in the Details,” The 
Wall Street Journal, April 11, 2014, p. A4; and C. C. Miller, “Pay Gap Is 
Because of Gender, Not Jobs,” The New York Times, April 24, 2014, p. 
B3. See also U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, 
CNHH6tUP1U-8sPJUYmRUSa8PaZjWuQ%26bvm%3Dbv.71198958%
2Cd.cGE (accessed July 19, 2014). An automated program for calculat-
ing the cost of turnover can be found at “Calculate Your Turnover Costs,” 
KeepEmployees.com, www.keepemployees.com/search_caf.php?src=li
nen&uid=www53cac940141ec7.13349496&abp=1&country=US&quer
y=Turnover%20Calculator&afdToken=CqgBChMI_OOwq5DSvwIVzFd-
Ch0uagAUGAEgAFCP0fkBUP7HyQVQ9p_MCFC0lN8OUPKC9w9QxZDzEl-
D2oK0pUIjSrk5QidKuTlDyh-FhUPOH4WFQpYj5ZlDMrJOPAVD1ge6XAVD-
pgu6XAVDwgu6XAVDisdW5AVD6g9idA1DMk9jCA1DNk9jCA3F4Mbcw-
38GITI0BO2QQc5EByIAU0zxDwAyRAR66IlqiE7mQEhkAnIUCSo7C-
3t9S0jqIHzGufObc8_99DAO (accessed July 9, 2014).
99. Onboarding is discussed by T. Arnold, “Ramping Up Onboarding,” 
HR Magazine, May 2010, pp. 75–76.
100. Techniques for reducing turnover are discussed by M. A. Tucker, 
“Show and Tell,” HR Magazine, January 2012, pp. 51–53; E. Krell, “5 
Ways to Manage High Turnover,” HR Magazine, April 2012, pp. 63–65; 
and A. Quirk, “The Business Case for Flex,” HR Magazine, April 2012, 
pp. 44–46.
101. D. W. Organ, “The Motivational Basis of Organizational Citizenship 
Behavior,” in B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings, eds., Research in Organi-
zational Behavior (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1990), p. 46.
102. See N. P. Podsakoff, S. W. Whiting, P. M. Podsakoff, and B. D. 
Blume, “Individual- and Organizational-Level Consequences of Organi-
zational Citizenship Behaviors: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, January 2009, pp. 122–141; D. S. Whitman, D. L. Van Rooy, 
and C. Viswesvaran, “Satisfaction, Citizenship Behaviors, and Perfor-
mance in Work Units: A Meta-Analysis of Collective Relations,” Person-
nel Psychology, Spring 2010, pp. 41–81; R. S. Rubin, E. C. Dierdorff, and 
D. G. Bachrach, “Boundaries of Citizenship Behavior: Curvilinearity and 
Context in the Citizenship and Task Performance Relationship,” Person-
nel Psychology, Vol. 66, No. 2 (2013), pp. 377–406; and N. C. Carpenter, 
C. M. Berry, and L. Houston, “A Meta-Analytic Comparison of Self-Re-
ported and Other-Reported Organizational Citizenship Behavior,” Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 35 (2014), pp. 547–574.
103. D. S. Ones, “Introduction to the Special Issue on Counterproduc-
tive Behaviors at Work,” International Journal of Selection and Assess-
ment, Vol. 10, No. 1–2 (2002), pp. 1–4. See also P. E. Spector and S. Fox, 
“Theorizing about the Deviant Citizen: An Attributional Explanation of the 
Interplay of Organizational Citizenship and Counterproductive Work Be-
havior,” Human Resource Management Review, June 2010, pp. 132–
143; K. Tyler, “Helping Employees Cool It,” HR Magazine, April 2010, 
pp. 53–55; M. S. Hershcovis, “‘Incivility, Social Undermining, Bullying . . . 
Oh My!’: A Call to Reconcile Constructs within Workplace Aggression 
Research,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 32 (2010), pp. 499–
519; J. Wu and J. M. Lebreton, “Reconsidering the Dispositional Basis of 
Counterproductive Work Behavior: The Role of Aberrant Personality,” 
Personnel Psychology, Vol. 64 (2011), pp. 593–626; and L. L. Meier and 
P. E. Spector, “Reciprocal Effects of Work Stressors and Counterproduc-
tive Work Behavior: A Five-Wave Longitudinal Study,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, May 2013, pp. 529–539.
104. Study by Georgetown University and Thunderbird School of Global 
Management, cited in R. Feintzeig, “When Co-workers Don’t Play Nice,” 
The Wall Street Journal, August 28, 2013, p. B6.
105. J. Janove, “Jerks at Work,” HR Magazine, May 2007, pp. 111–117.
106. S. Dilchert, D. S. Ones, R. D. Davis, and C. D. Rostow, “Cognitive 
Ability Predicts Objectively Measured Counterproductive Work Behav-
iors,” Journal of Applied Psychology, May 2007, pp. 616–627.
107. J. R. Detert, L. K. Treviño, E. R. Burris, and M. Andiappan, “Mana-
gerial Modes of Influence and Counterproductivity in Organizations: A 
Longitudinal Business-Unit-Level Investigation,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, July 2007, pp. 993–1005.
108. B. Leonard, “Study: Bully Bosses Prevalent in U.S.,” HR Magazine, 
May 2007, pp. 22, 28. For more on abusive bosses, see D. Auerbach, 
“Conquer Your Bad Boss Conflicts,” Reno Gazette-Journal, April 7, 2013, 
p. 9F; D. Meinert, “Abusive Supervisors May Be Overwhelmed,” HR 
Magazine, November 2013, p. 18; and M. E. Chan and D. J. McAllister, 
“Abusive Supervision through the Lens of Employee State Paranoia,” 
Academy of Management Review, January 2014, pp. 44–66.
109. See M. Sandy Hershcovis and J. Barling, “Toward a Multi-Foci Ap-
proach to Workplace Aggression: A Meta-Analytic Review of Outcomes 
from Different Perpetrators,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, January 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN35
Workplace-Jun-2007.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014). See also B. R. 
Ragins, R. Singh, and J. M. Cornwell, “Making the Invisible Visible: Fear 
and Disclosure of Sexual Orientation at Work,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, July 2007, pp. 1103–1118; and “A Broken Bargain: Unchecked 
Discrimination Against LGBT Workers,” Movement Advancement Proj-
ect, May 2014, www.lgbtmap.org/file/unchecked-discrimination-
against-lgbt-workers.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
144. Human Rights Campaign survey, cited in “Top U.S. Firms Support 
Gays, Pressure States over Same-Sex Marriage,” South China Morning 
Post, July 6, 2013, www.scmp.com/business/companies/article/1276364/
top-us-firms-support-gays-pressure-states-over-same-sex-marriage 
 (accessed July 19, 2014).
145. R. Wolf, “Year after Gay Marriage Ruling, a Changed Land,” USA 
Today, June 25, 2014, pp. 1A, 2A; and Associated Press, “Protection for 
Gay Federal Workers Signed into Law,” San Francisco Chronicle, July 
22, 2014, p. A7.
146. M. W. Brault, “Americans with Disabilities: 2010,” Current Popula-
tion Reports, July 2012, U.S. Census Bureau, www.census.gov/
prod/2012pubs/p70-131.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
147. See D. C. Baldridge and M. L. Swift, “Withholding Requests for 
Disability Accommodation: The Role of Individual Differences and Dis-
ability Attributes,” Journal of Management, March 2013, pp. 743–762.
148. Ibid.
149. See M. Korn, “Disability Studies Become a Hot Subject on Cam-
pus,” The Wall Street Journal, March 6, 2014, p. B7.
150. A. Pyke, “Half a Million People with College Degrees Are Working 
for Minimum Wage,” ThinkProgress, March 31, 2014, http://think-
progress.org/economy/2014/03/31/3420987/college-degree- minimum-
wage (accessed July 14, 2014).
151. “High School Dropout Rates: Indicators on Children and Youth,” 
Child Trends Databank, September 2013, www.childtrends.org/
wp-content/uploads/2012/10/01_Dropout_Rates.pdf (accessed July 
19, 2014).
152. T. L. Smith, “The Resource Center: Finding Solutions for Literacy,”
HRFocus, February 1995, p. 7. See also A. Bernstein, “The Time Bomb in 
the Workforce: Illiteracy,” BusinessWeek, February 25, 2002, p. 122.
153. M. Loden, Implementing Diversity; E. E. Spragins, “Benchmark: 
The Diverse Work Force,” Inc., January 1993, p. 33; and A. M. Morrison, 
The New Leaders: Guidelines on Leadership Diversity in America (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1992).
154. N. Silver, “Jeremy Lin Is No Fluke,” The New York Times, February 
11, 2012, http://fivethirtyeight.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/02/11/jeremy-
lin-is-no-fluke (accessed July19, 2014).
155. P. Zho and D. D. Park,”Which Organizations Are Best in Class in 
Managing Diversity and Inclusion, and What Does Their Path of Success 
Look Like?” Cornell University, ILR School, April 1, 2013, http://digitalc-
ommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1045&context=stu
dent (accessed July 19, 2014).
156. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Table 4, Families with Own Children: 
Employment Status of Parents by Age of Youngest Child and Family Type, 
2012–2013 Annual Averages,” Economic News Release, April 25, 2014, 
www.bls.gov/news.release/famee.t04.htm (accessed July 19, 2014).
157. C. Benko, “Up the Ladder? How Dated, How Linear,” The New York 
Times, November 9, 2008, Business section, p. 2; K. Evans, “In 
Downturn’s Wake, Women Hold Half of U.S. Jobs,” The Wall Street 
Journal, November 12, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB125797
318108844061.html (accessed July 14, 2014); and M. P. McQueen, 
“Better Education Shields Women from Worst Job Cuts,” The Wall 
Street Journal, February 12, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/
SB10001424052748703389004575033762482114190 (accessed July 
19, 2014).
158. R. S. Lazarus, Psychological Stress and Coping Processes (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1966); and R. S. Schuler, “Definition and Conceptual-
ization of Stress in Organizations,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance, April 1980, p. 1980.
159. Survey by Harris Interactive for the American Psychological Asso-
ciation, “Stress in America: Are Teens Adopting Adults’ Stress Habits?” 
February 11, 2014, www.apa.org/news/press/releases/stress/2013/
stress-report.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
160. M. Velasquez-Manoff, “Status and Stress,” The New York Times, 
July 28, 2013, pp. SR-1, SR-6.
Highlights of Women’s Earnings in 2012, Report 1045, October 2013, 
www.bls.gov/cps/cpswom2012.pdf (accessed July 5, 2014); and C. 
Goldin, “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter,” The American 
Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 4 (2014), pp. 1091–1119.
129. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, Highlights of 
Women’s Earnings in 2012.
130. 2013 Catalyst Census: Fortune 500 Executive Officers and Top 
Earners. December 10, 2013, www.catalyst.org/knowledge/2013-cata-
lyst-census-fortune-500-women-executive-officers-and-top-earners 
(accessed July 19, 2014).
131. For further discussion of various aspects of the glass ceiling, see 
also R. Parloff, “The War over Unconscious Bias,” Fortune, October 1, 
2007, 
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_
archive/2007/10/15/100537276/-index.htm (accessed July 19, 2014); 
and K. Miner-Rubino and L. M. Cortina, “Beyond Targets: Consequences 
of Vicarious Exposure to Misogyny at Work,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, September 2007, pp. 1254–1269.
132. B. R. Ragins, B. Townsend, and M. Matttis, “Gender Gap in the Ex-
ecutive Suite: CEOs and Female Executives Report on Breaking the Glass 
Ceiling,” Academy of Management Review, February 1998, pp. 28–42.
133. R. Sharpe, “As Leaders, Women Rule,” BusinessWeek, November 
20, 2000, pp. 75–84.
134. K. Wisul, “The Bottom Line on Women at the Top,” BusinessWeek, 
January 26, 2004, www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/jan2004/
nf20040126_3378_db035.htm (accessed July 19, 2014).
135. JMG Consulting LLC and Wyckoff Consulting LLC, “Venture Capi-
tal, Social Capital, and the Funding of Women-Led Businesses,” for SBA 
Office of Advocacy, April 2013, www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/files/
rs406tot%284%29.pdf (accessed July 5, 2014). See also J. Tozzi, 
 “Female-Led Companies Paid Off Well for VC Firms,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, April 22, 2013, pp. D1, D4.
136. U.S. Census Bureau, “U.S. Census Bureau Projections Show a 
Slower-Growing, Older, More Diverse Nation a Half Century from Now,” 
news release, December 12, 2012, www.census.gov/newsroom/re-
leases/archives/population/cb12-243.html.
137. “Table 697, Money Income of Households—Median Income by 
Race and Hispanic Origin, in Current and Constant (2009) Dollars: 1980 
to 2009,” U.S. Census Bureau, September 2010, www.census.gov/
compendia/statab/2012/tables/12s0697.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
138. See U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Race-
Based Charges FY 1997–FY 2013,” www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/en-
forcement/race.cfm (accessed July 19, 2014); B. Leonard, “Web, Call 
Center Fuel Rise in EEOC Claims,” HR Magazine, June 2008, p. 30; and 
M. Luo, “In Job Hunt, Even a College Degree Can’t Close the Racial 
Gap,” The New York Times, December 1, 2009, pp. A1, A4.
139. G. J. Gates and F. Newport, “Special Report: 3.4% of U.S. Adults 
Identify as LGBT,” Gallup Politics, October 18, 2012, www.gallup.com/
poll/158066/special-report-adults-identify-lgbt.aspx (accessed July 
19, 2014).
140. Human Rights Campaign, “The Cost of the Closet and the Re-
wards of Inclusion,” May 2014, http://hrc-assets.s3-website-us-east-1.
amazonaws.com//files/assets/resources/Cost_of_the_Closet_
May2014.pdf#__utma=149406063.1657137034.1405894648.140589
4648.1405894648.1&__utmb=149406063.3.9.1405894715072&__
utmc=149406063&__utmx=-&__utmz=149406063.1405894648.1.1.
utmcsr=google|utmccn=%28organic%29|utmcmd=organic|utmctr=%
28not%20provided%29&__utmv=-&__utmk=3520176 (accessed July 
19, 2014).
141. See J. B. Stewart, “Gay CEOs in a Closet of Glass,” The New York 
Times, June 28, 2014, pp. B1, B7.
142. M. V. L. Badgett, L. E. Durso, A. Kastanis, and C. Mallory, “The Busi-
ness Impact of LGBT-Supportive Workplace Policies,” Williams Institute 
on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy, UCLA 
School of Law, May 2013, http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-
content/uploads/Business-Impact-of-LGBT-Policies-May-2013.pdf (ac-
cessed July 19, 2014).
143. M. V. Badgett and H. Lau, “Bias in the Workplace: Consistent Evi-
dence of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Discrimination,” 
 Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and 
Public Policy, UCLA School of Law, June 2007, http://williamsinstitute.
law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Badgett-Sears-Lau-Ho-Bias-in-the-

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN36
181. G. G. Scott, A Survival Guide for Working with Bad Bosses: Dealing 
with Bullies, Idiots, Back-Stabbers, and Other Managers from Hell (New 
York: AMACOM, 2005); A. Dobson, “Working It Out: Fixing a Strained 
Relationship with Your Boss,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 2, 2008, 
p. H1; and R. B. Williams, “How Bad Bosses Can Make You Sick,” Psy-
chology Today, February 13, 2011, www.psychologytoday.com/blog/
wired-success/201102/how-bad-bosses-can-make-you-sick (ac-
cessed July 19, 2014).
182. J. Schaubroeck and D. C. Ganster, “Chronic Demands and Re-
sponsivity to Challenge,” Journal of Applied Psychology, February 1993, 
pp. 73–85; E. Demerouti, A. B. Bakker, F. Nachreiner, and W. B. Schaufeli, 
“The Job Demands Resources Model of Burnout,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, June 2001, pp. 499–512.
183. J. M. Plas, Person-Centered Leadership: An American Approach to 
Participatory Management (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996).
184. M. Patsalos-Fox, quoted in W. J. Holstein, “Tension Headaches in 
the Corner Office,” The New York Times, March 12, 2006, sec. 3, p. 1.
185. M. Staver, quoted in C. H. Deutsch, “Winning the Battle Against 
Burnout,” The New York Times, August 27, 2006, sec. 3, p. 5.
186. See A. Tugend, “Dealing with Burnout, Which Doesn’t Always Stem 
from Overwork,” The New York Times, November 30, 2013, p. B6.
187. See C. H. Deutsch, “Winning the Battle Against Burnout,” The New 
York Times, August 27, 2006, sec. 3, p. 5; M. P. Leiter, J. J. Hakanen, K. 
Ahola, S. Toppinen-Tanner, A. Koskinen, and A. Väänänen, “Organizational 
Predictors and Health Consequences in Burnout: A 12-Year Cohort 
Study,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, October 2013, pp. 959–973; 
and D. M. Owens, “Stressed Out,” HR Magazine, March 2014, pp. 44–45.
188. S. Sabia, A. Elbaz, A. Britton, S. Bell, A. Dugravot, M. Shipley, M. 
Kivimaki, and A. Singh-Manoux, “Alcohol Consumption and Cognitive 
Decline in Early Old Age,” Neurology, January 15, 2014, www.neurology.
org/content/early/2014/01/15/WNL.0000000000000063.short (ac-
cessed July 19, 2014).
189. M. Ferri, L. Amato, and M. Davoli, “Alcoholics Anonymous and Other 
12-Step Programmes for Alcohol Dependence (Review),” Cochrane Library,
Issue 3 (2009), pp. 1–26. See also J. Rockoff, “Go Cold Turkey? Science 
Seeks Better Way to Beat Addiction,” The Wall Street Journal, December 24, 
2013, pp. D1, D4; G. Glaser, “Cold Turkey Isn’t the Only Route,” The New 
York Times, January 2, 2014, p. A15; S. G. Freedman, “Alcoholics Anony-
mous without the Religion,” The New York Times, February 22, 2014, p. A14; 
and L. Dodes, The Sober Truth: Debunking the Bad Science Behind 12-Step 
Programs and the Rehab Industry (Boston: Beacon Press, 2014).
190. See S. Price, “Ante Up for Wellness,” HR Magazine, February 
2012, pp. 40–42; and S. J. Wells, “Wellness Rewards,” HR Magazine, 
February 2012, pp. 67–69.
191. See K. Pho, “Do Corporate Wellness Programs Really Work?” USA 
Today, September 12, 2013, p. 10A; S. Hananel, “A Workout During 
Work,” Reno Gazette-Journal, September 12, 2013, p. 7F; N. Hellmich, 
“Healthy, Wellness, and Wise about Costs,” USA Today, December 13, 
2013, p. 8B; A. Lukits, “Take Your Bike to Your Desk to Improve Health,” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2014, p. D2; and A. Bruzzese, “Mindful 
Eating, Exercise Boost Work Performance,” Reno Gazette-Journal, Janu-
ary 18, 2014, p. 9A.
192. R. Kreitner, “Personal Wellness: It’s Just Good Business,” Business 
Horizons, May–June 1982, p. 28.
CHAPTER 12
1. C. Kleiman, “Work-Life Rewards Grow,” San Francisco Examiner,
January 16, 2000, p. J-2; reprinted from Chicago Tribune. 
2. M. Buckingham and C. Coffman, First, Break All the Rules: What the 
World’s Greatest Managers Do Differently (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1999).
3. Kimberly Scott, project leader for Hewitt Associates, which helps 
compile the Fortune list, reported in D. Murphy, “Can Morale Contribute 
to Safer Skies?” San Francisco Examiner, February 11, 2000, p. J-1.
4. S. Shellenbarger, “Work & Family Mailbox,” The Wall Street Journal, 
August 5, 2009, p. D3; and C. Tkaczyk, “Offer Affordable (Awesome) Day 
Care,” Fortune, August 17, 2009, p. 26.
5. Adapted from definition in T. R. Mitchell, “Motivation: New Directions 
for Theory, Research, and Practice,” Academy of Management Review,
January 1982, p. 81.
161. Harris Interactive survey for American Psychological Association, 
“2013 Work and Well-Being Survey,” APA Center for Organizational Ex-
cellence, March 2013, www.apaexcellence.org/assets/general/2013-
work-and-wellbeing-survey-results.pdf (accessed July 19, 2014).
162. American Institute of Stress, cited in J. W. Upson, D. J. Ketchen Jr., 
and R. D. Ireland, “Managing Employee Stress: A Key to the Effective-
ness of Strategic Supply Chain Management,” Organizational Dynamics, 
Vol. 36 (2007), pp. 78–92.
163. See E. Zimmerman, “When Stress Flirts with Burnout,” The New 
York Times, January 17, 2010, Business section, p. 7.
164. S. Shellenbarger, “‘Desk Rage’: To Vent or Not to Vent,” The Wall 
Street Journal, January 26, 2010, p. D3.
165. Supportive results can be found in F. M. McKee-Ryan, Z. Song, C. R. 
Wanberg, and A. J. Kinicki, “Psychological and Physical Well-Being during 
Unemployment: A Meta-Analytic Study,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 
January 2005, pp. 53–76; and F. M. McKee-Ryan, M. Virick, G. E. Prussia, 
J. Harvey, and J. D. Lilly, “Life after the Layoff: Getting a Job Worth Keep-
ing,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, May 2009, pp. 561–580.
166. M. Luo, “For Workers at Closing Plant, Ordeal Included Heart At-
tacks,” The New York Times, February 25, 2010, pp. A1, A17.
167. See A. Weintraub, “Inside Drugmakers’ War on Fat,” Business-
Week,, March 17, 2008, pp. 41–46; and M. R. Frone, “Are Work Stress-
ors Related to Employee Substance Use? The Importance of Temporal 
Context in Assessments of Alcohol and Illicit Drug Use,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, January 2008, pp. 199–206.
168. H. Selye, Stress without Distress (New York: Lippincott, 1974), p. 27.
169. R. S. Lazarus and S. Folkman, “Coping and Adaptation,” in W. D. 
Gentry, ed., Handbook of Behavioral Medicine (New York: Guilford, 1982).
170. Selye, Stress without Distress, pp. 28–29.
171. See M. B. Hargrove, D. L. Nelson, and C. L. Cooper, “Generating 
Eustress by Challenging Employees: Helping People Savor Their Work,” 
Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 42 (2013), pp. 61–69.
172. M. Beck, “When Fretting Is in Your DNA: Overcoming the Worry 
Gene,” The Wall Street Journal, January 15, 2008, p. D1. See also 
L. M. Hilt, L. C. Sander, S. Nolen-Hoeksema, and A. A. Simen, “The BDNF 
Val66Met Polymorphism Predicts Rumination and Depression Differ-
ently in Young Adolescent Girls and Their Mothers,” Neuroscience Let-
ters, December 2007, pp. 12–16.
173. M. Friedman and R. H. Rosenman, Type A Behavior and Your Heart
(Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Publications, 1974), p. 84.
174. See M. S. Taylor, E. A. Locke, C. Lee, and. M. E. Gist, “Type A Be-
havior and Faculty Research Productivity: What Are the Mechanisms?” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, December 1984, 
pp. 402–418; S. D. Bluen, J. Barling, and W. Burns, “Predicting Sales 
Performance, Job Satisfaction, and Depression by Using the Achieve-
ment Strivings and Impatience–Irritability Dimensions of Type A Behav-
ior,” Journal of Applied Psychology, April 1990, pp. 212–216.
175. S. Booth-Kewley and H. S. Friedman, “Psychological Predictors of 
Heart Disease: A Quantitative Review,” Psychological Bulletin, May 
1987, pp. 343–362; S. A. Lyness, “Predictors of Differences between 
Type A and B Individuals in Heart Rate and Blood Pressure Reactivity,” 
Psychological Bulletin, September 1993, pp. 266–295; and T. Q. Miller, 
T. W. Smith, C. W. Turner, M. L. Guijarro, and A. J. Hallet, “A Meta-Analytic 
Review of Research on Hostility and Physical Health,” Psychological 
Bulletin, March 1996, pp. 322–348.
176. See 2014 study by CareerCast, reported in C. Brooks, “Most (and 
Least) Stressful Jobs for 2014,” Business News Daily, January 10, 
2014, www.businessnewsdaily.com/5744-most-and-least-stressful-
jobs-for-2014.html (accessed July 19, 2014).
177. J. O’Donnell, “Wanted: Retail Managers,” USA Today, December 
24, 2007, pp. 1B, 3B.
178. M. Richtel, “In Web World of 24/7 Stress, Writers Blog Till They 
Drop,” The New York Times, April 6, 2008, news section, pp. 1, 23.
179. “Stressful Jobs That Pay Badly,” CNN Money, March 7, 2014, 
http://money.cnn.com/gallery/pf/jobs/2013/03/07/jobs-stress-pay (ac-
cessed July 19, 2014).
180. E. Bernstein, “When a Co-Worker Is Stressed Out,” The Wall Street 
Journal, August 26, 2008, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/
SB121970425860670819 (accessed July 19, 2014); and S. Shellen-
barger, “The Problem with Busy Colleagues: Secondhand Stress,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2014, pp. D1, D4.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN37
“A Profile Approach to Self-Determination Theory Motivations at Work,” 
Journal of Vocational Behavior, December 2012, pp. 354–363.
26. M. Moskowitz and R. Levering, “The 100 Best Companies to Work 
For,” Fortune, February 4, 2013, p. 87.
27. R. J. Grossma, “Phasing Out Face Time,” HRMagazine, April 2013, 
pp. 33–34.
28. Moskowitz and Levering, “The 100 Best Companies to Work For,” 
p. 90.
29. F. Herzberg, B. Mausner, and B. B. Snyderman, The Motivation to 
Work (New York: Wiley, 1959); and F. Herzberg, “One More Time: How Do 
You Motivate Employees?” Harvard Business Review, January–February 
1968, pp. 53–62.
30. Survey by the Conference Board, reported in P. Korkki, “With Jobs 
Few, Most Workers Aren’t Satisfied,” The New York Times, January 10, 
2009, Business section, p. 2. See also P. Coy, “Are Your Employees Just 
Biding Their Time?” BusinessWeek, November 16, 2009, p. 27.
31. Survey results from the Conference Board, reported in L. Weber, 
“U.S. Workers Can’t Get No (Job) Satisfaction,” The Wall Street Journal, 
June 18, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/atwork/2014/06/18/u-s-workers-
cant-get-no-job-satisfaction (accessed August 8, 2014).
32. Society for Human Resource Management, 2014 Employee Job 
Satisfaction and Engagement Survey: The Road to Economic Recovery, 
www.shrm.org/Research/SurveyFindings/Documents/14-0028%20
JobSatEngage_Report_FULL_FNL.pdf (accessed August 7, 2014).
33. See J. Flint, “How to Be a Player,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
January 24–January 30, 2011, pp. 108–109.
34. J. Waggoner, “Do Happy Workers Mean Higher Profit?” USA Today, 
February 20, 2013, pp. 1B, 2B; and J. B. Stewart, “A Place to Play for 
Google Staff,” The New York Times, March 16, 2013, pp. B1, B6.
35. J. S. Adams, “Toward an Understanding of Inequity,” Journal of Ab-
normal and Social Psychology, November 1963, pp. 422–436; and J. S. 
Adams, “Injustice in Social Exchange,” in L. Berkowitz, ed., Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology, 2nd ed. (New York: Academic Press, 
1965), pp. 267–300.
36. K. Sweet, “Median CEO Pay Rises above $10M,” Reno Gazette-
Journal, May 28, 2014, pp. 7A, 8A.
37. N. Singer, “CEO Pay Gains May Have Slowed, but the Numbers Are 
Still Numbing,” The New York Times, April 8, 2012, pp. BU-1, BU-4.
38. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, Highlights of 
Women’s Earnings in 2012, Report 1045, October 2013, www.bls.gov/
cps/cpswom2012.pdf (accessed August 7, 2014).
39. U.S. Department of Commerce, cited in A. Salkever, “An Easy Anti-
dote to Employee Theft,” BusinessWeek online, May 20, 2003, www.
businessweek.com/smallbiz/content/may2003/sb20030520_9328_
sb018.htm (accessed August 7, 2014). See also J. Greenberg, “Employee 
Theft as a Reaction to Underpayment Inequity: The Hidden Cost of Pay 
Cuts,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 75 (1990), pp. 561–568.
40. The comparison process was discussed by S. T. Fiske, “Envy Up, 
Scorn Down: How Comparison Divides Us,” American Psychologist, 
November 2010, pp. 698–706.
41. See D. J. Holman, C. M. Axtell, C. A Sprigg, P. Totterdell, and T. D. 
Wall, “The Mediating Role of Job Characteristics in Job Redesign Inter-
ventions: A Serendipitous Quasi-Experiment,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, January 2010, pp. 84–105. Also see S. W. Whiting, P. M. 
 Podsakoff, and J. R. Pierce, “Effects of Task Performance, Helping, 
Voice, and Organizational Loyalty on Performance Appraisal Ratings,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2008, pp. 125–139.
42. See R. A. Posthuma, C. P. Maertz Jr., and J. B. Dworkin, “Procedural 
Justice’s Relationship with Turnover: Explaining Past Inconsistent Find-
ings,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, May 2007, pp. 381–398; Y. 
Cohen-Charash and J. S. Mueller, “Does Perceived Unfairness Exacer-
bate or Mitigate Interpersonal Counterproductive Work Behaviors Re-
lated to Envy?” Journal of Applied Psychology, May 2007, pp. 666–680; 
and H. Moon, D. Kamdar, D. M. Mayer, and R. Takeuchi, “Me or We? The 
Role of Personality and Justice as Other-Centered Antecedents to Inno-
vative Citizenship Behaviors within Organizations,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, January 2008, pp. 84–94.
43. V. H. Vroom, Work and Motivation (New York: Wiley, 1964).
44. C. Wallis, “How to Make Great Teachers,” Time, February 25, 2008, 
pp. 28–34; “Teacher Bonus Systems Tested,” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
October 22, 2008, p. 1D: S. Dillon, “Incentives for Advanced Work Let 
6. See R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: 
Classic Definitions and New Directions,” Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, January 2000, pp. 54–67.
7. K. G. Volpp, A. B. Troxel, M. V. Pauly, H. A. Glick, et al., “A Randomized, 
Controlled Trial of Financial Incentives for Smoking Cessation,” New 
England Journal of Medicine, February 12, 2009, pp. 699–709. Other 
research finds that such extrinsic rewards have little lasting effect on 
making workers healthier. See A. Kohn, “Cash Incentives Won’t Make Us 
Healthier,” USA Today, May 21, 2009, p. 11A.
8. 2011 Employer Survey on Purchasing Value in Health Care Report, 
Towers Watson/National Business Group on Health, www.towerswatson.
com/assets/pdf/3946/TowersWatson-NBGH-2011-NA-2010-18560.pdf 
(accessed August 7, 2014). See also S. J. Wells, “Wellness Rewards,” HR 
Magazine, February 2012, pp. 67–69; and S. Price, “Ante Up for Well-
ness,” HR Magazine, February 2012, pp. 40–42.
9. S. E. Needleman, “The Latest Office Perk: Getting Paid to Volunteer,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2008, p. D1.
10. See P. W. Hom, L. Roberson, and A. D. Ellis, “Challenging Conven-
tional Wisdom about Who Quits: Revelations from Corporate America,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2008, pp. 1–34; J. B. Olson-
Buchanan and W. R. Boswell, “An Integrative Model of Experiencing and 
Responding to Mistreatment at Work,” Academy of Management Re-
view, January 2008, pp. 76–96; and M. Riketta, “The Causal Relation 
Between Job Attitudes and Performance: A Meta-Analysis of Panel 
Studies,” Journal of Applied Psychology, March 2008, pp. 472–481.
11. K. Down and L. Liedtka, “What Corporations Seek in MBA Hires: A 
Survey,” Selections, Winter 1994, pp. 34–39; see also S. Armour, 
 “Companies Get Tough on Absent Employees,” The Arizona Republic,
February 7, 2003, p. A2; reprinted from USA Today.
12. A. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psychological Review,
July 1943, pp. 370–396.
13. C. Conley, Peak: How Great Companies Get Their Mojo from Maslow 
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2007).
14. Chip Conley, interview by M. Hofman, “The Idea That Saved My 
Company,” Inc., October 11, 2007, www.inc.com/magazine/20071001/
the-idea-that-saved-my-company.html (accessed August 7, 2014).
15. C. Conley, interviewed in K. Pattison, “Chip Conley Took the Maslow 
Pyramid, Made It an Employee Pyramid, and Saved His Company,” Fast 
Company, August 26, 2010, www.fastcompany.com/1685009/chip- 
conley-wants-your-employees-to-hit-their-peak (accessed August 7, 2014).
16. C. Conley, interviewed in E. Schurenberg, “Chip Conley: The 5 
Things Everyone Wants from You,” Inc., December 12, 2011, www.inc.
com/eric-schurenberg/Chip-Conley-5-Things-Everyone-Wants.html 
(accessed August 7, 2014).
17. Ibid.
18. Hofman, “The Idea That Saved My Company,” 2007.
19. See W. B. Swann Jr., C. Chang-Schneider, and K. I. McClarty, “Do 
People’s Self-Views Matter?” American Psychologist, February–March 
2007, pp. 84–94.
20. D. C. McClelland, Human Motivation (Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 
1985).
21. D. McClelland and H. Burnham, “Power Is the Great Motivator,” 
 Harvard Business Review, March–April 1976, pp. 100–110.
22. S. W. Spreier, M. H. Fontaine, and R. L. Malloy, “Leadership Run 
Amok,” Harvard Business Review, June 2006, pp. 72–82.
23. Some studies of achievement motivation can be found in H. Grant 
and C. S. Dweck, “A Goal Analysis of Personality and Personality Coher-
ence,” in D. Cervone and Y. Shoda, eds., The Coherence of Personality 
(New York: Guilford Press, 1999), pp. 345–371. See also D. B. Turban 
and T. L. Keon, “Organizational Attractiveness: An Interactionist Perspec-
tive,” Journal of Applied Psychology, April 1993, pp. 184–193.
24. R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Self-Determination Theory and the Fa-
cilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and Well-Being,” 
American Psychologist, January 2000, pp. 68–78.
25. E. L. Deci, R. Koestner, and R. M. Ryan, “A Meta-Analytic Review of 
Experiments Examining the Effects of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic 
Motivation,” Psychological Bulletin, November 1999, pp. 627–668; R. A. 
Kusurkar, T. J. Ten Cate, C. M. P. Vos, P. Westers, and G. Croisset, “How 
Motivation Affects Academic Performance: A Structural Equation Model-
ling Analysis,” Advances in Health Science Education, March 2013, 
pp. 57–69; and C. M. Moran, J. M. Diefendorff, T.-Y. Kim, and Z.-Q. Liu, 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN38
Psychology, February 1995, pp. 29–42; and B. Melin, U. Lundberg, 
J. Söderlund, and M. Granqvist, “Psychological and Physiological Stress 
Reactions of Male and Female Assembly Workers: A Comparison be-
tween Two Different Forms of Work Organization,” Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, January 1999, pp. 47–61.
60. M. A. Campion and C. L. McClelland, “Follow-Up and Extension of 
the Interdisciplinary Costs and Benefits of Enlarged Jobs,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, June 1993, pp. 339–351.
61. Herzberg et al., The Motivation to Work.
62. J. R. Hackman and G. R. Oldham, Work Redesign (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1980).
63. See S. E. Humphrey, J. D. Nahrgang, and F. P. Morgeson, “Integrat-
ing Motivational, Social, and Contextual Work Design Features: A Meta-
Analytic Summary and Theoretical Extension of the Work Design 
Literature,” Journal of Applied Psychology, September 2007, pp. 1332–
1356. Also see A. M. Grant, “The Significance of Task Significance: Job 
Performance Effects, Relational Mechanisms, and Boundary Condi-
tions,” Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2008, pp. 108–124; and 
F. W. Bond, P. E. Flaxman, and D. Bunce, “The Influence of Psychological 
Flexibility on Work Redesign: Mediated Moderation of a Work Reorgani-
zation Intervention,” Journal of Applied Psychology, May 2008, 
pp. 645–654.
64. See D. J. Holman, C. M. Axtell, C. A. Sprigg, P. Totterdell, and T. D. 
Wall, “The Mediating Role of Job Characteristics in Job Redesign Inter-
ventions,: A Serendipitous Quasi-Experiment,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, January 2010, pp. 84–105.
65. See B. Reagan, “Perks with a Payoff,” The Wall Street Journal, Oc-
tober 24, 2011, p. R3. Some employees have resisted such employer 
efforts, as when PepsiCo tried to charge its employees $50 a month if 
they smoke or have obesity-related medical problems. H. Rosenkrantz 
and D. Stanford, “PepsiCo Workers Balk at ‘Sin Tax,’” San Francisco 
Chronicle, March 18, 2012, p. D5.
66. Dr. Paul H. Grundy, I.B.M.’s director of Health Care Technology and 
Strategic Initiatives, quoted in M. Freudenheim, “A Model for Health 
Care That Pays for Quality,” The New York Times, November 7, 2007, 
p. C3. See also C. Lochhead, “Lessons on Health Care from Europe,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, January 29, 2009, pp. A1, A18.
67. S. Frier, “Wellpoint to Tie Payouts to Quality,” San Francisco Chron-
icle, January 28, 2012, p. D3.
68. See E. L. Thorndike, Educational Psychology: The Psychology of 
Learning, Vol. II (New York: Columbia University Teachers College, 1913); 
B. F. Skinner, Walden Two (New York: Macmillan, 1948); Science and 
Human Behavior (New York: Macmillan, 1953); and Contingencies of 
Reinforcement (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969).
69. Roy F. Baumeister, reported in A. Tugend, “Praise Is Fleeting, but 
Brickbats We Recall,” The New York Times, March 24, 2012, p. B5. See 
also R. F. Baumeister, E. Bratslavsky, C. Finkenauer, and K. D. Vohs, “Bad 
Is Stronger Than Good,” Review of General Psychology, Vol. 5, No. 4 
(2001), pp. 323–370.
70. J. Sandberg, “A Modern Conundrum: When Work’s Invisible, So Are 
Its Satisfactions,” The Wall Street Journal, February 19, 2008, p. B1.
71. Gallup Organization study, reported in A. Zipkin, “The Wisdom of 
Thoughfulness,” May 31, 2000, p. C1. See also J. Yang and A. Gonzalez, 
“Most Preferred Forms of Recognition at Workplace,” USA Today, May 4, 
2009, p. 1B; and N. Lublin, “Two Little Words,” Fast Company, Novem-
ber 2010, p. 56. A McKinsey global survey also found that employees 
view praise and commendation from their immediate manager as more 
effective than cash. See L. Freifeld, “Why Cash Doesn’t Motivate,” Train-
ing, July–August 2011, pp. 17–22. These results are also in line with a 
survey by the Society for Human Resource Management, 2011 Job Sat-
isfaction Survey Report, in which employees said the top five “very im-
portant” aspects of job satisfaction were job security, opportunity to use 
skills and abilities, organization’s financial stability, compensation pay, 
and benefits. See Society for Human Resource Management, “Em-
ployee Job Satisfaction: The External Forces Influencing Employee Atti-
tudes,” Workplace Visions, Issue 4, 2011, www.shrm.org/Research/
FutureWorkplaceTrends/Documents/11-0697%20Workplace_Visions_
Issue4%20FINAL.pdf (accessed August 7, 2014).
72. Great Place to Work Institute, Trust Index Employee Survey, de-
scribed in L. Petrecca, “Tech Companies Top List of ‘Great Workplaces,’” 
USA Today, October 31, 2011, p. 7B.
Pupils and Teachers Cash In,” The New York Times, October 3, 2011, 
pp. A1, A13; S. Dillon, “In Washington, Large Rewards in Teacher Pay,” The 
New York Times, January 1, 2012, News section, pp. 1, 18; and W. Kopp, 
“The Trouble with Humiliating Teachers,” The Wall Street Journal, March 
7, 2012, p. A15.
45. A Hudson survey of 10,000 employees March 20–26, 2006, found 
that 48% of managers but only 31% of nonmanagers agreed with the 
statement “Employees who do a better job get paid more”; 46% of 
managers but only 29% of nonmanagers agreed with the statement 
“My last raise was based on performance.” Information cited in “Rea-
sons for Raises,” BusinessWeek, May 29, 2006, p. 11.
46. See M. J. Pearsall, M. S. Christian, and A. P. J. Ellis, “Motivating Inter-
dependent Teams: Individual Rewards, Shared Rewards, or Something in 
Between?” Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2010, pp. 183–191.
47. B. Silverman, “CEOs and the Pay-for-Performance Puzzle,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, September 23, 2009, www.businessweek.com/investor/
content/sep2009/pi20090923_783858.htm (accessed August 7, 2014).
48. D. FitzGerald, “Staples Managers Fail to Meet Goals, but Get a 
 Bonus,” The Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2014, p. B3.
49. For more about the problem of linking executive compensation to 
performance, see J. Anderson, “Tying One’s Pay to Performance: What a 
Concept,” The New York Times, July 15, 2005, p. C7; G. Farrell and B. 
Hansen, “Stocks May Fall, but Pay Doesn’t,” USA Today, April 10, 2008, 
pp. 1B, 2B; M. J. Canyon, “Executive Compensation and Incentives,” 
Academy of Management Perspectives, February 2006, pp. 25–44; J. B. 
Stewart, “Rewarding CEOs Who Fail,” The New York Times, October 1, 
2011, p. B1; J. S. Lublin, “Longstanding Pay Practices under Attack by 
Activists,” The Wall Street Journal, March 21, 2013, pp. B1, B2; “CEO 
Compensation: Do Performance Incentives Pay Off?” Knowwpcarey, 
June 27, 2013, http://knowwpcarey.com/article.cfm?cid=10&aid=1420 
(accessed August 7, 2014); A. R. Sorkin, “A Question of What’s a Rea-
sonable Reward,” The New York Times, March 25, 2014, pp. B1, B5; 
P. Eavis, “Invasion of the Supersalaries,” The New York Times, April 13, 
2014, pp. BU-1, BU4; J. Nocera, “CEO Pay Goes Up, Up, and Away,” The 
New York Times, April 15, 2014, p. A2; and “Using Incentives to Cali-
brate a CEO’s ‘Risk Appetite,’” Knowledge@Wharton, May 10, 2014, 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/using-incentives-cali-
brate-ceos-risk-appetite (accessed August 7, 2014).
50. Tim Richard, quoted in D. Dullum, “Principal Nominated for Rodel 
Honor,” Florence Reminder Blade-Tribune, October 31, 2013, www. 
trivalleycentral.com/florence_reminder_blade_tribune/education/ 
principal-nominated-for-rodel-honor/article_00078a42-41a6-11e3-
a29b-0019bb2963f4.html (accessed August 7, 2014).
51. Richard, quoted in C. Creno, “Program Helps Students Succeed,” 
The Arizona Republic, November 27, 2012, p. B2.
52. See G. P. Latham and E. A. Locke, “Enhancing the Benefits and 
Overcoming the Pitfalls of Goal Setting,” Organizational Dynamics, 
 November 2006, pp. 332–340.
53. See J. J. Donovan and D. J. Radosevich, “The Moderating Role of 
Goal Commitment on the Goal-Difficulty Performance Relationship: A 
Meta-Analytic Summary and Critical Reanalysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, April 1998, pp. 308–315.
54. See D. Morisano, J. B. Hirsh, J. B. Peterson, R. O. Phil, and B. M. 
Shore, “Setting, Elaborating, and Reflecting on Personal Goals Improves 
Academic Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology, March 2010, 
pp. 255–264.
55. See E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, A Theory of Goal Setting and Task 
Performance (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990).
56. Supportive results can be found in S. E. Humphrey, J. D. Nahrgang, 
and F. P. Morgeson, “Integrating Motivational, Social, and Contextual 
Work Design Features: A Meta-Analytic Summary and Theoretical Ex-
tension of the Work Design Literature,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 
September 2007, pp. 1332–1356.
57. DDI Pulse of the Workforce Survey of 1,000 employees, reported in 
“Stagnating on the Job,” USA Today, September 21, 2009, p. 1B.
58. See G. R. Oldham and J. R. Hackman, “Not What It Was and Not 
What It Will Be: The Future of Job Design,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, February 2010, pp. 463–479.
59. S. Melamed, I. Ben-Avi, J. Luz, and M. S. Green, “Objective and 
Subjective Work Monotony: Effects on Job Satisfaction, Psychological 
Distress, and Absenteeism in Blue-Collar Workers,” Journal of Applied 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN39
88. Matos and Galinsky, 2014 National Study of Employers.
89. D. Meinert, “Make Telecommuting Pay Off,” HR Magazine, June 
2011, pp. 33–37; A. Tugend, “How to Make Working at Home Work for 
You,” The New York Times, October 8, 2011, p. B5; B. A. Lautsch and E. 
E. Kossek, “Managing a Blended Workforce: Telecommuters and Non-
commuters,” Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 40 (2011), pp. 10–17; 
“When Working at Home Is Productive, and When It’s Not,” Knowledge@
Wharton, March 13, 2013, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/
when-working-at-home-is-productive-and-when-its-not (accessed 
 August 8, 2014); N. Bloom and J. Liang, “To Raise Productivity, Let More 
Employees Work from Home,” Harvard Business Review, January– 
February 2014, pp. 28–29; and N. Bilton, “Staying Connected While 
Staying at Home,” The New York Times, March 17, 2014, p. B7.
90. Walker Information Global Network and Hudson Institute, 2000 Global 
Employee Relationship Report, in “Global Workforce Study Highlights 
Alarming Trends,” September 19, 2000, www.hudson.org/index.
cfm?fuseaction=public-ation_details&id=697 (accessed August 7, 2014).
91. Spherion and Louis Harris Associates 1999 survey, reported in 
 Zipkin, “The Wisdom of Thoughtfulness.”
92. See P. Falcone, “Doing More with Less: How to Motivate and Re-
ward Your Overworked Staff During Lean Times,” HR Magazine,
 February 2003, pp. 101–103; D. Kehrer, “Here Are Some Keys to Keep-
ing Good Employees,” Reno Gazette Journal, March 30, 2004, p. 4D; 
J. Noveck, “Do Bosses Need to Be Mean to Get Work Done?” Nevada 
Appeal, July 9, 2006, pp. D1, D2; and D. Volz, “How to Keep Workers 
When Raises Not Option,” Arizona Republic, December 11, 2011, p. EC1.
93. B. L. Ware, quoted in Zipkin, “The Wisdom of Thoughtfulness.”
94. K. Lingle, quoted in C. Kleiman, “Work-Life Rewards Grow,” San 
Francisco Examiner, January 16, 2000, p. J-2; reprinted from Chicago 
Tribune.
95. How’s Life? 2013: Measuring Well-Being, 2013 Better Life Index, 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris, www.
keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/economics/how-s-life-
2013_9789264201392-en#page3 (accessed August 18, 2014).
96. S. Shellenberger, “Companies Retool Time-Off Policies to Prevent 
Burnout, Reward Performance,” The Wall Street Journal, January 5, 
2006, p. D1.
97. A. Pomeroy, “The Future Is Now,” HR Magazine, September 2007, 
pp. 46–51; S. Shellenbarger, “Good News for Professionals Who Want to 
Work at Home,” The Wall Street Journal, November 15, 2007, p. D1; S. 
Armour, “As Dads Push for Family Time, Tensions Rise in Workplace,” 
USA Today, December 11, 2007, pp. 1A, 2A; K. R. Lewis, “Getting Time 
Off and Getting Work Done a Balancing Act,” San Francisco Chronicle,
December 16, 2007, p. E6; and B. Groysberg and R. Abrahams, “Man-
age Your Work, Manage Your Life,” Harvard Business Review, March 
2014, pp. 58–66.
98. J. Vatner, “Changing a Culture by Removing Walls,” The New York 
Times, February 10, 2010, p. B7.
99. A. Hedge, quoted in P. Wen, “Drab Cubicles Can Block Workers’ Cre-
ativity, Productivity,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 10, 2000, pp. B1, 
B3; reprinted from Boston Globe.
100. See A. Johnson, “It’s True: A Nicer Office Can Boost Morale,” The 
Arizona Republic, September 3, 2007, www.azcentral.com/arizonare-
public/business/articles/0903biz-workenvironment0903.html (ac-
cessed August 7, 2014), which describes a study by Harvard Medical 
School psychologist Nancy Etcoff that reinforces the idea that a per-
son’s physical environment has a big impact on his or her mood at 
work. Also see I. DeBare, “Shared Work Spaces a Sign of the Times,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, February 19, 2008, pp. A1, A7.
101. J. Sturges, N. Conway, D. Guest, and A. Liefooghe, “Managing the 
Career Deal: The Psychological Contract as a Framework for Under-
standing Career Management, Organizational Commitment, and Work 
Behavior,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, November 2005, 
pp. 821–838; and J. Badal, “‘Career Path’ Programs Help Retain 
 Workers,” The Wall Street Journal, July 24, 2006, pp. B1, B4.
102. J. P. Smith, “Sabbaticals Pervade Business Sector,” Reno Gazette-
Journal, February 22, 2004, p. H1; M. Arndt, “Nice Work If You Can Get 
It,” BusinessWeek, January 9, 2006, pp. 56–57; and L. Chao, “Sabbati-
cals Can Offer Dividends for Employers,” The Wall Street Journal, July 
17, 2006, p. B5.
103. NCAA home page, www.ncaa.org (accessed August 12, 2014).
73. E. White, “The Best vs. the Rest,” The Wall Street Journal, January 
30, 2006, pp. B1, B3; and J. Pfeffer, “Stopping the Talent Drain,” Busi-
ness 2.0, July 2006, p. 80.
74. For an alternative approach to paying salespeople, see S. Perman, 
“For Some, Paying Sales Commissions No Longer Makes Sense,” The 
New York Times, November 21, 2013, p. B4.
75. P. Hodson, 2008 Proxy Season Foresights #2—Performance Tar-
gets Targeted, February 15, 2008, Corporate Library, www.thecorpo-
ratelibrary.com/info.php?id=88 (accessed August 7, 2014). This study 
by Corporate Library, an independent governance research organization 
for the Securities and Exchange Commission, is reported in E. Simon, 
“How Execs Get Bonus Not Clear,” San Francisco Chronicle, February 
21, 2008, p. C3.
76. J. A. Michelli, The Starbucks Experience: 5 Principles for Turning 
Ordinary into Extraordinary (New York: McGraw-Hill Press, 2007).
77. Accenture, “Defining Success: 2013 Global Research Results,” 
www.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/Accenture-IWD-
2013-Research-Deck-022013.pdf (accessed August 8, 2014). See also 
C. Brooks, “Career Success Means Work-Life Balance, Study Finds,” 
Huffington Post, March 5, 2013, www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/03/05/
career-success-means-work-life-balance_n_2812707.html (accessed 
August 8, 2014).
78. K. W. Smola and C. D. Sutton, “Generational Differences: Revisiting 
Generational Work Values for the New Millennium,” Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, June 2002, p. 379.
79. The Millennials: Confident. Connected. Open to Change, Pew 
 Research Center Publications, February 2010, www.pewresearch.org/
millennials (accessed August 7, 2014).
80. See D. H. Pink, “Drive: The Surprising Truth about What Motivates Us 
(New York: Riverhead, 2010). The book proposes that workers are more 
efficient, loyal, and creative when they feel that their work has meaning.
81. See J. Turano, “Two Workers, Wearing One Hat,” The New York 
Times, October 4, 2009, Business section, p. 8; “Half a Job’s Better 
Than One,” The Week, November 6, 2009, p. 42; T. Pugh, “‘Work Shar-
ing’ Helps Limit Layoffs’ Impact,” San Francisco Chronicle, November 
15, 2009, p. D3; S. A Hewlett, “Making Flex Time a Win-Win,” The New 
York Times, December 13, 2009, Business section, p. 13; and S. Brown, 
“Line between Home, Work Will Blur More,” USA Today, February 8, 
2010, p. 11B.
82. Maynard Webb, interviewed by E. Chhabra, “Reinventing Work,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, February 16, 2013, pp. D1, D4. Webb is author, 
with Carlye Adler, of Rebooting Work: Transform How You Work in the 
Age of Entrepreneurship (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2013). See also 
H. Malcolm, “Unlimited Vay-k? I Want to Work Here,” USA Today, April 
30, 2013, p. 5B.
83. “Flexible Working Key to Staff Retention,” press release, CIMA/ 
Robert Half Finance & Accounting Salary Survey 2008, January 7, 2008, 
www.roberthalf.co.uk/portal/site/rh-uk/menuitem.b0a52206b89cee97
e7dfed10c3809fa0/?vgnextoid=7d962af7a1097110VgnVCM1000005e
80fd0aRCRD (accessed August 8, 2014); “Cisco Study Finds Telecom-
muting Significantly Increases Employee Productivity, Work-Life Flexi-
bility, and Job Satisfaction,” press release, Cisco’s The Network, June 
25, 2009, http://newsroom.cisco.com/dlls/2009/prod_062609.html 
(accessed August 8, 2014); P. Moen, E. L. Kelly, E. Tranby, and Q. Huang, 
“Can Real Work-Time Flexibility Promote Health Behaviors and Well-
Being?” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, December 2011, 
pp. 404–429; and E. Kelly, P. Moen, M. Oakes, W. Fan et al., “Changing Work 
and Work-Family Conflict: Evidence from the Work, Family, and Health Net-
work,” American Sociological Review, June 1, 2014, pp. 485–516.
84. See F. Witsil, “Is Part-Time Work the New Normal?” Reno Gazette-
Journal, September 3, 2013, p. 5A; reprinted from Detroit Free Press. 
85. V. L. Brescoll, J. Glass, and A. Sedlovskaya, “Ask and Ye Shall Re-
ceive? The Dynamics of Employer-Provided Flexible Work Options and the 
Need for Public Policy,” Journal of Social Issues, June 2013, pp. 367–388.
86. K. Matos and E. Galinsky, 2014 National Study of Employers, Fami-
lies and Work Institute and Society for Human Resource Management, 
http://familiesandwork.org/downloads/2014NationalStudyOfEmployers.
pdf (accessed August 8, 2014).
87. Statistics from American Community Survey, reported in A. Tugend, 
“It’s Unclearly Defined, but Telecommuting Is Fast on the Rise,” The 
New York Times, March 8, 2014, p. B6.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN40
14. Study by Center for Workforce Development, Newton, MA, reported 
in M. Jackson, “It’s Not Chitchat, It’s Training,” San Francisco Chronicle,
January 7, 1998, p. D2. See also S. Daniels, “Informal Learning Is Vital 
to Workforce Development,” Association for Talent Development, March 
8, 2013, www.astd.org/Publications/Magazines/TD/TD-Archive/2013/
03/Intelligence-Informal-Learning-Vital-to-Workforce-Dev (accessed 
August 10, 2014).
15. K. Kim, H. M. Collins, J. Williamson, and J. Chapman, Participation 
in Adult Education and Lifetime Learning: 2000–01, NCES 2004-050, 
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2008). For more on 
informal learning, see L. Dublin, “Formalizing Informal Learning,” Chief 
Learning Officer, March 2010, www.clomedia.com/features/2010/
March/2870/index.php (accessed August 10, 2014).
16. T. Elkeles, “In Practice: Storytelling Drives Knowledge and 
 Information Sharing Across Qualcomm,” HBSCO Host Connection, 
March 2010, http://connection.ebscohost.com/c/articles/48417152/
practice-storytelling-drives-knowledge-information-sharing-across-
qualcomm; and A. Lewis, “Innovative Learning and Development 
Practices,” HCI Blogs, March 23, 2010, www.hci.org/node/551943 
(both accessed August 10, 2014).
17. K. K. Spors, “Getting Workers to Share Their Know-How with 
Peers,” The Wall Street Journal, April 3, 2008, p. B6. For more on virtual 
knowledge sharing, see B. Rosen, S. Furst, and R. Blackburn, “Over-
coming Barriers to Knowledge Sharing in Virtual Teams,” Organizational 
Dynamics, Vol. 36 (2007), pp. 259–273.
18. Forrester Research, reported in R. Reitsma, “The Data Digest: 
How Democratization of Technology Empowers Employees,” Forrester 
Blogs, February 11, 2011, http://blogs.forrester.com/reineke_
reitsma/11-02-11-the_data_digest_how_democratization_of_technology_
empowers_employees (accessed August 10, 2014).
19. For more on social networks and employee collaboration, see R. 
Shah, “A New Organizational Learning Goal: The Accrual of Awareness,” 
Forbes, May 1, 2012, www.forbes.com/sites/rawnshah/2012/05/01/
a-new-organizational-learning-goal-the-accrual-of-awareness; M. 
 Benioff, “Welcome to the Social Media Revolution,” BBC News, May 10, 
2012, www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-18013662; and S. Aral, C. 
 Dellarocas, and D. Godes, “Introduction to the Special Issues—Social Me-
dia and Business Transformation: A Framework for Research,” Informa-
tion Systems Research, March 2013, pp. 3–13. Also see Cisco study 
that found that allowing employees to bring their own handheld device 
to work could help encourage workplace collaboration, reported in 
“Cisco Study: IT Saying Yes to BYOD,” Market Watch, May 16, 2012, 
www.marketwatch.com/story/cisco-study-it-saying-yes-to-
byod-2012-05-16 (all accessed August 10, 2014).
20. E. Sundstrom, K. P. DeMeuse, and D. Futrell, “Work Teams,” 
 American Psychologist, February 1990, pp. 120–133.
21. For example, see A. Zimmerman, “Wal-Mart’s Emergency-Relief 
Team Girds for Hurricane Gustav,” The Wall Street Journal, August 30, 
2008, p. A3; and S. Sternberg, “Saved by 96 Minutes of CPR,” USA 
 Today, March 3, 2011, pp. 1D, 2D.
22. See M. Roberts, Performance Hubs: Engaging Teams in Focused 
Continuous Improvement (London: CRC Press, 2011); and R. R. Bassett, 
“How to Create and Sustain Successful Continuous Improvement 
Teams,” Automation World, November 30, 2011, www.automation-
world.com/operations/how-create-and-sustain-successful-continuous-
improvement-teams (accessed August 10, 2014).
23. Data from J. P. Millikin, P. W. Hom, and C. C. Manz, “Self- Management 
Competencies in Self-Managing Teams: Their Impact on Multi-Team 
System Productivity,” The Leadership Quarterly, October 2010, 
pp. 687–702.
24. See R. Rico, M. Sánchez-Manzanares, F. Gil, and C. Gibson, “Team 
Implicit Coordination Processes: A Team Knowledge-Based Approach,” 
Academy of Management Review, January 2008, pp. 163–184.
25. See J. M. Beus, S. M. Jarrett, A. B. Taylor, and C. B. Wiese, “Adjust-
ing to New Work Teams: Testing Work Experience as a Multidimensional 
Resource for Newcomers,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 35 
(2014), pp. 489–506.
26. For a preview of the future workplace, see L. C. Lancaster and D. 
Stillman, The M-Factor: How the Millennial Generation Is Rocking the 
Workplace (New York: HarperCollins, 2010).
104. J. Mahler, “The Case For Higher Earning,” Bloomberg Business-
week, January 6–12, 2014, pp. 8–9.
105. V. Kopytoff, “In Major Blow to NCAA, Judge Rules that Colleges 
Can Pay Athletes,” Fortune, August 8, 2014, http://fortune.
com/2014/08/08/judge-deals-major-blow-to-ncaa-by-ruling-athletes-
can-be-paid (accessed August 12, 2014).
CHAPTER 13
1. D. L. Duarte and N. T. Snyder, Mastering Virtual Teams: Strategies, 
Tools, and Techniques That Succeed, 3rd ed. (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 2006).
2. M. K. Brown, B. Huettner, and C. James-Tanny, Managing Virtual 
Teams: Getting the Most from Wikis, Blogs, and Other Collaborative Tools
(Plano, TX: Wordware Publishing, 2007); M. Goldsmith, “Crossing the Cul-
tural Chasm,” BusinessWeek, May 30, 2007, www.businessweek.com/
careers/content/may2007/ca20070530_521679.htm?chan=search (ac-
cessed August 10, 2014); L. Noeth, “Supervising a Virtual Team Is Still All 
about Basics,” Rochester Democrat & Chronicle, April 27, 2008, www.
democratandchronicle.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080427/ 
BUSINESS01/804270332/-1/COLUMNS (accessed August 10, 2014); and 
J. E. Hoch and S. W. J. Kozlowski, “Leading Virtual Teams: Hierarchical 
Leadership, Structural Supports, and Shared Team Leadership,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, Vol. 99, No. 3 (2014),pp. 390–403.
3. P. F. Drucker, “The Coming of the New Organization,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, January–February 1988, pp. 45–53.
4. “Top 10 Leadership Tips from Jeff Immelt,” Fast Company, April 
2004, p. 96.
5. T. Kelley, quoted in P. Sinton, “Teamwork the Name of the Game for 
Ideo,” San Francisco Chronicle, February 23, 2000, pp. D1, D3. Kelley is 
coauthor, with J. Littman, of The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity 
from IDEO, America’s Leading Design Firm (New York: Random House, 
2001) and of The Ten Faces of Innovation: IDEO’s Strategies for Defeat-
ing the Devil’s Advocate and Driving Creativity Throughout Your Organi-
zation (New York: Currency/Doubleday, 2005).
6. S. E. Page, quoted in C. Dreifus, “In Professor’s Model, Diversity = 
Productivity,” The New York Times, January 8, 2008, p. D2. On the sub-
ject of diversity in teams, see also A. N. Pieterse, D. van Knippenberg, 
and D. van Dierendonck, “Cultural Diversity and Team Performance: The 
Role of Team Member Goal Orientation,” Academy of Management 
Journal, June 2013, pp. 782–804; interview with Robert E. Moritz, 
chairman and senior partner of Pricewaterhouse Coopers LLP, in “PwC’s 
Robert E. Moritz: ‘Diverse Teams Give You the Best Thinking,’” Knowl-
edge@Wharton, December 24, 2013, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.
edu/article/leadership-beyond-bottom-line (accessed August 10, 2014); 
and Michael P. Gregoire, CEO of CA Technologies, interviewed by A. 
 Bryant, “A Diverse Team Is a Creative Team,” The New York Times, 
January 12, 2014, p. BU-2.
7. This definition is based in part on one found in D. Horton Smith, 
“A Parsimonious Definition of ‘Group’: Toward Conceptual Clarity and 
 Scientific Utility,” Sociological Inquiry, Spring 1967, pp. 141–167.
8. E. H. Schein, Organizational Psychology, 3rd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1980), p. 145.
9. J. R. Katzenbach and D. K. Smith, The Wisdom of Teams: Creating 
the High-Performance Organization (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 1993), p. 45.
10. J. R. Katzenbach and D. K. Smith, “The Discipline of Teams,” 
 Harvard Business Review, March–April 1995, p. 112.
11. “How Three Bosses Got to the Top,” The Arizona Republic, August 5, 
2007, p. D5.
12. See R. Cross, N. Nohria, and A. Parker, “Six Myths about Informal 
Networks—and How to Overcome Them,” MIT Sloan Management Re-
view, Spring 2002, pp. 67–75; and C. Shirky, “Watching the Patterns 
Emerge,” Harvard Business Review, February 2004, pp. 34–35.
13. D. Krackhardt and J. R. Hanson, “Informal Networks: The Company 
behind the Chart,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 1993, p. 104. 
See also R. Cross and L. Prusack, “The People Who Make Organizations 
Go—Or Stop,” Harvard Business Review, June 2002, pp. 104–112; and 
R. McDermott and D. Archibald, “Harnessing Your Staff’s Informal Net-
works,” Harvard Business Review, March 2010, pp. 82–89.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN41
38. “Human Cooperation Has Long History,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
January 26, 2012, p. A9; reprinted from Los Angeles Times. See study 
by J. Henrich, “Social Science: Hunter-Gatherer Cooperation,” Nature, 
January 26, 2012, pp. 449–450.
39. “With Teamwork, Humans Best Other Primates,” The New York 
Times, March 6, 2012, p. D3. See study by L. G. Dean, R. Kendal, S. 
Schapiro, B. Thierry, and K. N. Laland, “Identification of the Social and 
Cognitive Processes Underlying Human Cumulative Culture,” Science, 
Vol. 335 (2012), pp. 1114–1118.
40. See C. M. Christensen, M. Marx, and H. H. Stevenson, “The Tools of 
Cooperation and Change,” Harvard Business Review, October 2006, 
pp. 73–80; and R. Ricci and C. Wiese, The Collaboration Imperative: 
Executive Strategies for Unlocking Your Organization’s True Potential 
(San Jose, CA: Cisco Systems, 2012) .
41. D. W. Johnson, G. Maruyama, R. Johnson, D. Nelson, and L. Skon, 
“Effects of Cooperative, Competitive, and Individualistic Goal Structures 
in Achievement: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin, January 
1981, pp. 56–57.
42. See J. O’Toole and W. Bennis, “What’s Needed Next: A Culture of 
Candor,” Harvard Business Review, June 2009, pp. 54–61; M. Yakovleva, 
R. R. Reilly, and R. Werko, “Why Do We Trust? Moving Beyond Individual 
to Dyadic Perceptions,” Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2010, 
pp. 79–91; and J. P. MacDuffie, “Inter-Organizational Trust and the 
 Dynamics of Distrust,” Journal of International Business Studies, 
January 2011, pp. 35–47.
43. A big part of cohesiveness is building trust. See D. De Cremer and 
T. R. Tyler, “The Effects of Trust in Authority and Procedural Fairness on 
Cooperation,” Journal of Applied Psychology, May 2007, pp. 639–649; 
J. A. Colquitt, B. A. Scott, and J. A. Lepine, “Trust, Trustworthiness, and 
Trust Propensity: A Meta-Analytic Test of Their Unique Relationships 
with Risk Taking and Job Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
July 2007, pp. 909–927; and R. Ilies, D. T. Wagner, and F. P. Morgeson, 
“Explaining Affective Linkages in Teams: Individual Differences in Sus-
ceptibility to Contagion and Individualism–Collectivism,” Journal of 
 Applied Psychology, July 2007, pp. 1140–1148.
44. A. Pentland, “The New Science of Building Great Teams,” Harvard 
Business Review, April 2012, pp. 61–70.
45. J. Schaubroeck, S.S.K. Lam, and S. E. Cha, “Embracing Transforma-
tional Leadership: Team Values and the Impact of Leader Behavior on 
Team Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology, July 2007, 
pp. 1020–1030.
46. “Is Your Team Too Big? Too Small? What’s the Right Number?” 
Knowledge@Wharton, June 14, 2006, Wharton School, University of 
Pennsylvania, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.
cfm?articleid-1501&CFID-1653072&CFTOKEN-14318984 (accessed 
August 10, 2014).
47. “A Team’s-Eye View of Teams,” Training, November 1995, p. 16. For 
more discussion of team size, see V. Hazrati, “Is Five the Optimal Team 
Size?” InfoQ, April 14, 2009, www.infoq.com/news/2009/04/agile- 
optimal-team-size (accessed August 10, 2014).
48. M. E. Shaw, Group Dynamics, 3rd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1981); and G. Manners, “Another Look at Group Size, Group Problem-
Solving and Member Consensus,” Academy of Management Journal, 
Vol. 18 (1975), pp. 715–724.
49. H.-S. Hwang and J. Guynes, “The Effect of Group Size on Group 
Performance in Computer-Supported Decision Making,” Information & 
Management, April 1994, pp. 189–198.
50. S. J. Karau and K. D. Williams, “Social Loafing: Research Findings, Im-
plications, and Future Directions,” Current Directions in Psychological Sci-
ence, October 1995, pp. 134–140; S. J. Zacarro, “Social Loafing: The Role of 
Task Attractiveness,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, Vol. 10 
(1984), pp. 99–106; P. W. Mulvey, L. Bowes-Sperry, and K. J. Klein, “The Ef-
fects of Perceived Loafing and Defensive Impression Management on Group 
Effectiveness,” Small Group Research, June 1998, pp. 394–415; and 
L. Karakowsky and K. McBey, “Do My Contributions Matter? The Influence 
of Imputed Expertise on Member Involvement and Self-Evaluations in the 
Work Group,” Group & Organization Management, March 2001, pp. 70–92.
51. J. Welch and S. Welch, “When a Star Slacks Off,” BusinessWeek,
March 17, 2008, p. 88.
52. B.-C. Lim and K. J. Klein, “Team Mental Models and Team Perfor-
mance: A Field Study of the Effects of Team Mental Model Similarity 
27. Based on three meta-analyses covering 70 studies. See P. S. 
 Goodman, R. Devadas, and T. L. Griffith Hughson, “Groups and Produc-
tivity: Analyzing the Effectiveness of Self-Managed Teams,” in Produc-
tivity in Organizations, ed. J. P. Campbell, R. J. Campbell, and Associates 
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998), pp. 295–327. Also see S. Kauffeld, 
“Self-Directed Work Groups and Team Competence,” Journal of Occu-
pational and Organizational Psychology, March 2006, pp. 1–21; and K. 
A. Smith-Jentsch, J. A. Cannon-Bowers, S. L. Tannenbaum, and E. Salas, 
“Guided Team Self-Correction: Impacts on Team Mental Models, Pro-
cesses, and Effectiveness,” Small Group Research, June 2008, 
pp. 303–327.
28. See B. W. Tuckman, “Developmental Sequence in Small Groups,” 
Psychological Bulletin, June 1965, pp. 384–399; and B. W. Tuckman 
and M.A.C. Jensen, “Stages of Small-Group Development Revisited,” 
Group & Organization Studies, December 1977, pp. 419–427. An in-
structive adaptation of the Tuckman model can be found in L. Holpp, “If 
Empowerment Is So Good, Why Does It Hurt?” Training, March 1995, p. 
56. See also S. Wait, “Team Building Is Critical for Successful Growth,” 
Reno Gazette-Journal, August 5, 2006, p. 5E; and Carey Smith, CEO of 
Big Ass Fans, interviewed by A. Bryant, “To Unite the Team, Become Its 
‘Hyperlink,’” The New York Times, December 29, 2013, p. BU-2.
29. See F. P. Morgeson, M. H. Reider, and M. A. Campion, “Selecting In-
dividuals in Team Settings: The Importance of Social Skills, Personality 
Characteristics, and Teamwork Knowledge,” Personnel Psychology, 
 Autumn 2005, pp. 583–611.
30. On the matter of trust, see survey by American Psychological As-
sociation, “2014 Work and Well-Being Survey,” April 23, 2014, in press 
release “Employee Distrust Is Pervasive in U.S. Workforce,” American 
Psychological Association, April 23, 2014, American Psychological As-
sociation, www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2014/04/employee- 
distrust.aspx (accessed August 10, 2014). See also R. Ricci, “Build Team 
Trust . . . Fast,” Cisco Blogs, May 28, 2013, http://blogs.cisco.com/col-
laboration/build-team-trust-fast (accessed August 10, 2014).
31. See J.-L. Farh, C. Lee, and C. I. C. Farh, “Task Conflict and Team 
Creativity: A Question of How Much and When,” Journal of Applied 
 Psychology, Vol. 95, No. 6 (2010), pp. 1173–1180.
32. See T. V. Mumford, F. P. Morgeson, C. H. Van Iddekinge, and M. A. 
Campion, “The Team Role Test: Development and Validation of a Team 
Role Knowledge Situational Judgment Test,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, Vol. 93, No. 2 (2008), pp. 250–267.
33. Practical advice on handling a dominating group member can be 
found in B. Carey, “Fear in the Workplace: The Bullying Boss,” The New 
York Times, June 22, 2004, pp. D1, D6. A description of three unhelpful 
co-workers you should try to sidestep (the chronic complainer, the 
shoulder rubber, and the chatterbox) are described in C. Potter, “Steer 
Clear: Three Coworkers to Avoid,” San Francisco Chronicle, January 10, 
2010, p. D1. The problem of overcommunication among co-workers 
appears in J. Spolsky, “A Little Less Conversation,” Inc., February 
2010, pp. 28–29. One CEO, Seth Merrin of Liquidnet, found that elimi-
nating job titles encouraged employees to be more responsible for the 
firm’s future, as described in his interview with A. Bryant, “Saying 
Goodbye to Titles, and Hello to Responsibility,” The New York Times, 
April 26, 2013, p. B2; another is Girish Navani, CEO of eClincalWorks, 
interviewed by A. Bryant, “Titles Don’t Matter. Teamwork Does,” The 
New York Times, January 19, 2014, p. BU-2. See also L. M. Sixel, “Job 
Slackers Can Become Team Players,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 
16, 2013, pp. C1, C6; P. Korkki, “Modern Offices, Chock-Full of Of-
fenses,” The New York Times, September 29, 2013, p. BU-9; and M. 
Richtel, “That Neurotic on the Team? Give Him Time,” The New York 
Times, February 2, 2014, p. BU-3.
34. For related research, see M. Van Vugt and C. M. Hart, “Social Iden-
tity as Social Glue: The Origins of Group Loyalty,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, April 2004, pp. 585–598.
35. See M. S. Cole, H. Bruch, and B. Vogel, “Energy at Work: A Measure-
ment Validation and Linkage to Unit Effectiveness,” Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, May, 2012, pp. 445-467.
36. S. Bucholz and T. Roth, Creating the High-Performance Team (New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1987), p. xi.
37. F. P. Morgeson, D. S. DeRue, and E. P. Karam, “Leadership in Teams: 
A Functional Approach to Understanding Leadership Structures and 
 Processes,” Journal of Management, January 2010, pp. 5–39.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN42
73. M. R. Callway and J. K. Desser, “Groupthink: Effects of Cohesive-
ness and Problem-Solving Procedures on Group Decision Making,” 
Social Behavior and Personality, no. 2, 1984, pp. 157–164.
74. See J. Lehrer, “Groupthink,” The New Yorker, January 30, 2012, 
pp. 22–27. Jonah Lehrer is author of Imagine: How Creativity Works 
(Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 2012).
75. K. Sawyer, quoted in Lehrer, “Groupthink,” p. 23.
76. See D. Palermo and J. Jenkins, Word Association Norms: Grade 
School Through College (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1964).
77. C. J. Nemeth, M. Personnaz, B. Personnaz, and J. A. Goncalo, “The 
Liberating Role of Conflict in Group Creativity: A Cross-Cultural Study,” 
Institute of Industrial Relations Working Paper No. iirwps-090-03, October 
13, 2003, http://ssrn.com/abstract=440663 (accessed August 10, 2014).
78. S. Cain, “The Rise of the New Groupthink,” The New York Times, 
January 15, 2012, pp. SR-1, SR-6. Cain is also author of Quiet: The 
Power of Introverts in a World That Can’t Stop Talking (New York: Crown 
Publishing Group, 2012).
79. Some discussions of sources of conflict appear in E. Bernstein, 
“When a Co-worker Is Stressed Out,” The Wall Street Journal, August 
26, 2008, pp. D1, D2; M. Steen, “Apologizing on the Job,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, February 28, 2010, p. D1; E. Zimmerman, “The Office Skir-
mish: How to Avoid Round 2,” The New York Times, March 14, 2010, 
Business section, p. 9; and D. Nishi, “What to Do If Your Boss Is the 
Problem,” The Wall Street Journal, April 20, 2010, p. D4.
80. J. A. Wall Jr. and R. Robert Callister, “Conflict and Its Management,” 
Journal of Management, No. 3 (1995), p. 517.
81. S. P. Robbins, “‘Conflict Management’ and ‘Conflict Resolution’ Are 
Not Synonymous Terms,” California Management Review, Winter 1978, 
p. 70; and C. Alter, “An Exploratory Study of Conflict and Coordination in 
Interorganizational Service Delivery Systems,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, September 1990, pp. 478–502.
82. Cooperative conflict is discussed in D. Tjosvold, Learning to Man-
age Conflict: Getting People to Work Together Productively (New York: 
Lexington, 1993); and D. Tjosvold and D. W. Johnson, Productive Conflict 
Management Perspectives for Organizations (New York: Irvington, 
1983). See also A. C. Amason, K. R. Thompson, W. A. Hochwarter, and A. 
W. Harrison, “Conflict: An Important Dimension in Successful Manage-
ment Teams,” Organizational Dynamics, Autumn 1995, pp. 20–35; and 
A. C. Amason, “Distinguishing the Effects of Functional and Dysfunc-
tional Conflict on Strategic Decision Making: Resolving a Paradox for 
Top Management Teams,” Academy of Management Journal, February 
1996, pp. 123–148.
83. Liz Lange, quoted in J. Noveck, “Do Bosses Need to Be Mean to Get 
Work Done?” Nevada Appeal, July 9, 2006, pp. D1, D2. See also D. 
Brady, “Charm Offensive,” BusinessWeek, June 26, 2006, pp. 76–80; 
and A. Dobson and R. Berman, “Building a Better Boss,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, September 23, 2007, p. H-1.
84. The 35% figure appeared in G. Namie, The WBI U.S. Workplace Bully-
ing Survey, 2010, conducted by Workplace Bullying Institute and Zogby 
International, http://workplacebullying.org/multi/pdf/WBI_2010_Natl_
Survey.pdf (accessed August 10, 2014). The 51% figure appeared in Society 
for Human Resource Management, “SHRM Survey Findings: Workplace 
Bullying,” February 28, 2012, www.shrm.org/research/ surveyfindings/
articles/pages/workplacebullying.aspx (accessed August 10, 2014).
85. K. L. Zellars, B. J. Tepper, and M. K. Duffy, “Abusive Supervision and 
Subordinates’ Organizational Citizenship Behavior,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, December 2002, pp. 1068–1076. For more on this kind of 
abusive behavior, see M. Korn and R. Feintzeig, “Is the Old-School, 
Hard-Nosed Boss Obsolete?” The Wall Street Journal, May 23, 2014, 
pp. B1, B2; and E. Schwitzgebel, “The Essence of Jerkitude,” The Week, 
July 4, 2014, pp. 36–37.
86. B. J. Tepper, S. E. Moss, D. E. Lockhart, and J. C. Carr, “Abusive 
Supervision, Upward Maintenance Supervision, and Subordinates’ Psy-
chological Distress,” Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 50 (2007), 
pp. 1169–1180; and B. J. Tepper, “Abusive Supervision in Formal Orga-
nizations: Review, Synthesis, and Research Agenda,” Journal of Man-
agement, June 1, 2007, pp. 261–289.
87. R. I. Sutton in “Breakthrough Ideas for 2004: The HBR List,” Harvard 
Business Review, February 2004, pp. 13–24, 32–37. Sutton’s topic was 
headed “More Trouble Than They Are Worth.” His book based on these 
and Accuracy,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, January 2006, 
pp. 403–418.
53. J. L. Yang, “The Power of Number 4.6,” Fortune, June 12, 2006, 
p. 122.
54. Deutschman, “The Managing Wisdom of High-Tech Superstars,” 
Fortune, October 17, 1994, pp. 197–206.
55. J. R. Hackman, Leading Teams: Setting the Stage for Great Perfor-
mances (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002).
56. J. R. Hackman and N. J. Vidmar, “Effects of Size and Task Type on 
Group Performance and Member Reactions,” Sociometry, Vol. 33 (1970), 
pp. 37–54.
57. K. J. Klein, cited in “Is Your Team Too Big? Too Small? What’s the 
Right Number?” Knowledge@Wharton, June 14, 2006.
58. See D. M. Fisher, “Distinguishing between Taskwork and Teamwork 
Planning in Teams: Relations with Coordination and Interpersonal Pro-
cesses,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 99, No. 3 (2014), pp. 423–436.
59. K. D. Benne and P. Sheats, “Functional Roles of Group Members,” 
Journal of Social Issues, Spring 1948, pp. 41–49. See also E. C. 
 Dierdorff and F. P. Morgeson, “Consensus in Work Role Requirements: 
The Influence of Discrete Occupational Contest on Role Expectations,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, September 2007, pp. 1228–1241; and 
D. J. McAllister, D. Kamdar, E. W. Morrison, and D. B. Turban, “Disentan-
gling Role Perceptions: How Perceived Role Breadth, Discretion, Instru-
mentality, and Efficacy Relate to Helping and Taking Charge,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, September 2007, pp. 1200-1211.
60. D. C. Feldman, “The Development and Enforcement of Group 
Norms,” Academy of Management Review, January 1984, pp. 47–53.
61. Siemens President and CEO Peter Löscher, interviewed by A. 
 Bryant, “The Trust That Makes a Team Click,” The New York Times, 
July 31, 2011, p. BU-1.
62. David A. Ferrucci, interviewed by P. R. Olsen, “Building the Team 
That Built Watson,” The New York Times, January 8, 2012, p. BU-7.
63. Pamela Fields, CEO of Stetson, interviewed by A. Bryant, “Valuing 
Those Who Tell You the Bitter Truth,” The New York Times, October 2, 
2011, p. BU-2.
64. Feldman, “The Development and Enforcement of Group Norms.”
65. J. B. Harvey, “The Abilene Paradox: The Management of Agree-
ment,” Organizational Dynamics, Summer 1988, pp. 17–43.
66. I. Janis, Groupthink, 2nd ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1982), p. 9. See 
also K. D. Lassila, “A Brief History of Groupthink,” Yale Alumni Magazine, 
January–February 2008, pp. 59–61, www.philosophy-religion.org/hand-
outs/pdfs/BRIEF-HISTORY_GROUPTHINK.pdf (accessed August 10, 2014).
67. V. Kemper, “Senate Intelligence Report: Groupthink Viewed as Cul-
prit in Move to War,” Los Angeles Times, July 10, 2004, p. A.17.
68. See N. Bilton, “Tech Valuations Defy Restraints of Reality,” The New 
York Times, January 23, 2012, p. B4.
69. J. Surowiecki, quoted in J. Freeman, “Books,” The Christian Sci-
ence Monitor, May 25, 2004; www.csmonitor.com/2004/ 0525/p15s01-
bogn.html (accessed August 10, 2014). Also see J. Surowiecki, The 
Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How 
Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies, and Nations 
(New York: Doubleday, 2004).
70. See K. Weise, “Humans Plus Computers Equals Better Crowdsourc-
ing,” Bloomberg Businessweek, November 14–November 20, 2011, 
p. 49; and A. Vance, “MassMotion’s Algorithms Bring Wisdom to the 
Virtual Crowds,” Bloomberg Businessweek, November 21–November 
27, 2011, p. 50. See also E. R. Mollick and R. Nanda, “Wisdom or Mad-
ness” Comparing Crowds with Expert Evaluation in Funding the Arts, 
June 20, 2014. Harvard Business School Entrepreneurial Management 
Working Paper No. 14-116. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/ 
abstract=2443114 or ; and “It’s Not Just the Experts: Crowds Can Pick 
a Winner, Too,” Knowledge@Wharton, July 21, 2014, http://knowledge.
wharton.upenn.edu/article/just-experts-crowds-can-pick-winner (both 
accessed August 10, 2014).
71. V. H. Palmieri, quoted in L. Baum, “The Job Nobody Wants,” Busi-
nessWeek, September 8, 1986, p. 60.
72. Surowiecki, quoted in Kemper, “Senate Intelligence Report: Group-
think Viewed as Culprit in Move to War.” See also J. A. LePine, “Adaptation 
of Teams in Response to Unforeseen Change: Effects of Goal Difficulty and 
Team Composition in Terms of Cognitive Ability and Goal Orientation,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 90 (2005), pp. 1153–1167.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN43
p. 35. See also G. Yukl, “Managerial Leadership: A Review of Theory and 
Research,” Journal of Management, Vol. 15 (1989), pp. 251–289.
5. T. Peters and N. Austin, A Passion for Excellence (New York: Random 
House, 1985), pp. 5–6; but see also B. Kellerman, “Leadership—Warts 
and All,” Harvard Business Review, January 1, 2004, pp. 40–45.
6. B. M. Bass and R. Bass, The Bass Handbook of Leadership: Theory, 
Research, and Managerial Applications, 4th ed. (New York: Free Press, 
2008), p. 654.
7. Tim Bucher, interviewed by A. Bryant, “Monday-Night Strategizing 
with the Team,” The New York Times, February 12, 2012, p. BU-2.
8. See R. Hooijberg and R. E. Quinn, “Behavioral Complexity and the Develop-
ment of Effective Managers.” In R. L. Phillips and J. G. Hunt (Eds.), Strategic 
Management: A Multiorganizational-Level Perspective (New York: Quorum, 
1992); and K. A. Lawrence, P. Lenk, and R. E. Quinn, “Behavioral Complexity in 
Leadership: The Psychometric Properties of a New Instrument to Measure 
Behavioral Repertoire,” The Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 20 (2009), pp. 87–102.
9. G. A. Yuki, Leadership in Organizations, 7th ed. (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008), p. 8.
10. J. P. Kotter, ”What Leaders Really Do,” Harvard Business Review,
December 2001, pp. 85–96; the role of leadership within organizational 
change is discussed in J. P. Kotter, Leading Change (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press, 1996).
11. Managing in the world of complexity is discussed in G. Sargut and 
R. G. McGrath, “Learning to Live with Complexity,” Harvard Business 
Review, September 2011, pp. 68–76; and M. J. Mauboussin, “Embrac-
ing Complexity,” Harvard Business Review, September 2011, pp. 88–92.
12. F. Smith, quoted in “All in a Day’s Work,” Harvard Business Review,
December 2001, pp. 54–66.
13. L. H. Chusmir, “Personalized versus Socialized Power Needs among 
Working Women and Men,” Human Relations, February 1986, p. 149.
14. A. Wong, quoted in “My Journey to the Top,” Newsweek, October 
15, 2007, pp. 49–65.
15. R. M. Kramer, “The Great Intimidators,” Harvard Business Review,
February 2006, pp. 88–96.
16. S. Harrison, “Deliberate Acts of Decency,” HR Magazine, July 2007, 
pp. 97–99.
17. Based on Table 1 in G. Yukl, C. M. Falbe, and J. Y. Youn, “ Patterns of 
Influence Behavior for Managers,” Group & Organization Management,
March 1993, pp. 5–28.
18. G. Yukl, H. Kim, and C. M. Falbe, “Antecedents of Influence Out-
comes,” Journal of Applied Psychology, June 1996, pp. 309–317.
19. A. Lashinsky, “The Decade of Steve,” Fortune, November 5, 2009, 
http://tech.fortune.cnn.com/2009/11/05/the-decade-of-steve (ac-
cessed August 14, 2014).
20. R. M. Stogdill, Handbook of Leadership (New York: Free Press, 
1974). See also B. M. Bass and R. Bass, The Bass Handbook of Leader-
ship: Theory, Research, and Managerial Applications, 4th ed. (New York: 
Free Press, 2008).
21. Bass and Bass, The Bass Handbook of Leadership.
22. But see D. S. DeRue, J. D. Nahrgang, N. Wellman, S. E. Humphrey, 
“Trait and Behavioral Theories of Leadership: An Integration and Meta-
Analytic Test of Their Relative Validity,” Personnel Psychology, Vol. 64 
(2011), pp. 7–52.
23. These results are based on E. H. O’Boyle Jr., D. F. Forsyth, G. C. 
Banks, and M. A. McDaniel, “A Meta-Analysis of the Dark Triad and Work 
Behavior: A Social Exchange Perspective,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, May 2012, pp. 557–579; and DeRue et al., “Trait and Behavioral 
Theories of Leadership.”
24. See S. M. Spain, P. Harms, and J. M. Lebreton, “The Dark Side of 
Personality at Work,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, February 2014, 
pp. S41–S60.
25. B. M. Galvin, D. A. Waldman, and P. Balthazard, “Visionary Communica-
tion Qualities as Mediators of the Relationship between Narcissism and At-
tributions of Leader Charisma,” Personnel Psychology, Autumn 2010, p. 510.
26. Ibid., pp. 509–537; and O’Boyle et al.,“A Meta-Analysis of the Dark 
Triad and Work Behavior.”
27. See J. Hogan, R. Hogan, and R. B. Kaiser, “Management Derail-
ment,” in S. Zedeck, ed., APA Handbook of Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 
2011), pp. 555–575. Also see M F. R. Kets de Vries, “Coaching the Toxic 
Leader,” Harvard Business Review, April 2014, pp. 101–109.
ideas is The No Asshole Rule: Building a Civilized Workplace and Surviv-
ing One That Isn’t (New York: Random House, 2007).
88. R. I. Sutton, “R. I. Sutton: Nasty People,” CIO Insight, May 1, 2004, 
www.cioinsight.com/c/a/Past-Opinions/Robert-I-Sutton-Nasty-People 
(accessed August 10, 2014).
89. A. M. O’Leary-Kelly, R. W. Griffin, and D. J. Glew, “Organization-
Motivated Aggression: A Research Framework,” Academy of Manage-
ment Review, January 1996, pp. 225–253. See also G. A. Van Kleef and 
S. Côté, “Expressing Anger in Conflict: When It Helps and When It Hurts,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, November 2007, pp. 1557–1569.
90. K. Duncum, “Turning Conflict into Cooperation,” Bloomberg Busi-
nessweek, October 15, 2010, www.businessweek.com/managing/ 
content/oct2010/ca20101014_882756.htm (accessed August 10, 2014).
91. C. M. Pearson and C. L. Porath, “On the Nature, Consequences, and 
Remedies of Workplace Incivility: No Time for ‘Nice’? Think Again,” 
Academy of Management Executive, February 2005, p. 7. See also C. L. 
Porath and C. M. Pearson, “The Cost of Bad Behavior,” Organizational 
Dynamics, January–March 2010, pp. 64–71.
92. K. T. Kishida, D. Yang, K. H. Quartz, S. R. Quartz, and P. R. Montague, 
“Implicit Signals in Small Group Settings and Their Impact on the Expres-
sion of Cognitive Capacity and Associated Brain Responses,” Philosophi-
cal Transactions of the Royal Society B, March 5, 2012, pp. 704–716.
93. E. Bernstein, “Speaking Up Is Hard to Do: Researchers Explain 
Why,” The Wall Street Journal, February 7, 2012, pp. D1, D4.
94. “Help for the Tongue-Tied,” sidebar to Bernstein, p. D4.
95. See K. A. Crowne, “What Leads to Cultural Intelligence?” Business 
Horizons, September–October 2008, pp. 391–399; and N. Goodman, 
“Cultivating Cultural Intelligence,” Training, March–April 2011, p. 38. On 
the subject of listening, see Bob Farrell, CEO of Kewill, interviewed by A. 
Bryant, “Always Take the Time to Listen,” The New York Times, June 27, 
2014, p. B2.
96. R. A. Cosier and C. R. Schwenk, “Agreement and Thinking Alike: 
Ingredients for Poor Decisions,” Academy of Management Executive,
February 1990, p. 71. Also see J. P. Kotter, “Kill Complacency,” Fortune,
August 5, 1996, pp. 168–170.
97. See “Facilitators as Devil’s Advocates,” Training, September 1993, 
p. 10; and C. R. Schwenk, “Devil’s Advocacy in Managerial Decision 
Making,” Journal of Management Studies, April 1984, pp. 153–168.
98. S. G. Katzenstein, “The Debate on Structured Debate: Toward a Uni-
fied Theory,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
June 1996, pp. 316–332.
99. Adapted from T. Allessandra and P. Hunsaker, Communicating at 
Work (New York: Fireside, 1993), p. 107. See also the core emotional 
elements of negotiation (appreciation, affiliation, autonomy, status, and 
role) in R. Kreitner and A. Kinicki, Organizational Behavior, 10th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2013), p. 389.
100. M. A. Rahim, “A Strategy for Managing Conflict in Complex Orga-
nizations,” Human Relations, January 1985, p. 84; and M. A. Rahim and 
N. R. Magner, “Confirmatory Factor Analysis of the Styles of Handling 
Interpersonal Conflict: First-Order Factor Model and Its Invariance 
across Groups,” Journal of Applied Psychology, February 1995, 
pp. 122–132. See also N. M. Atteya, “The Conflict Management Grid: A 
Selection and Development Tool to Resolve the Conflict between the 
Marketing and Sales Organizations,” International Journal of Business 
and Management, Vol. 7, No. 13 (2012), pp. 28–37.
101. Rahim, “A Strategy for Managing Conflict in Complex Organizations.”
102. J. Camp, “Schools’ Negotiating Lessons Just Don’t Work,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, August 10, 2014, p. D7.
CHAPTER 14
1. H. Lancaster, “If Your Career Needs More Attention, Maybe You 
Should Get an Agent,” The Wall Street Journal, October 20, 1998, p. B1.
2. R. L. Knowdell, “The 10 New Rules for Strategizing Your Career,” The 
Futurist, June–July 1998, pp. 19–24. See also K. Madden, “Plan a Suc-
cessful Career Change,” Reno Gazette-Journal, March 11, 2012, p. 1F.
3. Center for Professional Excellence, York College, 2010 national poll, 
reported in “Outfits Key to How You Are Perceived,” Arizona Republic, 
September 21, 2011, p. CL1.
4. C. A. Schriesheim, J. M. Tolliver, and O. C. Behling, “Leadership Theory: 
Some Implications for Managers,” MSU Business Topics, Summer 1978, 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN44
on the subject of woman and leadership are C. V. Flett, What Men Don’t 
Tell Women about Business: Opening Up the Heavily Guarded Alpha 
Male Playbook (New York: Wiley, 2008); and N. DiSesa, Seducing the 
Boys Club: Uncensored Tactics from a Woman at the Top (New York: 
Ballantine Books, 2008).
44. See research by N. M. Carter and C. Silva, “Women in Management: 
Delusions of Progress,” Harvard Business Review, March 2010, pp. 
19–21. Quit rates were studied by P. W. Hom, L. Roberson, and A. Ellis, 
“Challenging Conventional Wisdom about Who Quits: Revelations from 
Corporate America,” Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2008, pp. 
1–34.
45. L. Mundy, The Richer Sex: How the New Majority of Female Bread-
winners Is Transforming Sex, Love, and Family (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2012).
46. G. Yukl, “Effective Leadership Behavior: What We Know and What 
Questions Need More Attention,” Academy of Management Perspec-
tives, November 2012, p. 69.
47. DeRue et al., “Trait and Behavioral Theories of Leadership.”
48. D. McGinn, “Battling Back from Betrayal,” Harvard Business Re-
view, December 2010, p. 131.
49. A definition and description of transactional leadership is provided 
by Bass and Bass, The Bass Handbook of Leadership, pp. 618–648. See 
also J. Antonakis and R. J. House, “The Full-Range Leadership Theory: 
The Way Forward,” in B. J. Avolio and F. J. Yammarino, eds., Transforma-
tional and Charismatic Leadership: The Road Ahead (New York: JAI Press, 
2002), pp. 3–34. See also L. Y. C. Leong and R. Fischer, “Is Transforma-
tional Leadership Universal? A Meta-Analytical Investigation of Multifac-
tor Leadership Questionnaire Means across Cultures,” Journal of 
Leadership & Organizational Studies, Vol. 18, No. 2 (2011), pp. 164–174.
50. S. Perman, “For Some Paying Sales Commissions No Longer Makes 
Sense,” The New York Times, November 21, 2013, p. B4. 
51. T. A. Judge, R. F. Piccolo, and R. Ilies, “The Forgotten Ones? The 
Validity of Consideration and Initiating Structure in Leadership Re-
search,” Journal of Applied Psychology, February 2004, pp. 36–51.
52. DeRue et al., “Trait and Behavioral Theories of Leadership.”
53. Yukl, “Effective Leadership Behavior.”
54. Judge, Piccolo, and Ilies, “The Forgotten Ones?”
55. M. T. Maynard, L. L. Gilson, and J. E. Mathieu, “Empowerment—Fad 
or Fab? A Multilevel Review of the Past Two Decades of Research,” 
Journal of Management, July 2012, pp. 1231–1281. See also X. Zhang 
and K. M. Bartol, “Linking Empowering Leadership and Employee Cre-
ativity: The Influence of Psychological Empowerment, Intrinsic Motiva-
tion, and Creative Process Engagement,” Academy of Management 
Journal, February 2010, pp. 107–128.
56. M. Moskowitz and R. Levering, “The 100 Best Companies to Work 
For,” Fortune, February 4, 2013, p. 88.
57. M. Littman, “Best Bosses Tell All,” Working Woman, October 2000, p. 55.
58. For an extended discussion, see M. Sashkin, “Participative Man-
agement Is an Ethical Imperative,” Organizational Dynamics, Spring 
1984, pp. 4–22. Also see S. Meisinger, “Management Holds Key to Em-
ployee Engagement,” HR Magazine, February 2008, p. 8.
59. Results are presented in J. T. Delaney, “Workplace Cooperation: 
Current Problems, New Approaches,” Journal of Labor Research, Winter 
1996, pp. 45–61.
60. Supporting results can be found in C. R. Leana, R. S. Ahlbrandt, and A. J. 
Murrell, “The Effects of Employee Involvement Programs on Unionized Work-
ers’ Attitudes, Perceptions, and Preferences in Decision Making,” Academy of 
Management Journal, October 1992, pp. 861–873; and D. Plunkett, “The 
Creative Organization: An Empirical Investigation of the Importance of Par-
ticipation in Decision Making,” Journal of Creative Behavior, Second Quarter 
1990, pp. 140–148. Results pertaining to role conflict and ambiguity can be 
found in C. S. Smith and M. T. Brannick, “A Role Replication and Theoretical 
Extension,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, March 1990, pp. 91–104.
61. See J. A. Wagner III, “Participation’s Effects on Performance and 
Satisfaction: A Reconsideration of Research Evidence,” Academy of 
Management Review, April 1994, pp. 312–330.
62. A thorough discussion of this issue is provided by W. A. Randolph, 
“Navigating the Journey to Empowerment,” Organizational Dynamics,
Spring 1995, pp. 19–32.
63. P. E. Tesluk, J. L. Farr, J. E. Matheieu, and R. J. Vance, “Generaliza-
tion of Employee Involvement Training to the Job Setting: Individual and 
28. T. A. Judge, A. E. Colbert, and R. Ilies, “Intelligence and Leadership: 
A Quantitative Review and Test of Theoretical Propositions,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, June 2004, pp. 542–552.
29. Leadership development programs are discussed in “Strategies for 
Success,” Training, July/August 2014, pp. 56–59; and “Hall of Fame 
Outstanding Training Initiatives,” Training, July/August 2014, pp. 60–61.
30. Study by Catalyst, New York, reported in J. S. Lublin, “Women As-
pire to Be Chief as Much as Men Do,” The Wall Street Journal, June 28, 
2004, p. D2.
31. Supportive findings are contained in J. M. Twenge, “Changes in 
Women’s Assertiveness in Response to Status and Roles: A Cross-Tem-
poral Meta-Analysis, 1931–93,” Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, July 2001, pp. 133–145.
32. R. Sharpe, “As Leaders, Women Rule,” BusinessWeek, November 
20, 2000, pp. 75–84.
33. Study by Hagberg Consulting Group, Foster City, California, reported 
in ibid., p. 75.
34. See A. H. Eagly, S. J. Karau, and B. T. Johnson, “Gender and Leader-
ship Style among School Principals: A Meta-Analysis,” Educational Ad-
ministration Quarterly, February 1992, pp. 76–102. Also see “The 
‘Masculine’ and ‘Feminine’ Sides of Leadership and Culture: Perception 
vs. Reality,” Knowledge@Wharton, October 5, 2005, http://knowledge.
wharton.upenn.edu/article/the-masculine-and-feminine-sides-of-lead-
ership-and-culture-perception-vs-reality (accessed August 17, 2014).
35. Gender and the emergence of leaders was examined by A. H. Eagly 
and S. J. Karau, “Gender and the Emergence of Leaders: A Meta-Analy-
sis,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, May 1991, pp. 685–
710; J. L. Prime, N. M. Carter, and T. M. Welbourne, “Women ‘Take Care,’ 
Men ‘Take Charge’: Managers’ Stereotypic Perceptions of Women and 
Men Leaders,” The Psychologist-Manager Journal, January 2009, pp. 
25–49; and R. Ayman and K. Korabik, “Leadership: Why Gender and 
Culture Matter,” Harvard Business Review, May 2010, pp. 117–121.
36. For a summary of this research, see H. Ibarra and O. Obodaru, 
“Women and Vision Thing,” Harvard Business Review, January 2009, 
pp. 62–70.
37. “Fortune 500 CEO Positions Held by Women,” Catalyst Research,
June 23, 2014, www.catalyst.org/knowledge/fortune-500-ceo-posi-
tions-held-women; and “Women CEOs of the Fortune 1000,” Catalyst 
Research, July 14, 2014, www.catalyst.org/knowledge/women-ceos-
fortune-1000 (both accessed August 17, 2014).
38. C. L. Dezso˝, D. G. Ross, and J. Uribe, “Why Are There So Few 
Women Top Managers? A Large-Sample Empirical Study of Female Par-
ticipation in Top Management,” August 2013, http://apps.olin.wustl.edu/
CRES/pdf/ross.pdf (accessed August 17, 2014).
39. E. McBride, “Companies with Female CEOs Pay Out Significantly 
Higher Dividends,” Business Insider, March 17, 2012, http://financial-
feeder.net/2012/03/companies-with-female-ceos-pay-out-signifi-
cantly-higher-dividends (accessed August 22, 2014).
40. L. Tischler, “Where Are the Women?” Fast Company, February 
2004, pp. 52–60.
41. P. Sellers, “Power: Do Women Really Want It?” Fortune, October 13, 
2003, p. 88.
42. See “Guiding Aspiring Female Execs Up the Ladder,“ HR Magazine,
January 2006, p. 14; Q. M. Roberson and C. K. Stevens, “Making Sense 
of Diversity in the Workplace: Organizational Justice and Language Ab-
straction in Employees’ Accounts of Diversity-Related Incidents,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology, March 2006, pp. 379–391; “Young Women in 
Business Get a Hand Up from Field’s Finest,” KnowMgmt, February 28, 
2014, http://knowwpcarey.com/article.cfm?cid=10&aid=1506 (ac-
cessed August 17, 2014); D. Tannen, “‘Bossy’ More Than a Word to 
Women,” USA Today, March 12, 2014, p. 12A; A. Friedman, “It’s Harder 
for Women Bosses,” The Week, May 30, 2014, p. 10, summarizing arti-
cle in The New York Times; and A. Brown, “Perceptions about Women 
Bosses Improve, but Gap Remains,” Pew Research Center, August 7, 
2014, www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/08/07/perceptions-about-
women-leaders-improve-but-gap-remains (accessed August 17, 2014).
43. B. Groysberg, “How Star Women Build Portable Skills,” Harvard 
Business Review, February 2008, pp. 74–81. See also R. D. Arvey, Z. 
Zhang, B. J. Avolio, and R. F. Krueger, “Developmental and Genetic De-
terminants of Leadership Role Occupancy among Women,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, May 2007, pp. 693–706. Some popular treatments 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN45
Leaders’ Personal Attributes and Transformational Leadership,” Person-
nel Psychology, Vol. 64 (2011), pp. 627–659.
82. Supportive research is summarized by Antonakis and House, “The Full-
Range Leadership Theory: The Way Forward.” See also W. Zhu, R. E. Riggio, 
B. J. Avolio, and J. J. Sosik, “The Effect of Leadership on Follower Moral 
Identity: Does Transformational/Transactional Style Make a Difference?” 
Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, Vol. 18 (2011), pp. 150–163.
83. B. Morris, “What Makes Pepsi Great?” Fortune, March 3, 2008, 
pp. 54–66.
84. J. P. Mangalindan, “PepsiCo CEO: ‘If All Consumers Exercised . . . 
Obesity Wouldn’t Exist,’” Fortune, April 27, 2010, http://money.cnn.
com/2010/04/27/news/companies/indra_nooyi_pepsico.fortune/index.
htm (accessed August 17, 2014).
85. H. Schultz, “Indra Nooyi,” Time, April 30, 2008, www.time.com/
time/specials/2007/article/0,28804,1733748_1733758,00.html (ac-
cessed August 17, 2014). See also D. Brady, “Keeping Cool in Hot Wa-
ter,” BusinessWeek, June 11, 2007, p. 49.
86. “R. Wartzman, “The Pepsi Challenge,” Forbes, April 9, 2012, www.
forbes.com/sites/drucker;2012/04/09/the-pepsi-challenge. See also 
“Pop Quiz: Can Indra Nooyi Revive PepsiCo,” Knowledge@Wharton, 
March 28, 2012, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.
cfm?articleid=2966; S. Strom, “PepsiCo’s Profit Beats Estimates,” The 
New York Times, April 26, 2012, www.nytimes.com/2012/04/27/busi-
ness/pepsicos-profit-beats-estimates.html?_r=1 (all accessed August 17, 
2014); and M. Esterl, “PepsiCo Slips Despite New Ads,” The Wall Street 
Journal, April 27, 2012, p. B5.
87. See M. Esterl, “PepsiCo Sweetens Payout but Sticks with Soft 
Drinks,” The Wall Street Journal, February 14, 2014, p. B6; and M. Es-
terl, “Snack Sales Help PepsiCo,” The Wall Street Journal, April 18, 
2014, p. B4.
88. These definitions are derived from R. Kark, B. Shamir, and C. Chen, 
“The Two Faces of Transformational Leadership: Empowerment and De-
pendency,” Journal of Applied Psychology, April 2003, pp. 246–255. See 
A. E. Colbert, A. L. Kristof-Brown, B. H. Bradley, and M. R. Barrick, “CEO 
Transformational Leadership: The Role of Goal Importance Congruence 
in Top Management Teams,” Academy of Management Journal, Febru-
ary 2008, pp. 81–96.
89. See A. Erez, V. F. Misangyi, D. E. Johnson, M. A. LePine, and K. C. 
Halverson, “Stirring the Hearts of Followers: Charismatic Leadership as 
the Transferral of Affect,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 93 (2008), 
pp. 602–615.
90. See J. Antonakis, M. Fenley, and S. Liechti, “Can Charisma Be 
Taught? Tests of Two Interventions,” Academy of Management Learning 
& Education, Vol. 10, No. 3 (2011), pp. 374–396; and J. P. Balkundi, M. 
Kilduff, and D. A. Harrison, “Centrality and Charisma: Comparing How 
Leader Networks and Attributions Affect Team Performance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, November 2011, pp. 1209–1222.
91. B. Nanus, Visionary Leadership (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
1992), p. 8. See also J. Murphy, “Ghosn Hedges Bets on Emissions,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 15, 2008, p. B2: and D. Enrich, “Citigroup Pan-
dit Faces Test as Pressure on Bank Grows,” The Wall Street Journal,
May 6, 2008, pp. A1, A20.
92. Morris, “What Makes Pepsi Great?”
93. See R. E. Quinn, “Moments of Greatness: Entering the Fundamental 
State of Leadership,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 2005, pp. 
75–83.
94. “Pop Quiz: Can Indra Nooyi Revive PepsiCo?”
95. Morris, “What Makes Pepsi Great?”
96. D. Brady, “PepsiCo’s Nooyi Is Focused on Retention, Not Succes-
sion,” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 12, 2012, www.businessweek.
com/articles/2012-03-12/pepsicos-nooyi-is-focused-on-retention-not-
succession (accessed August 17, 2014).
97. Wartzman, “The Pepsi Challenge.”
98. See H. Lui, and A. Chuang, “Transforming Service Employees and 
Climate: A Multilevel, Multisource Examination of Transformational 
Leadership in Building Long-Term Service Relationships,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, July 2007, pp. 1006–1019.
99. Results can be found in Dundum, Lowe, and Avolio, “A Meta-Analy-
sis of Transformational and Transactional Leadership Correlates 
of Effectiveness and Satisfaction”; and A. Erez, V. F. Misangyi, D. E. 
Johnson, M. A. LePine, and K. C. Halverson, “Stirring the Hearts of 
Situational Effects,” Personnel Psychology, Autumn 1995, pp. 607–632; 
R. Rodgers, J. E. Hunter, and D. L. Rogers, “Influence of Top Manage-
ment Commitment on Management Program Success,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, February 1993, pp. 151–155; and S. A. Mohrman, E. 
E. Lawler III, and G. E. Ledford Jr., “Organizational Effectiveness and the 
Impact of Employee Involvement and TQM Programs: Do Employee In-
volvement and TQM Programs Work?” Journal for Quality and Participa-
tion, January/February 1996, pp. 6–10.
64. An overall summary of servant leadership is provided by L. C. 
Spears, Reflections on Leadership: How Robert K. Greenleaf’s Theory of 
Servant-Leadership Influenced Today’s Top Management Thinkers (New 
York: Wiley, 1995). See also D. Van Dierendonck, “Servant Management: 
A Review and Synthesis,” Journal of Management, Vol. 37 (2011), pp. 
1228–1261.
65. D. MacMillan, “Survivor: CEO Edition,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
March 1, 2010, p. 35.
66. D. Gergen, “Bad News for Bullies,” U.S. News & World Report, June 
19, 2006, p. 54.
67. M. De Pree, quoted in Gergen, “Bad News for Bullies.” The quote is 
from M. De Pree, Leadership Is an Art (New York: Dell, 1989).
68. See S. J. Peterson, B. M. Galvin, and D. Lange, “CEO Servant Lead-
ership: Exploring Executive Characteristics and Firm Performance,” Per-
sonnel Psychology, August 2, 2012, pp. 565–596; and F. O. Walumbwa, 
C. A. Hartnell, and A. Oke, “Servant Leadership, Procedural Justice Cli-
mate, Service Climate, Employee Attitudes, and Organizational Citizen-
ship Behavior: A Cross-Level Investigation,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, May 2010, pp. 517–529.
69. B. M. Bass, “From Transactional to Transformational Leadership: 
Learning to Share the Vision,” Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 18 (1990), 
pp. 19–31.
70. Results can be found in A. H. Eagly, M. C. Johannesen-Schmidt, and 
M. L. van Engen, “Transformational, Transactional, and Laissez-Faire 
Leadership Styles: A Meta-Analysis Comparing Women and Men,” Psy-
chological Bulletin, June 2003, pp. 569–591.
71. See DeRue et al., “Trait and Behavioral Theories of Leadership.”
72. F. E. Fiedler, “Assumed Similarity Measures as Predictors of Team 
Effectiveness,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, Vol. 49 
(1954), pp. 381–388; F. E. Fiedler, Leader Attitudes and Group Effective-
ness (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1958); and F. E. Fiedler, A 
Theory of Leadership Effectiveness (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967).
73. See M. V. Vugt, R. Hogan, and R. B. Kaiser, “Leadership, Follower-
ship, and Evolution,” American Psychologist, April 2008, pp. 182–196.
74. R. J. House, “A Path-Goal Theory of Leader Effectiveness,” Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, September 1971, pp. 321–338. The most 
recent version of the theory is found in R. J. House, “Path–Goal Theory 
of Leadership: Lessons, Legacy, and a Reformulated Theory,” Leader-
ship Quarterly, Autumn 1996, pp. 323–352.
75. These studies are summarized in House, “Path–Goal Theory of 
Leadership: Lessons, Legacy, and a Reformulated Theory.”
76. See G. Wang, I-S. Oh, S. H. Courtright, and A. E. Colbert, “Transfor-
mational Leadership and Performance Across Criteria and Levels: A 
Meta-Analytic Review of 25 Years of Research,” Group & Organization 
Management, Vol. 36, No. 2 (2011), pp. 223-270.
77. Results can be found in P. M. Podsakoff, S. B. MacKenzie, M. 
Ahearne, and W. H. Bommer, “Searching for a Needle in a Haystack: 
Trying to Identify the Illusive Moderators of Leadership Behaviors,” 
Journal of Management, Vol. 21, No. 3 (1995), pp. 423–470.
78. For a complete description of the full-range leadership theory, see 
B. J. Bass and B. J. Avolio, Revised Manual for the Multi-Factor Leader-
ship Questionnaire (Palo Alto, CA: Mindgarden, 1997).
79. See Wang et al., “Transformational Leadership and Performance 
Across Criteria and Levels.”
80. U. R. Dundum, K. B. Lowe, and B. J. Avolio, “A Meta-Analysis of 
Transformational and Transactional Leadership Correlates of Effective-
ness and Satisfaction: An Update and Extension,” in B. J. Avolio and F. J. 
Yammarino, eds., Transformational and Charismatic Leadership: The 
Road Ahead (New York: JAI Press, 2002), p. 38.
81. Supportive results can be found in T. A. Judge and J. E. Bono, “Five-
Factor Model of Personality and Transformational Leadership,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, October 2000, pp. 751–765; and S. Oreg and Y. 
Berson, “Leadership and Employees’ Reactions to Change: The Role of 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN46
E-leadership: How It May Impact Your Leadership,” Organizational Dy-
namics, Vol. 31 (2003), pp. 325–338.
114. The role of followers is discussed by D. S. DeRue and S. J. Ash-
ford, “Who Will Lead and Who Will Follow? A Social Process of Leader-
ship Identity Construction in Organizations,” Academy of Management 
Review, October 2010, pp. 627–647.
115. See R. Goffee and G. Jones, “Followership: It’s Personal, Too,” Har-
vard Business Review, December 2001, p. 148.
116. Bass and Bass, The Bass Handbook of Leadership, p. 408.
117. See L. Bossidy, “What Your Leader Expects of You and What You 
Should Expect in Return,” Harvard Business Review, April 2007, pp. 58–65.
118. N. Lublin, “Let’s Hear It for the Little Guys,” FastCompany, April 
2010, p. 33.
119. This checklist was proposed by J. J. Gabarro and J. P. Kotter, “Man-
aging Your Boss,” Harvard Business Review, January 2005, pp. 92–99.
120. Ideas partly based on P. Drucker, “Managing Oneself,” Harvard 
Business Review, January 2005, pp. 2–11; and B. Dattner, “Forewarned 
Is Forearmed,” BusinessWeek, September 1, 2008, p. 50.
CHAPTER 15
1. Adapted from M. Civello, “Communication Counts in Landing a Job,” 
Training & Development, February 2009, pp. 82–83; and from A. Kinicki 
and M. Fugate, Organizational Behavior: Key Concepts, Skills & Best 
Practices, 5th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2012), p. 313.
2. For more on these matters, see E. Bernstein, “Why Do Compliments 
Cause So Much Grief?” The Wall Street Journal, May 4, 2010, pp. D1, 
D6; J. Zaslow, “Surviving the Age of Humiliation,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, May 5, 2010, pp. D1, D3; A. Tugend, “An Attempt to Revive the Lost 
Art of Apology,” The New York Times, January 30, 2010, p. B5; L. Garcia, 
“Curses, Roiled Again,” The Arizona Republic, June 21, 2009, p. EC1, 
reprinted from Washington Post; and S. Elliott, “Bleep or No Bleep, 
Bolder Words Blow In,” The New York Times, May 14, 2010, pp. B1, B4.
3. See K. Gurchiek, “Survey: ‘Key Skills Advance HR Career,’” HR Maga-
zine, April 2008, p. 38.
4. September 1998 survey by Office Team, reported in S. Armour, “Fail-
ure to Communicate Costly for Companies,” USA Today, September 30, 
1998, p. B1.
5. J. R. Hinrichs, “Communications Activity of Industrial Research Per-
sonnel,” Personnel Psychology, Summer 1964, pp. 193–204.
6. J. Kotter, “Power, Dependence, and Effective Management,” Harvard 
Business Review, Vol. 55 (1977), pp. 125–136.
7. J. Sandberg, “From Crib to Cubicle, a Familiar Voice—Our Own—
Reassures,” The Wall Street Journal, March 25, 2008, p. B1.
8. R. L. Daft and R. H. Lengel, “Information Richness: A New Approach 
to Managerial Behavior and Organizational Design,” in B. M. Staw and L. 
L. Cummings, eds., Research in Organizational Behavior (Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press, 1984), p. 196; and R. H. Lengel and R. L. Daft, “The Selection 
of Communication Media as an Executive Skill,” Academy of Manage-
ment Executive, August 1988, pp. 225–232.
9. See B. Barry and I. S. Fulmer, “The Medium and the Message: The 
Adaptive Use of Communication Media in Dyadic Influence,” Academy 
of Management Review, April 2004, pp. 272–292; and A. F. Simon, 
“Computer-Mediated Communication: Task Performance and Satisfac-
tion,” The Journal of Social Psychology, June 2006, pp. 349–379.
10. For discussion of uses of social media, see A. M. Kaplan and M. 
Haenlein, “Users of the World, Unite! The Challenges and Opportunities of 
Social Media,” Business Horizons, January–February 2010, pp. 59–68; 
G. A. Fowler, “Are You Talking to Me?” The Wall Street Journal, April 25, 
2011, p. R5; T. L. Griffith, “Tapping into Social Media Smarts,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 25, 2011, p. R6; and A. Samuel, “Better Leadership 
Through Social Media,” The Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2012, p. R4.
11. Drawn from S. M. Crampton, J. W. Hodge, and J. M. Mishra, “The 
Informal Communication Network: Factors Influencing Grapevine Activ-
ity,” Public Personnel Management, Winter 1998, pp. 569–584; J. Yang 
and V. Salazar, “What Is the Most Taboo Topic to Discuss at Work?” USA 
Today, June 17, 2008, p. 1B; and C. Mills, “Experiencing Gossip: The 
Foundations for a Theory of Embedded Organizational Gossips,” Group 
and Organization Management, April 2010, pp. 213–240.
12. See S. McKnight, “Workplace Gossip? Keep It to Yourself,” The New 
York Times, November 15, 2009, Business section, p. 9.
Followers: Charismatic Leadership as the Transferal of Affect,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, May 2008, pp. 602–615.
100. See Kark, Shamir, and Chen, “The Two Faces of Transformational 
Leadership.”
101. D. N. Den Hartog and F. D. Belschak, “When Does Transformational 
Leadership Enhance Employee Proactive Behavior? The Role of Auton-
omy and Role Breadth Self-Efficacy,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
January 2012, pp. 194–202.
102. Supportive results can be found in B. M. Bass, B. J. Avolio, D. I. 
Jung, and Y. Berson, “Predicting Unit Performance by Assessing Trans-
formational and Transactional Leadership,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, April 2003, pp. 207–218; and D. N. Den Hartog and F. D. Belschak, 
“When Does Transformational Leadership Enhance Employee Proactive 
Behavior? The Role of Autonomy and Role Breadth Self-Efficacy,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology, January 2012, pp. 194–202.
103. B. J. Avolio, R. J. Reichard, S. T. Hannah, F. O Walumbwa, and A. 
Chan, “A Meta-Analytic Review of Leadership Impact Research: Experi-
mental and Quasi-Experimental Studies,” Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 20 
(2009), pp. 764–784 ; J. Kanengieter and A. Rajagopal-Durbin, “Wilder-
ness Leadership—On the Job,” Harvard Business Review, April 2012, 
pp. 127–131.
104. See J. E. Stiglitz, “Who Do These Bankers Think They Are?” Har-
vard Business Review, March 2010, p. 36.
105. See K. K. Mihelic, B. Lipicnik, and M. Tekavcic, “Ethical Leader-
ship,” International Journal of Management and Information Systems, 
Fourth Quarter 2010, pp. 31–41; and F. O. Walumbwa, A. L. Christensen, 
and F. Hailey, “Authentic Leadership and the Knowledge Economy: Sus-
taining Motivation and Trust among Knowledge Workers,” Organiza-
tional Dynamics, Vol. 40 (2011), pp. 110–118.
106. G. Graen and J. F. Cashman, “A Role-Making Model of Leadership 
in Formal Organizations: A Developmental Approach,” in J. G. Hunt and 
L. L. Larson, eds., Leadership Frontiers (Kent, OH: Kent State University 
Press, 1975), pp. 143–165; F. Dansereau Jr., G. Graen, and W. J. Haga, 
“A Vertical Dyad Linkage Approach to Leadership Within Formal Organi-
zations: A Longitudinal Investigation of the Role-Making Process,” Orga-
nizational Behavior and Human Performance, February 1975, pp. 
46–78; and K. S. Wilson, H.-P. Sin, and D. E. Conlon, “What About the 
Leader in Leader–Member Exchange? The Impact of Resource Ex-
changes and Substitutability in the Leader,” Academy of Management 
Review, July 2010, pp. 358–372.
107. See D. Duchon, S. G. Green, and T. D. Taber, “Vertical Dyad Link-
age: A Longitudinal Assessment of Antecedents, Measures, and Conse-
quences,” Journal of Applied Psychology, February 1986, pp. 56–60.
108. See B. Erdogan and T. N. Bauer, “Differentiated Leader-Member 
Exchanges: The Buffering Role of Justice Climate,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, November 2010, pp. 1104–1120; F. O. Walumbwa, R. 
Cropanzano, and B. M. Goldman, “How Leader–Member Exchange In-
fluences Effective Work Behaviors: Social Exchange and Internal Exter-
nal Efficacy Perspectives,” Personnel Psychology, Vol. 64 (2011), pp. 
739–770; and E. Xu, X. Huang, C. K. Lam, and Q. Miao, “Abusive Super-
vision and Work Behaviors: The Mediating Role of LMX,” Journal of Or-
ganizational Behavior, May 2012, pp. 531–543.
109. See Walumbwa, Cropanzano, and Goldman, “How Leader–Mem-
ber Exchange Influences Effective Work Behaviors.”
110. See B. J. Avolio, J. J. Sosik, D. I. Jung, and Yair Berson, “Leader-
ship Models, Methods, and Applications,” Handbook of Psychology 
(New York: John Wiley, 2003), pp. 295–298.
111. L. Capotosto, “Millennial Management,” Darwin, www2.
darwinmag.com/connect/books/book.cfm?ID-188 (accessed April 
26, 2012).
112. D. MacRae, “Six Secrets of Successful E-Leaders,” Business Week 
online, September 6, 2001; www.businessweek.com/technology/con-
tent/sep2001/tc2001096_619.htm (accessed August 17, 2014).
113. D. Q. Mills, E-Leadership: Guiding Your Business to Success in the 
New Economy (Paramus, NJ: Prentice Hall Press, 2001). See also R. 
Hargrove, E-Leader: Reinventing Leadership in a Connected Economy
(Boulder, CO: Perseus Books Group, 2001); T. M. Siebel, Taking Care of 
eBusiness: How Today’s Market Leaders Are Increasing Revenue, Pro-
ductivity, and Customer Satisfaction (New York: Doubleday, 2001); S. 
Annunzio, eLeadership: Bold Solutions for the New Economy (New York: 
Free Press, 2002); and B. J. Avolio and S. S. Kahai, “Adding the “E” to 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN47
sion Processes, March 2012, pp. 249–260; and M. Baer and G. Brown, 
“Blind in One Eye: How Psychological Ownership of Ideas Affects the 
Types of Suggestions People Adopt,” Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes, May 2012, pp. 60–71.
33. R. E. Silverman, “Some Managers Just Won’t Take Advice,” The 
Wall Street Journal, September 19, 2011, p. B8.
34. C. R. Rogers and F. J. Roethlisberger, “Barriers and Gateways to 
Communication,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 1952, 
pp. 46–52.
35. Ibid., p. 47.
36. S. Nassauer, “How Waiters Read Your Table,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, February 22, 2012, pp. D1, D2.
37. W. D. St. John, “You Are What You Communicate,” Personnel Jour-
nal, October 1985, p. 40. Also see S. Baker, “Reading the Body Lan-
guage of Leadership,” BusinessWeek, March 23–30, 2009, p. 48.
38. Statistic reported in R. O. Crockett, “The 21st Century Meeting,” 
BusinessWeek, February 26, 2007, pp. 72–79.
39. D. B. Rane, “Effective Body Language for Organizational Success,” 
The IUP Journal of Soft Skills, December 2010, pp. 17–26; and I. Talley 
“Body Language: Read It or Weep,” HR Magazine, July 1, 2010, www.
highbeam.com/doc/1G1-232814994.html (accessed August 18, 2014).
40. See N. Morgan, “The Kinesthetic Speaker: Putting Action into 
Words,” Harvard Business Review, April 2001, pp. 113–120. Also see A. 
Bruzzese, “Communication Is Critical to Coping with Workplace Stress,” 
Reno Gazette-Journal, September 4, 2008, p. 6A; and Alex Pentland, 
interviewed by M. E. Mangelsdorf, “The Power of Nonverbal Communi-
cation,” The Wall Street Journal, October 20, 2008, p. R2.
41. See L. Nardon, R. M. Steers, C. J. Sanchez-Runde, “Seeking Com-
mon Ground: Strategies for Enhancing Multicultural Communication,” 
Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 40 (2011), pp. 85–95.
42. Norms for cross-cultural eye contact are discussed by C. Engholm, 
When Business East Meets Business West: The Guide to Practice and 
Protocol in the Pacific Rim (New York: Wiley, 1991). Also see G. Ward and 
Y. Al Bayyari, “American and Arab Perceptions of an Arabic Turn-Taking 
Cue,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, March 2010, pp. 270–275.
43. See J. A. Russell, “Facial Expressions of Emotion: What Lies Beyond 
Minimal Universality?” Psychological Bulletin, November 1995, 
pp. 379–391; and Rane, “Effective Body Language for Organizational 
Success.” Also see B. Azar, “A Case for Angry Men and Happy Women,” 
Monitor on Psychology, April 2007, pp. 18–19.
44. See N. Angier, “Abstract Thoughts? The Body Takes Them Literally,” 
The New York Times, February 2, 2010, p. D2.
45. Related research is summarized by J. A. Hall, “Male and Female 
Nonverbal Behavior,” in A. W. Siegman and S. Feldstein, eds., Multichan-
nel Integrations of Nonverbal Behavior (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum, 1985), pp. 195–226.
46. A thorough discussion of cross-cultural differences is provided by 
R. E. Axtell, Gestures: The Do’s and Taboos of Body Language Around 
the World (New York: Wiley, 1998). Problems with body language analy-
sis also are discussed by C. L. Karrass, “Body Language: Beware the 
Hype,” Traffic Management, January 1992, p. 27; and M. Everett and B. 
Wiesendanger, “What Does Body Language Really Say?” Sales & Mar-
keting Management, April 1992, p. 40.
47. P. Korkki, “More Courses Get You Ready to Face the World,” The 
New York Times, March 1, 2012, p. F7.
48. Results can be found in Hall, “Male and Female Nonverbal Behavior.”
49. J. N. Cleveland, M. Stockdale, and K. R. Murphy, Women and Men in 
Organizations: Sex and Gender Issues at Work (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum, 2002), p. 108.
50. P. Leo, “Thorny Etiquette Problem for Men: Hug, Kiss, or Hand-
shake?” Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, March 23, 2006, www.post-gazette.
com/pg/06082/675002-294.stm (accessed August 18, 2014). See also 
D. Brown, “Men Are Hugging Men More, but Rules Aren’t Always Clearly 
Defined,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer, July 11, 2005, http://seattlepi.nw-
source.com/lifestyle/231855_guyhugs.html (accessed August 18, 2014).
51. See B. Carey, “Evidence That Little Touches Do Mean So Much,” 
The New York Times, February 23, 2010, p. D5.
52. E. Reuben, P. Rey-Biel, P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, “The Emergence 
of Male Leadership in Competitive Environments,” Journal of Economic 
Behavior & Organization, June 23, 2011, www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0167268111001612 (accessed August 18, 2014).
13. T. J. Peters and R. H. Waterman Jr., In Search of Excellence (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1982); and T. Peters and N. Austin, A Passion for Excel-
lence: The Leadership Difference (New York: Random House, 1985).
14. Steve Jobs, interviewed by B. Morris, “What Makes Apple Golden,” 
Fortune, March 17, 2008, pp. 72, 74.
15. C. C. Miller, “Google’s Chief Works to Trim a Bloated Ship,” The New 
York Times, November 9, 2011, www.nytimes.com/2011/11/10/tech-
nology/googles-chief-works-to-trim-a-bloated-ship.html?_
r=2&pagewanted=1; and M. Rosoff, “How Larry Page Changed 
Meetings at Google After Taking Over Last Spring,” Business Insider, 
January 10, 2012, www.businessinsider.com/this-is-how-larry-page-
changed-meetings-at-google-after-taking-over-last-spring-
2012-1?nr_email_referer=1&amp (both accessed August 18, 2014).
16. A. Bruzzese, “Tame the Meeting Beast with These 8 Tips,” Reno 
Gazette-Journal, March 1, 2012, p. 8A.
17. K. Maher, “Running Meetings,” The Wall Street Journal, January 13, 
2004, p. B6.
18. C. L. Romero, “Tedious Meetings Top Time-Wasters,” The Arizona 
Republic, April 22, 2003, p. D2.
19. P. Lencioni, reported in D. Murphy, “Making Sense of Meetings,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, April 3, 2004, p. 1C. See also P. M. Lencioni, 
Death by Meeting: A Leadership Fable . . . About Solving the Most Pain-
ful Problem in Business (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2004).
20. D. Batstone, “Right Reality: Most Meetings Stink . . . 5 Tips for Mak-
ing Yours Useful,” The Wag, December 21, 2005, www.rightreality.com/
wag_items/issues/051221wag.html (accessed August 18, 2014); S. G. 
Rogelberg, D. J. Leach, P. B. Warr, and J. L. Burnfield, “‘Not Another 
Meeting!’ Are Meeting Time Demands Related to Employee Well-
Being?” Journal of Applied Psychology, January 2006, pp. 86–96; M. 
Linksky, “The Morning Meeting Ritual,” Harvard Management 
Communication Letter, June 19, 2006, http://hbswk.hbs.edu/ar-
chive/5388.html (accessed August 18, 2014); D. Robinson, “Keep Meet-
ings on Schedule,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 15, 2009, p. D5; and 
Bruzzese, “Tame the Meeting Beast with These 8 Tips.”
21. A. P. Knight and M. Baer, “Get Up, Stand Up: The Effects of a Non-
Sedentary Performance,” Social Psychology and Personality Science, June 
12, 2014, http://spp.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/06/12/194855061
4538463.abstract (accessed August 18, 2014). On the subject of standing 
at meetings, see also C. Tate, “When You’ve Had One Meeting Too Many,” 
The New York Times, February 17, 2013, p. BU-9.
22. Letter by “Working the Window in Georgia” to J. Phillips (“Dear 
Abby”), in “Server Gives Tips on Drive-Through Etiquette,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, January 22, 2012, www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/
c/a/2012/01/19/PKPH1MLC2S.DTL (accessed August 18, 2014).
23. Libby in Little Rock, Arkansas, in letter to J. Phillips, “Fast-Food 
Windows Drive Readers Mad,” Reno Gazette-Journal, May 1, 2012, 
p. 3C.
24. Peggy in Thornton, Colorado, in letter to Phillips.
25. R. Cross, P. Gray, S. Cunningham, M. Showers, and R. J. Thomas, 
“The Collaborative Organization: How to Make Employee Networks 
Work,” MIT Sloan Management Review, Fall 2010, pp. 83–91.
26. S. Merchant, quoted in S. Srivastava, “Why India Worries about Out-
sourcing,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 21, 2004, p. E3.
27. T. Musbach, “The Most Annoying, Overused Words in the Work-
place,” San Francisco Chronicle, October 11, 2009, p. A1.
28. See A. Stein, “Straight Talk,” FSB, December 2009/January 2010, p. 
23.
29. See D. Nelson and J. Quick, Organizational Behavior: Science, the 
Real World, and You (Boston: Cengage, 2012), p. 290.
30. S. Dillon, “Guest-Teaching Chinese, and Learning America,” The 
New York Times, May 10, 2010, pp. A1, A14. For more about what a 
difference culture makes, see S. Begley, “West Brain, East Brain,” 
Newsweek, March 1, 2010, p. 22.
31. For some interesting ideas about possible biochemical bases of 
trust, see P. J. Zak, “The Trust Molecule,” The Wall Street Journal, April 
28–29, 2012, pp. C1, C2.
32. L. P. Tost, F. Gino, and R. P. Larrick, “Power, Competitiveness, and 
Advice Taking: Why the Powerful Don’t Listen,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, January 2012, pp. 63–65. See also N. 
J. Fast, N. Sivanathan, N. D. Mayer, and A. D. Galinsky, “Power and Over-
confident Decision Making,” Organizational Behavior and Human Deci-

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN48
searchexcellence.com/news/032609_vcm.php (accessed August 18, 
2014). See also Stelter, “8 Hours a Day Spent on Screens, Study Finds.”
73. A. Lenhart, Teens, Smartphones, & Texting, March 15, 2012, Pew 
Research Center Internet and American Life Project report, http://
pewresearch.org/pubs/2223/teens-cellphones-texting-phone-calls 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
74. J. C. Meister and K. Willyerd, “Mentoring Millennials,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, May 2010, pp. 68–72.
75. D. Tapscott, Grown Up Digital: How the Net Generation Is Changing 
Your World (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009), p. 36.
76. J. Q. Anderson and L. Rainie, Millennials Will Benefit and Suffer Due 
to Their Hyperconnected Lives, February 29, 2012, Pew Research Cen-
ter Internet and American Life Project report, www.pewinternet.org/~/
media//Files/Reports/2012/PIP_Future_of_Internet_2012_Young_
brains_PDF.pdf (accessed August 18, 2014).
77. Meister and Willyerd, “Mentoring Millennials,” p. 69.
78. S. A. Hewlett, L. Sherbin, and K. Sumberg, “How Gen Y & Boomers 
Will Reshape Your Agenda,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 
2009, pp. 71–76.
79. B. Yite, “Employers Rethink How They Give Feedback,” The Wall 
Street Journal, October 13, 2008, p. B5. See also T. J. Erickson, “Gen Y 
in the Workforce,” Harvard Business Review, February 2009, pp. 43–49.
80. M. Esterl, “More Lucrative Business Travelers Now Teleconference, 
Fly Coach,” The Wall Street Journal, February 18, 2010, pp. B1, B2; 
C. Jones, “What Helps You Decide When to Travel?” USA Today, April 15, 
2010, 1B, 2B; J. Sharkey, “Turning to Teleconferencing as Air Travel 
Stalls,” The New York Times, April 20, 2010, p. B6; and J. S. Lublin, “Video 
Comes to Board Meetings,” The Wall Street Journal, April 25, 2011, p. B6.
81. The Return on Investment on U.S. Business Travel, study by Oxford 
Economics USA, reported in J. Mullich, “The New Face of Face-to-Face 
Meetings,” The Wall Street Journal, September 22, 2009, pp. A17, A18.
82. J. Scheck and B. White, “‘Telepresence’ Is Taking Hold,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 6, 2008, http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB121003318054369255.html (accessed August 18, 2014).
83. J. S. Lublin, “Some Dos and Don’ts to Help You Hone Videoconfer-
ence Skills,” The Wall Street Journal, February 7, 2006, p. B1. See also B. 
K. Williams and S. C. Sawyer, Using Information Technology: A Practical 
Introduction, 11th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2015), p. 342.
84. D. E. Baily and N. B. Kurland, “A Review of Telework Research: Find-
ings, New Directions, and Lessons for the Study of Modern Work,” Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior, June 2002, pp. 383–400.
85. The 2012 Jobs and Broadband Report, National Projections on How 
American Businesses Use Computers and Broadband to Grow, Hire, and 
Thrive, reported in “Report: Broadband an Economic Driver Vital to Con-
tinuing Recovery,” The Lane Report, May 3, 2012, www.lanereport.
com/5235/2012/05/report-broadband-an-economic-driver-vital-to-
continuing-recovery (accessed August 18, 2014).
86. See E. Garone, “How to Make Working at Home Work for You,” The 
Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2008, p. D4; R. S. Gajendran and D. A. 
Harrison, “The Good, the Bad, and the Unknown about Telecommuting: 
Meta-Analysis of Psychological Mediators and Individual Conse-
quences,” Journal of Applied Psychology, November 2007, pp. 1524–
1541; S. Brown, “Line Between Home, Work Will Blur More,” USA Today, 
February 8, 2010, p. 11B; and C. L. Tan, “Working in Style: The Acciden-
tal Home Office,” The Wall Street Journal, March 8, 2012, p. D3.
87. See S. Shellenbarger, “Some Companies Rethink the Telecommut-
ing Trend,” The Wall Street Journal, February 28, 2008, p. D1.
88. S. Marino, “Debunking the Myths of the Telecommute,” The New 
York Times, April 18, 2010, Business section, p. 9.
89. C. Said, “Work Is Where You Hang Your Coat,” San Francisco Chron-
icle, July 18, 2005, p. E5.
90. J. Hodges, “Office (and Beanbag) Sharing among Strangers,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 31, 2009, p. D3.
91. For accounts of security problems, see J. Angwin, Dragnet Nation: 
A Quest for Privacy, Security, and Freedom in a World of Relentless Sur-
veillance (New York: Henry Holt, 2014). See also “Internet Security: The 
Problem with Passwords,” The Week, June 6, 2014, p. 20; N. Perlroth 
and D. Gelles, “Russian Hackers Steal Passwords of Billion Users,” The 
New York Times, August 6, 2014, pp. A1, A3; M. Snider, “Net Breach an 
Opportunity to Improve Password Practices,” USA Today, August 7, 
2014, p. 3A; E. Weise, “The Internet of (Unsafe) Things,” USA Today, 
53. See J. S. Lublin, “Women Fall Behind When They Don’t Hone Nego-
tiation Skills,” The Wall Street Journal, November 4, 2003, p. B1. See 
also “Do Women Shy Away from Competition, Even When They Can 
Win?” Knowledge@Wharton, November 16, 2005, http://knowledge.
whart.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=1308 (accessed August 18, 
2014); and J. R. Curhan and A. Pentland, “Thin Slices of Negotiation: 
Predicting Outcomes from Conversational Dynamics within the First 5 
Minutes,” Journal of Applied Psychology, May 2007, pp. 802–811.
54. J. C. Tingley, Genderflex: Men & Women Speaking Each Other’s 
Language at Work (New York: American Management Association, 
1994), p. 16.
55. D. Tannen, “The Power of Talk: Who Gets Heard and Why,” in Nego-
tiation: Readings, Exercises, and Cases, 3rd ed., R. J. Lewicki and D. M. 
Saunders, eds. (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 1999), pp. 147–148. 
Research on gender differences in communication can be found in V. N. 
Giri and H. O. Sharma, “Brain Wiring and Communication Style,” Psy-
chological Studies, Vol. 48 (2003), pp. 59–64; and E. L. MacGeorge, A. R. 
Graves, B. Feng, S. J. Gillihan, and B. R. Burleson, “The Myth of Gender 
Cultures: Similarities Outweigh Differences in Men’s and Women’s Pro-
vision of Responses to Supportive Communication,” Sex Roles, Vol. 50 
(2004), pp. 143–175.
56. C. Clarke, quoted in A. Pomeroy, “Female Executives May Have a 
Business Edge,” HR Magazine, August 2005, p. 16. See also C. Clarke, 
“A (Necessary) End to Male Dominance,” Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 
March 17, 2012, www.post-gazette.com/pg/06080/673640-334.stm 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
57. Study by R. E. Page, reported in H. C. Bristol, “Women Set Casual 
Tone on Social Media (v. Eexxcciiittting!),” USA Today, December 8, 
2011, p. 3D. Her research appears in R. E. Page, Stories and Social 
Media: Identities and Interaction (Oxford: Routledge, 2012).
58. R. Sharpe, “As Leaders, Women Rule,” BusinessWeek, November 
20, 2000, pp. 75–84.
59. E. Melero, “Are Workplaces with Many Women in Management Run 
Differently?” Journal of Business Research, Vol. 64 (2011), pp. 385–393.
60. A. Cummings, reported in “The ‘Masculine’ and ‘Feminine’ Sides of 
Leadership and Culture: Perception vs. Reality,” Knowledge@Wharton, Oc-
tober 5, 2005, knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleide=1287 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
61. D. Jones, “Male Execs Like Female Coaches,” USA Today, October 
24, 2001, p. 3B.
62. N. L. Reinsch Jr., J. W. Turner, and C. H. Tinsley, “Multicommunicat-
ing: A Practice Whose Time Has Come?” Academy of Management Re-
view, April 2008, p. 391.
63. See ibid., pp. 391–403, for a complete discussion of multicommu-
nicating.
64. C. Pearson, “Sending a Message That You Don’t Care,” The New 
York Times, May 16, 2010, Business section, p. 9.
65. Portions of the material that follows were adapted from R. Kreitner 
and A. Kinicki, Organizational Behavior, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw-
Hill/Irwin, 2013), pp. 418–426.
66. A. Fisher, “E-Mail Is for Liars,” Fortune, November 24, 2008, p. 57.
67. Studies at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, reported in 
A. Pentland, “How Social Networks Network Best,” Harvard Business Re-
view, February 2009, p. 37. Also see A. Pentland, “The New Science of 
Building Great Teams,” Harvard Business Review, April 2012, pp. 61–70.
68. Study by Council for Research Excellence, reported in B. Stelter, 
“8 Hours a Day Spent on Screens, Study Finds,” The New York Times, March 
27, 2009, p. B6. See also J. Wortham, “Everyone Is Using Cellphones, but 
Not So Many Are Talking,” The New York Times, May 14, 2010, pp. A1, B4.
69. Pew Research Center, “The Millennials: Confident. Connected. Open 
to Change,” reported in S. Jayson, “A Detailed Look at Millennials,” USA 
Today, February 24, 2010, p. 10B.
70. “Millennials in Adulthood,” Pew Research Social & Demographic 
Trends, March 7, 2014, www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/03/07/millen-
nials-in-adulthood (accessed August 18, 2014).
71. David Verhaagen, quoted in S. Jayson, “‘iGeneration’ Has No Off 
Switch,” USA Today, February 10, 2010, pp. 1D, 2D.
72. “Ground-Breaking Study of Video Viewing Finds Younger Boomers 
Consume More Video Media Than Any Other Group,” press release, 
March 27, 2009, on study conducted on behalf of Council for Research 
Excellence by Ball State University’s Center for Media Design, www.re-

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN49
107. A. Schneider, “Fantasy Football Expected to Cost $8 Billion in Lost 
Work Time This NFL Season,” KUHF Public Radio, September 3, 2013, 
http://app1.kuhf.org/articles/1377884091-Fantasy-Football-Expected-
To-Cost-$8-Billion-In-Lost-Work-Time-This-NFL-Season.html (ac-
cessed August 18, 2014).
108. D. Meinert, “Social Media Screening Leads to Hiring Discrimi-
nation,” HR Magazine, January 2014, p. 14; A. E. Marwick, Status 
Update: Celebrity, Publicity, and Branding in the Social Media Age 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013); and J. Shinal, “Social Me-
dia Can Bring Politics to the Corner Office,” USA Today, April 11, 
2014, p. 7B. See also “‘When Worlds Collide’: Navigating the Mine-
field of Social Media,” Knowledge@Wharton, June 9, 2014, http://
knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/social-media-social-minefield 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
109. See I. Dorbian, “A Twist on Crowdfunding,” The Wall Street Journal, 
August 19, 2013, p. R3; K. Pender, “Students Raise Cash with Novel Fund 
Tool,” San Francisco Chronicle, August 25, 2013, pp. D1, D5; K. Murphy, 
“Crowdfunding Tips for Turning Inspiration into Reality,” The New York 
Times, January 23, 2014, p. B7; and “How to Prepare for Crowdfunding,” 
The Wall Street Journal, February 3, 2014, pp. R1, R2. For the downside 
of crowdfunding, see E. Gamerman, “The Trouble with Kickstarter,” The 
Wall Street Journal, June 21, 2013, pp. D1, D2; S. M. Davidoff, “Trepida-
tion and Restrictions Leave Crowdfunding Rules Weak,” The New York 
Times, October 30, 2013, p. B5; A. Tugend, “Crowdfunding’s Effect on 
Venerable Nonprofits Raises Concern,” The New York Times, February 8, 
2014, p. B4; and J. Burke, “The Harsh Truth about Crowdfunding,” Reno 
Gazette-Journal, May 30, 2014, p. 11A.
110. T. Rosenberg, “Crowdsourcing a Better World,” The New York Times, 
March 28, 2011, http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/03/28/
crowdsourcing-a-better-world (accessed August 18, 2014).
111. E. Janzen, “Samuel Adams Crowd-Sourced Beer Debuts During 
SXSW,” Liquid, March 11, 2012, www.austin360.com/blogs/content/
shared-gen/blogs/austin/bws/entries/2012/03/11/samuel_adams_
crowd_sourced_bre.html (accessed August 18. 2014).
112. D. Lim, “Pentagon-Funded Games Would Crowdsource Weapons 
Testing,” Netguv, January 19, 2012, www.nextgov.com/de-
fense/2012/01/pentagon-funded-games-would-crowdsource-weap-
ons-testing/50479 (accessed August 18, 2014).
113. J. Temple, “How Trivial Distractions Divert Us from Our Goals,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, April 22, 2012, pp. D1, D7. On the matter of dis-
tractions, see M. Harris, The End of Absence: Reclaiming What We’ve 
Lost in a World of Constant Connection (New York: Current, 2014); 
K. Schulz, “Seduced by Twitter,” The Week, December 27, 2013, 
pp. 40–41; M. della Cava, “‘How Do I Want to Live?’” Reno Gazette-Journal, 
April 20, 2014, p. 8B, reprinted from USA Today; M. Wood, “Swear Off 
Social Media, for Good or Just for Now,” The New York Times, July 3, 
2014, p. B8; and D. Heitman, “Have You Twittered Away Your Summer?” 
The Wall Street Journal, August 19, 2014, p. A13. See also Williams and 
Sawyer, Using Information Technology, p. 94.
114. G. Mosier, “Tweeting Can Leave the Wrong Impression,” Reno 
Gazette-Journal, May 9, 2012, p. 7A.
115. S. Turkel, “The Flight from Conversation,” The New York Times, 
April 22, 2012, pp. SR-1, SR-6, SR-7. See also J. O’C. Hamilton, “Sepa-
ration Anxiety,” Stanford Magazine, January/February 2011, pp. 55–59; 
and E. Keller and B. Fay, “Facebook Can’t Replace Face-to-Face Conver-
sation,” USA Today, April 30, 2012, p. 9A.
116. See M. Burley-Allen, “Listen Up,” HR Magazine, November 2001, 
pp. 115–120.
117. Online Survey conducted July 2007 by Society for Human Re-
source Management, reported in Gurchiek, “Survey: ‘Key Skills Advance 
HR Career.’”
118. Burley-Allen, “Listen Up”; see also C. G. Pearce, “How Effective 
Are We as Listeners?” Training & Development, April 1993, pp. 79–80; 
and R. A. Luke Jr., “Improving Your Listening Ability,” Supervisory Man-
agement, June 1992, p. 7.
119. Research by The Discovery Group, reported in “Hey, I’m Talking 
Here,” Training, December 2005, p. 9.
120. Five listening styles proposed by Edward Dvorak, president of ECD 
Associates, discussed in “Listening and Thinking: What’s Your Style?” 
Pediatric Services, November 25, 2011, www.pediatricservices.com/
prof/prof-10.htm (accessed August 19, 2014).
August 8, 2014, pp. 1B, 2B; and G. Fields and J. R. Emshwiller, “As Ar-
rest Records Mount, Consequences Last a Lifetime,” The Wall Street 
Journal, August 119, 2014, pp. A1, A12,
92. Norton Cyber Crime Report for 2013, reported in P. Paganini, “2013 
Norton Report, the Impact of Cybercrime According to Symantec,” Secu-
rity Affairs, October 9, 2013, http://securityaffairs.co/wordpress/18475/
cyber-crime/2013-norton-report.html (accessed August 18, 2014).
93. B. Worthen, “Facebook Alters Privacy Controls, but Critics Say It’s Not 
Enough,” The Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2010, pp. B1, B2. See also B. 
Acohido, “Member or Not, Visit Facebook, and It Tracks You,” USA Today, No-
vember 16, 2011, pp. 1A, 2A; N. Bilton, “Privacy Fades in Facebook Era,” The 
New York Times, December 12, 2011, p. B8; H. Alford, “Watching Every Click 
You Make,” The New York Times, April 22, 2012, p. ST-2; J. Temple, “Social 
App Really Not Your Friend,” San Francisco Chronicle, April 20, 2012, pp. D1, 
D6; R. Albergotti, “Furor Erupts over Facebook Study,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, June 30, 2014, pp. B1, B2; and S. Jayson, “Uninvited Facebook Friends: 
Researchers Studying You,” USA Today, August 10, 2014, p. 8B.
94. Study by Pew Internet & American Life Project, reported in L. M. 
Holson, “The Tell-All Generation Learns to Keep Some Things Offline,” 
The New York Times, May 9, 2010, News section, pp. 1, 4. See also 
D. MacMillan, “Younger Adults Vigilant about Online Identities,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, May 27, 2010, p. D2; M. Bond, “Your Facebook Past 
on Display?” USA Today, November 3, 2011, p. 3B; and “Teens Are Wag-
ing a Privacy War on the Internet—Why Marketers Should Listen,” 
Knowledge@Wharton, August 5, 2014, http://knowledge.wharton.
upenn.edu/article/teens-privacy-online (accessed August 18, 2014).
95. Study by Radicati Group, Palo Alto, California, reported in N. Bilton, 
“Looking for Relief from a Flood of Email,” The New York Times, January 
20, 2014, p. B4.
96. Research firm Basex, reported in R. Scoble, “Reengineering Your 
Inbox,” Fast Company, February 2009, p. 50.
97. Harris Interactive survey, reported in K. M. Huessner, “Tech Stress: 
How Many Emails Can You Handle a Day?” ABC News, July 20, 2010, 
http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/tech-stress-emails-handle-day/
story?id=11201183 (accessed August 18, 2014).
98. Based on K. Byron, “Carrying Too Heavy a Load? The Communica-
tion and Miscommunication of Emotion by Email,” Academy of Manage-
ment Review, April 2008, pp. 309–327.
99. Pew survey, reported in “Americans More Dependent on Cellphones 
Than Landlines,” The Arizona Republic, March 8, 2008, p. D3; J. Kornblum, 
“Text Messaging Taps Out a Family-Friendly Result,” USA Today, 
October 20, 2008, p. 7D; and A. R. Careyand J. Snider,” Replacing Land-
Line Phones with Cellphones,” USA Today, April 7, 2009, p. 1A.
100. Survey by One Poll, reported in “Manners and Smartphone,” Inte-
people, February 19, 2014, www.intepeople.co.nz/news/manners-and-
smartphones (accessed August 19, 2014).
101. “Phone Use Slows Driver Reaction,” The Wall Street Journal, 
February 3, 2005, p. D5; and M. Esterl, “Less Smoking, More Texting,” 
The Wall Street Journal, June 13, 2014, p. A3.
102. A. Smith, Why Americans Use Social Media, Pew Research Center 
Internet and American Life Project report, November 14, 2011, 
www.pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/Reports/2011/Why%20Americans%
20Use%20Social%20Media.pdf (accessed August 18, 2014).
103. V. Wickramasinge and M. S. M. Nisaf, “Organizational Policy as 
Moderator between Online Social Network and Job Performance,” VINE: 
The Journal of Information and Knowledge Management Systems, Vol. 
43, No. 2 (2013), pp. 161–184.
104. S. Ng and S. Vranica, “P&G Shifting Ad Dollars to Digital,” The Wall 
Street Journal, August 2, 2013, B7.
105. J. Meister, “Want to Be a More Productive Employee? Get on Social 
Networks,” Forbes, April 18, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/jeannemeis-
ter/2013/04/18/want-to-be-a-more-productive-employee-get-on-so-
cial-networks (accessed August 18, 2014); and B. A. Lautsch and E. E. 
Kossek, “Managing a Blended Workforce: Telecommuters and Non-
Telecommuters,” Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 40 (2011), pp. 10–17.
106. R. E. Ployhart, “Social Media in the Workplace: Issues and Strate-
gic Questions,” SHRM Executive Briefing, November 2011. www.shrm.
org/about/foundation/products/documents/social%20media%20brief-
ing-%20final.pdf (accessed August 18, 2014). See also “Should Com-
panies Monitor Their Employees’ Social Media?” The Wall Street 
Journal, May 12, 2014, pp. R1, R2.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN50
York Times, August 14, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/08/15/us/star-
bucks-to-revise-work-scheduling-policies.html?_r=0 (accessed Sep-
tember 3, 2014); and “Employment: How Robo-Scheduling Hurts 
Workers,” The Week, August 29, 2014, p. 33.
11. A. P. Sloan Jr., My Years with General Motors (New York: Doubleday, 
1964).
12. A. Taylor III, “Hyundai Smokes the Competition,” Fortune, January 5, 
2010, http://money.cnn.com/2010/01/04/autos/hyundai_competition.
fortune/index.htm (accessed September 3, 2014).
13. J. R. Healey, “J. D. Power: Most Reliable 3-Year-Old Cars,” USA To-
day, February 12, 2014, www.usatoday.com/story/money/cars/2014/
02/12/used-cars-less-dependable-jdpower/5403139 (accessed 
 September 3, 2014).
14. J. Levitz, “UPS Thinks Outside the Box on Driver Training,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 6, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB200014240527
02303912104575164573823418844.html (accessed September 3, 2014).
15. D. Foust, “Big Brown’s New Bag,” BusinessWeek, July 19, 2004, 
pp. 54–56. See also M. Brewster and F. Dalzell, Driving Change: The 
UPS Approach to Business (New York: Hyperion, 2007).
16. B. G. Hoffman, “Inside Ford’s Fight to Avoid Disaster,” The Wall 
Street Journal, March 9, 2012, pp. B1, B7; and N. E. Boudette, C. Rogers, 
and J. S. Lublin, “Mulally’s Legacy: Setting Ford on a Stronger Course,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 21, 2014, http://online.wsj.com/news/
articles/SB10001424052702304049904579515852823291232 
(accessed August 31, 2014).
17. “The Journey of the Couch,” Ted Koppel on Discovery Channel, http://
dsc.discovery.com/convergence/koppel/china/couch-journey.html; 
“Changes in China: Koppel Investigates,” CNN.com, July 7, 2008, www.cnn.
com/2008/SHOWBIZ/TV/07/06/koppel.china.ap; and F. R. Lee, “Ted Koppel 
Tours a China Brimming with Dreams and Consumerism,” The New York 
Times, July 8, 2008, www.nytimes.com/2008/07/08/arts/television/08kopp.
html?n=Top/Reference/Times%20Topics/Organizations/C/Council%20
on%20Foreign%20Relations (all accessed August 31, 2014).
18. J. R. Hagerty, “Why U.S. Manufacturing Is Poised for a Comeback 
(Maybe),” The Wall Street Journal, June 2, 2014, pp. R1, R2; and M. 
Crawford, “Manufacturing in America: Bigger, Better, and Bolder,” 
Area Development, August 7, 2014, www.areadevelopment.com/
EconomicsGovernmentPolicy/Q1-2014/US-manufacturing-upswing-
innovation-productivity-11278770.shtml (accessed August 31, 2014).
19. R. E. Walton, “From Control to Commitment in the Workplace,” 
Harvard Business Review, March–April 1985, pp. 76–84.
20. I. G. Seidenberg, quoted in S. E. Ante, “Giving the Boss the Big Pic-
ture,” BusinessWeek, February 13, 2006, pp. 48–51.
21. R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, “The Balanced Scorecard—Measures 
That Drive Performance,” Harvard Business Review, January–February 
1992, pp. 71–79.
22. For more on the uses of the balanced scorecard, see K. R. Thompson 
and N. J. Mathys, “The Aligned Balanced Scorecard: An Improved Tool for 
Building High Performance Organizations,” Organizational Dynamics, 
October–December 2008, pp. 378–393; S. C. Voelpel and C. K. Streb, “A 
Balanced Scorecard for Managing the Aging Workforce,” Organizational 
Dynamics, Vol. 39 (2009), pp. 84–90; R. S. Kaplan, D. P. Norton, and B. 
Rugelsjoen, “Managing Alliances with the Balanced Scorecard,” Harvard 
Business Review, January–February 2010, pp. 114–120; E. Tapinos, R. G. 
Dyson, and M. Meadows, “Does the Balanced Scorecard Make a Differ-
ence to the Strategy Development Process?” Journal of the Operational 
Research Society, Vol. 62 (2011), pp. 888–899; M. L. Werner and F. Xu, 
“Executing Strategy with the Balanced Scorecard,” International Journal 
of Financial Research, January 2012, pp. 88–94; K. R. Thompson and 
N. J. Mathys, “It’s Time to Add the Employee Dimension to the Balanced 
Scorecard,” Organizational Dynamics, January 2013, pp. 135–144; and A. 
Janes, “Empirical Verification of the Balanced Scorecard,” Industrial Man-
agement & Data Systems, Vol. 114, No. 2 (2014), pp. 203–219.
23. Kaplan and Norton, “The Balanced Scorecard—Measures That 
Drive Performance.”
24. See M. Arndt, “Damn! Torpedoes Get Quizons Back on Track,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 25, 2010, pp. 54–55.
25. See S. Thomke and D. Reinertsen, “Six Myths of Product Develop-
ment,” Harvard Business Review, May 2012, pp. 84–94.
26. R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, “Having Trouble with Your Strategy? 
Then Map It,” Harvard Business Review, September–October 2000, 
121. M. Just, P. A. Carpenter, and M. Masson, reported in J. Meer, “Read-
ing More, Understanding Less,” Psychology Today, March 1987, p. 12.
122. K. Alesandrini, Survive Information Overload (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 
1992), pp. 197.
123. K. Tyler, “Toning Up Communications,” HR Magazine, March 2003, 
pp. 87–89.
124. See S. E. Needleman, “Standout Letters to Cover Your Bases,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 9, 2010, p. D4; and R. Abrams, “Writing Win-
ning Business Proposals Is Critical to Your Success,” Reno Gazette-
Journal, September 9, 2008, p. 6A.
125. T. Alessandra and P. Hunsaker, Communicating at Work (New York: 
Fireside, 1993), p. 231.
126. Ibid., p. 241.
127. Cited in ibid., p. 169.
128. TNS for LG Spring Cleaning Survey of 1,000 adults, March 2010, 
reported in “Activities Adults Say They Dread,” USA Today, May 14, 
2010, p. A1. See also E. Garone, “Improving Your, Um, You Know, Public 
Speaking,” The Wall Street Journal, November 3, 2011, p. D6.
129. G. Lindenfield, “Don’t Be Nervous,” Management Today, June 2003, 
p. 81. Also see A. Bruzzese, “Put Yourself in Your Listener’s Place When 
Communicating,” Reno Gazette-Journal, June 9, 2011, p. 5A; and “Speak-
ing Publicly Is a Big Help,” The Arizona Republic, October 12, 2011, p. CL1.
130. See D. Molina, “Conquering My Fear of Speaking in Public,” The 
New York Times, October 2, 2011, p. BU-8.
131. P. Theibert, “Speechwriters of the World, Get Lost!” The Wall Street 
Journal, August 2, 1993, p. A16. This section adapted from C. Wahl-
strom and B. Williams, Learning Success: Being Your Best at College & 
Life, 3rd ed. (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2002), pp. 243–245.
132. L. Waters, Secrets of Successful Speakers: How You Can Motivate, 
Captivate, and Persuade (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993), p. 203.
CHAPTER 16
1. Some new ideas are found in J. Quittner, “How Jeff Bezos Rules the 
Retail Space,” Fortune, May 5, 2008, pp. 127–134; A. Taylor III, “Can 
This Car Save Ford?” Fortune, May 5, 2008, pp. 170–178; M. V. 
 Copeland, “Boeing’s Big Dream,” Fortune, May 5, 2008, pp. 180–191; R. 
J. Grossman, “Keep Pace with Older Workers,” HR Magazine, May 2008, 
pp. 39–46; A. Wolfe, “Laura Arrillaga-Andreessen,” Wall Street Journal, 
September 6–7, 2014, p. C11 (on new ideas in philanthropy); and M. T. 
Barra, “V2V Road Communication,” San Francisco Chronicle, September 7, 
2014, pp. E5, E7 (on vehicle-to-vehicle communication).
2. See, for example, G. Colvin, “Who Wants to Be the Boss?” Fortune, 
February 20, 2006, pp. 76–78.
3. J. B. Stewart, “In the Undoing of a CEO, a Puzzle,” The New York 
Times, May 19, 2012, pp. B1, B7.
4. J. Silver-Greenberg and N. D. Schwartz, “Discord at Key J.P. Morgan 
Unit Is Blamed in Bank’s Huge Loss,” The New York Times, May 20, 
2012, news section, pp. 1, 4.
5. J. Van Derbeken, “PG&E Alarmed at Rate of Surges,” San Francisco 
Chronicle, May 20, 2012, pp. A1, A14.
6. W. Taylor, “Control in an Age of Chaos,” Harvard Business Review, 
November–December 1994, pp. 64–70.
7. Data from Pacific Gas & Electric Food Service Technology Center, 
reported in B. Horovitz, “Can Eateries Go Green, Earn Green?” USA 
 Today, May 16, 2008, pp. 1B, 2B.
8. Also see A. Kelso, “Restaurant Chains Going Green in Response to 
Consumer Demand,” PizzaMarketplace.com, March 26, 2012, www.
pizzamarketplace.com/article/192243/Restaurant-chains-going-green-
in-response-to-consumer-demand; and M. B. McNatt, “The Rewards for 
Restaurants Going Green,” EcoGreenOffice, April 25, 2012, www
.ecogreenoffice.com/rewards-for-restaurants-going-green.html (both 
accessed September 3, 2014).
9. J. R. Hagerty, “3M Begins Untangling Its ‘Hairballs,’” The Wall Street 
Journal, May 17, 2012, pp. B1, B2.
10. J. Kantor, “Working Anything but 9 to 5,” The New York Times, Au-
gust 13, 2014, www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/08/13/us/starbucks-
workers-scheduling-hours.html?action=click&contentCollection=
U.S.&module=RelatedCoverage&region=Marginalia&pgtype=article 
(accessed September 3, 2014). See also J. Kantor, “Starbucks to Revise 
Policies to End Irregular Schedules for Its 130,000 Baristas,” The New 

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN51
41. O. Port, “The Push for Quality,” BusinessWeek, June 8, 1987, 
pp. 130–136.
42. J. Bennett, “New Chrysler Battling Old Defects,” The Wall Street 
Journal, May 10, 2012, pp. B1, B2.
43. Planning Perspectives, Inc., “Chrysler and GM Continue Strong Im-
provement, Ford Stalled in 3rd, Toyota and Honda Continue Their Slide 
in Annual Study of Automaker Buyer-Supplier Relations Share,” Sacra-
mento Bee, May 14, 2012, www.sacbee.com/2012/05/14/4487887/
chrysler-and-gm-continue-strong.html#storylink=cpy (accessed Sep-
tember 3, 2014).
44. See, for example, S. S. Carty, “Consumer Reports Raves about New 
Chrysler 300,” AOL Autos, September 29, 2011, http://autos.aol.com/
article/consumer-reports-raves-about-new-chrysler-300 (accessed 
September 3, 2014); and C. Jensen, “Japanese Autos Lose Ground in 
Consumer Reports Reliability Ratings,” The New York Times, November 
23, 2013, p. AU-4.
45. C. Jensen, “Chrysler Owners Sound Off on a Power Defect,” The 
New York Times, August 22, 2014, p. B3.
46. See H. Liao and M. Subramony, “Employee Customer Orientation in 
Manufacturing Organizations: Joint Influences of Customer Proximity 
and the Senior Leadership Team,” Journal of Applied Psychology, March 
2008, pp. 317–328. Also see P. Hellman, “Rating Your Dentist,” Manage-
ment Review, July–August 1998, p. 64.
47. S. Lohr, “Academia Dissects the Service Sector, but Is It a Science?” 
The New York Times, April 18, 2008, www.nytimes.com/2006/04/18/
business/18services.html (accessed September 3, 2014).
48. F. X. Frei, “The Four Things a Service Business Must Get Right,” 
Harvard Business Review, April 2008, pp. 70–80.
49. I. Austen, “In a Chevy, Engine from China and Transmission from 
Japan,” The New York Times, March 26, 2008, pp. C1, C8.
50. C. L. Mann, “Globalization of I.T. Services and White-Collar Jobs: 
The Next Wave of Productivity Growth,” December 2003, International 
Economics Policy Briefs, No. PB03-11, www.iie.com/publications/pb/
pb03-11.pdf (accessed September 3, 2014). See also V. Postrel, “A Re-
searcher Sees an Upside in the Outsourcing of Programming Jobs,” The 
New York Times, January 29, 2004, p. C2.
51. N. Ungerleider, “Software Developer Caught Outsourcing His Own 
Job to China,” Fast Company, January 17, 2013, www.fastcompany.
com/3004896/software-developer-caught-outsourcing-his-own-job-
china (accessed September 3, 2014).
52. H. Menzies, “Quality Counts When Wooing Overseas Clients,” For-
tune, 
June 
1, 
1997, 
www.fortune.com/fortune/subs/ 
article/0,15114,378797,00.html (accessed September 3, 2014).
53. B. Ekeler, quoted in Menzies, “Quality Counts When Wooing Overseas 
Clients.”  See also M. V. Uzumeri, “ISO 9000 and Other Metastandards: 
Principles for Management Practice?” Academy of Management Execu-
tive, Vol. 11, No 1. (1997), pp. 21–28; and T. B. Schoenrock, “ISO 9000: 
2000 Gives Competitive Edge,” Quality Progress, May 2002, p. 107.
54. A. Fisher, “Rules for Joining the Cult of Perfectability,” Fortune, Feb-
ruary 7, 2000, p. 206.
55. See B. Burnseed and E. Thornton, “Six Sigma Makes a Comeback,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, September 10, 2009, www.businessweek.
com/magazine/content/09_38/b4147064137002.htm (accessed Sep-
tember 3, 2014).
56. J. E. Morehouse, quoted in C. H. Deutsch, “Six Sigma Enlighten-
ment,” The New York Times, December 7, 1998, pp. C1, C7. For more on 
Six Sigma, see M. S. Sodhi and N. S. Sodhi, “Six Sigma Pricing,” Harvard 
Business Review, May 2005, pp. 135–142; and J. Gordon, “Take That to 
the Bank,” Training, June 2006, p. 41.
57. D. Jones, “Firms Aim for Six Sigma Efficiency,” USA Today, July 21, 
1998, pp. 1B, 2B.
58. See M. Poppendieck, “Why the Lean in Lean Six Sigma?” The Proj-
ect Management Best Practices Report, June 2004, www.poppendieck.
com/pdfs/Lean_Six_Sigma.pdf (accessed September 3, 2014).
59. F. Arner and A. Aston, “How Xerox Got Up to Speed,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, May 2, 2004, www.businessweek.com/stories/
2004-05-02/how-xerox-got-up-to-speed (accessed September 3, 2014); 
and A. Aston, J. Carey, and O. Kharif, “Online Extra: The New Factory 
Floor, and Tomorrow’s,” BusinessWeek Online, May 3, 2004, www
.businessweek.com/=@@vr3DfocQkImUSw0A/magazine/content/
04_18/b3881601.htm (accessed September 3, 2014).
pp. 167–176. See also R. Kaplan and D. Norton, “Plotting Success 
with ‘Strategy Maps,’” InformationWeek, February 1, 2004, www.
informationweek.com/news/18200733 (accessed September 1, 2014); 
P. L. Umayal Karpagam and L. Suganthi, “A Strategy Map of Balanced 
Scorecard in Academic Institutions for Performance Improvement,” The 
IUP Journal of Business Strategy, Vol. IX, No. 3 (2012), pp. 7–16; and M. 
M. Cheng and K. A. Humphreys, “The Differential Improvement Effects of 
the Strategy Map and Scorecard Perspectives on Managers’ Strategic 
Judgments,” The Accounting Review, Vol. 87, No. 3 (2012), pp. 899–924.
27. R. Quinn, quoted in J. H. Lingle and W. A. Schiemann, “From Bal-
anced Scorecard to Strategic Gauges: Is Measurement Worth It?” 
 American Management Association, March 1996, pp. 56–61.
28. For a dissenting view, see L. Ryan, “‘If You Can’t Measure It, You 
Can’t Manage It’: Not True,” Forbes, February 10, 2014, www.forbes.
com/sites/lizryan/2014/02/10/if-you-cant-measure-it-you-cant-man-
age-it-is-bs (accessed September 3, 2014).
29. Lingle and Schiemann, “From Balanced Scorecard to Strategic 
Gauges: Is Measurement Worth It?”
30. See G. L. Neilson, K. L. Martin, and E. Powers, “The Secrets to 
Successful Strategy Execution,” Harvard Business Review, June 2008, 
pp. 61–70.
31. For discussions of how to measure services and intangible assets, 
see R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, “Measuring the Strategic Readiness of 
Intangible Assets,” Harvard Business Review, February 2004, pp. 52–63; 
Y. Lee, “How Do I Determine the HR Metrics That Are Most Helpful for My 
Company?” HR Magazine, September 2011, p. 26; D. Grote, “The Myth of 
Performance Metrics,” HBR Blog Network, September 12, 2011, http://
blogs.hbr.org/cs/2011/09/the_myth_of_performance_metric.html (ac-
cessed September 3, 2014); and D. Robb, “Creating Metrics for Senior 
Management,” HR Magazine, December 2011, pp. 109–111.
32. See H. C. Ott, “Are Scorecards and Metrics Killing Employee En-
gagement?” HBR Blog Network, July 12, 2011, http://blogs.hbr.org/
cs/2011/07/are_scorecards_and_metrics_kil.html (accessed Septem-
ber 3, 2014).
33. For more about Ritz-Carlton, see C. Gallo, “How Ritz-Carlton Maintains 
Its Mystique,” BusinessWeek, February 13, 2007, www.businessweek.
com/smallbiz/content/feb2007/sb20070213_171606.htm?chan=search; 
C. Gallo, “Employee Motivation the Ritz-Carlton Way,” BusinessWeek, Feb-
ruary 29, 2008, www.businessweek.com/smallbiz/content/feb2008/
sb20080229_347490.htm?chan=search; “Beyond Satisfaction: J. D. 
Power 2012 Customer Service Champions,” March 13, 2012, www
.jdpower.com/content/special-report/12TU3X9/beyond-satisfaction-j-d-
power-2012-customer-service-champions.htm; and R. Dragon, “The Big 
Brand Theory: The Ritz-Carlton Uses Social Media to Create Indelible Mem-
ories,” SocialMedia Today, September 4, 2013, www.socialmediatoday
.com/content/big-brand-theory-ritz-carlton-uses-social-media-create-
indelible-memories (all accessed September 3, 2014).
34. “Top 10 Best Companies for Work-Life Balance,” survey by Forbes 
and Indeed.com, July 30, 2014, http://lookingtop10.com/top-10-best-
companies-for-work-life-balance (accessed September 3, 2014).
35. D. Jones, “Baldrige Winners Named,” USA Today, November 24, 
1999, p. 3B. See also D. Jones, “Baldrige Award Honors Record 7 Qual-
ity Winners,” USA Today, November 26, 2003, p. B6; and R. O. Crockett, 
“Keeping Ritz Carlton at the Top of Its Game,” BusinessWeek Online,
May 29, 2006, www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_22/
b3986130.htm?chan=search (accessed September 3, 2014). For more 
about the Baldrige awards, go to the Baldrige National Quality Program 
website at www.quality.nist.gov.
36. D. A. Foster and J. Chenoweth, Comparison of Baldrige Award Appli-
cants and Recipients with Peer Hospitals on a National Balanced Score-
card, October 2011, Thomson Reuters, www.nist.gov/baldrige/upload/
baldrige-hospital-research-paper.pdf (accessed September 3, 2014).
37. W. E. Deming, Out of the Crisis (Cambridge, MA: MIT press, 1986), 
p. 5.
38. R. N. Lussier, Management: Concepts, Applications, Skill Develop-
ment (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western College Publishing, 1997), p. 260.
39. J. Goldstein, “As Doctors Get a Life, Strains Show,” The Wall Street 
Journal, April 29, 2008, pp. A1, A14.
40. The Japanese have taken efficiency to a high level. See the example 
of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., described in K. Hall, “No One Does 
Lean like the Japanese,” BusinessWeek, July 10, 2006, pp. 40–41.

CHAPTER NOTES
Chapter Notes
CN52
75. D. Gross, “Listen, the U.S. Is Better, Stronger, and Faster Than Any-
where Else in the World,” Newsweek, May 7, 2012, pp. 22–30.
76. “Productivity and Costs, Second Quarter 2014, Revised,” Economic 
News Release, September 4, 2014, Bureau of Labor Statistics, www.
bls.gov/news.release/prod2.nr0.htm (accessed September 3, 2014); 
and E. C. Prescott and L. E. Ohanian, “U.S. Productivity Growth Has 
Taken a Dive,” The Wall Street Journal, February 4, 2014, p. C4.
77. L. Uchitelle, “Productivity Finally Shows the Impact of Computers,” The 
New York Times, March 12, 2000, sec. 3, p. 4; J. Reingold, M. Stepanek, 
and D. Brady, “Why the Productivity Revolution Will Spread,” Business-
Week, February 14, 2000, pp. 112–118; G. S. Becker, “How the Skeptics 
Missed the Power of Productivity,” BusinessWeek, January 1, 2004, p. 26; 
and J. Aversa, “Bernanke Bullish on Productivity Gains,” BusinessWeek 
Online, August 31, 2006, www.businessweek.com/ap/financialnews/
D8JRJTJO0.htm?chan=search (accessed September 3, 2014).
78. See study by B. P. Bosworth and J. E. Triplett, “Productivity Mea-
surement Issues in Services Industries: ‘Baumol’s Disease’ Has Been 
Cured,” The Brookings Institution, September 1, 2003, www.brookings.
org/views/articles/bosworth/200309.htm (accessed September 3, 
2014). Also see H. R. Varian, “Information Technology May Have Been 
What Cured Low Service-Sector Productivity,” The New York Times,
February 12, 2004, p. C2; S. Lohr, “More Jobs Predicted for Machines, 
Not People,” The New York Times, October 23, 2011, www.nytimes.
com/2011/10/24/technology/economists-see-more-jobs-for- 
machines-not-people.html?ref=productivity (accessed September 3, 
2014); and Associated Press, “Growth in Service Sector Is Slow but 
Steady, Suggesting Modest Economic Gains,” The New York Times, No-
vember 3, 2011. www.nytimes.com/2011/11/04/business/service-
sector-growth-is-slow-but-steady.html?ref=productivity (accessed 
September 3, 2014). See also interview of venture capitalist Ben 
Horowitz by M. Bartiromo, “Technology Soars Again as Economic 
Driver,” USA Today, February 20, 2012, p. 3B.
79. C. Holman, B. Joyeux, and C. Kask, “Labor Productivity Since 
2000, by Sector and Industry,” Monthly Labor Review, February 2008, 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2008/02/art4full.
pdf; and M. R. Brill and S. T. Rowe, “Industry Labor Productivity Trends 
from 2000 to 2010,” Spotlight on Statistics, March 2013, Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, www.bls.gov/spotlight/2013/productivity (both ac-
cessed September 3, 2014).
80. G. Hamel, with B. Breen, The Future of Management (Boston: 
 Harvard Business School Press, 2007), p. 6.
81. A. R. Rasbury, “New Kid on the Job: How to Get Off to a Good Start,” 
Black Enterprise, May 1, 2008, www.thefreelibrary.com/New+kid+on+
the+job:+{how+to+get+off+to+a+good+start.-a0178674810 (ac-
cessed September 3, 2014).
82. K. Holland, “For the Chief, a Little Skepticism Can Go a Long Way,” 
The New York Times, May 25, 2008, business section, p. 14.
83. B. Taylor, “Why Zappos Pays New Employees to Quit—and You 
Should Too,” Harvard Business Review, May18, 2008, http://discussion-
leader.hbsp.com/taylor/2008/05/wy_zappos_pays_new_employees_t.
html (accessed September 3, 2014).
84. “Ebola Outbreak Deaths in West Africa Top 1,000: WHO,” Nikkei 
Asian Review, August 12, 2014, http://asia.nikkei.com/Politics-Economy/
International-Relations/Ebola-outbreak-deaths-in-West-Africa-top-
1-000-WHO (accessed August 12, 2014).
85. See B. McKay and P. Loftus, “Experimental Drugs Are Approved to Fight 
Ebola in West Africa,” The Wall Street Journal, August 13, 2014, p. A7.
60. K. Day and J. Howard, “Albertsons Officials to Implement New Effi-
ciency Program,” Reno Gazette-Journal, February 25, 2004, pp. 1D, 3D.
61. C. Barnes and R. Walker, “Improving Corporate Communications: 
Lean Six Sigma Science Has Broad Reach,” Journal of Business Strat-
egy, Vol. 31, Issue 1 (2010), pp. 23–26.
62. For a dissenting view on the value of Six Sigma, see R. Ashkenas, 
“Why Continuous Improvement May Need to Be Discontinued,” Forbes.
com, July 24, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/ronashkenas/2013/07/24/
why-continuous-improvement-may-need-to-be-discontinued (ac-
cessed September 3, 2014).
63. Six Sigma has come under fire for hurting creativity, yet it was 
adopted as a major initiative by the conglomerate Textron in 2002, and 
since then the stock has soared. See B. Hindo and B. Grow, “Six Sigma: So 
Yesterday?” BusinessWeek, June 11, 2007, www.businessweek.com/-
magazine/content/07_24/b4038409.htm (accessed September 3, 2014); 
D. Jones, “CEO Expects Good Things as Textron Does Six Sigma Right,” USA 
Today, January 21, 2008, p. 3B; and S. Beckman, “Welcoming the New, 
Improving the Old,” The New York Times, September 6, 2009, p. BU-3.
64. See R. J. Aldag and T. M. Stearns, Management (Cincinnati, OH: 
South-Western Publishing, 1987), pp. 653–654; D. Robertson and E. 
Anderson, “Control System and Task Environment Effects on Ethical 
Judgment: An Exploratory Study of Industrial Salespeople,” Organiza-
tional Science, November 1993, pp. 617–629.
65. K. A. Merchant, Control in Business Organizations (Boston: Pitman, 
1985), pp. 10–11; K. M. Bartol and D. C. Martin, Management, 3rd ed. 
(Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 1998), pp. 533–534; and J. R. 
Schermerhorn Jr., Management for Productivity, 3rd ed. (New York: 
 Wiley, 1993), p. 592.
66. See annual Rechargeable Recycling Corporation green guilt survey, 
reported in “Survey Shows ‘Green Guilt’ Is Up among Americans,” Call-
2Recycle, April 19, 2012, www.call2recycle.org/2012-green-guilt-survey 
(accessed September 3, 2014). See also The Environment: Public 
 Attitudes and Individual Behavior—A Twenty-Year Evolution (Racine, WI: 
S.C. Johnson, 2011).
67. Subaru of Indiana’s environmental cost-saving practices are de-
scribed in A. G. Robinson and D. M. Schroeder, “Greener and Cheaper,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 23, 2009, p. 4; and R. Farzad, “The 
Scrappiest Car Manufacturer in America,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
June 6, 2011, pp. 68–74.
68. Bartol and Martin, Management, pp. 532–533; and S. C. Certo, 
Modern Management, 8th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
2000), pp. 435–436.
69. J. P. Kotter, L. A. Schlesinger, and V. Sathe, Organization: Text, 
Cases, and Readings on the Management of Organizational Design and 
Change (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1979).
70. Merchant, Control in Business Organizations.
71. When labor costs rise, productivity slows down, unless other vari-
ables are changed. When companies are able to get more output from 
fewer workers, productivity rises. See C. Dougherty, “Workforce Produc-
tivity Falls,” The Wall Street Journal, May 4, 2012, p. A5.
72. A. Kowalski and I. Kolet, “Productivity Is Not the Savior You Think It 
Is,” Bloomberg Businessweek, October 24–October 30, 2011, pp. 13–14.
73. T. Cowen, “The Sad Statistic That Trumps the Others,” The New 
York Times, August 21, 2011, p. BU-6.
74. Office of Macroeconomic Analysis, U.S. Treasury, “Profile of the 
Economy,” February 16, 2012, www.docstoc.com/docs/117787321/
Profile-of-the-Economy (accessed September 3, 2014).

CREDITS
Credits 
CR1
CHAPTER 1
Page 4: © AP Photo/Mark Lennihan; p. 5: © Image Source 
RF; p. 7: © AP Photo/Ben Margot; p. 8: © Ian C. Bates/San 
Francisco Chronicle/Corbis; p. 10: © AP Photo/Seth Wenig; 
p. 12: © AP Photo/Jeff Chiu; p. 13: © AP Photo/Sunday 
Alamba; p. 15: © Erich Schlegel/Corbis; p. 19: © Justin 
Sullivan/Getty Images; p. 20: © Charley Gallay/Getty 
Images; p. 21: © Courtesy Woman Care Global; p. 23: 
© AP Photo/David Zalubowski; p. 24: © moodboard/Su-
perStock RF; p. 25: © Ethan Miller/Getty Images; p. 28: 
© Associated Press; p. 30: © Imaginechina via AP Images; 
p. 31: © AP Photo/Manu Fernandez.
CHAPTER 2
Page 42: © Steve Smith/Corbis; p. 44: © Basic Elements 
Photography/Moment/Getty Images; p. 46: © Bettmann/
Corbis; p. 47: © Bettmann/Corbis; p. 48: © Monty Rakusen/
Getty Images RF; p. 50: © ASSOCIATED PRESS; p. 52: © 
The Washington Post/Getty Images; p. 53: © Justin 
Sullivan/Getty Images; p. 59: © Helen King/Corbis; p. 62: 
© Bettmann/Corbis; p. 63: © Hill Street Studios/Blend 
Images LLC RF.
CHAPTER 3
Page 73: © AP Photo/Michael Sah; p. 75: © Ed Endicott/
Demotix/Corbis; p. 78: © AP Photo/Jessica Hill; p. 79: 
© Paul Weiskel/Demotix/Corbis; p. 81: © Science Photo 
Library RF/Getty Images RF; p. 83: © Jose Luis Pelaez Inc/
Blend Images LLC RF; p. 85: © Dave Einsel/Getty Images; 
p. 91: © Royalty-Free/Corbis RF; p. 94: © Bloomberg via 
Getty Images/Getty Images.
CHAPTER 4
Page 104: © AP Photo/Rajanish Kakade; p. 105 (top): © AP 
Photo/Carlos Osorio; p. 105 (middle): © AP Photo/Gene 
J. Puskar; p. 105 (bottom): © AP Photo/Fiat Press Office; p. 
106: © Digital Vision/Getty Images RF; p. 108: © arabianEye/
PunchStock/Getty Images RF; p. 110: © Imaginechina via 
AP Images; p. 114: © Ekasit Wangprasert/Alamy RF; 
p. 116: © Imaginechina/Corbis; p. 120: © U. Baumgarten 
via Getty Images; p. 121: © Steve Mason/Getty Images RF; 
p. 127: © Pascal Deloche/Godong/Corbis.
CHAPTER 5
Page 138: © David Martin-Warr; p. 145: © AP Photo/
Charles Rex Arbogast; p. 148: © Jeff Michell/Corbis; 
p. 149: © mediaphotos/E+/Getty Images RF; p. 153: © 
Stockdisc/PunchStock/Getty Images RF.
CHAPTER 6
Page 160: © Bloomberg via Getty Images; p. 163: © Imag-
inechina via AP Images; p. 164: © Hill Street Studios/Getty 
Images RF; p. 165: © Chuck Savage/Corbis; p. 167: 
© Chris Farina/Corbis; p. 170: © Michele Eve Sandberg/
Corbis; p. 172: © ZHANG JUN/Xinhua Press/Corbis; 
p. 173: © John Greim/Loop Images/Corbis; p. 177: © MCT 
via Getty Images; p. 180: © Courtesy of SAS.
CHAPTER 7
Page 194: © Cultura/Matelly/Riser/Getty Images; p. 195: © 
Bloomberg via Getty Images; p. 197: © UK Stock Images 
Ltd/Alamy RF; p. 199: © AFP/Getty Images; p. 202: © 
Thomas Barwick/Stone/Getty Images; p. 205: © Bloomberg 
via Getty Images; p. 207: © Bloomberg via Getty Images; 
p. 208: © Elsa/Getty Images Sport/Getty Images; p. 215: © 
Yuri Arcurs/Cutcaster RF; p. 216: © Clerkenwell/Getty Images 
RF; p. 218: © Photodisc/PunchStock/Getty Images RF.
CHAPTER 8
Page 228: © Ariel Skelley/Blend Images/Alamy RF; p. 232: 
© ASSOCIATED PRESS; p. 237: © Jared McMillen/Aurora 
Photos/Corbis; p. 238: © MShieldsPhotos/Alamy; p. 240: © 
Emmanuel Faure/Corbis RF; p. 245: © Triangle Images/
Photolibrary/Getty Images; p. 251: © Tony Hobbs/Alamy; 
p. 252: © Thinkstock Images/Getty Images RF.
CHAPTER 9
Page 265 (top): © Justin Sullivan/Getty Images; p. 265 (bot-
tom): © Ian Shaw/Alamy; p. 273: © John Boykin/Stock 
Connection Blue/Alamy; p. 274: © Comstock Images RF; 
p. 275: © Radius Images/Alamy RF; p. 276: © Senthil 
Photography/Alamy; p. 279: © Tetra Images/Getty Images 
RF; p. 282: © Asia Images Group/Getty Images RF; p. 287: 
© Stuart Pearce/age fotostock Spain, S.L./Alamy; p. 291: 
© Hiep Vu/First Light/Corbis; p. 293: © Jetta Productions/
The Image Bank/Getty Images.
CHAPTER 10
Page 307: © Alvey & Towers Picture Library/Alamy; p. 312: 
© Luca Teuchmann/GC Images/Getty Images; p. 319: © 
BananaStock/PictureQuest/Getty Images RF; p. 325: © 
David Howells/Corbis; p. 330: © Lev Dolgachov/Alamy RF.
CHAPTER 11
Page 338: © Jupiterimages/Stockbyte/Getty Images RF; p. 
340: © Didrik Johnck/Corbis; p. 346: © AP Photo/New 
School for Social Research; p. 347: © Bob Goldberg Fea-
ture Photo Service/Newscom; p. 350: © Tom Merton/
Caiaimage/Getty Images RF; p. 355: © Courtesy of 
Zingerman’s Community of Businesses; p. 359: © Digital 
Vision/Getty Images RF; p. 361: © Scott T. Baxter/
Getty Images RF; p. 362: © Ronnie Kaufman/Larry Hirshowitz/
Blend Images/Getty Images; p. 364: © Caroline Purser/
Photographer’s Choice/Getty Images; p. 365: © ColorBlind 
Images/Blend Images LLC RF; p. 367: © Image Source/
Getty Images RF.
CHAPTER 12
Page 383: © Photodisc/Getty Images RF; p. 394: © Digital 
Vision/Getty Images RF; p. 398: © Ariel Skelley/Blend Im-
ages/Getty Images; p. 400: © Photo by Howard Sokol/
Courtesy of The Boppy Pillow; p. 403: © JoeFox/Radharc 
Images/Alamy.
CHAPTER 13
Page 414: © BananaStock/Jupiterimages/Getty Image RF; 
p. 416: © Gerhard Joren/LightRocket via Getty Images; p. 
420: © AP Photo/Bob Jordan; p. 424 (top right): © Seth 
Wenig/AP Images; p. 424 (top left): © Suzanne DeChillo/
The New York Times/Redux Pictures; p. 427: © Frank 
Trapper/Corbis; p. 429: © John Lund/Nevada Wier/Blend 
Images/Corbis RF; p. 432: © Mike Kemp/RubberBall/
Alamy RF.

CREDITS
Credits
CR2
Images RF; p. 496: © John Fedele/Blend Images/Getty Im-
ages RF; p. 501: © Image Source/PunchStock/Getty Im-
ages RF; p. 503: © moodboard/Corbis RF; p. 505: © Hill 
Street Studios/Blend Images/Alamy RF.
CHAPTER 16
Page 516: © Don Mason/Blend Images/Getty Images RF; p. 
519: © MyLoupe/Universal Images Group/UIG via Getty Im-
ages; p. 525: © Jim West/Alamy; p. 528: © Photo by Jordan 
Strauss/Invision/AP; p. 529: © Courtesy Pewaukee School 
District; p. 532: © epa european pressphoto agency b.v./
Alamy; p. 537: © AP Photo/Paul Sakuma; p. 539: © Stefan 
Huwiler/Rolf Nussbaumer Photography/Alamy; p. 541: © 
Tony Hertz/Alamy.
CHAPTER 14
Page 444: © David Brabyn/Corbis; p. 450: © Bloomberg via 
Getty Images; p. 451: © Steve Dunwell/Getty Images; 
p. 456: © Digital Vision/Photodisc/Getty Images RF; p. 457: 
© Jeff Greenberg 4 of 6/Alamy; p. 461: © David Paul 
Morris/Bloomberg via Getty Images; p. 464: © Karwai 
Tang/WireImage/Getty Images.
CHAPTER 15
Page 479: © Erik Isakson/Tetra Images/Alamy RF; p. 482: 
© Jacobs Stock Photography/Getty Images RF; p. 484: © 
Inti St Clair/Blend Images/Alamy RF; p. 487: © Stephen 
Simpson/Getty Images; p. 490: © mediaphotos/Getty 
Images RF; p. 493: © Brand X Pictures/PunchStock/Getty 

NAME INDEX
Name Index 
IND1
A
Abdulla, Mohammed, 8
Abell, Scott, 546–548
Abosch, Ken, 407
Adams, J. Stacey, 386
Agnefjäll, Peter, 139
Akert, R. D., 346n
Albrecht, Karl, 308
Alesandrini, K., 503n, 504
Allen, David, 500
Allen, G., 259n
Allen, Woody, 111
Allman, Brian, 136
Allmendinger, A. J., 420
Alsup, William, 259
Amabile, T., 259n
Anderson, Chris, 306
Andreessen, Marc, 537
Ariely, Dan, 151
Aronson, E., 346n
Arrillaga-Andreessen, Laura, 537
Austin, Nancy, 442
Avolio, B. J., 462, 465n
B
Bader, Chrys, 461
Bagley, C. E., 200n
Bagley, Constance, 199–200
Balaze, Jenny, 377
Ballmer, Steve, 371
Baltazar, Ivana, 390
Barber, Ken, 302
Barnard, Chester I., 238
Barnes, Brooks, 309
Barra, Mary, 4, 22–23, 25, 26, 60, 67, 80, 
171, 334
Barra, Tony, 22
Barrett, Chris, 325
Barry, Bryan, 180
Barsade, Sigal, 52
Bartol, K. M., 325n
Bartolome, F., 419n
Bass, Bernard, 462
Bateman, T. S., 523n
Battier, Shane, 204
Beers, Charlotte, 343
Begemann, Jens, 437
Belkin, D., 509n
Bell, C. H., Jr., 318n
Bell, Genevieve, 30
Benioff, Marc, 88, 233
Bennett, J., 68n, 334n
Berkun, Scott, 321
Bernanke, Ben, 210
Berners-Lee, Tim, 103
Betts, Doug, 532
Bezos, Jeff, 20, 76, 142, 143, 547
Bezos, Jeffrey, 444
Bhidé, Amar V., 322
Blanchett, Cate, 528
Bloch, Susan, 493
Blumenthal, Richard, 334
Bohr, Niels, 306
Bok, S., 346n, 346t
Booker, Cory, 236
Bossidy, Larry, 180, 181, 181n, 182, 284
Boyatzis, R., 342n
Branson, Richard, 30, 135, 307, 464
Brin, Sergey, 10, 29, 245
Brooks, B., 502n
Brown, Dick, 63
Brown, K. V., 293t
Brown, L. D., 430n
Brown, P. R., 498n
Brown, Susan, 400
Brown, Tim, 257, 258
Browne, John, 361
Brunswick, Roger, 356
Bruzzese, Anita, 108, 293t
Bucher, Tim, 442
Buckley, George, 324
Buffett, Warren, 91, 192
Burkhardt, Dan, 228
Burns, Tom, 253
Burns, Ursula, 4
Busch, August III, 138
Bush, George W., 213
Butler, D., 346n
Byttow, David, 461
C
Cain, Susan, 426
Calo, Ryan, 222
Cameron, K. S., 229n
Campbell, Robert James, 316
Carbayo, Miguel, 126
Carey, Benedict, 71
Carnegie, Andrew, 91
Carroll, Archie B., 89, 90n
Cascio, Wayne, 203
Chait, Eli, 318–319
Chambers, John T., 25
Charan, Ram, 180, 181, 181n, 182
Chavez, Hugo, 127
Chesky, Brian, 311
Cheung, Aaron, 28–29
Cheung, Adora, 28–29
Chiaberi, Emil, 356
Christensen, Clayton, 43, 141, 307
Clark, Maxine, 322
Clarke, Chris, 493
Coleman, Debi, 371–372
Collins, Jim, 327
Colliver, Victoria, 54
Colvin, Geoffrey, 159, 160
Conley, Chip, 380
Cook, Timothy, 386
Cooper, Robert, 305
Cote, David, 235
Coyne, Kevin, 160
Crier, Catherine, 488
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 11
Culbert, Samuel, 281
Cummings, Anne, 493
Cummings, T. G., 318n
D
Daft, Richard, 481
Daily, Gretchen, 91
Dale, Ted, 107–108
Daniels, Aubrey, 281
Dansereau, Fred, 466
Davenport, Coral, 90
Davenport, Thomas H., 204–205
David, F. R., 166n
Davis, D. Scott, 547
Day, George S., 190
D’Cruz-Young, Ted, 311
Dean, James, Jr., 68
DeBakey, Michael, 349
Deci, Edward, 379, 382, 385f
Dedmono, Steve, 133
Degraff, J., 229n
Deming, W. Edwards, 55f, 61–62, 281, 
529, 530, 530n, 538
Denrell, Jerker, 324
De Pree, Max, 455
Disney, Walt, 166
Dobrzeniecki, A., 346n
Donahoe, John, 455
Donald, Jim, 64
Doran, Carolyn, 268
Drew, Ina, 512
Drucker, Peter, 18, 30, 42, 111–113, 140, 
148, 306, 359, 412
Dugan, Jim, 407
Dunkelberg, Bill, 99
Durrant, Kevin, 204
Dweck, Carol, 41
Dwoskin, Elizabeth, 222n
Dyer, Dave, 532
E
Easterbrook, Gregg, 104
Ebbers, Bernard, 15, 85
Edison, Thomas, 412
Edmondson, C., 320n
Edmondson, David, 268
Efron, Zach, 28
Eisner, Michael, 445
Ekeler, Bill, 535
Elberse, Anita, 473n
Eng, D., 186n
English, Paul, 52
Evans, Fred J., 86
Evans, Gail, 453
F
Farnham, Alan, 192
Fayol, Henri, 45, 46f, 47, 58
Feinberg, Kenneth, 334
Ferguson, Alex, 471–473
Ferucci, David A., 424
Festinger, Leon, 346
Fiedler, F. E., 458n, 459
Fiedler, Fred, 457
Fields, Pamela, 423
Fine, J. R., 504n
Fisher, C. M., 259n
Foley, Vicki, 312
Follett, Mary Parker, 46f, 49–50
Ford, Henry, 29
Foss, Frode, 132
Foster, Dean, 121
Fox, A., 302n
Foyt, Carol, 68
Franken, Al, 222
Frei, Frances X., 534
French, W. L., 318n
Friedman, Milton, 89
Friedman, Nick, 232
Friedman, Thomas, 14, 15, 228
Fry, Art, 324
Fry, Marty, 548
Fugate, M., 500n
G
Gallagher, Winifred, 26
Gantt, Henry L., A3–A4
Gardenswartz, Lee, 74n, 357, 358n
Gartenberg, Michael, 161
Gates, Bill, 91, 199
Gates, Melinda, 91
Gebbia, Joe, 311
Ghosn, Carlos, 157
Gilbert, Daniel, 209
Gilbreth, Frank, 45, 46f, 47, 50, 58
Gilbreth, Lillian, 45, 46f, 47, 50, 58
Gill, David, 473
Gilpin, Chris, 222
Glader, P., 438n
Goizueta, Robert, 111
Goleman, D., 342n
Goleman, Daniel, 342
Gong, Gillain, 133n
Goodnight, Jim, 75
Gore, Al, 16

NAME INDEX
Name Index
IND2
Gorelick, Jamie, 450
Grady, Anycia, 302
Graen, George, 466
Gratton, Eloise, 222
Greenleaf, Robert, 454
Greer, Stephen, 452
Guanhua, Wang, 133
Gupta, Rajat, 15
H
Hackman, J. Richard, 393, 393n, 395, 422
Hailey, Arthur, 61
Hall, Edward T., 122, 125, 126
Hall, Judith, 491
Halpern, D., 498n
Hamel, Gary, 43, 59, 138, 159, 249, 542
Hamermesh, Daniel, 350
Harrison, Steve, 446
Hartnell, C. A., 234n
Harvey, James, 424
Hedge, Alan, 403
Heins, William, 156
Hennigan, W. J., 133n
Herzberg, Frederick, 379, 383–385, 
385f, 392
Hewlett, William, 232
Hill, Jonah, 204
Hoffer, Eric, 306
Hogg, Bevil, 228
Holmes, Ryan, 508
House, R. J., 123n
House, Robert J., 122, 459, 460, 460n, 461
Howell, J. M., 465n
Hsieh, Tony, 20
Huber, George P., 216n
Hugh, Ben, 197
Hughes, S., 334n
Humphrey, Ambrosia, 508–509
Hurley, Robert, 94
Huse, E. G., 318n
Hyde, Joseph “Pitt,” III, 185–186
Hymowitz, Carol, 60, 193, 305
I
Idei, Nobuyuki, 329
Immelt, Jeffrey, 156, 412
Iorio, Luke, 352
Isaacson, W., 372n
J
Jacobsen, Hans Erik, 132
Jacobson, K.J.L., 280n
Janis, Irvin, 424, 426
Javidan, M., 123n
Jenkins, Dustee, 37
Jobs, Steve, 30, 57, 153, 370–372, 426, 
445, 448, 463, 485
Johnson, Lyndon, 213
Johnson, Ron, 57, 372
Johnson, Steve, 508
Jones, Ashby, 157n
Jones, Jeffrey, 37
Jones, Jonathan, 301
Joseph, Jeremy, 133
Juran, Joseph M., 55f, 61, 62, 529
K
Kahn, R., 483n
Kahneman, Daniel, 191, 213
Kamprad, Invar, 233
Kanne, Leo, 297
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 103, 287, 
329, 347
Kaplan, Robert, 520, 521, 521n, 522
Katz, D., 483n
Katz, Robert, 22
Katzenbach, Jon R., 413
Katzenberg, Jeff, 372
Kawasaki, Guy, 500
Kelleher, Herb, 145
Kelleher, James B., 407n
Kelley, Tom, 412
Kennedy, Scott, 37
Kenyon, Larry, 372
Kets de Vries, Manfred, 287
Keyser, J., 502n
Khan, Hani, 359
Kieny, Marie Paule, 548
Kim, Walter, 285
King, B., 458n
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 463
Kinicki, A., 217n, 234n, 280n, 328n, 
420n, 495n, 500n
Kirkman, B. L., 416n
Kise, Bjorn, 132
Kjos, Bjorn, 131–132
Klein, Katherine J., 422
Knowell, Richard L., 441
Kohlberg, Laurence, 86
Kotter, John, 24, 315–316, 315n, 326n, 
443, 444
Kozlowski, Dennis, 15, 85
Kreitner, A., 495n
Kreitner, R., 152n, 217n, 328n, 420n
Kuehn, Kurt, 97, 98n
L
Lafley, A. G., 320
Lampert, Edward, 162
Langley, Monica, 38n
Lashinsky, Adam, 448
Lasseter, John, 372
Latham, G. P., 147n
Latham, Gary, 391
Lawrence, Paul R., 254
Lee, Don, 133n
Lee, Jennifer, 311
Lee, Jess, 235
Leider, Dick, 140
Lengel, Robert, 481
Leonard, Devin, 132n, 548n
Lepowsky, Bill, 292
Lerner, Hanny, 28
Leung, Joseph, 390
Levine, Robert, 126
Levy, Fred, 112
Lewin, Kurt, 313, 314
Lewis, Michael, 204
Lightner, Candy, 463
Lin, Jeremy, 362
Lindenfield, Gael, 504–505
Linebaugh, K., 156n
Lingle, John, 523, 524
Lingle, Kathie, 402
Locke, E. A., 147n
Locke, Edwin, 391
London, Jack, 380
Lorenzi, P., 443n
Lorsch, Jay W., 254
Love, Courtney, 500
Loveman, Gary, 203
Lublin, Joann, 157n, 187n
Lublin, Nancy, 468
Lundgren, Terry, 57
Lytle, T., 509n
M
Machaver, W., 483n
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 448
MacMillan, D., 474
Madoff, Bernard, 15, 85, 
199, 465
Mancuso, Julia, 28
Marchionne, Sergio, 532
Margolis, Scott, 121
Marino, Sylvia, 496
Martin, D. C., 325n
Martoma, Mathew, 85
Martz, Gayle, 20
Maslow, Abraham, 46f, 49, 50–51, 
379–380, 385f
Mateen, Justin, 292
Mayer, Marissa, 4, 18, 20
Mayo, Elton, 46f, 49, 50
Mayo, K., 373n
McCaskill, Claire, 334
McClelland, David, 379, 
380–381, 385f
McClendon, Aubrey K., 93–94
McConaughey, Matthew, 528
McCoy, Millington F., 493
McCullough, Ross, 547
McDonald, Paul, 106
McGrady, Tracy, 204
McGrath, Rita Gunther, 307
McGregor, Douglas, 46f, 49–51
McGuinn, Martin, 305
McIlvane, Thomas, 356
McIntire, Lynette, 98n
McKee, A., 342n
McLuhan, Marshall, 103
McNamara, Robert, 53
McNerney, James, 324
Meisinger, Susan, 263
Michelangelo, 412
Millikin, Michael, 334
Mills, D. Quinn, 467
Milunovich, Steven, 333
Ming, Yao, 204
Mintzberg, Henry, 24–26, 443
Moak, Lee, 132
Monaghan, Tom, 281
Morey, Daryl, 204
Moritz, Bob, 106
Morrison, Denise, 20
Morse, Ty, 107
Mulally, Alan, 517
Mulligan, John, 37
Munsterberg, Hugo, 46f, 49
Musk, Elon, 30
Mycoskie, Blake, 199
N
Nadella, Satya, 19, 30
Namie, Gary, 293
Nanus, B., 166, 166n, 463
Nash, Adam, 237
Negroponte, Nicholas, 105
Netanyahu, Benjamin, 509
Newlund, D., 498n
Nichting, Patrick, 407
Nilson, Lina, 312
Nooyi, Indra, 4, 101, 463, 
464–465
Norton, D. P., 521n
Norton, David, 520–522
O
O’Bannon, Ed, 408
Oberhelman, Doug, 407
O’Connor, Thomas D., Jr., 211
Oldham, Greg R., 393, 393n, 395
Osborn, A. F., 217
Ou, A. Y., 234n

NAME INDEX
Name Index 
IND3
Toffler, Heidi, 308
Toyoda, Akio, 162, 169–171
Trebeck, Alex, 424
Tung, R. L., 432n
Turkle, Sherry, 500
U
Ulbricht, Ross, 15, 16
V
Van Liew, Roland, 279
Vartabedian, Ralph, 133n
Venant, E., 346n
Vernon, David, 547
Vidmar, Neil, 422
Vilas, Sandy, 493
Vroom, Victor, 388
W
Wahlberg, Mark, 214
Waksal, Sam, 85, 199
Walker, Tristan, 28
Wall, John, 204
Walton, Sam, 235
Wang, Charles, 106
Wardenaar, Matthew, 8
Ware, B. Lynn, 402
Waterman, Robert, 253
Watson, Thomas J., 171
Webb, Maynard, 401
Webber, Alan, 30
Weber, Max, 45, 46f, 47–48
Weddle, Glenna, 222
Weinstein, Harvey, 445
Weinstein, Margery, 302n
Welch, Jack, 225, 262, 266, 284, 320, 422
Welch, Suzy, 225, 266, 320, 422
Westergren, Tim, 54
Whitcomb, Judy, 302
White, Mike, 464
Whitman, Meg, 4, 309, 333
Wicks, Judy, 72
Williams, B. K., 497n, 498n
Williams, Roy, 68
Willingham, Mary, 68
Willis, Bruce, 214
Wilson, Russell, 208
Wilson, T. D., 346n
Winfrey, Oprah, 29, 163
Withow, Gregory, 346t
Witty, Andrew, 235–236
Wolfe, Whitney, 291–292
Wong, Andrea, 445
Wooden, John, 211
Wozniak, Stephen, 30, 371, 426
Wright, Frank Lloyd, 6
Y
Yu, Zheng, 488–489
Z
Zhang, Fan, 221–222
Zormelo, Justin, 204
Zory, Rose, 301
Zuckerberg, Mark, 7, 18, 91, 537
Zuckerman, Mortimer, 199
Sappington, Mike, 252
Sawyer, Keith, 426
Sawyer, S. C., 497n, 498n
Scarborough, David, 272
Schein, Edgar, 227, 241
Schickler, Jacob, 106
Schiemann, William, 523, 524
Schlesinger, L. A., 326n
Schmidt, Eric, 166, 245, 262
Schultz, Howard, 162–163, 455, 463
Scott, H. Lee, Jr., 148
Sculley, John, 371
Seidenberg, Ivan, 520
Selye, Hans, 363, 364
Senge, Peter, 63
Sepinwall, Amy, 80
Shane, Scott, 29, 322
Sharma, V. K., 228
Shaw, G. B., 352
Shefy, E., 198n
Shellenbarger, Sue, 276
Sherwood, R., 293t
Shewart, Walter, 55f, 61
Shope, Bill, 333
Shukla, Anu, 493
Silverman, R. E., 223n
Simmermaker, Roger, 102
Simon, Herbert, 196
Sinclair, Upton, 276
Sisario, Ben, 54
Skilling, Jeffrey, 15, 85
Skinner, B. F., 396
Sloan, Alfred, 514
Smith, Douglas K., 413
Smith, Fred, 29, 30, 444
Smith, James, 294
Snell, S. A., 523n
Spacey, Kevin, 428
Spears, L. C., 455n
Spiegel, Eric, 112
Spohrer, Jim, 113
Stalker, G. M., 253
Stanford, Allen, 85, 199
Staver, Michael, 366
Steinhafel, Gregg, 37, 38
Stewart, James, 143
Stewart, Martha, 85
Stogdill, Ralph, 448
Streep, Meryl, 428
Streufert, S., 458n
Stringer, Howard, 329
Surowiecki, James, 57, 424–425
Sutton, Robert, 60, 201–202, 429
Swinburn, Peter, 237
T
Tannen, D., 492n
Tapscott, Don, 495, 495n
Taylor, Frederick W., 45–47, 46f, 50, 53, 
58, 529
Tenbrunsel, Ann E., 16
Terwiesch, Christian, 190
Thakor, A. V., 229n
Theibert, Phil, 505
Thompson, Dan, 207
Thompson, Scott, 268, 512
Thorndike, Edward L., 396
Tingley, Judith, 492
Toffler, Alvin, 308
P
Packard, David, 232
Page, Larry, 10, 29, 30, 245, 485
Page, Scott E., 357, 412
Palmisano, Samuel J., 175
Patsalos-Fox, Michael, 365
Pélata, Patrick, 157
Pelletier, Saundra, 21
Perez, Raul, 228
Peters, Tom, 42, 253, 305, 442
Peterson, S. J., 280n
Pfeffer, Jeffrey, 60, 201–203
Pickens, T. Boone, 91
Pillemer, J., 259n
Pink, Daniel H., 91
Pitt, Brad, 204
Planty, E., 483n
Plotnik, R., 346n
Pollack, Harold, 161
Pollar, Odette, 17, 218, 243
Porter, Eduardo, 172
Porter, Michael, 160, 163–164, 167, 
173–175
Powers, Mark, 193
Preston, P., 491n
Prussia, G. E., 280n
Purdy, Mona, 91
Q
Quhuai, Zhang, 133
Quick, B., 99n
Quinn, R. E., 229n
Quinn, Richard, 523
R
Rad, Sean, 292
Rahim, Ahmed, 28
Rahim, Reem, 28
Rajaratnam, Raj, 15, 85, 199
Ramsay, M., 500n
Rasbury, Angeli R., 542
Raynor, Michael, 43
Read, Ian C., 231
Reardon, Kathleen Kelley, 229
Reilly, Ed, 24
Reinhard, Keith, 101
Richard, Tim, 390, 452
Rigas, John, 15, 85
Roberts, J. J., 259n
Roedy, Bill, 101
Rogers, Carl, 489
Rometty, Virginia “Ginni,” 4, 31, 175
Rondo, Rajon, 204
Rosen, B., 416n
Rossi, Patricia, 108
Rowe, Anita, 357, 358n
Rudenstine, Neil L., 243
Ryan, Richard, 379, 382, 385f
S
Sadler-Smith, E., 198n
Salaita, Steven, 509
Samuelson, Paul, 89
Sandaker-Nielsen, Lasse, 132
Sandberg, Jared, 399
Sandberg, Sheryl, 450

Organization/Brand Index
IND4
ORGANIZATION/BRAND INDEX
A
A. T. Kearney, 536
ABB Consulting, 532
AB Electrolux, Sweden, 108
Abercrombie & Fitch, 139, 359
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and 
Sciences, 528
Ace Hardware, 532
Acer, 176
Adam Opel AG, 114
Adelphia, 15, 85, 93
Adobe Systems, 351
The Adolphus, 77
Aegis Media, 301
Aerospace Industrial Development, 251
Aflac, 312
Agility, 98
AIG, 232
Air Berlin, 131
Airbnb, 11, 311, 323t
Airbus Group, 131, 132, 194, 195, 201, 
372, 373
Air Line Pilots Association International 
in Washington, 132
AirTran, 145
Alaska Airlines, 144
Albertsons Inc., 536
Alcoholics Anonymous, 366
Alfa Romeo, 311
Allegiant, 144
AllianceBernstein, 547
Allied Signal, 180, 284, 536
Amazon, 20, 54, 76–77, 138, 139, 
141–143, 161, 167, 175, 307, 
324, 422, 444, 513, 532, 534, 547
American Airlines, 132, 144, 317, 319, 373
American Association of University 
Professors, 509
American Council on Education (ACE), 302
American Express, 536
American Federation of Teachers, 77–78, 
294, 294t
American Funds, 142
American Institute of Architects, 6
American Institute of Stress, 363
American Management Association, 
24, 287
American Psychological Association, 363
Anheuser-Busch, 108, 138
Annie’s Organic & Natural Mac and 
Cheese, 173
Antioch College, 51
Aon Hewitt, 407
Apple, 16–17, 30, 54, 57, 78, 107, 110, 
125, 128, 138, 153, 161, 167, 190, 
199, 222, 245, 259, 307, 323t, 324, 
326, 370–372, 386, 403, 414, 426, 
445, 448, 463, 485
Arnold Worldwide, 235
Artsana Group, 400
Asperian Global, 107–108
Assess Systems, 267
Association for the Rationalization of 
Spanish Working Hours, 126
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners, 92
AT&T, 103, 251, 267, 454, 504
Atari, 371
Automatic Data Processing, 268
Autonomy, 333
Auto Shack, 186
AutoZone, 185, 186
Avon, 423
B
Babson College, 204
Background Information Services, 268
Bain & Company, 159
Balanced Scorecard Collaborative, 520
Banana Republic, 114
Bank of America, 105, 223
Barclays Center, 28
Barnes & Noble, 143
Bear Snax Vending, 136
Beats Music, 54
Bell Telephone Labs, 61
Bentley, 114
Berkshire Hathaway, 91, 107, 177, 192
Bessemer Trust, 160
Best Ball Analytics, 204
Best Buy, 143
B.F. Goodrich, 319
Bic, 176
Big Truck Brands, 28
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 91
Bizrate.com, 161
Bloomberg Philanthropies, 323t
BMW, 265
Boeing, 131–133, 145, 194–195, 201, 
372, 412t
Bombardier, 251, 308
Booz & Co., 324
Boppy Co., 400
Borders, 138, 143
Boston Celtics, 204
Boston Consulting Group, 179, 262
Bowl Championship Series (BCS), 408
BP (British Petroleum), 107, 309, 361
Brandeis University, 50–51, 379
British Airways, 131
Brookings Institution, 276
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, 294
Budweiser, 108, 137
Buick, 114
Build-a-Bear Workshop, 322
Burberry, 178
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 112
Burger King, 114
Business Analytics, 437
Business for Diplomatic Action (BDA), 101
C
Cadillac, 61
California State University. Northridge, 
86
Campbell Soup Co., 20, 197
Capital One, 204
Care.com., 29
CareerCast, 364
Career Research and Testing, 441
Cargill, 127
Carmike Cinemas, 160
Cartier, 177
Catalyst, 186
Caterpillar, 79, 108, 112, 406–407
Cathay Pacific, 416
Cerberus (Albertsons), 105
Cerberus Capital Management L.P., 532
Ceres, 172
Cessna Aircraft, 308
Changan Ford, 114
Checker Auto Parts, 186
Chelsea Green, 177
Chesapeake Energy, 93–94
Chevrolet, 80, 238, 534
Chevron, 107
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, 272
Chili’s, 139
Chipotle, 173
Chrysler, 105, 114, 171, 321, 532
Church of Latter Day Saints, 107
Cigna, 287
Cisco Systems, 25, 283, 412t
Citigroup Inc., 230
Civilian American and European Surface 
Anthropometry Resource Project 
(Caesar), 372–373
Claremont Graduate University, 11
Clark Foam, 174
Clinique, 57
ClosetDash, 311
CNN, 103, 453
Coach U, 493
Coca-Cola Company, 48, 82, 90, 104, 
111, 120, 153, 177, 192
College Athletes Players Association, 294
College Hunks Hauling Junk, 232
Columbia Business School, 307
Comcast, 82, 105
ConAgra, 139
Concorde, 212
Conference Board, 385
The Container Store, 262
Continental jet, 251
Continental Lite, 161
Copilot Labs, 318, 319
Cornell University, 403
Craigslist, 28
Crédit Mobilier, 86
CubeGuard, 52
D
Dairy Queen, 297
Dark Arts Consulting, 253
DaVita, 201
DDB Worldwide, 101
Dell Inc, 153
Deloitte & Touche, 362
Delta Airlines, 132, 144, 145, 373
Denver Broncos, 208
Department of Agriculture, 172
DeSoto Cab Co., 12
DirectTV, 464
Discovery Channel, 518
Disney, 166, 178, 372, 445
DocBase Direct, 535
Dodge, 323t, 532
DogVacay, 311
Domino’s Pizza, 281, 534
DonorsChoose.org, 323t
Dow Chemical, 90
Dress for Success, 468
Dropbox, 323t, 333
Du Pont, 114, 535
Dynegy, 236
E
East Carolina University, 316
EasyJet, 131
eBay, 322, 455
Eddie Bauer, 105
Edmunds.com, 496
EDS, 422
Edward Jones, 136, 262
EffectiveMeetings.com, 485
Electrical Workers, 294t
Electronic Data Systems (EDS), 63
EndoStim, 228, 230
England’s Royal Air Force, 53
Enron, 15, 85, 93, 199, 465
Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC), 35, 290
Ernst & Young LLC, 377
ESPN, 78
Ethan Allen, 110, 518
Ethical-Systems.org, 16
EU, 115
Euclid Analytics Inc., 222
European Union, 12, 82, 117–119
Evenflo, 80

Organization/Brand Index
IND5
ORGANIZATION/BRAND INDEX
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (United Nations group), 
172
Internal Revenue Service, 87, 246
International Consumer Electronics Show 
(CES), 167, 168
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
11, 115, 116
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), 535
International Red Cross, 107
Intuit, 305
ITT, 319
iTunes, 54
Izod, 57
J
J. Crew, 139
J. M. Smucker, 262, 264
Jack Rabbit, 29
Jaguar, 114
Jaguar Land Rover, 30
Japan Airlines, 195
J.C. Penney, 57
J.D. Power, 170, 515
Jeep, 532
JetBlue, 144
Jiffy Lube, 160
Jiffy Lube International, 302
Jiffy Lube University, 302
John F. Kennedy International 
Airport, 132
Johnny Rockets, 13
Johnson & Johnson, 80
Johnsonville Foods, 422
Joie de Vivre (JDV), 380
Jos. A. Bank, 105
J.P. Morgan Chase, 512
Justice Department, 94
K
Kayak, 52, 232
Kettering University (formerly General 
Motors Institute), 4
Keurig, 322
Kia Motors, 230
Kmart, 105, 162, 244
Kodak, 138, 190, 307
KPMG, 402
Kraft, 99, 173
Kroger, 77
L
La Boulange bakery, 163
Lamborghini, 114, 177
Land Rover, 114
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
172
Lego, 250
Lehman Brothers, 425
Levi’s, 120
Levi Strauss, 16–17
Lexus, 170, 176
Lifetime Network and Entertainment 
Services, 445
LinkedIn, 265, 266, 268–269, 310, 
499, 508
LinkExchange, 20
Litzky Public Relations, 58
LiveNation, 77, 105
Liz Claiborne, 57
Long Island Hospital, 28
Lucky Supermarkets, 186
Lululemon Athletica, 80
Lyft, 11, 474
Green Mountain Boys of the American 
Revolution, 110
Green Toys, 177
Grey Group, 403
Groupon, 319
GrubHub Seamless, 139
Guidant Corp., 412t
H
HR Block, 516
Handybook, 29
Happy Child, 221, 222
Harley-Davidson, 178, 244
Harpo Productions, 29
Harrah’s, 203
Hartwell Pacific, 452
Harvard Business School, 24, 47, 103, 
160, 199, 307, 329, 347, 362, 443, 
467, 520, 534
Harvard University, 49, 50, 141, 209, 243, 
254, 352, 422
Hawker Beechcraft, 308
Hawker de Havilland, 251
The Hay-Adams, 77
Heineken, 112
Hello Hello Books, 161
Heritage Foundation, 102
Herman Miller Inc., 455
Hertz, 114
Hewlett-Packard, 4, 64, 108, 153, 232, 
245, 272, 309, 333
HiGear, 311
Hilton, 77, 114, 141, 267
Hitachi, 110
Hit Entertainment, 105
Hoku Materials, 78
Hollister, 359
Home Depot, 176, 194, 202
Homejoy, 28–29
Honda, 112, 532
Honeywell, 235, 319
Hootsuite, 508–509
Hootsuite University, 508
Hotel Rex, 380
Houston Rockets, 204
HP Labs, 205
Human Rights Campaign, 361
Hyatt, 77
Hyatt Hotels, 311
Hyundai, 171, 515
I
IBM, 4, 31, 108, 138, 171, 175, 199, 347, 
362, 367, 371, 423, 424, 495, 
534–535
IBM Almaden Research Center, 113
I Can Has Cheezburger?, 197
Idaho Rivers United, 156
Idaho’s National Forest, 156
Idaho State Police, 267
Ideo, 217, 257–259, 412, 426
iGrafx, A1
IKEA, 139, 233
ImClone, 85
Imperial Oil, 156
InBev, 108
Inc. magazine, 322
Indian Motorcycle Company, 178
InfoLink Screening Services, 268
Infosys Technologies, 103
InnoCentive.com, 500
Instagram, 261, 499
Institute for Local Self-Reliance, 148
The Institute for Professional Excellence 
in Coaching, 352
Intel, 30, 283, 403, 536
E-Verify, 86, 268
Evofem Inc., 21
Ewing Marion Kauffman 
Foundation, 322
eWorkbench, 15
Excelsior Roofing, 193
Exelon, 16–17
Extended Stay America, 64
ExxonMobil, 93, 107
F
Fabulus, 201
Facebook, 7, 14, 18, 26, 28, 87, 91, 205, 
222, 261, 265, 266, 269, 291, 292, 
310, 333, 414, 481, 494, 498–500, 
500t, 508, 537
Fannie Mae, 450
Fast Company, 437
Federal Aviation Agency (FAA), 79
Federal Express, 29
FedEx, 30, 53, 139, 264, 265, 400, 
444, 547
Ferrari, 177
Fiat, 105, 114, 321
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA), 105
Fiat SpA, 532
Finish Line, 272
First Securities ASA, 132
Five Guys, 173
Food & Commercial Workers, 294t
Ford Motor Co., 29, 53, 107, 114, 170, 
171, 246, 247, 283, 517, 532
Forrester Research, 112
Foursquare, 28
Foxconn, 199
FreePriceAlerts.com, 161
Frigidaire, 108
Frontier, 144
G
Galleon Group, 15
Gallup Organization, 125, 375
Gap, 114
G.D. Searles, 21
Geeley, 114
Genentech, 105, 262
General Electric, 107, 108, 111, 155–156, 
178, 251, 262, 266, 283, 319, 377, 
412, 412t, 536
General Mills, 420
General Motors, 4, 22–23, 26, 67, 80, 
107, 114, 138, 161, 162, 169–171, 
230, 238, 244, 312, 334, 514, 532
General Motors Institute (now Kettering 
University), 4
Geneva Association, 172
Georgetown University, 204
Georgia Institute of Technology, 106
GE’s Resource Conservation Company 
International, 156
Get2Human.com (GetHuman.com), 6
Glassdoor, 265
GlaxcoSmithKline, 80, 235–236
GLOBE (Global Leadership and 
Organizational Behavior 
Effectiveness), 12, 122
gloStream, 252, 254
GM, 309
Goldman Sachs, 15, 333
Goodwill Industries, 392
Google, 10, 20, 29, 30, 75, 82, 125, 138, 
161, 166, 201, 202, 222, 230, 245, 
261, 262, 291, 307, 323t, 324, 326, 
333, 375, 376, 385, 485, 508, 541
Graco, 80
Great Place to Work Institute, 399

Organization/Brand Index
IND6
ORGANIZATION/BRAND INDEX
Progressive Casualty, 534
Prudential, 319
Public Citizen, 118
Publix Super Markets, 75
Purdue University, 24–25, 47, 207
Purina (Nestlé of Switzerland), 108
Q
Quaker Oats, 463
Qualcomm, 414
Quicken Loans, 262
Quiznos, 520
R
Rac Boutique, 222
RadioShack, 57, 139, 186, 268
Redbox, 175
Red Cross, 21
REI, 534
Renault, 156–157
ResumeDoctor.com, 268
The Rittenhouse, 77
Ritz-Carlton, 176, 529, 532
Robert Half Management Resources, 106
Roche, 105
Rockwell Collins, 251
Rolls-Royce, 177, 308
Rotten Robbie, 177
Royal Dutch Shell, 79, 107, 309
Royal Oak Post Office, 356
Ryanair, 131
Rypple, 283
S
SAC Capital Advisors, 85
Safeway, 77, 105
Saks, 139
Salesforce.com, 88, 233, 333, 376
Salvation Army, 21
Sam Adams, 500
Samoa Air, 373
Samsung, 307, 324
San Francisco 49ers, 204
SAS, 75, 180, 262, 376
SAS Institute, 262
Scandinavian Airlines (SAS), 132
Scion, 170
Sears, 105, 138, 139, 162
Sears Holdings, 162
Sears Merchandising Group, 523
Seattle Seahawks, 208
Secret, 461
Securities and Exchange Commission, 85, 
94, 168, 400
See’s Candies, 177
Senate Intelligence Committe, 424
Sendpackage.com, 325
Service Employees International Union, 
77–78, 294, 294t
Seven & I Holdings, Japan, 108
7-Eleven, 108, 175
7-Up, 178
Sewway, 312
Shanghai Automotive Industry Group, 114
Share Your Soles, 91
Sherpa’s Pet Trading Co., 20
Shutterfly, 211
Sidecar, 11
Siemens Corp., 112, 308, 414, 423
Signet Jewelers, 105
Silk Road, 15, 16
SinoPec China Petroleum, 107
Skilled Manufacturing Inc., 178–179
Skokie Public Library, 164
Smashburger, 28
Neiman Marcus, 199
NetApp, 262, 382
Netflix, 54, 58, 267, 323t
Network Appliance, 317
Neutrogena, 160
New Belgium Brewery, 75, 233
Newspaper Guild, 77
New York Knicks, 362
New York Stock Exchange, 75
New York Yankees, 204
Next-StepU.com, 58
Nez Perce Tribe, 156
NFL (National Football League), 204
Nieman Marcus, 400
Nike, 120, 323t
Nippon Airways, 195
Nokia, 251, 307
Nordstrom, 424, 547
Northwestern University, 294
Norton, 497
Norwegian Air International, 132
Norwegian Air Shuttle, 131
Novell, 108
Nugget Market, 382
Numi, 28
NYC CoolRoofs, 347
O
Oakland Athletics, 204
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, 87
Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide, 343
Oklahoma City Thunder, 94, 204
Old Navy, 114
100 Montaditos, 138
Oprah Chai tea, 163
Oracle, 108
Oticon, 237
Overland Products, 535
Owngig.com, 500
P
Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E), 16–17, 
73–74, 512
Pandora Internet Radio, 54
Patagonia, 141
PayPal, 30
Penn State, 210
Pentagon, 500
People for the Ethical Treatment of 
Animals (PETA), 79–80
Pep Boys, 186
PepsiCo, 4, 82, 101, 104, 111, 178, 347, 
362, 371, 463, 464
PetroChina, 107
Pewaukee (Wisconsin) School 
District, 529
Pfizer Inc., 228, 231
PfizerWorks, 231
Phillips 66, 107
Pinterest, 265
Pitney Bowes, 356
Pixar, 30, 372
Pizza Hut, 48
Pizza Ranch, 297
PNM Resources, 16–17
Polaris Industries, 178
Polyvore, 235
Popsicle, 108
Poston Butte High School, 390
Pricegrabber.com, 161
Priceline.com, 513
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 106, 
527, 528
Procter & Gamble (P&G), 110, 319–322, 
347, 499
M
Machinists & Aerospace Workers, 294t
Macy’s, 57, 139
Major League Baseball, 204
Malaysia Airlines, 133
Malone & Hyde, 185, 186
Management Innovation Lab, 59, 542
Manchester United, 471–473
Marriott International, 77, 203, 529
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT), 63, 112, 151, 346
Mattel, 105
Maverik, 177
McDonald’s, 48, 173, 207, 244, 312, 
403, 536
McGill University, 24–25
McGraw-Hill, 107, 165
MCI Communications, 277
McKenzie, 262
McKinsey & Co., 160, 365
McMaster University, 305
Mealku, 311
Mellon Bank Corp., 305
Men’s Wearhouse, 412t
Mercedes, 265, 311
Mercedes-Benz, 61
Merrill Lynch, 105
Merrymaids.com, 29
Messier-Dowty, 251
Miami Heat, 204
Michael Kors (fashion), 323t
Microsoft, 19, 20, 30, 78, 91, 108, 138, 
167, 171, 203, 284, 307, 321, 
371, 422, A3
Migration Policy Institute, 357
Mike’s Carwash, 400
Mini Cooper, 116
Minted.com, 211
Miramax, 445
Mitsubishi, 251
MOD Restoration, 28
Mohawk Fine Papers, 16–17, 211
Molson Coors, 237
Mondelez International, 99
Monsanto Corp., 323
Monster.com, 265
Mothers Against Drunk Driving, 
79–80, 463
Motorola, 78, 108, 536
Mountain Dew, 178
MTV Arabia, 101
MTV Networks International, 101
Music Genome Project, 54
N
NASA, 515
NASCAR, 420
National Basketball Association (NBA), 
94, 204
National Business Ethics, 92
National Collegiate Athletic Association 
(NCAA), 408
National Education Association, 
77, 294t
National Federation of Independent 
Businesses, 99
National Football League (NFL), 204
National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA), 67, 170
National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB), 294
National Organization for Women, 79–80
National Rifle Association, 79–80, 509
Nature Conservancy, 90
Navy, 172, 262
NEC, 110

Organization/Brand Index
IND7
ORGANIZATION/BRAND INDEX
Virgin Trains, 307
Virgin Vodka, 307
Vitale, 380
VoIP Supply, 58
Volkswagen, 114, 120, 169, 171
Volkswagen (Germany), 107
Volvo, 114, 384, 422
W
Walker & Company, 28
Walker Information, 402
Walmart, 75, 107, 137–139, 143, 148, 
173, 175, 235, 312, 523f, 525
Walt Disney World, 309–310
Warby Parker, 199
Warner Bros., 246
Warner Music, 54
Washington Navy Yard, 52
Washington University, 426
Washington Wizards, 204
Wealthfront, 237
Webb Investment Network, 401
Wegmans Food Markets, 262, 263
Western Electric, 50
Westinghouse, 412t
Westinghouse Canada, 319
Westwood High School, 390, 452
Wharton School, 52, 422
Whirlpool, 111
White Castle, 146
White Dog Café, 72
Whole Foods Market, 105, 248–249, 542
Wikipedia, 268, 500
Wild Oats, 105
Williams-Sonoma, 546
Windy City Fieldhouse, 271
W. L. Gore, 43
W. L. Gore & Associates, 75, 230
WomanCare Global, 21
Wooga, 436–438
Workplace Bullying Institute, 293
World Bank, 115–117
WorldCom, 15, 85, 93, 199
World Economic Forum, 102
World Health Organization (WHO), 
107, 548
World Trade Organization, 79, 115, 
116–117
Wyndham Worldwide, 311
X
Xerox Corp., 4, 64, 173, 321, 371, 536
Xiaomi (electronics, China), 323t
Y
Yahoo!, 4, 18, 20, 268, 291, 512
Yale University, 363, 364
Yammer, 237, 508
Yelp, 28, 323t
YouTube, 265, 269
Z
Zales, 105
Zappos, 20, 230, 237, 543
Zendesk, 78
Zingerman’s, 355
Zipcar, 534
ZipDial (marketing, India), 323t
Zoosk, 78
UCLA, 281
Unicru, 272
Unilever, 108
Union Pacific, 105
United Airlines, 132, 144, A6
United Auto Workers, 77, 294
United Food & Commercial Workers 
International Union, 297
United Parcel Service (UPS), 106, 
546–548
Universal Information Services, 58
Universal Orlando Resort, 310
University of California, 21
University of California, Berkeley, 
294, 318
University of California, Los Angeles, 
211, 281, 408
University of California, Santa 
Barbara, 356
University of Colorado, 203
University of Georgia, 89
University of Illinois, 
Champaign-Urbana, 509
University of Kansas, 509
University of Michigan, 357
University of Minnesota, 493
University of North Carolina (UNC), 
68, 185
University of Pennsylvania, 122
University of Rochester, 382
University of Southern California, 9, 
166, 211
University of Texas, 350
University of Toronto, 495
University of Washington School 
of Law, 222
UN’s World Food Programme, 98
UPS (formerly United Parcel Service), 
53, 97–98, 139, 204–205, 230, 516, 
546–548
U.S. Army, 230, 270
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 265, 296
U.S. Census Bureau, 265, 290, 361
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 16–17
U.S. Commerce Department, 115
U.S. Department of Agriculture, 308
U.S. Department of Defense, 54
U.S. Department of Transportation, A6
U.S. Department of Transportation 
(DOT), 132, 172
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, 14
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, 22
U.S. Grant, 77
U.S. International Trade Commission, 11
U.S. Postal Service, 21, 204, 547
U.S. Security Associates, Inc., 301
U.S. Treasury, 52
US Airways, 132, 144, 317, 373
V
Valve Corp., 43
Vanguard Group, 161
Vaseline, 108
Vauxhall Motor Cars Ltd., 114
Verizon, 251
Verizon Communications, 520
Vi, 301–302
Virgin America, 144
Virgin Atlantic airline, 464
Virgin Cola, 307
Virgin Comics, 307
Virgin Galactic, 307
Virgin Group Ltd., 30, 307, 464
Virginia Tech, 431, 509
Virgin Mobile, 307
Virgin Records, 307
Smithfield, 297
Society for Human Resource 
Management, 87, 263
SolarCity, 30
Sony, 110, 178
Sony Corp., 329
Southern Pacific., 105
Southwest Airlines, 6, 131, 144–145, 161, 
203, 230, 272, A6
SpaceX, 30
Spirit, 144
Spirit Air, 6
Spotify, 54, 78
Stanford University, 4, 21, 41, 60, 91, 
201–203, 324, 429, 504, 537
Staples, 57, 139, 390
Starbucks, 114, 138, 139, 162–163, 400, 
455, 463, 513, 534
StarKist Tuna Co., 238
Starwood, 77
State, County, & Municipal Employees, 294t
Stetson, 423
stickK.com, 135
Stolichnaya vodka, 80
Strategic Management Society, 160
StubHub, 77
Subaru of Indiana Automotive, 90, 537
Sun Country, 144
Sun Microsystems, 19
Super Bowl, 208
Super D, 186
Surftech, 174
Swoopo.com, 213
SXSW (conferences), 323t
T
Target Corp., 37–38, 57, 386, 389, 522, 523f
TastingRoom.com, 442
Tata of India, 114
Teamsters, 294t
Teamsters Union, 77, 294
Tennessee Powerball, 212
Terrible Herbst, 177
Tesla Motors, 30
Texaco, 112
Texas Instruments, 108, 319, 416
3M, 108, 227, 323, 324, 513
Ticketmaster, 77, 105
Tiffany, 16–17
Tiffany’s, 114
Time Warner, 176, 178, 246
Time Warner Cable, 82, 105
Timex, 175, 176
Tinder, 291–292
Titeflex, 422
TNT, 98
Toms, 199
Toyota Motor Corp., 54, 107, 138, 162, 
169–171, 309, 514, 532
Toys R Us, 114
Trader Joe’s, 139
Trek Bicycle Corporation, 228
Triage Consulting Group, 236–237
Tropicana, 463
Turnbull & Asser, 177
Turnstyle Solutions Inc., 221–222
2020 Women on Boards, 186
Twitter, 14, 24, 78, 108, 205, 236, 237, 
265, 266, 269, 292, 323t, 414, 481, 
494, 499, 500, 508, 509
Ty Beanie Babies, 322
Tyco International, 15, 85, 93
U
Uber, 11, 12, 28, 311, 474
UBS, 333

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
IND8
Glossary/Subject Index
A
ABC Flow Chart software, A1
Abilene paradox, 424
Ability tests, 271
Absenteeism When an employee doesn’t 
show up for work, 349, 355 
Academic freedom, 509
Accommodating, 434
Accountability Describes expectation 
that managers must report and 
justify work results to the managers 
above them, 18, 243
Achievement needs, 381
Acquired needs theory Theory that 
states that there are three needs—
achievement, affiliation, and 
power—that are the major motives 
determining people’s behavior in 
the workplace, 380–382
 Acquisitions. See Mergers and 
 acquisitions
Action plans Course of action needed to 
achieve a stated goal, 144, 150
Action teams, 415
Active listening The process of 
actively decoding and interpreting 
verbal messages, 501
 ADA. See Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA)
Adaptive change Reintroduction of a 
familiar practice, 313
 ADEA. See Age Discrimination in 
 Employment Act (ADEA)
Adhocracy culture Type of organiza-
tional culture that has an external 
focus and values flexibility, 230
Adjourning One of five stages of forming 
a team; the stage in which mem-
bers of an organization prepare 
for disbandment, 418
Administrative management 
Management concerned with 
managing the total organization, 
45, 47–48
Adverse impact Effect an organization 
has when it uses an employment 
practice or procedure that results 
in unfavorable outcomes to a pro-
tected class (such as Hispanics) 
over another group of people (such 
as non-Hispanic whites), 290
Advice teams, 415
Affective component of an attitude 
The feelings or emotions one has 
about a situation, 345
 Affiliation needs, 381, 382
Affirmative action The focus on achiev-
ing equality of opportunity, 291
 Age, in workforce, 359
 Age Discrimination in Employment Act 
(ADEA), 289t
 Agency shop, 295t
 Age stereotypes, 349
 Agreeableness, 338
 Alcoholism/alcohol abuse, 366
 “Always on” generation, 494–495, 495t. 
See also Millennials
 Ambiguity
role, 365
tolerance for, 206, 322
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
Act that prohibits discrimination 
against the disabled, 289t, 361
 Analytical decision-making style, 207
Analytics (business analytics) Term 
used for sophisticated forms of 
business data analysis, such as 
portfolio analysis or time-series 
forecast, 203–205
Anchoring and adjustment bias The 
tendency to make decisions based 
on an initial figure, 212–213
 APEC. See Asia-Pacific Economic 
 Cooperation (APEC)
 Appreciative listening style, 501
Arbitration The process in which a neutral 
third party, an arbitrator, listens to 
both parties in a dispute and makes 
a decision that the parties have 
agreed will be binding on them, 297
Artificial intelligence (AI) The discipline 
concerned with creating computer 
systems that simulate human 
 reasoning and sensation, 15
 ASEAN. See Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC) A group of 21 Pacific 
Rim countries whose purpose is 
to improve economic and political 
ties, 118
 Assertiveness, 123, 123t
Assessment center Company depart-
ment where management candi-
dates participate in activities for a 
few days while being assessed by 
evaluators, 271
 Asset management ratios, 527
Association of Southeast Asian 
 Nations (ASEAN) A trading 
bloc consisting of 10 countries 
in Asia, 119
 Attainable goals, 147
 Attire, 269
Attitudes Learned predisposition toward 
a given object, 345
behavior and, 347, 353
collision between reality and, 345–346, 
346t
components of, 345
job success and, 370–372
work-related, 353–356
 Attractiveness, 350
Audits Formal verifications of an organi-
zation’s financial and operational 
systems, 527–528
Authority The right to perform or com-
mand; also, the rights inherent in 
a managerial position to make 
 decisions, give orders, and utilize 
resources, 242–243
centralized, 244
decentralized, 244
 Automated experience, 197
 Autonomy, 382
Availability bias Tendency of managers 
to use information readily avail-
able from memory to make judg-
ments; they tend to give more 
weight to recent events, 212
 Avoiding, 434
B
 Baby Boomers, 495
 Background information, 268–269
Balanced scorecard Gives top manag-
ers a fast but comprehensive view 
of the organization via four indi-
cators: (1) customer satisfaction, 
(2) internal processes 3) the orga-
nization’s innovation and improve-
ment activities, and (4) financial 
measures, 520
perspectives of, 520–522
visual representation of, 522, 523f
Balance sheet A summary of an organi-
zation’s overall financial worth—
assets and liabilities—at a specific 
point in time, 527
 BARS. See Behaviorally anchored rating 
scale (BARS)
Base pay Consists of the basic wage or 
salary paid employees in exchange 
for doing their jobs, 274
 Basic assumptions, 232
BCG matrix A means of evaluating stra-
tegic business units on the basis of 
(1) their business growth rates and 
(2) their share of the market, 179, 
179f
Behavior Actions and judgments, 347
effect of attitudes and values on, 347
individual attitudes and, 344–347, 353
perception and, 348–352
personality and, 338–343
stress and, 363–367
values and, 344–347
workplace diversity and, 357–363
work-related attitudes and, 353–356
 Behavioral appraisals, 282
Behavioral component of an attitude 
Also known as intentional compo-
nent, this refers to how one intends 
or expects to behave toward a 
 situation, 345
 Behavioral decision-making style, 207
Behavioral-description interview Type 
of structured interview in which the 
interviewer explores what appli-
cants have done in the past, 270
Behavioral leadership approaches 
Attempts to determine the distinc-
tive styles used by effective lead-
ers, 447t, 451–456, 455t
Behaviorally anchored rating scale 
(BARS) Employee gradations in 
performance rated according to 
scales of specific behaviors, 282
Behavioral science approach Relies 
on scientific research for develop-
ing theories about human behavior 
that can be used to provide practi-
cal tools for managers, 51, 52
Behavioral viewpoint Emphasizes the im-
portance of understanding human 
behavior and of motivating employ-
ees toward achievement, 49–52
Benchmarking A process by which a 
company compares its perfor-
mance with that of high-performing 
organizations, 173
Benefits Additional nonmonetary forms 
of compensation, 275, 288
Big Data Stores of data so vast that conven-
tional database management systems 
cannot handle them, 14, 205
Big Data analytics The process of ex-
amining large amounts of data 
of a variety of types to uncover 
hidden patterns, unknown 
 correlations, and other useful 
 information, 205
Big Five personality dimensions They 
are (1) extroversion, (2) agreeable-
ness, (3) conscientiousness, 
(4) emotional stability, and 
(5) openness to experience, 338
 Bill collection, 99
 Board of directors
independence of, 93–94
as stakeholders, 75

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND9
Collaborative computing Using state-
of-the-art computer software and 
hardware, to help people work 
 better together, 15
Collective bargaining Negotiations 
 between management and 
 employees regarding disputes 
over compensation, benefits, 
working conditions, and job 
 security, 288
 College graduates, underemployed, 361
 Commitment bias, 213
Common purpose A goal that 
unifies employees or members 
and gives everyone an 
understanding of the organiza-
tion’s reason for being, 241
 Commonweal organizations, 21
Communication The transfer of 
information and understanding 
from one person to another, 
478–479. See also Digital 
communication
conflict due to failures in, 431
cultural differences in, 125
digital, 494–500
effectiveness of, 501–505
formal channels of, 482–484
gender differences in, 492–493
informal channels of, 484
medium for, 480–481
in meetings, 485
nonverbal, 490–491
process of, 479–480
technology and, 494–500
verbal vs. written, 24
of vision, 325–326
 Communication barriers
explanation of, 486–487
personal, 488–490
physical, 487
semantic, 487–488
 Communities, as stakeholders, 78–79
Compensation Payment comprising 
three parts: wages or salaries, 
incentives, and benefits, 274
of chief executives, 7
issues related to, 288, 296
as motivator, 399–400
types of, 274–275
 Competence needs, 382
 Competition
conflict and, 430, 432
organizational change and, 307
Competitive advantage The ability of 
an organization to produce goods 
or services more effectively than 
competitors do, thereby outper-
forming them, 11
cultural differences and, 124
strategic management and, 139
struggle for, 11–12
Competitive intelligence Gaining 
information about one’s 
competitors’ activities so that 
one can anticipate their moves 
and react appropriately, 167–168
Competitors People or organizations 
that compete for customers or 
 resources, 77, 174
 Complexity, controls to deal with, 513
Complexity theory The study of how 
 order and pattern arise from very 
complicated, apparently chaotic 
systems, 57
 Comprehensive listening style, 501–502
 Compromising, 434
 Computer-aided decision making, 217–218
Central America Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA-DR) Trade agreement in-
volving the United States and Costa 
Rica, the Dominican Republic, El 
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, 
and Nicaragua and which is in-
tended to reduce tariffs and other 
barriers to free trade, 119
Centralized authority Organizational 
structure in which important deci-
sions are made by upper managers—
power is concentrated at the top, 244
 Chain of command, 241–242
 Change. See Organizational change
Change agent A person inside or out-
side the organization who can be 
a catalyst in helping deal with old 
problems in new ways, 317, 328
 Changing stage of organizational 
change, 314
Charisma Form of interpersonal attrac-
tion that inspires acceptance and 
support, 463
Charismatic leadership Once assumed to 
be an individual inspirational and 
motivational characteristic of par-
ticular leaders, now considered part 
of transformational leadership, 463
 Cheating, 16, 71
 Civil Rights Act (1991), 289t
 Civil Rights Act, Title VII (1964), 289t
Clan culture Type of organizational cul-
ture that has an internal focus and 
values flexibility rather than sta-
bility and control, 230
 Classical model of decision making. See 
Rational model of decision making
Classical viewpoint In the historical 
perspective, the viewpoint that em-
phasizes finding ways to manage 
work more efficiently; it has two 
branches—scientific and adminis-
trative, 45–48
Clawbacks Rescinding the tax breaks 
when firms don’t deliver promised 
jobs, 78
Climate change Refers to major changes 
in temperature, precipitation wind 
patterns, and similar matters 
 occurring over several decades, 
89–90, 172
 Closed shop, 295t
Closed system A system that has little in-
teraction with its environment, 56–57
Cloud computing The storing of soft-
ware and data on gigantic collec-
tions of computers located away 
from a company’s principal site, 14
 Coalition tactics, 446
Code of ethics A formal, written set of 
ethical standards that guide an 
 organization’s actions, 87
Coercive power One of five sources of a 
leader’s power that results from 
the authority to punish subordi-
nates, 445
Cognitive component of an attitude 
The beliefs and knowledge one has 
about a situation, 345
Cognitive dissonance Psychological 
discomfort a person experiences 
between his or her cognitive atti-
tude and incomparable behavior, 
345–346, 346t
Cohesiveness The tendency of a group 
or team to stick together, 419–420
 COLA. See Cost-of-living adjustment 
(COLA) clause
 Boards, gender and, 186–187
 Body movements, 490–491
 Boldface, 504
Bonuses Cash awards given to employ-
ees who achieve specific perfor-
mance objectives, 236–237, 400
Boundaryless organization A fluid, 
highly adaptive organization 
whose members, linked by infor-
mation technology, come together 
to collaborate on common tasks; 
the collaborators may include 
competitors, suppliers, and 
 customers, 250–251
Bounded rationality One type of nonra-
tional decision making; the ability 
of decision makers to be rational is 
limited by numerous constraints, 196
Brainstorming Technique used to help 
groups generate multiple ideas and 
alternatives for solving problems; in-
dividuals in a group meet and review 
a problem to be solved, then silently 
generate ideas, which are collected 
and later analyzed, 217, 426
 Brainwriting, 217
Break-even analysis A way of identify-
ing how much revenue is needed to 
cover the total costs of developing 
and selling a product, A4–A6
Budgets A formal financial projection, 
525–526, 526t
Buffers Administrative changes that 
managers can make to reduce the 
stressors that lead to employee 
burnout, 366–367
Bullying Repeated mistreatment of one or 
more persons by one or more per-
petrators. It’s abusive, physical, 
psychological, verbal, or nonverbal 
behavior that is threatening, humil-
iating, or intimidating, 292–293
 Bureaucracy, 47–48
Bureaucratic control The use of rules, 
regulations, and formal authority 
to guide performance, 519
Burnout State of emotional, mental, and 
even physical exhaustion, 366
 Business analytics, 203–205
Business model Outline of need the 
firm will fill, the operations of the 
business, its components and func-
tions, as well as the expected reve-
nues and expenses, 136
Business plan A document that out-
lines a proposed firm’s goals, the 
strategy for achieving them, and 
the standards for measuring 
 success, 136
C
 CAFTA-DR. See Central America Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR)
 CAI. See Computer-assisted instruction 
(CAI)
 Canada, 117–118
 Capital letters, 504
 Career counseling, 367
Cascading Objectives are structured in 
a unified hierarchy, becoming 
more specific at lower levels of 
the organization, 150
Causal attribution The activity of 
 inferring causes for observed 
 behavior, 351
 Cell phones, 498. See also Smartphones

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND10
Cost-leadership strategy One of Por-
ter’s four competitive strategies; 
keeping the costs, and hence 
prices, of a product or service 
 below those of competitors and 
to target a wide market, 176
Cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) 
clause Clause in a union contract 
that ties future wage increases to 
increases in the cost of living, 296
Counterproductive work behaviors 
(CWB) Types of behavior that 
harm employees and the organiza-
tion as a whole, 356
Countertrading Bartering goods for 
goods, 113
Creativity The process of developing 
something new or unique, 320
 Credibility, 489
 Crime, white-collar, 85–86
 Crises, responses to organizational, 236
Cross-functional teams A team that is 
staffed with specialists pursuing a 
common objective, 415, 415t
Crowdfunding Raising money for a proj-
ect or venture by obtaining many 
small amounts of money from many 
people (“the crowd”), 79, 499
Crowdsourcing The practice of obtain-
ing needed services, ideas, or 
 content by soliciting contributions 
from a large group of people and 
especially from the online commu-
nity, such as Facebook and Twitter 
users, 499, 500
 CSR. See Corporate social responsibility 
(CSR)
 Cultural adaptability, 128
 Cultural differences. See also Diversity
communication and, 125
competitive advantage and, 124
conflict and, 431–432
GLOBE project and, 122–124
interpersonal space and, 125
language and, 124–125
law and political stability and, 127–128
national culture and, 122
overview of, 121–122
religion and, 127
stereotypes and, 348–349
time orientation and, 125–126
tipping customs and, 121
in virtual teams, 411
in workforce, 360–361
Culture The shared set of beliefs, 
values, knowledge, and patterns 
of behavior common to a group 
of people, 122. See also Organiza-
tional culture
dimensions of, 122–123, 123t
high-context, 122
importance of, 233–234
of innovation, 323, 324
low-context, 122
transmission of, 232–233
Current reality assessment Assessment 
to look at where the organization 
stands and see what is working 
and what could be different so as 
to maximize efficiency and 
 effectiveness in achieving the 
 organization’s mission, 163–164
 Curse of knowledge, 191
Customer divisions Divisional structures 
in which activities are grouped 
around common customers or 
 clients, 246
 Customer satisfaction, 533
Continuous improvement Ongoing, 
small, incremental improvements 
in all parts of an organization, 531
Continuous improvement teams  
Small groups of volunteers or 
workers and supervisors who meet 
intermittently to discuss work-
place- and quality-related prob-
lems, 415t, 416
 Contract negotiation, 294
 Control/control systems. See also Total 
quality management (TQM)
areas of, 517–519, 518f
balanced scorecard and, 520–522, 521f
barriers to, 538–539
example of, 546–548
financial tools for, 525–528, 526t
levels of, 517
measurement management and, 523–524
need for, 512–514
productivity and, 511, 513, 540–541
strategy map and, 522, 523f
Controlling Monitoring performance, 
comparing it with goals, and taking 
corrective action as needed, 10, 
512
Control process steps The four steps 
in the process of controlling: 
(1) establish standards; (2) measure 
performance; (3) compare perfor-
mance to standards; and (4) take 
corrective action, if necessary, 
514–516, 514f
Control standard The first step in the 
control process; the performance 
standard (or just standard) is the 
desired performance level for a 
given goal, 514–515
Cooperating Behavior when individuals’ 
efforts are systematically inte-
grated to achieve a collective 
objective, 419
Coordinated effort The coordination of 
individual efforts into a group or 
organization-wide effort, 241
Core innovations The optimizing of 
products or services for existing 
customers, 321–322
Core self-evaluation Represents a broad 
personality trait comprising four 
positive individual traits: (1) self-
efficacy, (2) self-esteem, (3) locus 
of control, and (4) emotional 
 stability, 340–342
 Corporate culture. See Organizational culture
Corporate governance The system of 
governing a company so that the 
interests of corporate owners and 
other stakeholders are protected, 
93–94
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) 
The notion that corporations 
are expected to go above and 
beyond following the law and 
making a profit, to take actions 
that will benefit the interests of 
society as well as of the organiza-
tion, 88
climate change and, 89–91
effects of, 91–92
philanthropy and, 91
viewpoints on, 88–89
Cost-focus strategy One of Porter’s 
four competitive strategies; keep-
ing the costs, and hence prices, of 
a product or service below those 
of competitors and to target a 
 narrow market, 177
Computer-assisted instruction (CAI) 
Training in which computers are 
used to provide additional help or 
to reduce instructional time, 279
 Conceptual decision-making style, 207
Conceptual skills Skills that consist of 
the ability to think analytically, to 
visualize an organization as a 
whole and understand how the 
parts work together, 22–23
Confirmation bias Biased way of thinking 
in which people seek information to 
support their point of view and 
 discount data that does not, 212
Conflict Process in which one party per-
ceives that its interests are being 
opposed or negatively affected by 
another party, 428
constructive, 432–433
functional vs. dysfunctional, 428–429
intergroup, 431
management of, 317, 428–429
methods to handle, 433, 434
multicultural, 431–432
nature of, 428
performance and, 429–430
personality, 430–431
programmed, 432–433
resistance to change and, 329
role, 365
 Connectivity, social media and, 499
 Conscientiousness, 338, 339
Consensus General agreement; group 
solidarity, 216
Consideration A leadership behavior 
that is concerned with group mem-
bers’ needs and desires and that is 
directed at creating mutual respect 
or trust, 453
 Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconcilia-
tion Act (COBRA) (1985), 289t
 Consultation, 446
Contemporary perspective In con-
trast to the historical perspective, 
the business approach that in-
cludes the systems,  contingency, 
and quality-management view-
points, 44
Content perspectives Also known as 
need-based perspectives; theories 
that emphasize the needs that 
 motivate people, 379
Deci and Ryan’s self-determination 
theory, 382
Herzberg’s two-factor theory, 383–385
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 50–51, 
379–380, 379f
McClelland’s acquired needs theory, 
380–382
Contingency design The process of 
 fitting the organization to its 
 environment, 252–254
Contingency leadership model A 
model that determines if a leader’s 
style is (1) task-oriented or 
(2) relationship-oriented and if 
that style is effective for the 
 situation at hand, 457–459, 458f
Contingency planning Also known as 
scenario planning and scenario 
analysis; the creation of alterna-
tive hypothetical but equally likely 
future conditions, 171, 172
Contingency viewpoint The belief that 
a manager’s approach should vary 
according to—that is, be contin-
gent on—the individual and the 
environmental situation, 58, 59

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND11
 Directive decision-making style, 207
 Discerning listening style, 502
 Discipline, employee, 286
 Discrimination. See Workplace 
 discrimination
 Dismissal, employee, 286, 287
Disparate treatment Results when em-
ployees from protected groups 
(such as disabled individuals) are 
intentionally treated differently, 290
Disruptive innovation Process by which 
a product or service takes root ini-
tially in simple applications at the 
bottom of a market and then re-
lentlessly moves up market, even-
tually displacing established 
competitors, 307
Distributors People or organizations that 
help another organization sell its 
goods and services to customers, 77
Diversification Strategy by which a com-
pany operates several businesses in 
order to spread the risk, 178–179
Diversity All the ways people are unlike 
and alike—the differences and 
similarities in age, gender, race, 
religion, ethnicity, sexual orienta-
tion, capabilities, and socioeco-
nomic background, 357. See also 
Cultural differences
barriers to, 361–362
layers of, 358–359
managing for, 13
stereotypes and, 348–349
trends in workforce, 359–361
 Diversity wheel, 357, 358f
 Divisional objectives, 150
Divisional structure The third type of 
organizational structure, whereby 
people with diverse occupational 
specialties are put together in for-
mal groups according to products 
and/or services, customers and/or 
clients, or geographic regions, 246
Division of labor Also known as work 
specialization; arrangement of 
having discrete parts of a task 
done by different people. The 
work is divided into particular 
tasks assigned to particular 
workers, 241, 421
 Doha Round, 116
 Downsizing, 286
Downward communication Communi-
cation that flows from a higher 
level to a lower level, 483
 Dress code, 269
 Drug abuse, 366
Dumping The practice of a foreign com-
pany’s exporting products abroad 
at a lower price than the price in 
the home market—or even below 
the costs of production—in order 
to drive down the price of a com-
peting domestic product, 116
Dysfunctional conflict Conflict that hin-
ders the organization’s performance 
or threatens its interests, 428–429
E
 EAPs. See Employee assistance programs 
(EAPs)
 Ebola outbreak (2014), 548
E-business Using the Internet to facili-
tate every aspect of running a 
business, 14
Decision trees Graph of decisions and 
their possible consequences, used 
to create a plan to reach a goal, 
199–200
Decoding Interpreting and trying to 
make sense of a message, 479, 485
Defensive avoidance When a manager 
cannot find a good solution and 
follows by (a) procrastinating, 
(b) passing the buck, or (c) denying 
the risk of any negative conse-
quences, 210
Defensive communication Form of 
communication that is either ag-
gressive, attacking, angry, passive, 
or withdrawing, 488
Defensive strategy Also called re-
trenchment strategy, one of three 
grand strategies, this strategy 
 involves reduction in the organiza-
tion’s efforts, 175, 176t
Delegation The process of assigning 
managerial authority and respon-
sibility to managers and employ-
ees lower in the hierarchy, 243
Delphi technique A group process that 
uses physically dispersed experts 
who fill out questionnaires to 
anonymously generate ideas; the 
judgments are combined and in ef-
fect averaged to achieve a consen-
sus of expert opinion, 217
Deming management Ideas proposed 
by W. Edwards Deming for making 
organizations more responsive, 
more democratic, and less 
 wasteful, 529–530
Demographic forces Influences on an 
organization arising from changes 
in the characteristics of a popula-
tion, such as age gender, or ethnic 
origin, 82
organizational change and, 310, 311f
 Demographics, 82
 Departmental objectives, 150
Development The education of profes-
sionals and managers in the skills 
they will need to do their jobs in 
the future, 277–278
Devil’s advocacy Taking the side of an 
unpopular point of view for the 
sake of argument, 433
Diagnosis Analysis of underlying 
causes, 192
Dialectic method Role-playing two 
sides of a proposal to test whether 
it is workable, 433
 Differential rate system, 46
Differentiation strategy One of  Porter’s 
four competitive strategies; offering 
products or services that are of 
unique and superior value com-
pared with those of competitors but 
to target a wide market, 176–177
Differentiation The tendency of the parts 
of an organization to disperse and 
fragment, 254
 Digital communication
advances in, 494
Millennials and, 494–495, 495t
privacy issues and, 497–498
productivity issues and, 498
security issues and, 497
smartphones and, 498–499, 499t
social media and, 499–500, 500t
telecommuting and, 496
teleworking and, 496–497
videoconferencing and, 496
Customers Those who pay to use an or-
ganization’s goods or services, 76
balanced scorecard and, 521–522
dealing with foreign, 108
delivering value to, 531
organizational change and, 312
responsiveness to, 12
social responsibility effect on, 91
as stakeholders, 76–77
 CWB. See Counterproductive work 
 behaviors (CWB)
 Cybercrime, 497
D
Databases Computerized collections of 
interrelated files, 14
 Data-mining techniques, 204
 Deadlines, 150–151
Decentralized authority Organiza-
tional structure in which important 
decisions are made by middle-
level and supervisory-level 
 managers—power is delegated 
throughout the organization, 244
Decentralized control An approach to 
organizational control that is char-
acterized by informal and organic 
structural arrangements, the oppo-
site of bureaucratic control, 519
Deciding to decide A manager agrees 
that he or she must decide what to 
do about a problem or opportunity 
and take effective decision-making 
steps, 211
Decision A choice made from among 
available alternatives, 190
Decisional roles Managers use informa-
tion to make decisions to solve 
problems or take advantage of 
 opportunities. The four decision-
making roles are entrepreneur, 
disturbance handler, resource 
 allocator, and negotiator, 26, 27t
Decision making The process of identi-
fying and choosing alternative 
courses of action, 190
analytics and, 203–205
barriers to, 209–213
biases in, 211–213
Big Data and, 205
computer-aided, 217–218
decentralization of, 514
ethical, 199–200
evidence-based, 201–205
group, 214–218
groupthink and, 425–427
innovation and, 190
knowledge and, 191
nonrational model of, 196–198
overview of, 190–191
rational model of, 191–196
systems of, 190
tracking devices to assist in, 221–222
Decision-making styles Styles that 
 reflect the combination of how an 
individual perceives and responds 
to information, 206
know your own, 207–208
types of, 207
value orientation and tolerance for 
ambiguity and, 206
Decision support system A computer-
aided information system that pro-
vides a flexible tool for analysis 
and helps managers focus on the 
future, 218

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND12
administration of untested drugs, 548
airline accommodation for overweight 
individuals, 372–373
apology for wrongdoing, 68
approaches to, 84–85
bill paying standards, 99
cheating, 16
employee firing, 334
employee monitoring, 223
employee poaching, 474
employee theft, 259
information disclosure, 38
lying, 71, 268
for managers, 15
marijuana use, 438
pay to perform for athletes, 403
pregnant employees, 302
whistle-blowers, 156–157
white-collar crime and, 85–86
Ethics Standards of right and wrong that 
influence behavior, 83
codes of, 87
in decision making, 199–200
leadership and, 465, 465t
methods to promote, 86–87
moral development and, 86
overview of, 83–84
social responsibilities and, 88–92
values and, 84
Ethics officers Individuals trained in 
matters of ethics in the workplace, 
particularly about resolving 
 ethical dilemmas, 199
Ethnocentric managers Managers who 
believe that their native country, 
culture, language, and behavior 
are superior to all others, 109
Ethnocentrism The belief that one’s 
 native country, culture, language, 
abilities, and/or behavior are supe-
rior to those of another culture, 362
European Union (EU) Union of 28 
 trading partners in Europe, 118
 Evaluation, of decisions, 194–195
 Evaluative listening style, 502
 Evidence-based decision making, 201–203
Evidence-based management Trans-
lation of principles based on best 
evidence into organizational prac-
tice, bringing rationality to the 
 decision-making process, 59–60, 201
Exchange rates The rate at which the 
currency of one area or country 
can be exchanged for the currency 
of another’s, 119, 120
 Exchange tactics, 446
 Execution: The Discipline of Getting 
Things Done (Bossidy and 
Charan), 180
Execution Using questioning, analysis, 
and follow-through in order to 
mesh strategy with reality, align 
people with goals, and achieve the 
results promised, 180–182, 326
 Executive functioning, 25–26
Expatriates People living or working in 
a foreign country, 128
multicultural conflict and, 431–432
Expectancy The belief that a particular 
level of effort will lead to a partic-
ular level of performance, 389
Expectancy theory Theory that suggests 
that people are motivated by two 
things: (1) how much they want 
something and (2) how likely they 
think they are to get it, 387f, 
388–390
 Expertise, 197
Employment tests Tests legally consid-
ered to consist of any procedure 
used in the employment selection 
process, 271–273
Empowering leadership A form of 
leadership that represents the 
 extent to which a leader creates 
perceptions of psychological 
 empowerment in others, 453–454
 Empowerment
participative management and, 454
of teams, 416
Enacted values Values and norms 
 actually exhibited in the 
 organization, 232
Encoding Translating a message into 
understandable symbols or 
language, 479
 Encoding barriers, 485
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
Software information systems for 
integrating virtually all aspects of 
a business, 541
Entrepreneurs Someone who sees a new 
opportunity for a product or service 
and launches a business to try to 
realize it, 29 
managers vs., 30–32
Entrepreneurship The process of taking 
risks to try to create a new enter-
prise, 29
successful start-ups and, 322
types of, 29
Environmental scanning Careful moni-
toring of an organization’s inter-
nal and external environments to 
detect early signs of opportunities 
and threats that may  influence the 
firm’s plans, 168
 Equal employment opportunity, 288, 290
Equal Employment Opportunity 
(EEO) Commission U.S. panel 
whose job it is to enforce antidis-
crimination and other employment 
related laws, 288
 Equality, 433
 Equal Pay Act (1963), 289t
Equity theory In the area of employee 
motivation, the focus on how em-
ployees perceive how fairly they 
think they are being treated com-
pared with others, 386–388, 387f
 ERISA. See Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act (ERISA)
 ERP. See Enterprise resource planning (ERP)
Escalation of commitment bias When 
decision makers increase their 
commitment to a project despite 
negative information about it, 213
Espoused values Explicitly stated 
 values and norms preferred by 
an organization, 232
 Esteem needs, 379f
Ethical behavior Behavior that is ac-
cepted as “right” as opposed to 
“wrong” according to those 
 standards, 83, 87
Ethical climate A term that refers to em-
ployees’ perceptions about the ex-
tent to which work environments 
support ethical behavior, 86
Ethical dilemma A situation in which you 
have to decide whether to pursue a 
course of action that may benefit 
you or your organization but that is 
unethical or even illegal, 83–85
 Ethical/legal issues
academic freedom, 509
E-commerce Electronic commerce—the 
buying and selling of goods or 
 services over computer networks, 
14, 103, 139
 Economic community. See Trading bloc
Economic forces General economic 
conditions and trends—unemploy-
ment, inflation, interest rates, eco-
nomic growth—that may affect an 
organization’s performance, 81
 Economy, global, 103–104
Effectiveness To achieve results, to 
make the right decisions, and to 
successfully carry them out so that 
they achieve the organization’s 
goals, 5–6
Efficiency To use resources—people, 
money raw materials, and the 
like—wisely and cost effectively, 5
effectiveness by, 5–6
importance of, 12–13
social responsibility and, 92
E-leadership Leadership that involves 
one-to-one, one-to-many, and 
within-group and between-group 
and collective interactions via 
 information technology, 
447t, 467
E-Leadership (Mills), 467
Electronic brainstorming Technique in 
which members of a group come to-
gether over a computer network to 
generate ideas and alternatives, 217
 Electronic health record system, 316
E-mail Text messages and documents 
transmitted over a computer 
 network, 14, 498, 498t
Embargoes A complete ban on the import 
or export of certain products, 116
Emotional intelligence The ability to 
cope, to empathize with others, 
and to be self-motivated, 
342–343
 Emotional stability, 338, 342
 Empathic listening style, 501
 Empathy, 433
Employee assistance programs 
(EAPs) Host of programs aimed at 
helping employees to cope with 
stress, burnout, substance abuse, 
health-related problems, family 
and marital issues, and any gen-
eral problems that negatively in-
fluence job performance, 367
Employee engagement An individual’s 
involvement, satisfaction, and 
 enthusiasm for work, 353
 Employee retention, 92
 Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act (ERISA), 289t
 Employees. See also Human resource 
(HR) management
discipline for, 286
dismissal of, 286, 287
effects of social responsibility on, 
91–92
firing of, 286
health and safety of, 288
layoff of, 203, 286
legislation and regulations protecting, 
289t
pregnant, 302
promotion of, 236–237, 285
resistance to change in, 326–330
as stakeholders, 75
transfer of, 285–286
use of sensors to monitor, 223
 Employment interviews, 270–271

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND13
Full-range leadership Approach that 
suggests that leadership behavior 
varies along a full range of 
 leadership styles, from take-no-
responsibility (laissez-faire) 
“leadership” at one extreme 
through transactional leadership, 
to transformational leadership at 
the other extreme, 462
Functional conflict Conflict that bene-
fits the main purposes of the orga-
nization and serves its interests, 
428–429
Functional manager Manager who is 
responsible for just one organiza-
tional activity, 20
Functional structure The second type of 
organizational structure, whereby 
people with similar occupational 
specialties are put together in for-
mal groups, 245–246
Fundamental attribution bias Ten-
dency whereby people attribute an-
other person’s behavior to his or 
her personal characteristics rather 
than to situational factors, 351
 Future orientation, 123, 123t
G
Gainsharing The distribution of savings 
or “gains” to groups of employees 
who reduce costs and increase 
measurable productivity, 400
Gantt charts A kind of time schedule—a 
specialized bar chart that shows the 
relationship between the kind of 
work tasks planned and their sched-
uled completion dates, A3–A4
 GATT. See General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade (GATT)
 Gender
boards of directors and, 186–187
communication differences and, 492–493
financial decisions and, 192
pay inequality and, 290–291, 360
traits and, 449–450
in workforce, 360
 Gender egalitarianism, 123, 123t
 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT), 116, 117
General and Industrial Management 
(Fayol), 47
General environment Also called mac-
roenvironment; in contrast to the 
task environment, it includes six 
forces: economic, technological, 
sociocultural, demographic, 
 political-legal, and international, 
80–82
General manager Manager who is 
 responsible for several organiza-
tional activities, 20–21
 Gen X, 494, 495
 Gen Y, 72, 494, 495. See also Millennials
 Gen Z, 25–26, 72. See also Millennials
Geocentric managers Managers who 
accept that there are differences 
and similarities between home and 
foreign personnel and practices 
and that they should use whatever 
techniques are most effective, 109
Geographic divisions Divisional 
 structures in which activities are 
grouped around defined regional 
locations, 246
 Gestures, 490–491
 Fit, 161
Fixed budgets Allocation of resources 
on the basis of a single estimate of 
costs, 526
Flat organization Organizational struc-
ture with few or no levels of 
 middle management between 
top managers and those 
reporting to them, 241
 Flexible workplace, 401–402
Flowcharts A useful graphical tool for 
representing the sequence of 
events required to complete a 
 project and for laying out 
“what-if” scenarios, A1–A3
Focused-differentiation strategy One 
of Porter’s four competitive strate-
gies; offering products or services 
that are of unique and superior 
value compared to those of com-
petitors and to target a narrow 
market, 177
 Followers, 447t, 467, 468
Forced ranking performance review 
systems Performance review sys-
tems whereby all employees within 
a business unit are ranked against 
one another, and grades are dis-
tributed along some sort of bell 
curve, like students being graded 
in a college course, 283–284
 Forcing, 434
Forecast A vision or projection of the 
 future, 171
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (1978) 
Act that makes it illegal for em-
ployees of U.S. companies to make 
“questionable” or “dubious” 
 contributions to political decision 
makers in foreign nations, 127–128
Formal appraisals Appraisals con-
ducted at specific times throughout 
the year and based on perfor-
mance measures that have been 
established in advance, 284
Formal communication channels 
Communications that follow the 
chain of command and are recog-
nized as official, 482
Formal group A group, headed by a 
leader, that is established to do 
something productive for the orga-
nization, 413, 414
 Formal statements, 235
Forming The first of the five stages 
of forming a team, in which 
people get oriented and get 
acquainted, 417
 For-profit organizations, 21, 238
Four management functions The 
management process that “gets 
things done”: planning, organiz-
ing, leading, and controlling, 9
Framing bias The tendency of decision 
makers to be influenced by the 
way a situation or problem is pre-
sented to them, 213
Franchising A form of licensing in which 
a company allows a foreign com-
pany to pay it a fee and a share of 
the profit in return for using the first 
company’s brand name and a pack-
age of materials and services, 114
Free trade The movement of goods 
and services among nations 
without political or economic 
obstruction, 115
 Fringe benefits. See Benefits
Expert power One of five sources of 
a leader’s power, resulting from 
 specialized information or 
 expertise, 445
Exporting Producing goods domestically 
and selling them outside the 
 country, 113
Expropriation A government’s seizure of 
a domestic or foreign company’s 
assets, 127
External audits Formal verification by 
outside experts of an organiza-
tion’s financial accounts and 
statements, 527
External communication Communica-
tion between people inside and 
outside an organization, 484
External dimensions of diversity 
Human differences that include an 
element of choice; they consist of 
the personal characteristics that 
people acquire, discard, or modify 
throughout their lives, 359
 External locus of control, 341
External recruiting Attracting job 
 applicants from outside the 
 organization, 266–267, 267t
External stakeholders People or groups 
in the organization’s external envi-
ronment that are affected by it, 76
in general environment, 80–82
in task environment, 76–80
Extinction The weakening of behavior by 
ignoring it or making sure it is not 
reinforced, 396–397
Extrinsic reward The payoff, such as 
money, that a person receives from 
others for performing a particular 
task, 377
 Extroversion, 338, 339
 Eye contact, 490
F
 Facial expressions, 490
 Failure and mistakes, 320, 323, 324
Fair Labor Standards Act Legislation 
passed in 1938 that established 
minimum living standards for 
workers engaged in interstate 
commerce, including provision of 
a federal minimum wage, 288
 Fair Minimum Wage Act (2007), 289t
 Fairness, 85, 285
 Family & Medical Leave Act (1993), 289t
 Feedback barriers, 485
Feedback Information about the reac-
tion of the environment to the 
 outputs that affect the inputs, 56
corrective action based on, 515
on teams, 420
 Fertility rates, 82
 Financial capital
access to, 111
innovation and, 323
 Financial management, tools for, 
525–528, 526t
Financial statements Summary of some 
aspect of an organization’s 
 financial status, 526–527
 Firings, employee, 286
First-line managers One of four mana-
gerial levels; they make short-term 
operating decisions, directing the 
daily tasks of nonmanagerial 
 personnel, 19–20
operational planning by, 143

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND14
 Helping behavior, 257–258
Hero A person whose accomplishments 
embody the values of the organiza-
tion, 233
Heuristics Strategies that simplify the 
process of making decisions, 211
Hierarchy culture Type of organiza-
tional culture that has an internal 
focus and values stability and 
 control over flexibility, 230
Hierarchy of authority Also known as 
chain of command; a control 
mechanism for making sure the 
right people do the right things at 
the right time, 241
Hierarchy of needs theory Psychologi-
cal structure proposed by Maslow 
whereby people are motivated by 
five levels of needs: (1) physiologi-
cal, (2) safety, (3) love, (4) esteem, 
and (5) self-actualization
background of, 50–51
explanation of, 379–380, 379f
High-context culture Culture in which 
people rely heavily on situational 
cues for meaning when communi-
cating with others, 122
 High-control situations, 458
 Highlighting, 504
 High-school dropouts, 361
High-touch jobs Jobs when managers 
deal with people rather than com-
puter screens or voice-response 
systems, 19
Hindsight bias The tendency of people 
to view events as being more pre-
dictable than they really are, 213
 HIPPA. See Health Insurance Portability 
& Accountability Act (HIPPA)
 Hiring decisions, ethics screening and, 86
Historical perspective In contrast to 
the contemporary perspective, the 
view of management that includes 
the classical, behavioral, and 
quantitative viewpoints, 44, 45
 “Holier-than-thou” effect, 71
 Holistic hunch, 197
Holistic wellness program Program 
that focuses on self-responsibility, 
nutritional awareness, relaxation 
techniques, physical fitness, and 
environmental awareness, 367
Hollow structure Often called network 
structure, structure in which the 
organization has a central core of 
key functions and outsources other 
functions to vendors who can do 
them cheaper or faster, 250
Horizontal communication Communi-
cation that flows within and 
 between work units; its main 
 purpose is coordination, 483
Horizontal design Arrangement in which 
teams or workgroups, either tempo-
rary or permanent, are used to im-
prove collaboration and work on 
shared tasks by breaking down in-
ternal boundaries, 247–248, 249f
 Horizontal specialization, 239, 240
 Horn-and-halo effect, 349
 Hostile environment, 291
Human capital Economic or productive 
potential of employee knowledge, 
experience, and actions, 263
 Humane orientation, 123, 123t
Human relations movement The 
movement that proposed that 
 better human relations could 
 increase worker productivity, 50–51
rules under which organizations 
may operate, 79
Grand strategies Second step in the 
strategic-management process; it 
explains how the organization’s 
mission is to be accomplished. 
Three grand strategies are growth, 
stability, and defensive, 164
formulation of, 175
types of, 175, 176t
Grapevine The unofficial communication 
system of the informal organiza-
tion, 484
 Great Recession (2007–2009)
as economic force, 81
search for meaningfullness and, 72
Greenfield venture A foreign subsidiary 
that the owning organization has 
built from scratch, 114
Grievance Complaint by an employee 
that management has violated the 
terms of the labor-management 
agreement, 297
Group cohesiveness A “we feeling” 
that binds group members 
 together, 418–420
 Group decision making. See also Decision 
making
advantages of, 214
characteristics of, 215–216
consensus and, 216
disadvantages of, 214–215
function of, 214
guidelines for, 216
problem-solving techniques for, 216–218
Groups Two or more freely interacting 
individuals who share collective 
norms, share collective goals, and 
have a common identity, 413. See 
also Teams
demands of, 365
formal vs. informal, 413–414
managing conflict in, 428–434
size of, 215, 431
stages of development for, 417–418
teams vs, 412–413
Groupthink A cohesive group’s blind un-
willingness to consider alternatives. 
This occurs when group members 
strive for agreement among them-
selves for the sake of unanimity and 
avoid accurately assessing the 
 decision situation, 214, 424
effects of, 425–426
nature of, 424–425
prevention of, 426–427
symptoms of, 425
Grown Up Digital (Tapscott), 495
Growth strategy One of three grand 
strategies, this strategy involves 
 expansion—as in sales revenues, 
market share, number of employ-
ees, or number of customers or (for 
nonprofits) clients served, 175, 176t
H
Halo effect An effect in which we form a 
positive impression of an individual 
based on a single trait, 349, 350
 Happiness
decision making and expectations 
about, 209
managing for, 17
 Hawthorne effect, 50
 Hawthorne studies, 50
 Health Insurance Portability & Account-
ability Act (HIPPA) (1996), 289t
Givebacks Negotiation tactic in which 
the union agrees to give up previ-
ous wage or benefit gains in return 
for something else, 296
Glass ceiling The metaphor for an invis-
ible barrier preventing women and 
minorities from being promoted to 
top executive jobs, 360
The Glass Closet (Browne), 361
Global economy The increasing tendency 
of the economies of the world to  
 interact with one another as one 
market instead of many national 
markets, 103–104
Globalization The trend of the world 
economy toward becoming a more 
interdependent system, 102
competition and, 102
managing for, 13–14
view of Americans and, 101
 Global management
aspects of, 107–108
attitudes and, 109–110
cultural differences and, 121–128 (See 
also Cultural differences)
exchange rates and, 119–120
expansion methods and, 110–115
expatriates and, 128
megamergers and, 105
minifirms and, 105
most favored nation trading status 
and, 119
organizations promoting trade and, 
116–117
skills for, 106
trade issues and, 115–116
trading blocs and, 117–119
travel issues and, 107–108
Global outsourcing Also called offshor-
ing; use of suppliers outside the 
United States to provide labor, 
goods, or services, 112
Global village The “shrinking” of time 
and space as air travel and the elec-
tronic media have made it easier 
for the people around the globe to 
communicate with one another, 103
Global warming One aspect of climate 
change, refers to the rise in global 
average temperature near the 
Earth’s surface, caused mostly by 
increasing concentrations in the 
atmosphere of greenhouse gases, 
such as carbon emissions from 
fossil fuels, 89–90, 537
GLOBE project A massive and ongoing 
cross-cultural investigation of nine 
cultural dimensions involved in 
leadership and organizational 
 processes., 122–123, 123t
Goal displacement The primary goal is 
subsumed to a secondary goal, 215
Goals Also known as objective; a specific 
commitment to achieve a measur-
able result within a stated period 
of time, 144
method to achieve, 151
organizational, 237
setting big, 135
SMART, 147–148
types of, 144–145
Goal-setting theory Employee-motiva-
tion approach that employees can 
be motivated by goals that are 
specific and challenging but 
achievable, 391
Government regulators Regulatory 
agencies that establish ground 

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND15
 Integrity tests, 272
 Intelligence, emotional, 342–343
 Intergroup conflict, 431
Internal audits A verification of an orga-
nization’s financial accounts and 
statements by the organization’s 
own professional staff, 528
 Internal business perspective, 522
Internal dimensions of diversity Dif-
ferences that exert a powerful, 
sustained effect throughout every 
stage of people’s lives, 358–359
Internal locus of control The belief that 
you control your own destiny, 31, 341
Internal recruiting Hiring from the in-
side, or making people already 
employed by the organization 
aware of job openings, 266, 267t
Internal stakeholders Employees, own-
ers, and the board of directors, if 
any, 75
International forces Changes in the 
economic, political, legal, and 
technological global system that 
may affect an organization, 82
 International management. See Global 
management
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
One of three principal organiza-
tions designed to facilitate inter-
national trade: its purpose is to 
assist in smoothing the flow of 
money between nations, 117
Internet The global network of indepen-
dently operating but intercon-
nected computers, linking 
hundreds of thousands of smaller 
networks around the world, 14
Interpersonal roles Of the three types 
of managerial roles, the roles in 
which managers interact with peo-
ple inside and outside their work 
units. The three interpersonal 
roles include figurehead, leader, 
and liaison activities, 26, 27t
 Interpersonal space, 125
Intervention Interference in an attempt 
to correct a problem, 318
 Interviews, employment, 270–271
Intrapreneurs Someone who works in-
side an existing organization who 
sees an opportunity for a product 
or service and mobilizes the orga-
nization’s resources to try to 
 realize it, 29, 30
Intrinsic reward The satisfaction, such 
as a feeling of accomplishment, a 
person receives from performing a 
task, 377
Intuition Making a choice without the use 
of conscious thought or logical 
 inference, 197–198
Invention The act of creating or making 
up something new, 320
ISO 9000 series Quality-control proce-
dures companies must install—
from purchasing to manufacturing 
to  inventory to shipping—that 
can be audited by independent 
quality-control experts, or 
 “registrars,” 535
ISO 14000 series Set of quality-control 
procedure that extends the concept 
of the ISO 9000 series, identifying 
standards for environmental 
 performance, 535
 Italics, 504
It’s All Politics (Reardon), 229
 Industrial psychology, 49
 Influence, leadership and, 446–447
Informal appraisals Appraisals con-
ducted on an unscheduled basis 
and consisting of less rigorous 
 indications of employee perfor-
mance than those used in formal 
appraisals, 284
Informal communication channels  
Communication that develops 
outside the formal structure and 
does not follow the chain of 
command, 484
Informal group A group formed by 
 people seeking friendship that 
has no officially appointed leader, 
although a leader may emerge 
from the membership, 414
Informational roles Managers as moni-
tors, disseminators, and spokes-
persons, 26, 27t
 Information oversimplification, 481
 Information processing, 488–489
 Information technology. See also Technology
communication and, 494–500
managing for, 14–15
productivity and, 541
 Ingratiating tactics, 446
 In-group collectivism, 122–123, 123t
 In-group exchange, 466
Initiating-structure leadership A lead-
ership behavior that organizes and 
defines—that is, “initiates the 
structure for”—what employees 
should be doing to maximize 
 output, 452
Innovation Introduction of something 
new or better, as in goods or ser-
vices, 12. See also Organizational 
change
balanced scorecard and, 522
culture and, 323
decision making and, 190
function of, 320
human capital and, 323
impact of failure on, 320, 323, 324
managing for, 305
methods to foster, 324–326
myths about, 320–321
resources and, 323
rewards and, 323
seeds of, 321
strategic planning and, 138–139
types of, 321–322
Innovative change The introduction 
of a practice that is new to the 
 organization, 313, 314
 Innovative entrepreneurs, 322
The Innovator’s Dilemma 
(Christensen), 307
Inputs The people, money, information, 
equipment, and materials required 
to produce an organization’s 
goods or services, 56
In Search of Excellence (Peters), 42
Insider trading The illegal trading of 
a company’s stock by people 
using confidential company 
 information, 85
 Inspirational appeals, 446
 Institutional collectivism, 122, 123t
 Institutional power, 381
Instrumentality The expectation that suc-
cessful performance of the task will 
lead to the outcome desired, 389
Integration The tendency of the parts of 
an organization to draw together 
to achieve a common purpose, 254
Human resource (HR) management 
The activities managers perform 
to plan for, attract, develop, and 
retain a workforce, 262–264
compensation and benefits and, 274–275
employee selection and, 268–273
labor-management issues for, 294–297, 
295t, 296f
legal issues for, 288, 289t, 290–293
orientation, training, and development 
and, 276–279
performance appraisal and, 280–284
planning and, 264–265
proactive, 301–302
promotions, transfers, discipline, and 
dismissals, 285–287, 287f
recruitment and, 266–267
social media use in, 508–509
strategic planning and, 263
Human resource inventory A report 
listing an organization’s employ-
ees by name, education, training, 
languages, and other important 
information, 265
Human skills Skills that consist of the 
ability to work well in cooperation 
with other people to get things 
done, 23
Hygiene factors Factors associated with 
job dissatisfaction—such as sal-
ary, working conditions, interper-
sonal relationships, and company 
policy—all of which affect the job 
context or environment in which 
people work, 384
I
Identity theft A violation of privacy in 
which thieves hijack your name 
and identity and use your good 
credit rating to get cash or buy 
things, 498
 iGeneration, 495, 495t
 IMF. See International Monetary Fund
 Immigration Reform & Control Act 
(1986), 289t
 Implementation, 193–194
Importing Buying goods outside the 
country and reselling them 
 domestically, 112
Import quotas A trade barrier in the 
form of a limit on the numbers of a 
product that can be imported, 116
 Improvement orientation, 531–532
 Incentives, 58, 274
Income statement Summary of an 
 organization’s financial results—
revenues and expenses—over a 
specified period of time, 527
An Inconvenient Truth (Gore), 17
Incremental budgeting Allocating in-
creased or decreased funds to a 
department by using the last bud-
get period as a reference point; 
only incremental changes in the 
budget request are reviewed, 
525–526
Individual approach One of four ap-
proaches to solving ethical dilem-
mas; ethical behavior is guided by 
what will result in the individual’s 
best long-term interests, which 
 ultimately are in everyone’s 
 self-interest, 84
 Individual objectives, 150
 Industrial engineering, 47

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND16
and is able to modify its behavior 
to reflect new knowledge, 63–64
 Legal issues. See also Ethical/legal issues
in human resource management, 288–293
white-collar crime and, 85–86
 Legends, 235–236
Legitimate power One of five sources 
of a leader’s power that results 
from formal positions with the 
 organization, 445
 Legitimating tactics, 446
 Lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgendered 
(LGBT) individuals, 361
Licensing Company X allows a foreign 
company to pay it a fee to make 
or distribute X’s product or 
service, 114
Line managers Managers who have the 
authority to make decisions and 
usually have people reporting to 
them, 244
Linguistic style A person’s characteristic 
speaking patterns—pacing, pausing, 
directness, word choice, and use of 
questions, jokes, stories, apologies, 
and similar devices, 492–493
 Listening skills, 489, 501–502, 502t
 Listening styles, 501–502
 LMX model. See Leader-member ex-
change (LMX) model of leadership
 Local communities, as stakeholders, 78–79
Locus of control Measure of how much 
people believe they control their 
fate through their own efforts, 
341–342
The Long Tail (Anderson), 306
 Love needs, 379f
Low-context culture Culture in which 
shared meanings are primarily 
 derived from written and spoken 
words, 122
 Low-control situations, 458–459
 Lying, 71, 268
M
Machiavellianism A cynical view of 
 human nature and condoning 
 opportunistic and unethical ways 
of manipulating people, putting 
 results over principles, 448
Macroenvironment In contrast to the 
task environment, it includes six 
forces: economic, technological, 
sociocultural, demographic, 
 political-legal, and international, 
80–81
stakeholders in, 81–82
Maintenance role Relationship-related 
role consisting of behavior that 
fosters constructive relationships 
among team members, 422–423
 Malcolm Baldrige National Quality 
Award, 529
Management The pursuit of organiza-
tional goals efficiently and effec-
tively by integrating the work of 
people through planning, organiz-
ing, leading, and controlling the 
organization’s resources, 4, 5
areas of, 20–21
as art or science, 60
as coping with complexity, 443
evidence-based, 59–60, 201
keys to successful, 5, 542–543
levels of, 18–20
measurement, 523–524
L
 Labor costs, multinationals and, 111
 Labor-management issues
arbitration and, 297
compensation and, 296
contract negotiation and, 294
grievance procedures and, 297
mediation and, 297
union formation and, 294
union security and workplace types 
and, 295
Labor unions Organizations of employ-
ees formed to protect and advance 
their members’ interests by bar-
gaining with management over 
job-related issues, 294
collective bargaining by, 294
compensation issues and, 296
disputes between management 
and, 297
functions of, 295
as stakeholders, 77–78
Laissez-faire leadership A form of 
leadership characterized by a gen-
eral failure to take responsibility 
for leading, 456
 Language differences, 124–125
 Layoffs, 203, 286
Leader-member exchange (LMX) 
model of leadership Model of 
leadership that emphasizes that 
leaders have different sorts of 
 relationships with different 
 subordinates, 447t, 466–467
 Leader-member relations, 458
 Leaders
coping with change, 444
managers vs., 442, 443t
relationship-oriented, 457
task-oriented, 457
transformational, 462–465
Leadership The ability to influence 
 employees to voluntarily pursue 
organizational goals, 442, 443
approaches to, 447, 447t
behavioral approaches to, 451–456, 455t
coping with change and, 444
e-leadership, 467
followers and, 467, 468
influence and, 446–447
leader-member exchange, 466–467
lessons in, 471–473
managerial, 442
power sources for, 445
relationship-oriented, 452–455
situational approaches to, 447t, 
457–461, 458t–460t
task-oriented, 451–452
trait approaches to, 447t, 448–450
transformational, 447t, 462–465, 465t
Leading Motivating, directing, and oth-
erwise influencing people to work 
hard to achieve the organization’s 
goals, 10, 512
 Lean medium, 481
Lean Six Sigma Quality-control approach 
that focuses on problem solving and 
performance improvement—speed 
with excellence—of a well-defined 
project, 536. See also Six Sigma
Learned helplessness The debilitating 
lack of faith in one’s ability to 
control one’s environment, 340
 Learning, 41, 414
Learning organization An organization 
that actively creates, acquires, and 
transfers knowledge within itself 
J
Jargon Terminology specific to a particu-
lar profession or group, 487–488
Job analysis The determination of the 
basic elements of a job, 264
Job characteristics model The job 
 design model that consists of five 
core job characteristics that affect 
three critical psychological states 
of an employee that in turn affect 
work outcomes—the employee’s 
motivation, performance, and 
 satisfaction, 393–395, 393f
Job description A summary of what the 
holder of the job does and how 
and why he or she does it, 264
Job design The division of an organiza-
tion’s work among its employees 
and the application of motiva-
tional theories to jobs to increase 
satisfaction and performance, 392
employee motivation and, 392–395, 393f
Job enlargement Increasing the num-
ber of tasks in a job to increase 
variety and motivation, 392
Job enrichment Building into a job 
such motivating factors as respon-
sibility, achievement, recognition, 
stimulating work, and advance-
ment, 392–393
 Job performance. See Performance
Job posting Placing information about 
job vacancies and qualifications on 
bulletin boards, in newsletters, and 
on the organization’s intranet, 266
 Jobs, effect of outsourcing on, 112–113
Job satisfaction The extent to which 
one feels positive or negative 
about various aspects of one’s 
work, 312, 354
Job simplification The process of reduc-
ing the number of tasks a worker 
performs, 392
Job specification Description of the 
minimum qualifications a person 
must have to perform the job suc-
cessfully, 264
Joint venture Also known as a 
strategic alliance; a U.S firm 
may form a joint venture with 
a foreign company to share the 
risks and rewards of starting a 
new enterprise together in a 
foreign country, 114
The Jungle (Sinclair), 276
Justice approach One of four ap-
proaches to solving ethical dilem-
mas; ethical behavior is guided by 
respect for impartial standards of 
fairness and equity, 85
K
 Knowledge
as competitive advantage, 308
decision making and, 191
Knowledge management Implementa-
tion of systems and practices to in-
crease the sharing of knowledge 
and information throughout an 
 organization, 15
Knowledge workers Someone whose 
occupation is principally con-
cerned with generating or inter-
preting information, as opposed to 
manual labor, 18, 263–264

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND17
 Millennials
communication methods and, 495t, 
494–495
management of, 72, 337
search for meaning, 72
 Mindguards, 425
 Mindset, 41
 Minifirms, 105
Minority dissent Dissent that occurs 
when a minority in a group pub-
licly opposes the beliefs, attitudes, 
ideas, procedures, or policies 
 assumed by the majority of the 
group, 215
Mission An organization’s purpose or 
reason for being, 140
strategic management and, 163, 165
Mission statements Statement that 
 expresses the purpose of the 
 organization, 140–141
characteristics of good, 165, 166t
 Mistakes. See Failure and mistakes
 Modeling, predictive, 204
Modular structure Seventh type of orga-
nizational structure, in which a 
firm assembles product chunks, 
or modules, provided by outside 
contractors, 250–251
Monochronic time The standard kind of 
time orientation in U.S. business; 
a preference for doing one thing at 
a time, 126
 Moral development, ethics and, 86
Moral-rights approach One of four 
 approaches to solving ethical 
 dilemmas; ethical behavior is 
guided by respect for the fundamen-
tal rights of human beings, 84–85
Most favored nation This trading status 
describes a condition in which a 
country grants other countries fa-
vorable trading treatment such as 
the reduction of import duties, 119
 Motion studies, 46
 Motivated blindness, 71
Motivating factors Factors associated 
with job satisfaction—such as 
achievement, recognition, respon-
sibility, and advancement—all of 
which affect the job content or the 
rewards of work performance, 384
Motivation Psychological processes that 
arouse and direct goal-directed 
behavior, 376–377
to be manager, 17
compensation and rewards as, 275, 
377–378, 399–400
content perspectives on, 378–385
importance of, 378
inspirational, 463
intrinsic, 382
job design perspectives on, 392–396
for job performance, 376–378
management by objectives and, 148
managing for, 375
model of, 377, 377f
nonmonetary methods for, 401–403
process perspectives of, 386–391
reinforcement perspectives on, 396–398
on teams, 420
Multicommunicating The use of tech-
nology to participate in several 
 interactions at the same time, 494
 Multicultural conflict, 431–432
Multinational corporations A business 
firm with operations in several 
countries, 107
expansion and, 110–114
rewards for, 6–7
roles of, 24–25, 27t
skill requirements for, 22–23
as transformational leaders, 465
valued traits for, 23
Maquiladoras Manufacturing plants 
 allowed to operate in Mexico with 
special privileges in return for 
 employing Mexican citizens, 111
 Marijuana, 438
Market culture Type of organizational 
culture that has a strong external 
focus and values stability and 
 control, 230
 Markets, change in, 312
 Marriage rates, 82
 Maslach Burnout Inventory, 366
 Mass media, 80
Matrix structure Fourth type of organiza-
tional structure, which combines 
functional and divisional chains of 
command in a grid so that there are 
two command structures—vertical 
and horizontal, 246–247, 248f
 MBO. See Management by objectives 
(MBO)
 MBWA. See Management by wandering 
around (MBWA)
 Meaningfulness, 17, 72
Means-end chain A hierarchy of goals; 
in the chain of management (oper-
ational, tactical, strategic), the ac-
complishment of low-level goals 
are the means leading to the ac-
complishment of high-level goals 
or ends, 144
 Measurable goals, 147
 Measurement-managed organizations, 
523–524
 Measurement management, 523–524
Mechanistic organization Organiza-
tion in which authority is central-
ized, tasks and rules are clearly 
specified, and employees are 
closely supervised, 253
 Media, 80
Media richness Indication of how well a 
particular medium conveys infor-
mation and promotes learning, 481
Mediation The process in which a neu-
tral third party, a mediator, listens 
to both sides in a dispute, makes 
suggestions, and encourages them 
to agree on a solution, 297
 Medium barriers, 485
Medium The pathway by which a mes-
sage travels, 479
 Meetings, method to streamline, 485
 Megamergers, 105
Mentor An experienced person who pro-
vided guidance to someone new in 
the work world, 8
Mercosur The largest trade bloc in Latin 
America, with five core members—
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, 
Uruguay, and Venezuela, 119
 Mergers and acquisitions
adapting to, 317
trends in, 105
Message The information to be shared, 479
 Mexico, 111, 117–118
 Microsoft Word, A1
Middle managers One of four manage-
rial levels; they implement the poli-
cies and plans of the top managers 
above them and supervise and coor-
dinate the activities of the first-line 
managers below them, 19, 143
organization types and, 21
origins of modern, 42
perspectives of, 44–45
for productivity, 540–541, 540f
rewards of practicing, 8
rewards of studying, 7–8
Management by exception Control 
principle that states that managers 
should be informed of a situation 
only if data show a significant 
 deviation from standards, 515
Management by objectives (MBO) 
Four-step process in which 
(1) managers and employees jointly 
set objectives for the employee, 
(2) managers develop action plans, 
(3) managers and employees peri-
odically review the employee’s per-
formance, and (4) the manager 
makes a performance appraisal and 
rewards the employee according to 
results, 148–149
cascading objectives in, 150
deadlines and, 150–151
elements of, 149–150
types of objectives in, 149t
Management by wandering around 
(MBWA) Style of management 
whereby a manager literally wan-
ders around the organization and 
talks with people across all lines 
of authority, 484
Management process Performing the 
planning, organizing, leading, and 
controlling necessary to get things 
done, 9
Management science Sometimes 
called operations research; branch 
of quantitative management; fo-
cuses on using mathematics to aid 
in problem solving and decision 
making, 53–54
 Management theory
administrative management, 47–48
behavioral science viewpoint, 51–53
behavioral viewpoint, 49–50
classical viewpoint, 48–49
contingency viewpoint, 58–59
evidence-based, 59–60
human relations movement, 50–51
learning organization, 63–64
management science, 53–54
operations management, 54
perspectives on, 44–45
quality-management viewpoint, 61–62
reasons to study, 43
scientific management, 45–47
systems viewpoint, 55–57
Managerial leadership The process of 
influencing others to understand 
and agree about what needs to be 
done and the process of facilitating 
individual and collective efforts to 
accomplish shared objectives, 442
 Managers
challenges facing, 11–17
communication channels and, 482–485
coping with complexity, 443
entrepreneurs vs., 30–32
expatriate, 128
functions of, 9–10
international, 109
leaders vs., 442, 443t
lessons of successful, 159
line, 244
multiplier effect and, 6
organizational change and behavior 
of, 312

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND18
 Organizational change. See also Innova-
tion; Resistance to change
adapting to, 513
external forces of, 310, 311f, 312
function of, 235
internal forces of, 312
leadership and, 443, 444
mechanisms of, 235–237
nature of, 306–308
proactive, 309–310, 327
reactive, 308, 309, 327
resistance to, 327–330, 328f
revenue growth and, 333
steps for leading, 315–316, 315t
technology and, 310, 311, 311f
as threat, 313–315, 327–330
Organizational citizenship behaviors 
Employee behaviors that are not 
directly part of employees’ job 
 descriptions—that exceed their 
work-role requirements—such as 
constructive statements about the 
department, 355–356
Organizational commitment Behavior 
that reflects the extent to which an 
employee identifies with an orga-
nization and is committed to its 
goals, 354
Organizational culture Sometimes 
called corporate culture; system of 
shared beliefs and values that de-
velops within an organization and 
guides the behavior of its members, 
227. See also Culture
change in, 235–237, 432
example of, 231
fitting in to, 225
helping behavior and, 257–258
importance of, 233–234
levels of, 232
organizational structure and, 228, 245
strategy implementation and, 226–227
stress and, 365
transmission of, 232–233
types of, 229–230
Organizational design Creating the opti-
mal structures of accountability and 
responsibility that an organization 
uses to execute its strategies, 245
boundaryless, 250–251
contingency approach to, 252–254
horizontal, 247–249
traditional, 245–247
Organizational development (OD) Set 
of techniques for implementing 
planned change to make people and 
organizations more effective, 317
applications of, 317
effectiveness of, 319
example of, 318–319
function of, 317–318
 Organizational dimensions of diversity, 359
 Organizational objectives, 150
Organizational opportunities Environ-
mental factors that the organiza-
tion may exploit for competitive 
advantage, 169
Organizational strengths The skills and 
capabilities that give the organization 
special competencies and competitive 
advantages in executing strategies in 
pursuit of its mission, 169
Organizational structure A formal sys-
tem of task and reporting relation-
ships that coordinates and motivates 
an organization’s members so that 
they can work together to achieve 
the organization’s goals, 227, 237
evaluations that are based on 
facts and that are often numerical, 
281–282
Objective Also known as goal; a specific 
commitment to achieve a measur-
able result within a stated period 
of time, 144
jointly set, 149
types of, 149t
 Observable artifacts, 232
 Occupational Safety and Health Act 
(OSHA), 289t
 OD. See Organizational development (OD)
 Office design, organizational culture 
and, 236
Offshoring Also called global outsourc-
ing; use of suppliers outside the 
United States to provide labor, 
goods, or services, 112–113
 Off-the-job training, 278
Onboarding Programs that help employ-
ees to integrate and transition to 
new jobs by making them familiar 
with corporate policies, proce-
dures, culture, and politics by 
clarifying work-role expectations 
and responsibilities, 355
 On-the-job training, 278
 Openness, 338, 433
 Open offices, 52
 Open shop, 295t
Open system System that continually 
interacts with its environment, 56
closed vs., 57
Operating plan Typically designed for a 
1-year period, this plan defines 
how a manager will conduct his or 
her business based on the action 
plan; the operating plan identifies 
clear targets such as revenues, 
cash flow, and market share, 144
Operational control Monitoring perfor-
mance to ensure that operational 
plans—day-to-day goals—are be-
ing implemented and taking correc-
tive action as needed, 517
Operational goals Goals that are set by 
and for first-line managers and 
are concerned with short-term 
matters associated with realizing 
tactical goals, 144, 145
Operational planning Determining how 
to accomplish specific tasks with 
available resources within the next 
1-week to 1-year period; done by 
first-line managers, 143
Operations management A branch of 
quantitative management; focuses 
on managing the production and 
delivery of an organization’s prod-
ucts or services more effectively, 54
 Operations research (OR), 53
Opportunities Situations that present 
possibilities for exceeding existing 
goals, 192
controls to detect, 513
recognition of, 325
Organic organizations Organization in 
which authority is decentralized, 
there are fewer rules and proce-
dures, and networks of employees 
are encouraged to cooperate and 
respond quickly to unexpected 
tasks, 253
Organizational behavior (OB) Behav-
ior that is dedicated to better un-
derstanding and managing people 
at work, 344
Multinational organization A nonprofit 
organization with operations in 
several countries, 107–108
 Multiplier effect, 6
Murder by Proxy (film), 356
 Mutual-benefit organizations, 21, 238
 Myths, 235–236
The Myths of Innovation (Berkun), 321
N
 NAFTA. See North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA)
Narcissism A self-centered perspective, 
feelings of superiority, and a drive 
for personal power and glory, 448
National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB) Legislated in 1935, U.S. 
commission that enforces proce-
dures whereby employees may 
vote to have a union and for 
 collective bargaining, 288
Natural capital The value of natural re-
sources, such as topsoil, air, water, 
and genetic diversity, which 
 humans depend on, 90–91
 Need-based perspectives. See Content 
perspectives
Needs Physiological or psychological de-
ficiencies that arouse behavior, 379
Negative reinforcement Process of 
strengthening a behavior by with-
drawing something negative, 396
 Net Generation, 494, 495
 Network structure, 250
 New entrants, threats to, 173
 NLRB. See National Labor Relations 
Board (NLRB)
Noise Any disturbance that interferes with 
the transmission of a message, 480
Nondefensive communication Com-
munication that is assertive, 
direct, and powerful, 488
 Non-measurement-managed organiza-
tions, 523–524
 Nonprofit organizations
explanation of, 21, 238
multinational, 107–108
Nonrational models of decision making 
Models of decision-making style 
that explain how managers make 
decisions; they assume that deci-
sion making is nearly always 
 uncertain and risky, making it 
 difficult for managers to make 
 optimum decisions, 196–198
Nonverbal communication Messages 
in a form other than the written or 
the spoken word, 490–491
Norming One of five stages of forming a 
team; stage three, in which con-
flicts are resolved, close relation-
ships develop, and unity and 
harmony emerge, 417–418
Norms General guidelines or rules of 
 behavior that most group or team 
members follow, 423–424
North American Free Trade Agree-
ment (NAFTA) A trading bloc 
consisting of the United States, 
Canada, and Mexico, 117–118
O
 OB. See Organizational behavior (OB)
Objective appraisals Also called 
 results appraisals; performance 

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND19
Personality The stable psychological traits 
and behavioral attributes that give a 
person his or her identity, 338, 358
core self-evaluations and, 340–342
dimensions of, 338
emotional intelligence and, 342–343
proactive, 340
Personality conflict Interpersonal op-
position based on personal dislike, 
disagreement, or differing styles, 
430–431
 Personality tests, 272, 338, 339
Personalized power Power directed at 
helping oneself, 445
 Personal power, 381
Person-organization fit The extent to 
which your personality and values 
match the climate and culture of 
an organization, 226
 Persuasion, leadership and, 446–447
Philanthropy Making charitable dona-
tions to benefit humankind, 91
 Physical area, control of, 517–518
 Physical barriers, to communication, 487
 Physiological needs, 379f
Piece rate Pay based on how much out-
put an employee produces, 399
Planning Setting goals and deciding how 
to achieve them; also, coping with 
uncertainty by formulating future 
courses of action to achieve speci-
fied results, 9, 136. See also Deci-
sion making; Strategic management
example of poor, 155–156
fundamentals of, 140
importance of, 137–139
mission statements and, 140–141
operational, 143, 143f
strategic, 136–139, 142, 143f
tactical, 143, 143f
vision statements and, 141
Planning/control cycle A cycle that has 
two planning steps (1 and 2) and two 
control steps (3 and 4), as follows: 
(1) Make the plan. (2) Carry out the 
plan. (3) Control the direction by 
comparing results with the plan. 
(4) Control the direction by taking 
corrective action in two ways—
namely (a) by correcting deviations 
in the plan being carried out, or (b) 
by improving future plans, 152, 153
 Planning tools
break-even analysis as, A4–A6
flowcharts as, A1–A3
Gantt charts as, A3–A4
 Plans, 146
 PM. See Participative management (PM)
Policy A standing plan that outlines the 
general response to a designated 
problem or situation, 146
Political-legal forces Changes in the 
way politics shape laws and laws 
shape the opportunities for and 
threats to an organization, 82
 Political stability, 127–128
 Politics, 312
Polycentric managers Managers who 
take the view that native managers 
in the foreign offices best under-
stand native personnel and prac-
tices, and so the home office 
should leave them alone, 109
Polychronic time The standard kind of 
time orientation in Mediterranean, 
Latin American, and Arab cultures; 
a preference for doing more than 
one thing at a time, 126
problem that he or she cannot deal 
with realistically, 210
Paraphrasing Form of communication 
that occurs when people restate in 
their words the crux of what they 
heard or read, 479–480
Parochialism A narrow view in which 
people see things solely through 
their own perspective, 109
Participative management (PM) The 
process of involving employees in 
setting goals, making decisions, 
solving problems, and making 
changes in the organization, 354
Passive leadership A form of leader-
ship behavior characterized by a 
lack of leadership skills, 456
Path–goal leadership model Approach 
that holds that the effective leader 
makes available to followers desir-
able rewards in the workplace and 
increases their motivation by clari-
fying the paths, or behavior, that 
will help them achieve those goals 
and providing them with support, 
459–461, 459t, 460t
 Patient Protection & Affordable Care Act 
(2010), 289t
Pay for knowledge Situation in which 
employees’ pay is tied to the num-
ber of job-relevant skills they have 
or academic degrees they earn, 400
Pay for performance Situation in which 
an employee’s pay is based on the 
results he or she achieves, 399
PDCA cycle A Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle 
using observed data for continuous 
improvement of operations, 530
 People orientation, 531
Perception Awareness; interpreting and 
understanding one’s environment, 
348
causal attributes and, 351
distortions in, 348–349
halo effect and, 349, 350
recency effect and, 351
self-fulfilling prophecy and, 352
 Performance
controls to monitor, 512–516
effect of conflict on, 429–430
evaluation of, 150, 355
job satisfaction and, 354
standards of, 515
Performance appraisals Assessment of 
an employee’s performance and 
the provision of feedback, 281
formal, 284
informal, 284
management by objectives and, 150
methods for, 282–284
objective, 281
subjective, 282
Performance management The con-
tinuous cycle of improving job 
performance through goal setting, 
feedback and coaching, and re-
wards and positive reinforcement, 
280, 280f, 281
 Performance measures, 515
 Performance orientation, 123, 123t
 Performance tests, 271
Performing The fourth of five stages of 
forming a team, in which members 
concentrate on solving problems 
and completing the assigned task, 
418
 Personal appeals, 446
 Personal career coaches, 441
contingency design of, 252–254
factors in design of, 252–254
hollow, 250
horizontal design of, 247–249
modular, 250–251
organizational culture and, 228, 245
organization chart and, 239–240
organization types and, 238
traditional design of, 245–247
virtual, 251
Organizational threats Environmental 
factors that hinder an organiza-
tion’s achieving a competitive 
 advantage, 169
Organizational weaknesses The draw-
backs that hinder an organization 
in executing strategies in pursuit 
of its mission, 169
Organization chart Box-and-lines illus-
tration of the formal relationships 
of positions of authority and the 
organization’s official positions or 
work specializations, 239–240
Organizations A group of people who 
work together to achieve some 
specific purpose. A system of con-
sciously coordinated activities or 
forces of two or more people, 5
boundaryless, 250–251
common elements of, 241–244
for-profit, 238
learning, 63–64
measurement-managed, 523–524
multinational, 107–108
mutual-benefit, 238
non-measurement-managed, 523–524
nonprofit, 238
promotion of ethics within, 86–87
responsibilities of, 73–74, 88–92
revitalization of, 317
strategic management and size of, 161
types of, 21
virtual, 251
Organizing Arranging tasks, people, and 
other resources to accomplish the 
work, 10, 512
Orientation Process of helping a new-
comer fit smoothly into the job and 
the organization, 277
The Origin and Evolution of New Busi-
nesses (Bhidé), 322
 OSHA. See Occupational Safety & Health 
Act (OSHA)
 Out-group exchange, 466
Outputs The products, services, profits, 
losses, employee satisfaction or 
discontent, and the like that are 
produced by the organization, 56
Outsourcing Using suppliers outside the 
company to provide goods and 
services, 111–112
effects of, 104, 112–113
quality improvement and, 534–535
 Overcommunicating, 493
Overconfidence bias Bias in which 
people’s subjective confidence in 
their decision making is greater 
than their objective accuracy, 
213
 Overdelivering, 225
Owners All those who can claim the orga-
nization as their legal property, 75
P
Panic Situation in which a manager 
 reacts frantically to get rid of a 

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND20
Radically innovative change Change 
involving a practice that is new to 
the industry, 314
RATER scale Scale enabling customers 
to rate the quality of a service 
along five dimensions—reliability, 
assurance, tangibles, empathy, 
and responsiveness—each on a 
scale from 1 (for very poor) to 10 
(for very good), 533
Ratio analysis The practice of evaluating 
financial ratios, 527
Rational model of decision making 
Also called the classical model; 
the style of decision making that 
explains how managers should 
make decisions; it assumes that 
managers will make logical deci-
sions that will be the optimum in 
furthering the organization’s best 
interests, 191
problems related to, 195–196
stages in, 191–195
 Rational persuasion, 446
Reactive change Change made in re-
sponse to problems or opportuni-
ties as they arise; compare 
Proactive change, 308, 309, 327
 Reading skills, 503, 503t
Realistic job preview (RJP) A picture 
of both positive and negative fea-
tures of the job and organization 
given to a job candidate before he 
or she is hired, 267
 Recalls, 67
 Receiver barriers, 485
Receiver The person for whom a message 
is intended, 479
Recency effect The tendency of people 
to remember recent information 
better than earlier information, 351
Recruiting The process of locating and at-
tracting qualified applicants for jobs 
open in the organization, 266–267
Reduced cycle time The reduction of 
steps in the work process, 535
 References, employee, 269
Referent power One of five sources of 
a leader’s power deriving from 
personal attraction, 445
 Refreezing stage of organizational 
change, 315
Reinforcement Anything that causes a 
given behavior to be repeated 
or inhibited; the four types are 
positive, negative extinction, and 
punishment
to motivate employees, 397–398
types of, 396–397
Reinforcement theory The belief that 
behavior reinforced by positive 
consequences tends to be repeated, 
whereas behavior reinforced by 
negative consequences tends not 
to be repeated, 397
Related diversification An organization 
under one ownership operates 
separate businesses that are 
 related to one another, 178–179
 Relatedness needs, 382
Relationship-oriented leadership 
Form of leadership that is 
primarily concerned with the 
 leader’s interactions with his or 
her people, 452–454
 Relationship-oriented role, 422–423
Relaxed avoidance The situation in 
which a manager decides to take 
Product innovation A change in the 
 appearance or the performance 
of a product or a service or the 
 creation of a new one, 321
 Production teams, 415
 Productivity
control systems and, 511, 513
explanation of, 540–541
importance of, 541
 Product recalls, 67
 Profit, social responsibility and, 92
Profit sharing The distribution to 
 employees of a percentage of 
the company’s profits, 400
Program A single-use plan encompass-
ing a range of projects or activi-
ties, 146
Programmed conflict Conflict designed 
to elicit different opinions without 
inciting people’s personal feelings,
432–433
Project A single-use plan of less scope and 
complexity than a program, 146
Project management software Pro-
grams for planning and scheduling 
the people, costs, and resources to 
complete a project on time, 15
 Project teams, 415
 Promotion, employee, 236–237, 285
Psychological empowerment Employ-
ees’ belief that they have control 
over their work, 353
Psychopathy A lack of concern for 
 others, impulsive behavior, and 
a dearth of remorse when the psy-
chopath’s actions harm others, 449
Punishment The process of weakening 
behavior by presenting something 
negative or withdrawing some-
thing positive, 397, 398
 Pygmalion effect, 352
Q
Quality The total ability of a product or 
service to meet customer needs, 61
Deming management and, 529–530
importance of, 12
Quality assurance A means of ensuring 
quality that focuses on the perfor-
mance of workers, urging employ-
ees to strive for “zero defects,” 61, 
529
Quality control A means of ensuring 
quality whereby errors are mini-
mized by managing each stage of 
production, 61, 529
Quality-management viewpoint Perspec-
tive that focuses on quality control, 
quality assurance, and total quality 
management, 61–62. See also Total 
quality management (TQM)
Quantitative management The appli-
cation to management of quantita-
tive techniques, such as statistics 
and computer simulations. Two 
branches of quantitative manage-
ment are management science and 
operations management, 53
 Quid pro quo harassment, 291
 Quotas, avoidance of, 111
R
 Race/ethnicity stereotypes, 349
 Racial diversity, 360–361. See also 
 Cultural differences
Ponzi scheme A scheme in which cash 
is used from newer investors to 
pay off older ones, 85, 199
Porter’s four competitive strategies 
Also called four generic strate-
gies; (1) cost leadership, (2) dif-
ferentiation, (3) cost-focus, and 
(4) focused-differentiation. The 
first two strategies focus on wide 
markets, the last two on narrow 
markets, 176–177
Porter’s model for industry analysis 
Model proposes that business-level 
strategies originate in five primary 
competitive forces in the firm’s en-
vironment: (1) threats of new en-
trants, (2) bargaining power of 
suppliers, (3) bargaining power of 
buyers, (4) threats of substitute 
products or services, and 
(5)  rivalry among competitors, 
173–174
 Position power, 458
 Positiveness, 433
Positive reinforcement The use of posi-
tive consequences to strengthen a 
particular behavior, 396–398
 Power
explanation of, 445
position, 458
sources of, 445
 Power distance, 122, 123t
 Power needs, 381
 The Practice of Management (Drucker), 42
Predictive modeling Data-mining 
 technique used to predict future 
behavior and anticipate the 
 consequences of change, 204
 Pregnant employees, 302
 Pressure tactics, 446
 Privacy Act (1974), 289t
Privacy The right of people not to reveal 
information about themselves, 
497–498
Proactive change Planned change; 
making carefully thought-out 
changes in anticipation of possible 
or expected problems or opportu-
nities; opposite of reactive change, 
309–310, 327
Proactive personality Someone who is 
apt to take initiative and persevere 
to influence the environment, 340
Problems Difficulties that inhibit the 
achievement of goals, 191
recognition of, 324–325
 Problem solving, 434
 Problem-solving teams, 415t
Procedure Also known as standard operat-
ing procedure; a standing plan that 
outlines the response to particular 
problems or circumstances, 146
Process innovation A change in the way 
a product or service is conceived, 
manufactured, or disseminated, 321
Process perspectives Theories of em-
ployee motivation concerned with 
the thought processes by which 
people decide how to act: expec-
tancy theory, equity theory, and 
goal-setting theory, 321, 386
equity theory, 386–388
expectancy theory, 388–390
goal-setting theory, 391
Product divisions Divisional structures 
in which activities are grouped 
around similar products or 
 services, 246

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND21
goals of both followers and the 
 organization—rather than to 
 oneself, 454–455, 455t
 Services companies, 534
 Setting, as nonverbal communication, 491
 Sex-role stereotypes, 349
Sexual harassment Unwanted sexual 
attention that creates an adverse 
work environment, 291–292
 Sexual orientation, 361
 Shareholders
balanced scorecard and, 520–521
change and, 312
Simple structure The first type of orga-
nizational structure, whereby an 
organization has authority cen-
tralized in a single person, as well 
as a flat hierarchy, few rules, and 
low work specialization, 245
Single-product strategy Strategy by 
which a company makes and sells 
only one product within its market, 
177–178
Single-use plans Plans developed 
for activities that are not likely 
to be repeated in the future; such 
plans can be either programs or 
projects, 146
Situational approaches An approach 
to leadership where it is believed 
that effective leadership behavior 
depends on the situation at hand, 
447t, 457–461, 458t–460t
Situational interview A structured 
interview in which the interviewer 
focuses on hypothetical 
situations, 270
Six Sigma A rigorous statistical analysis 
process that reduces defects in 
manufacturing and service-related 
industries, 536
 Sliders, 422
 Slogans, 236
SMART goals A goal that is Specific, 
Measurable, Attainable, Results 
oriented, and has Target dates, 
147–148
 Smartphones, 498–499, 499t
Social audit A systematic assessment of 
a company’s performance in im-
plementing socially responsible 
programs, often based on 
 predefined goals, 72
Social capital Economic or productive 
potential of strong, trusting, and 
cooperative relationships, 264
Socialized power Power directed at 
helping others, 445
Social loafing The tendency of people to 
exert less effort when working in 
groups than when working alone, 
421–422
Social media Internet-based and mobile 
technologies used to generate in-
teractive dialogue with members 
of a network, 14, 499
downside of, 500
effective use of, 499, 500, 500t, 508–509
used to enhance business productivity, 499
Social responsibility A manager’s duty 
to take actions that will benefit the 
interests of society as well as of 
the organization, 88
climate change and, 89–91
corporate, 89
effects of, 91–92
philanthropy and, 91
viewpoints on, 88–89
 Safety requirements, 288
Sales commission The percentage of a 
company’s earnings as the result 
of a salesperson’s sales that is 
paid to that salesperson, 399–400
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 Often 
shortened to SarbOx or SOX, es-
tablished requirements for proper 
financial record keeping for public 
companies and penalties for non-
compliance, 85, 86, 289t
 Satisficing, 215
Satisficing model One type of nonra-
tional decision-making model; 
managers seek alternatives until 
they find one that is satisfactory, 
not optimal, 196
Scenario analysis Also known as sce-
nario planning and contingency 
planning; the creation of alterna-
tive hypothetical but equally likely 
future conditions, 171
Scientific management Management 
approach that emphasizes the sci-
entific study of work methods to 
improve the productivity of 
 individual workers, 45–47
The Secret Handshake (Reardon), 229
Security A system of safeguards for pro-
tecting information technology 
against disasters, system failures, 
and unauthorized access that re-
sult in damage or loss, 497
Seeds of innovation The starting point 
for organizational innovation, 321
Selection process The screening of 
job applicants to hire the best 
 candidate, 268
background information for, 268–269
employment tests for, 271–273
interviews for, 270
 Self-actualization needs, 379f
 Self-appraisals, 283
Self-determination theory Theory that 
assumes that people are driven to 
try to grow and attain fulfillment, 
with their behavior and well-being 
influenced by three innate needs: 
competence, autonomy, and 
 relatedness, 382
Self-efficacy Belief in one’s personal 
ability to do a task, 340, 341
Self-esteem Self-respect; the extent to 
which people like or dislike them-
selves, 341
Self-fulfilling prophecy Also known as 
the Pygmalion effect; the phenom-
enon in which people’s expecta-
tions of themselves or others leads 
them to behave in ways that make 
those expectations come true, 352
Self-managed teams Groups of work-
ers who are given administrative 
oversight for their task domains, 
415t, 416, 416t
 Self-regard, 489
Self-serving bias The attributional 
 tendency to take more personal 
 responsibility for success than 
for failure, 351
Semantics The study of the meaning of 
words, 487–488
Sender The person wanting to share 
 information, 479
 Sender barriers, 485
 Sensors, 223
Servant leadership Providing increased 
service to others—meeting the 
no action in the belief that there 
will be no great negative conse-
quences, 209–210
Relaxed change The situation in which 
a manager realizes that complete 
inaction will have negative conse-
quences but opts for the first avail-
able alternative that involves low 
risk, 210
Reliability Degree to which a test measures 
the same thing consistently, so that 
an individual’s score remains about 
the same over time, assuming the 
characteristics being measured also 
remain the same, 273
 Religious values, 127
 Replicative entrepreneurs, 322
Representative bias The tendency to 
generalize from a small sample or 
a single event, 212
 Resentment, 285
Resistance to change An emotional/
behavioral response to real or 
imagined threats to an established 
work routine, 327
causes of, 327–328
process to overcome, 326
reasons for, 329–330
Responsibility The obligation one has to 
perform the assigned tasks, 243
 Results-oriented goals, 147
 Resumes, 268–269
 Retrenchment strategy. See Defensive 
strategy
 Return on assets (ROA), 527
 Return on investment (ROI), 527
 Revenue
organizational change and, 333
social responsibility and, 92
 Revised path–goal theory, 459–461
Reward power One of five sources of a 
leader’s power that results from 
the authority to reward subordi-
nates, 445
 Rewards
extrinsic, 377
for innovation, 323
intrinsic, 377
as motivation, 275, 377–378, 398–400
nonreinforcing, 330
transmission of organizational culture 
and, 236–237
 Rich medium, 481
 Ridesharing, 11–12
Right-to-work laws Statutes that prohibit 
employees from being required to 
join a union as a condition of em-
ployment, 295–296, 296f
Rites and rituals The activities and cer-
emonies, planned and unplanned, 
that celebrate important occasions 
and accomplishments in an orga-
nization’s life, 233, 235
 Role ambiguity, 365
 Role conflict, 365
 Role modeling, 236
 Role overload, 364
Roles Sets of behaviors that people 
 expect of occupants of a position, 
364–365, 422–423
Rule A standing plan that designates 
 specific required action, 146
S
 Sabbaticals, 403
 Safety needs, 379f

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND22
then compares the responses to a 
standardized set of answers, 270
Subjective appraisals Performance 
evaluations based on a manager’s 
perceptions of an employee’s traits 
or behaviors, 282
 Substance abuse, 366
Subsystems The collection of parts 
making up the whole system, 56
Sunk-cost bias Way of thinking in 
which managers add up all the 
money already spent on a project 
and conclude it is too costly to 
simply abandon it, 212
Suppliers People or organizations that 
provide supplies—that is, raw mate-
rials, services, equipment, labor, or 
energy—to other organizations, 77
bargaining power of, 174
offshore, 307–308
 Supply availability, 110
Supply chain The sequence of suppliers 
that contribute to creating and deliv-
ering a product, from raw materials 
to production to final buyers, 518
 Supportiveness, 433
Sustainability Economic development 
that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability 
of future generations to meet their 
own needs, 16, 97–98
SWOT analysis Also known as a situa-
tional analysis, the search for the 
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportuni-
ties, and Threats affecting the 
 organization, 168–169
benefit of, 174
example of, 169–170
Symbol An object, act, quality, or event 
that conveys meaning to others, 233
Synergy Situation in which the economic 
value of separate, related businesses 
under one ownership and manage-
ment is greater together than the 
businesses are worth separately, 178
System A set of interrelated parts that 
operate together to achieve a 
 common purpose, 55–56
Systems viewpoint Perspective that re-
gards the organization as a system 
of interrelated parts, 55–57
T
Tactical control Monitoring perfor-
mance to ensure that tactical 
plans—those at the divisional or 
departmental level—are being 
 implemented and taking corrective 
action as needed, 517
Tactical goals Goals that are set by and 
for middle managers and focus on 
the actions needed to achieve 
 strategic goals, 144, 145
Tactical planning Determining what 
contributions departments or simi-
lar work units can make with their 
given resources during the next 
6 months to 2 years; done by 
 middle management, 143, 143f
 Taft-Hartley Act (1947), 288
 Target dates, for goals, 148
Tariffs A trade barrier in the form of a 
customs duty, or tax, levied mainly 
on imports, 115
avoidance of, 111
disputes related to, 115–116
taking corrective action as needed, 
164, 180, 517
Strategic goals Goals that are set by 
and for top management and focus 
on objectives for the organization 
as a whole, 144–145
Strategic human resource planning 
The development of a systematic, 
comprehensive strategy for (1) un-
derstanding current employee 
needs and (2) predicting future 
employee needs, 264
Strategic management A process that 
involves managers from all parts 
of the organization in the formula-
tion and the implementation of 
strategies and strategic goals, 137
BCG matrix and, 179
benchmarking and, 173
competitive intelligence and, 167–168
firm size and, 161–162
forecasting and, 171–173
grand strategies and, 175, 176t
implementation and control in, 180–182
importance of, 137–139
mission statement and, 165, 166t
organization size and, 161
Porter’s five competitive forces and, 
173–174, 176–177
single-product strategy vs. diversification 
strategy and, 177–179
strategic positioning and, 160–161
SWOT analysis and, 168–169
vision statement and, 166, 166t
 Strategic-management process
example of crisis leading to, 162–163
steps in, 163–164
timing and, 162
 Strategic planning, 136–139, 142, 143f. 
See also Planning
Strategic positioning Strategy that at-
tempts to achieve sustainable com-
petitive advantage by preserving 
what is distinctive about a com-
pany, 160–161
Strategy A large-scale action plan that 
sets the direction for an organiza-
tion, 137
Strategy formulation The process of 
choosing among different strate-
gies and altering them to best fit 
the organization’s needs, 164
Strategy implementation The imple-
mentation of strategic plans, 164
Strategy map A visual representation of 
the four perspectives of the bal-
anced scorecard that enables man-
agers to communicate their goals 
so that everyone in the company 
can understand how their jobs are 
linked to the overall objectives of 
the organization, 522, 523
Stress The tension people feel when they 
are facing or enduring extraordi-
nary demands, constraints, or op-
portunities and are uncertain 
about their ability to handle them 
effectively, 363
consequences of, 365–366
effects of, 363
function of, 363–364
methods to reduce, 366–367
sources of, 364–365
symptoms of, 366
Stressor The source of stress, 363–364
Structured interviews Interviews in 
which the interviewer asks each 
applicant the same questions and 
Sociocultural forces Influences and 
trends originating in a country’s, a 
society’s, or a culture’s human re-
lationships and values that may 
affect an organization, 81–82
Soft skills Ability to motivate, to inspire 
trust, and to communicate with 
others, 23, 493
Sonic Boom: Globalization at Mach 
Speed (Easterbrook), 104
Span of control The number of people 
reporting directly to a given 
 manager, 242
 Speaking skills, 504–505
Special-interest groups Groups whose 
members try to influence specific 
issues, 79–80
Special-purpose team A team that 
meets to solve a special or onetime 
problem, 531
 Specific goals, 147
 SQ3R method, 503
Stability strategy One of three grand 
strategies, this strategy involves 
little or no significant change, 
175, 176t
Staff personnel Staff with advisory 
functions; they provide advice, 
recommendations, and research 
to line managers, 244
Stakeholders People whose interests 
are affected by an organization’s 
activities, 74
external, 76–82
internal, 75
Standing plans Plans developed for 
 activities that occur repeatedly 
over a period of time; such plans 
consist of policies, procedures, 
or rules, 146
Start-ups Newly created companies 
 designed to grow fast, 28
characteristics of successful, 322
example of, 26–27
Statistical process control A statisti-
cal technique that uses periodic 
random samples from production 
runs to see if quality is being 
 maintained within a standard 
range of acceptability, 535–536
Stereotypes Standardized mental pic-
tures resulting from oversimplified 
beliefs about a certain group of 
people, 349, 489
Stereotyping The tendency to attribute 
to an individual the characteristics 
one believes are typical of the 
group to which that individual 
 belongs, 348
Stock options The right to buy a com-
pany’s stock at a future date for a 
discounted price, 400
Storming The second of five stages of 
forming a team in which individ-
ual personalities, roles, and con-
flicts within the group emerge, 417
Story A narrative based on true events, 
which is repeated—and sometimes 
embellished upon—to emphasize a 
particular value, 233, 235–236
 Strategic alliances. See Joint ventures
Strategic allies Describes the relation-
ship of two organizations that join 
forces to achieve advantages nei-
ther can perform as well alone, 77
Strategic control Monitoring perfor-
mance to ensure that strategic 
plans are being implemented and 

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND23
internal processes, and technology 
that are applied to converting 
 inputs into outputs, 56
 Travel, international, 107–108
Trend analysis A hypothetical extension 
of a past series of events into the 
future, 171
Triple bottom line Representing people, 
planet, and profit (the 3 Ps)— 
measures an organization’s social, 
environmental, and financial 
 performance, 72
Trust Reciprocal faith in others’ inten-
tions and behaviors, 419
ethical behavior and, 94
retention of consumer, 37–38
on teams, 419, 423
 Trustworthiness, 489
 Tuition reimbursement, 403
Turnover The movement of employees in 
and out of an organization when 
they obtain and then leave their 
jobs, 355
Two core principles of TQM (1) People 
orientation—everyone involved 
with the organization should focus 
on delivering value to customers; 
and (2) improvement orientation—
everyone should work on continu-
ously improving the work 
processes, 531
Two-factor theory Theory that pro-
poses that work satisfaction and 
dissatisfaction arise from two dif-
ferent work factors—work satis-
faction from so-called motivating 
factors and work dissatisfaction 
from so-called hygiene factors, 
383–385
Two-tier wage contracts Contracts in 
which new employees are paid less 
or receive lesser benefits than vet-
eran employees have, 296
Type A behavior pattern Behavior 
describing people involved in a 
chronic, determined struggle to 
accomplish more in less time, 364
U
 Uncertainty, adapting to, 513
 Uncertainty avoidance, 122, 123t
Underemployed Working at a job that 
requires less education than one 
has, 361
 Unfreezing stage of organizational 
change, 314
 Unified hierarchy, 150
Union security clause Part of a labor-
management agreement that states 
that employees who receive union 
benefits must join the union, or at 
least pay dues to it, 295
 Union shop, 295t
Unity of command Principle that 
stresses an employee should report 
to no more than one manager in 
order to avoid conflicting priori-
ties and demands, 241–242
Unrelated diversification Operating 
several businesses under one own-
ership that are not related to one 
another, 178
Unstructured interviews Interviews in 
which the interviewer asks probing 
questions to find out what the 
 applicant is like, 270
 Theory X, 51
 Theory Y, 51
Thinking Fast and Slow (Kahneman), 191
 Thoughtfulness, 402
360-degree assessment A perfor-
mance appraisal in which employ-
ees are appraised not only by their 
managerial superiors but also by 
peers, subordinates, and some-
times clients, 283
 Time management, 491
 Time orientation, 125–126
 Tipping customs, 121
 Tolerance for ambiguity, 206, 322
 Top-management teams, 415t
Top managers Managers that determine 
what the organization’s long-term 
goals should be for the next 1–5 
years with the resources they expect 
to have available, 142–143, 143f
Total quality management (TQM) A 
comprehensive approach—led by 
top management and supported 
throughout the organization— 
dedicated to continuous quality 
improvement, training, and 
 customer satisfaction, 62, 530
applied to services, 533
components of, 530–532
tools and techniques for, 534–536
 Touch, 491
 TQM. See Total quality management 
(TQM)
 Trade
barriers to international, 115–116
organizations promoting, 116–117
Trade protectionism The use of govern-
ment regulations to limit the 
 import of goods and services, 115
Trading bloc Also known as an economic 
community, it is a group of nations 
within a geographical region that 
have agreed to remove trade barri-
ers with one another, 117
Training Educating technical and opera-
tional employees in how to better 
do their current jobs, 278
function of, 277–278
in organizational values, 236
types of, 278
Trait approaches to leadership At-
tempts to identify distinctive char-
acteristics that account for the 
effectiveness of leaders, 447t, 
448–450
 Traits
appraisals of, 282
“dark side,” 448–449
function of, 448
gender and, 449–450
Transactional leadership Leadership 
style that focuses on clarifying 
 employees’ roles and task require-
ments and providing rewards and 
punishments contingent on perfor-
mance, 452, 462, 463
 Transfer, employee, 285–286
Transformational innovations The in-
vention of breakthrough products 
or services that don’t exist yet and 
that are aimed at creating brand 
new markets and customers, 322
Transformational leadership Leadership 
style that transforms employees to 
pursue organizational goals over 
self-interests, 447t, 462–465, 465t
Transformation processes An organi-
zation’s capabilities in management, 
Task environment Eleven groups that 
present you with daily tasks to han-
dle: customers, competitors, suppli-
ers, distributors, strategic allies, 
employee organizations, local com-
munities, financial institutions, gov-
ernment regulators, special-interest 
groups, and mass media, 76–80
Task-oriented leadership behaviors 
Form of leadership that ensures 
that people, equipment, and other 
resources are used in an efficient 
way to accomplish the mission of a 
group or organization, 451–452
Task role Behavior that concentrates on 
getting the team’s task done, 422
 Task structure, 458
 Team-based design. See Horizontal design
Team leaders Manager who is responsi-
ble for facilitating team activities 
toward achieving key results, 20
Teams A small group of people with 
complementary skills who are 
committed to a common purpose, 
performance goals, and approach 
to which they hold themselves 
mutually accountable, 413. See 
also Groups
accountability of, 420
benefits of, 412, 412t
cohesiveness of, 419–420, 420t
cooperation on, 419
diversity and, 411, 511
effect of controls on, 514
example of, 436–437
groups vs., 412–413
groupthink on, 424–427
guidelines for effective, 419–427, 420t
high-performance, 419
managing conflict in, 428–434
motivation and accountability on, 420
norms for, 423–424
performance goals for, 420
purposes of work, 414–415
roles of individuals on, 422–423
self-managed, 416, 416t
size of, 421–422
special-purpose, 531
stages of development for, 417–418
trust on, 419, 423
types of, 415–416, 415t, 416t
virtual, 411
work, 414–415
Technical skills Skills that consist of 
the job-specific knowledge needed 
to perform well in a specialized 
field, 22
Technological forces New developments 
in methods for transforming re-
sources into goods or services, 81
 Technology
Big Data, 14, 205
communication and, 494–500
managing for, 14–15
organizational change and, 310, 311, 311f
productivity and, 511
telepresence, 496
Telecommute To work from home or re-
mote locations using a variety of 
information technologies, 15, 496
Telepresence technology High- 
definition videoconference systems 
that simulate face-to-face meeting 
between users, 496
 Telework, 496–497
 Tests. See Employment tests
Texting Quick text messages exchanged 
among smartphones, 14

GLOSSARY/SUBJECT INDEX
Glossary/Subject Index
IND24
race and ethnicity and, 360–361
sexual orientation and, 361
 Work-life benefits, 402
 Workplace
behaviors in, 354–356
bullying in, 292–293
design of, 247–248, 249f, 403
diversity in, 359–362
flexible, 401–402
informal learning in, 414
sexual harassment in, 290–293
stress in, 363–367
varying educational levels in, 361
Workplace discrimination Type of 
 discrimination that occurs when 
people are hired or promoted—or 
denied hiring or promotion—for 
reasons not relevant to the 
job, 290
employee promotion and, 285
fear of, 362
pay discrepancies and, 290–291
 Work teams, 414–415. See also Teams
World Bank One of three principal orga-
nizations designed to facilitate 
international trade: its purpose is 
to provide low-interest loans to 
 developing nations for improving 
transportation, education, health, 
and telecommunications, 117
World Trade Organization (WTO) 
One of three principal 
organizations designed to 
facilitate international trade: 
its purpose is to monitor and 
enforce trade agreements, 
116–117
 Writing skills, 503–504
Z
 Zero-based budgeting (ZBB), 525
Virtual organization An organization 
whose members are geographically 
apart, usually working with e-mail, 
collaborative computing, and other 
computer connections, 251
 Virtual teams
challenges related to, 411
explanation of, 415t
Vision A long-term goal describing 
“what” an organization wants to 
become; it is a clear sense of the 
future and the actions needed to 
get there, 141
communication of, 325–326
Vision statements Statement 
that  expresses what the organiza-
tion should become and where 
it wants to go strategically, 141, 
166, 166t
W
 Wage reopener clause, 296
 Wages, 296
Wheels (Hailey), 61
Whistle-blower An employee who re-
ports organizational misconduct to 
the public, 87, 156–157
 White-collar crime, 85–86
Wholly owned subsidiary A foreign 
subsidiary, or subordinate section 
of an organization, that is totally 
owned and controlled by an orga-
nization, 114
The Wisdom of Crowds (Surowiecki), 424
 Women. See Gender
 Word (Microsoft), A1
 Workforce
age and, 359
gender and, 360
individuals with differing physical and 
mental abilities in, 361
Upward communication Communica-
tion that flows from lower levels to 
higher levels, 483
Utilitarian approach One of four 
 approaches to solving ethical 
 dilemmas; ethical behavior is 
guided by what will result in the 
greatest good for the greatest 
number of people, 84
V
Valence The value or the importance a 
worker assigns to a possible out-
come or reward, 389
Validity Extent to which a test measures 
what it purports to measure and 
 extent to which it is free of bias, 273
 Value orientation, 206
Values Abstract ideals that guide one’s 
thinking and behavior across all 
situations; the relatively permanent 
and deeply held underlying beliefs 
and attitudes that help determine a 
person’s behavior, 84, 344
behavior and, 344, 347
enacted, 232
espoused, 232
Value system The pattern of values 
within an organization, 84
Variable budgets Allowing the alloca-
tion of resources to vary in pro-
portion with various levels of 
activity, 526
 Vertical communication, 482
 Vertical hierarchy of authority, 239
Videoconferencing Using video and 
audio links along with computers 
to let people in different locations 
see, hear, and talk with one 
 another, 15, 496
 Virtual office, 496–497

