

MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
Straight Talk about How To Do It Right
Sixth Edition
LINDA KLEBE TREVI ~NO
Distinguished Professor of Organizational Behavior and Ethics
Smeal College of Business
The Pennsylvania State University
KATHERINE A. NELSON
Instructor
Fox School of Business
Temple University

VICE PRESIDEN T & EXECUTIVE PUBLISH ER 
George Hoffman
EXECUTIVE EDITOR 
Lise Johnson
PROJECT EDITOR 
Brian Baker
EDITORIAL ASSIS TANT 
Jacqueline Hughes
DIRECTOR OF MARKETI NG 
Amy Scholz
SENIOR MARKETI NG MANAGER 
Kelly Simmons
MARKETING ASSISTANT 
Juliette San Fillipo
DESIGN DIRECTOR 
Harry Nolan
PRODUCT DESIGN ER 
Allison Morris
SENIOR PRODUCTI ON MANAGER 
Janis Soo
ASSOCIAT E PRODUCTION MANAGER 
Joel Balbin
PRODUCTION EDITOR 
Yee Lyn Song
COVER DESIGN ER 
Kenji Ngieng
COVER PHOTO CREDIT 
# na rvikk/Getty Images
This book was set in 10/12 Times Roman by Thomson Digital and printed and bound by Courier Westford. The cover
was printed by Courier Westford.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding for more than
200 years, helping people around the world meet their needs and fulfill their aspirations. Our company is built on a
foundation of principles that include responsibility to the communities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008,
we launched a Corporate Citizenship Initiative, a global effort to address the environmental, social, economic, and
ethical challenges we face in our business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper specifications
and procurement, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and charitable support.
For more information, please visit our website: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship.
Copyr ig ht # 2014, 2011, 2007, 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act,
wi th ou t e it he r t he pr io r w ritte n p er mi ss i on o f t he P ub lis he r, or a uth or iz atio n t hr oug h pa ym ent of t he a pp ro pri at e p er- co py
fe e t o t h e Co py ri gh t C le ar an ce Ce nt e r, In c. 22 2 Ro sewoo d D rive , D anve rs , M A 0 19 23 , we bs i te ww w. copyr ig ht .c om.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111
River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201)748-6011, fax (201)748-6008, website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualified academics and professionals for review purposes only, for use in their
courses during the next academic year. These copies are licensed and may not be sold or transferred to a third party.
Upon completion of the review period, please return the evaluation copy to Wiley. Return instructions and a free of
charge return mailing label are available at www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. If you have chosen to adopt this textbook for
use in your course, please accept this book as your complimentary desk copy. Outside of the United States, please
contact your local sales representative
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Trevi~no, Linda Klebe.
Managing business ethics: straight talk about how to do it right/Linda Klebe Trevi~no, Katherine A. Nelson.—
Sixth edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-58267-1 (pbk.)
1. Business ethics.
2. Business ethics--Case studies.
I. Nelson, Katherine A.
II. Title.
HF5387.T734 2014
1740.4–dc23
2013024205
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

BRIEF CONTENTS
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING
BUSINESS ETHICS: WHERE WE’RE GOING AND WHY
2
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT:
A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
38
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT:
A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
70
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’
COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
110
SECTION III MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
150
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
207
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
251
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
288
SECTION IV ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
318
CHAPTER 10 ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
351
CHAPTER 11 MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
IN A GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT
400
INDEX
447
iii


CONTENTS
PREFACE
XIII
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
XVII
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION
1
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING
BUSINESS ETHICS: WHERE WE’RE GOING AND WHY
2
Introduction
2
The Financial Disaster of 2008
4
Borrowing Was Cheap
4
Real Estate Became the Investment of Choice
5
Mortgage Originators Peddled “Liar Loans”
5
Banks Securitized the Poison and Spread it Around
6
Those Who Were Supposed to Protect Us Didn’t
7
Moving Beyond Cynicism
9
Can Business Ethics Be Taught?
14
Aren’t Bad Apples the Cause of Ethical Problems in Organizations?
14
Shouldn’t Employees Already Know the Difference between Right and Wrong?
15
Aren’t Adults’ Ethics Fully Formed and Unchangeable?
16
This Book is about Managing Ethics in Business
19
Ethics and the Law
21
Why Be Ethical? Why Bother? Who Cares?
21
Individuals Care about Ethics: The Motivation To Be Ethical
22
Employees Care about Ethics: Employee Attraction and Commitment
23
Managers Care about Ethics
24
Executive Leaders Care about Ethics
25
Industries Care about Ethics
26
Society Cares about Ethics: Business and Social Responsibility
26
The Importance of Trust
27
The Importance of Values
29
How This Book Is Structured
30
Conclusion
31
Discussion Questions
32
v

Exercise
33
Your Cynicism Quotient
33
Notes
34
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL
37
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT:
A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
38
Ethics and the Individual
38
Ethical Dilemmas
38
Prescriptive Approaches to Ethical Decision Making in Business
39
Eight Steps to Sound Ethical Decision Making in Business
51
Practical Preventive Medicine
58
Conclusion
61
Discussion Questions
61
Exercise
62
Clarifying Your Values
62
Introducing the Pinto Fires Case
63
Case: Pinto Fires
63
Short Cases
68
Notes
68
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT:
A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
70
Ethical Awareness and Ethical Judgment
70
Individual Differences, Ethical Judgment, and Ethical Behavior
74
Ethical Decision-Making Style
75
Cognitive Moral Development
76
Locus of Control
83
Machiavellianism
84
Moral Disengagement
85
Facilitators of and Barriers to Good Ethical Judgment
87
Thinking about Fact Gathering
87
Thinking about Consequences
88
Consequences as Risk
89
Thinking about Integrity
90
Thinking about Your Gut
92
Unconscious Biases
93
Emotions In Ethical Decision Making
94
Toward Ethical Action
96
Revisiting the Pinto Fires Case: Script Processing and Cost-Benefit Analysis
100
Cost-Benefit Analysis
102
Conclusion
104
vi
CONTENTS

Exercise
104
Understanding Cognitive Moral Development
104
Discussion Questions
105
Short Case
106
Notes
106
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’
COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
110
Identifying Your Values—and Voicing Them
111
People Issues
113
Discrimination
114
Harassment, Sexual and Otherwise
118
Conflicts of Interest
122
What Is It?
122
How We Can Think about This Issue
124
Why Is It an Ethical Problem?
125
Costs
125
Customer Confidence Issues
126
What Is It?
126
How We Can Think about This Issue
130
Why Is It an Ethical Problem?
130
Costs
130
Use of Corporate Resources
131
What Is It?
131
How We Can Think about This Issue
135
Why Is It an Ethical Problem?
136
Costs
136
When all Else Fails: Blowing the Whistle
136
When Do You Blow the Whistle?
139
How to Blow the Whistle
140
Conclusion
144
Discussion Questions
145
Short Cases
145
Notes
147
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION
149
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
150
Introduction
150
Organizational Ethics as Culture
151
What Is Culture?
151
Strong versus Weak Cultures
151
CONTENTS
vii

How Culture Influences Behavior: Socialization and Internalization
152
Ethical Culture: A Multisystem Framework
153
Alignment of Ethical Culture Systems
154
Ethical Leadership
156
Executive Leaders Create Culture
156
Leaders Maintain or Change Organizational Culture
157
Other Formal Cultural Systems
165
Selection Systems
165
Values and Mission Statements
167
Policies and Codes
168
Orientation and Training Programs
170
Performance Management Systems
171
Organizational Authority Structure
174
Decision-Making Processes
177
Informal Cultural Systems
178
Role Models and Heroes
179
Norms: “The Way We Do Things around Here”
180
Rituals
181
Myths and Stories
181
Language
182
Organizational Climates: Fairness, Benevolence,
Self-Interest, Principles
184
Developing and Changing the Ethical Culture
185
How an Ethical Culture Can Become an Unethical Culture
186
Becoming a More Ethical Culture
187
A Cultural Approach to Changing Organizational Ethics
189
Audit of the Ethical Culture
190
A Cultural Systems View
190
A Long-Term View
191
Assumptions about People
191
Diagnosis: the Ethical Culture Audit
191
Ethical Culture Change Intervention
193
The Ethics of Managing Organizational Ethics
195
Conclusion
195
Discussion Questions
195
Case: Culture Change at Texaco
196
Case: An Unethical Culture In Need of Change: Tap Pharmaceuticals
198
Case: “Bad to the Bone”
200
Notes
202
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
207
Introduction
207
Structuring Ethics Management
208
Making Ethics Comprehensive and Holistic
211
viii
CONTENTS

Managing Ethics: The Corporate Ethics Office
211
Ethics and Compliance Officers
211
The Ethics Infrastructure
213
The Corporate Ethics Committee
214
Communicating Ethics
215
Basic Communications Principles
215
Evaluating the Current State of Ethics Communications
218
Multiple Communication Channels for Formal Ethics Communication
220
Interactive Approaches to Ethics Communication
222
Mission or Values Statements
225
Organizational Policy
226
Codes of Conduct
227
Communicating Senior Management Commitment to Ethics
229
Formal and Informal Systems to Resolve Questions and Report Ethical Concerns
235
Using the Reward System to Reinforce the Ethics Message
238
Evaluating the Ethics Program
239
Surveys
240
Values or Compliance Approaches
241
Globalizing an Ethics Program
242
Conclusion
245
Discussion Questions
245
Short Case
246
Appendix: How Fines Are Determined under the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines
247
Notes
249
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
251
Introduction
251
In Business, Ethics is about Behavior
251
Practical Advice for Managers: Ethical Behavior
252
Our Multiple Ethical Selves
252
The Kenneth Lay Example
253
The Dennis Levine Example
255
Practical Advice for Managers: Multiple Ethical Selves
255
Rewards and Discipline
256
People Do What Is Rewarded and Avoid Doing What Is Punished
256
People Will Go the Extra Mile to Achieve Goals Set by Managers
257
How Goals Combined with Rewards Can Encourage Unethical Behavior
258
Practical Advice for Managers: Goals, Rewards, and Discipline
259
Recognize the Power of Indirect Rewards and Punishments
260
Can Managers Really Reward Ethical Behavior?
262
What About the Role of Discipline?
263
Practical Advice for Managers: Discipline
265
People Follow Group Norms
266
“Everyone’s Doing It”
266
Rationalizing Unethical Behavior
266
CONTENTS
ix

Pressure to Go Along
267
Practical Advice for Managers: Group Norms
267
People Fulfill Assigned Roles
268
The Zimbardo Prison Experiment
269
Roles at Work
270
Conflicting Roles Can Lead to Unethical Behavior
271
Roles Can Also Support Ethical Behavior
271
Practical Advice for Managers: Roles
272
Obedience to Authority: People Do What They’re Told
272
The Milgram Experiments
273
Obedience to Authority at Work
275
Practical Advice for Managers: Obedience to Authority
275
Responsibility is Diffused in Organizations
275
“Don’t Worry—We’re Taking Care of Everything”
276
Diffusing Responsibility in Groups
276
Diffusing Responsibility by Dividing Responsibility
277
Diffusing Responsibility by Creating Psychological Distance
278
Practical Advice for Managers: Personal Responsibility
279
Conclusion
280
Am I Walking My Ethical Talk?
280
Discussion Questions
281
Case: Sears, Roebuck, and Co.: The Auto Center Scandal
281
Short Case
284
Notes
285
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
288
Introduction
288
Managers and Employee Engagement
288
Managing the “Basics”
291
Hiring and Work Assignments
291
Performance Evaluation
292
Discipline
295
Terminations
297
Why Are These Ethical Problems?
299
Costs
299
Managing a Diverse Workforce
300
Diversity
301
Harassment
302
Family and Personal Issues
304
Why Are These Ethical Problems?
306
Costs
306
The Manager as a Lens
306
The Buck Stops with Managers
307
Managers Are Role Models
309
x
CONTENTS

Managing Up and Across
310
Honesty Is Rule One
311
Standards Go Both Ways
312
Conclusion
313
Discussion Questions
313
Short Cases
314
Notes
315
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
317
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
318
Introduction
318
Why Corporate Social Responsibility?
318
Types of Corporate Social Responsibility
325
Economic Responsibilities
325
Legal Responsibilities
326
Ethical Responsibilities
326
Philanthropic Responsibilities
327
Triple Bottom Line and Environmental Sustainability
330
Is Socially Responsible Business Good Business?
334
The Benefit of a Good Reputation
334
Socially Responsible Investors Reward Social Responsibility
335
The Cost of Illegal Conduct
335
The Cost of Government Regulation
337
What the Research Says about Social Responsibility and Firm Performance
339
Being Socially Responsible Because It’s the Right Thing to Do
342
Conclusion
344
Discussion Questions
344
Case: Merck and River Blindness
345
Short Case
346
Notes
347
CHAPTER 10 ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
351
Introduction
351
Managing Stakeholders
352
Ethics and Consumers
353
Conflicts of Interest
354
Product Safety
362
Advertising
367
Ethics and Employees
372
Employee Safety
372
Employee Downsizings
377
CONTENTS
xi

Ethics and Shareholders
380
Ethics and the Community
385
Why Are These Ethical Issues?
388
Costs
388
Conclusion
389
Short Cases
390
Discussion Questions
395
Notes
395
CHAPTER 11 MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY IN A GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT
400
Introduction
400
Focus on the Individual Expatriate Manager
401
The Difficulties of Foreign Business Assignments
401
The Need for Structure, Training, and Guidance
401
Foreign Language Proficiency
402
Learning about the Culture
402
Recognizing the Power of Selective Perception
404
Assumption of Behavioral Consistency
405
Assumption of Cultural Homogeneity
405
Assumption of Similarity
406
How Different Are Ethical Standards in Different Cultures—Really?
413
Development of Corporate Guidelines and Policies for Global Business Ethics
414
The Organization in a Global Business Environment
418
Deciding to Do Business in a Foreign Country
419
Development of a Transcultural Corporate Ethic
426
Conclusion
431
Discussion Questions
431
Short Case
432
Case: Selling Medical Ultrasound Technology in Asia
432
Case: Google Goes to China
436
Notes
441
INDEX
447
xii
CONTENTS

PREFACE
WHY DOES THE WORLD
NEED ANOTHER BUSINESS
ETHICS TEXT?
The popular business press is replete with feature stories describing ethical
meltdowns and how those corporate misdeeds have eroded the public trust of
business leaders and their organizations. As most of us learned at our parents’ knees,
trust and reputation are built over many years and take but an instant to be destroyed.
So here we stand at a crossroads. Is it going to be business as usual for business?
Or are businesspeople going to commit to regaining the trust of our peers, our
families, and our fellow citizens?
In response to this crisis of trust, universities across the country are scrambling to
design new courses that incorporate leadership, communication skills, the basics of
human resources management, and ethics. That’s why we wrote this book; we want to
make the study of ethics relevant to real-life work situations. We want to help business-
people regain the trust that’s been squandered in the last few years. This book is different
from other business ethics texts in several key ways: First, it was written by an unusual
team. Linda Trevi~no is Distinguished Professor of Organizational Behavior and Ethics in
the Management and Organization Department of the Smeal College of Business at the
Pennsylvania State University. Her prolific research on the management of ethical
conduct in organizations is published in the field’s best journals and is internationally
known and referenced. She has more than 25 years of experience in teachingstudents and
executives in university and nonuniversity settings, and she also has experience as a
corporate consultant and speaker on ethics and management issues. Kate Nelson is a full-
time faculty member at the Fox School of Business at Temple University in Philadelphia,
where she teaches management, business ethics, and human resources to undergraduates.
Before joining Temple’s faculty, Kate worked for more than 30 years in strategic
organizational communication and human resources at a variety of companies including
Citicorp, Merrill Lynch, and Mercer HR Consulting. She also has worked as a consultant
specializing in ethics and strategic employee communications and has designed ethics
programs for numerous organizations. We think that bringing together this diverse mix of
theory and practice makes the book unique.
Second,theapproachofthisbookispragmatic,andthatapproachisadirectresponse
to complaints and suggestions we have heard from students, employees, and corporate
xiii

executives. “Make it real,” they have said. “Tell us what we need to know to effectively
manage people. Take the mystery out of this subject that seems so murky. Get to the
point.” This book starts with the assumption that ethics in organizations is about human
behaviorinthoseorganizations.Webelievethatbehaviorresultsfromanumberoffactors,
many of which can be influenced by managers and the organizations themselves. As a
result, this book is organized into sections about individuals, managing in an organiza-
tional context, and organizations in their broader environment, the ethical dilemmas
managers face, and how they might solve them. It also features philosophical and
psychological factors of decision making, ethical culture, how managers can influence
employees’ behavior through ethical leadership, what corporations are doing to encour-
age ethical behaviorand corporatesocialresponsibility, and internationalbusiness ethics.
Third, we have used a different mix of examples than is found in conventional
business ethics texts. Most texts focus on high-level, corporate dilemmas: “Should
senior executives be paid at a particular level? Should this industry do business in
China? Should American environmental laws apply to American companies operating
overseas?” Although these are interesting issues, the vast majority of students and
employees will never have to face them. However, they will have to hire, manage,
assess performance, discipline, fire, and provide incentives for staff, as well as produce
quality products and services and deal effectively and fairly with customers, vendors,
and other stakeholders. As a result, although we do feature some classic corporate
ethics cases, many of the cases in this book center on the kinds of problems that most
people will encounter during the course of their careers. All of the “hypothetical” cases
in this text are based on actual incidents that have happened somewhere—it’s the real
stuff that goes on every day in offices across the country.
Fourth, this book was developed with the help of students at a number of
universities and with guidance from numerous managers and senior executives from
various corporations and organizations. We have incorporated the latest research on
ethics and organizational behavior into this text, and much of the material that
appears within these pages has been tested in both university and corporate settings.
Fifth, we believe this book is easy to use because it is organized to be flexible. It
can be used alone to teach an ethics course, or it can be used as a supplement to a more
conventional, philosophical text. The sections in this book basically stand alone and
can be taught in a different sequence than is presented here, and the book also has
many cases and vignettes you can use for class discussion. Wiley will create custom
versions of the text with selected chapters if requested to do so. To help teach this
course, the instructor’s guide provides resources such as outlines, overheads, discus-
sion questions, and additional cases for class discussion; it also supplies references to
many other resources that can be used to teach the course.
A NOTE TO STUDENTS
This book was written for you. We have listened to your complaints and your wish
lists and have tried to pare this complicated subject down to a digestible size. The
cases that appear in this book all happened to people just like you, who were not as
xiv
PREFACE

prepared to deal with the dilemmas as you will be after taking this course. Before
you get into this book, we have one suggestion: know that regardless of how large an
organization you find yourself in, you’re not some little cog in a giant wheel. You
have the power to change not only your own behavior and knowledge of ethics but
also the behavior and knowledge of the people you work with. Use that power: the
job you save may be your own.
We also want to suggest that when interviewing for your next job, you try to make
sure that you’re joining an organization that values ethics. Are ethics and values
described in the firm’s recruiting materials? Do organizational representatives talk
about ethics and values during their interviews with you? When you ask about how
their organization demonstrates ethics and values, does your interviewer respond
enthusiastically, or does he or she look like a deer caught in headlights so you instantly
know that he or she has never even considered this question before? It’s much easier to
get into an ethical organization in the first place than try to get out of an unethical one
later on.
PREFACE
xv


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
It takes a lot of work by a lot of people to make a project like this come together. We’ll
begin with some joint thank-yous. Then, because this process has been so meaningful
for each of us, we will separately share our more personal thanks.
We both offer our heartfelt appreciation to current and former executives who
helped us with this and previous editions, in particular, Larry Axline, Jeffrey Braun,
Jacquelyn Brevard, Earnie Broughton, Craig Cash, Frank Daly, Srinivas Dixit, Ray
Dravesky, Kent Druyvesteyn, Kim Ingham, Dennis Jorgensen, John O’Byrne, Kevin
O’Connor, Joe Paterno, Robert Paul, Jo Pease, Shirley Peterson, Vin Sarni, Carl
Skooglund, Phil Tenney, and George Wratney. All shared their valuable time and
advice, some of them on multiple occasions. Their wisdom can be found throughout
this book, but especially in Chapter 6. They helped bring the subject of managing
business ethics to life.
We also wish to thank Gary Weaver (University of Delaware) for being our
philosophy adviser for the first edition, and Dennis Gioia (Penn State faculty member
and dear friend) for sharing his Pinto fire case and especially his reflections.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is a fine publisher with a superb team. These people
encouraged, nudged, nudged, and nudged again. We have many Wiley people to thank
for helping to make this book a success.
The book’s past and present reviewers also contributed significantly to making
this a better book, and we thank them as well. We also thank our students and
particularly Penn State undergraduate, MBA, and Executive MBA students who
provide us with excellent feedback and advice semester after semester.
SPECIAL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS—FROM
LINDA K. TREVIN~ O
I have always wondered what makes people do especially good and bad things. As the
child of Holocaust survivors, I have a unique perspective on and curiosity about such
issues. My parents and their families escaped Nazi Germany before Hitler began
killing Jews en masse, but not before my maternal grandfather was severely beaten and
not before my fraternal grandfather was taken to a concentration camp (euphemis-
tically referred to as a work camp at the time). My father’s family received papers
allowing them to emigrate from Germany to the United States shortly before the war
began (in spring 1939), allowing my grandfather to be released from the camp where
he was being held (once they were able to find him!). Both families landed in New
York, where they survived through sheer grit, perseverance, and belief in the American
xvii

dream. Although my family never dwelled on their experiences in Germany, I grew up
with a special sensitivity and concern for equality and fair treatment.
I traveled to Germany with my dad and brother about 35 years ago. We visited
the tiny towns where Mom and Dad were born and met some wonderful German
people who had helped them or at least tried to. I walked through a German village
holding hands with the elderly woman who had been my maternal grandmother’s
best friend and who urged the family to leave Germany because she anticipated the
worst. I met another elderly woman who had cared for my father and aunt when they
were children and who tried to take care of their home when they were forced to
leave everything behind. These were special people, and the opportunity to connect
with them holds a special place in my heart. So my family and background
influenced me in ways I can’t fully grasp with my mind but in ways that I feel
in my soul. And I know that my quest to understand what makes people do good and
bad things has something to do with that influence.
Many special people have helped along the path that brought me to the writing
of this book. I’ll begin by thanking my mentors in the doctoral program at Texas
A&M University’s management department. Many thanks to Stuart Youngblood
(now at Texas Christian University), Don Hellriegel, Richard Woodman, Dick Daft
(now at Vanderbilt University), and Mary Zey, who encouraged my early theorizing
and research in business ethics. They told me to go with my gut and to do what was
important, and they supported my every step. My exceptional colleagues in the
Management and Organizational Department at Penn State have also been support-
ive all along the way. They have read my papers and challenged me to think harder
and make my work ever better.
My thanks also to the colleagues who have worked with me on ethics-related
research over the years and who have been partners in learning about the management
of business ethics: particularly Gail Ball, Michael Brown, Ken Butterfield, Derron
Bishop, Niki den Nieuwenboer, James Detert, David Harrison, Laura Hartman,
Jennifer Kish Gephart, Glen Kreiner, Don McCabe, Bart Victor, Gary Weaver, and
more. This shared learning has contributed to the book in important ways.
Shortly after becoming a faculty member at Penn State, I had the good fortune to
meet my friend and coauthor, Kate Nelson. I was intrigued by a brief Wall Street
Journal article about Kate’s work at Citibank (you’ll read more about that later). We
met and became fast friends, who (believe it or not) loved talking about business
ethics. We decided to write an article together, and the rest, as Kate says, is history.
Kate brought the real world into this book. She was also willing to tell me when I was
getting too academic (not her words exactly). It became clearer and clearer to me that
we were supposed to write this book together, and I’m very glad we did. Thanks, Kate!
The article became a book proposal that we first shared with publishers at the
Academy of Management meeting in 1992 (almost 20 years ago now). Shortly
thereafter, Bill Oldsey (formerly publisher at John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) showed up
in my office at Penn State. His enthusiasm for the book was immediate and infectious,
and he talked us into writing a textbook rather than a trade book. I want to thank Bill
for the special part he played.
xviii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Over the years, Penn State colleagues, administrators, and donors have continued
to support my efforts in the area of business ethics. I am grateful to the Cook family,
especially the late Ann Cook, for supporting business ethics at Smeal and the Cook
Fellowship that I held for a number of years. My thanks also to Mrs. Mercedes
Shoemaker (and her late husband, Albert) for supporting the Shoemaker program in
Business Ethics that has brought us wonderful speakers on the topic of business ethics
year after year. Finally, I am especially grateful to Dean James Thomas for naming me
Distinguished Professor of Organizational Behavior and Ethics. My association with
the Ethics Resource Center Fellows program (see www.ethics.org) has connected me
with executives who manage ethics in large business organizations as well as consultants
and those in government who are interested in making the business world (and the rest
of the world, for that matter) a more ethical place. I appreciate the relationships and
the learning that have come from this association as well as the time these executives
have shared with me. In particular, I appreciate the funding that this group has provided
for researchthat hasfounditswayintothis book,especiallyresearch onexecutive ethical
leadership.
My heartfelt thanks also go to family members, colleagues, and many dear friends
not only for cheering me on (as usual) but also for their many contributions to this
book. They have served as readers and interviewees. They have provided clipping
services, helped me make contacts, and offered ideas for cases. They were there when
I was overwhelmed. I can’t thank them enough. Finally, I thank the light of my life,
Dan, for the inspiration, love, and support he provides every day of my life and for
being one of the most ethical human beings I know.
SPECIAL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS—FROM
KATHERINE A. NELSON
I began to learn about ethics and integrity as a very young child in a family where
“doing it right” was the only option. I was blessed to grow up hearing about how your
reputation is priceless and you must always guard it and act in ways that enhance that
reputation. As a result, my biggest debt is to my parents, the late Harry R. and
Bernadette Prendergast Nelson (formerly of New Hartford, New York), and my
brother, James V. Nelson of Pasadena, California. My parents worked tirelessly to
set Jim and me on the right path, and Jim’s generosity and enthusiastic support
encouraged me not only to teach ethics but also to write this book. (Jim proved to me
that one can be an investment banker and have high ethical standards, and I’m very
proud of him.) I’m also grateful to Jim’s wife, Susan, for her many encouraging words
of support and for giving our family its two most precious additions, Conor Vincent
and James Patrick Nelson.
Thanks to my dearest friends, for their friendship, love, and support: Debra Besch,
Loren Hart, Rose Ciotta, Elizabeth Dow, Carol Dygert, Ann Frazier Hedberg, and Gail
Martin. Thanks also to the educational institutions that provided me with a sound
footing in values: Utica Catholic Academy in Utica, New York, and the College of
Mount St. Vincent in Riverdale, New York.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xix

If I had ever known how much fun it is to teach, I might have made the transition
to academia much earlier. Many thanks to the deans at the Fox School of Business
at Temple University—including Moshe Porat, Rajan Chandran, and Diana Breslin
Knudson, who took a chance on my teaching ability—and thanks to my many students
past and present, who have enriched my life in ways I could not have imagined.
Sincere thanks also to my many colleagues at Temple, who were so welcoming to
this corporate refugee and who made me feel so much a part of this wonderful
institution, especially Norm Baglini, Gary Blau, Debbie Campbell, Deanna Geddes,
Terry Halbert, and John McClendon.
Thanks go to the many executives who, each in his or her own way, taught me that
business ethics need not be an oxymoron: Christopher York, Don Armiger, Peter Thorp,
Judith Fullmer, Jerry Lieberman, and Jane Shannon—all formerly with Citicorp in New
York City; and Eugenie Dieck, Charlie Scott,and LeaPeterson, all formerly with Mercer
HR Consulting in Philadelphia and Boston. And thank you to Allan Kennedy, the
coauthor of the groundbreaking book from the late 1970s, Corporate Cultures. While
working at Citicorp as a McKinsey consultant back in 1985, Allan was the very first
person who encouraged me to go into ethics by helping me germinate the idea of
designing an ethics game for Citicorp.
Themostimportantthank-yougoestomywonderfulhusband,StephenJ.Morgan—
an honorable man if there ever was one—who inspires and loves me every day. This
book and my teaching would not be possible without his support, wisdom, and
encouragement.
Of course, a final thank-you goes to my coauthor, Linda Trevi~no, for her dear, dear
friendship and for working with me to produce this book in what, in comparison to
accounts from other writing teams, was an almost painless experience.
xx
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

S E C T I O N I
INTRODUCTION
1

C H A P T E R1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT
TALK ABOUT MANAGING
BUSINESS ETHICS: WHERE
WE’RE GOING AND WHY
INTRODUCTION
Back in 1993, when we sat down to write the first edition of this book, people
wondered if business ethics was just a fad. At that point, companies were just
beginning to introduce ethics into new-hire orientations and management training
programs. In academia, business ethics was just beginning to gain traction as a subject
for serious academic study, and some business schools were going so far as to require a
business ethics course to graduate.
Back then there was still the feeling among many experts that business ethics—like
time management, quality circles, and other management buzzwords of the day—
would soon become a footnote in texts that described business fads of the late
twentieth century. Despite multiple waves of scandal over the years, these have often
been portrayed as temporary blips. For example, one prominent business writer for
Fortune Magazine wrote an article in 2007 entitled “Business is Back!” Here’s a
choice excerpt: “It must be said: The shaming is over. The 51/2 year humiliation of
American business following the tech bubble’s burst and the Lay-Skilling-Fastow-
Ebbers-Kozlowski-Scrushy perp walks that will forever define an era has run its
course. After the pounding and the ridicule, penance has finally been done. No longer
despised by the public, increasingly speaking up and taking stands, beloved again by
investors, chastened and much changed—business is back.”1 Could he have been more
wrong? Business managed to outdo itself on the shame index yet again just about a
year later. We’ve seen these ethical debacles occur regularly for the past 25 years. As a
result, we’re convinced that business ethics is far from a fad. It’s an ongoing
phenomenon that must be better understood and managed and for which business
professionals must be better prepared.
We tell our students that serious ethical scandals often result from multiple
parties contributing in their own small or large ways to the creation of a catastrophe.
As you’ll read later on in this book, Enron’s collapse in 2001 was not just the failure
of Enron executives and employees, but also the failure of Enron’s auditors, the
2

bankers who loaned the company money, and the lawyers who never blew the
whistle on Enron’s shenanigans. However, no scandal of recent years—not even
Enron—matches the financial industry debacle in 2008. Like Enron, many players
contributed to this colossal failure. But the financial crisis was unparalleled in its
scope and has fueled public outrage like no other business disaster in our lifetime.
The aftermath has people around the world angry and mistrustful of companies,
governments, regulators, rating agencies, and the people who work in them. If there
was ever a crisis of trust and confidence, this is it. It is also a textbook-perfect
example of how numerous people’s actions (and inactions) can conspire to spawn an
almost unimaginable calamity.
Recent business history has proven beyond any doubt that divorcing business from
ethics and values runs huge risks. Rushworth Kidder,2 the highly regarded ethics writer
and thinker who died in 2012, wrote about the financial debacle and the resulting
public anger. He eloquently described how free marketers cite Adam Smith’s Wealth
of Nations to justify a breed of capitalism that abhors regulation and focuses on short-
term profits over long-term stewardship. Kidder wisely noted that 17 years before his
more famous book, Smith wrote another one entitled The Theory of Moral Sentiments.
Smith’s first book deserves more attention because he always presumed that the
messages from these two books would go hand in hand. Smith’s “moral sentiments”
work rests on the assumption that human beings are empathetic; they care about others,
and they derive the most joy from human love and friendship. His book opened with the
following statement: “How selfish soever man may be supposed, there are evidently
some principles in his nature, which interest him in the fortune of others. . . . ”3 Smith
believed that a good life derives from the expression of “beneficence,” not from material
wealth. He proposed that self-love (which he also acknowledged) can spur the
individual to better his own condition by besting competitors. But he argued that
this must be done in a just manner and in the spirit of fair play as judged by an informed,
ethical, and impartial spectator. We care what others think of us because we are first and
foremost social beings. But we also are moral beings who want to do the right thing
becauseitistherightthingtodo(notjusttowinthepraiseofothers).AccordingtoSmith,
virtuous persons balance prudence (mature self-love), strict justice, and benevolence,
and ideal societies are comprised of such persons. Finally, a flourishing and happy
society is built upon a foundation of justice and rules of conduct that create social order.
Smith was confident that humankind would progress toward this positive ethical state;
he called on leaders to avoid the arrogance of power and, instead, to be virtuous
statesmen. Kidder’s point was that capitalism will succeed only when firmly tethered to
a moral base, and he reminds us that Adam Smith—that hero of free marketers—knew
this better than anyone.
We completely agree. We began this book almost 20 years ago with the firm belief
that business isn’t just “better” when companies and businesspeople are ethical, but
rather that good ethics is absolutely essential for effective business practice. This is not
just empty rhetoric. Work is essential to life, and most people work for a business of
some kind. How we work and the standards we uphold while we are working affect
much more than just commerce. Our business behavior also affects our personal and
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
3

company reputations, politics, society at large, and even our national reputation. For
example, the 2008 financial crisis, while global in scope, had its roots in the United
States, and the nation’s reputation has suffered because of the behavior of individuals
and companies. Similarly, China’s reputation has suffered because of contaminants
found in Chinese exports such as infant formula, drywall (used in construction), and
children’s toys. So, corporate misbehavior does not happen in a vacuum, and it’s not
just corporate reputations that suffer as a result. These scandals cast long shadows, and
they often affect entire industries and countries. In this complex and increasingly
transparent world, where reputation influences everything from who wants to hire you
or trade with you to who buys your products to who finances your debt—and much
more—unethical behavior in business is a very big deal indeed. So, let’s take a closer
look at the elephant in the room: the near collapse of the financial markets in 2008 and
what it has to do with business ethics.
THE FINANCIAL DISASTER OF 2008
The implosion of the financial markets in 2008 was largely not the result of illegal
behavior. For the most part, the activities that brought down the U.S. economy and
others around the world were not against the law, at least not yet (government
regulators and the legal system often play catch-up after ethical debacles in business).
Many of those activities, however, were unethical in that they ultimately produced
great harm and were contrary to a number of ethical principles such as responsibility,
transparency, and fairness. Let’s start with some of the factors that laid the groundwork
for the disaster in the United States.
Borrowing Was Cheap
First, borrowing money became really cheap. In 2000, stocks in high-technology
companies had soared to unsustainable heights, and that bubble finally burst. To soften
the effects on the U.S. financial markets, Alan Greenspan, who headed the Federal
Reserve at that time, lowered the Federal Funds rate (the rate banks charge each other
for overnight loans, which has a direct impact on short-term interest rates, including
the prime rate) to almost zero. That move, seemingly innocent at the time, injected
huge amounts of money into the U.S. financial system. It made the cost of borrowing
so low that it fueled a glut of consumer borrowing. Suddenly, it was amazingly cheap
to buy a new car, a wide-screen television, a backyard pool, a larger home, a second
home, and all sorts of designer goodies. There was even encouragement to indulge.
Following the terrorist attacks in September 2001, President George W. Bush told
people that if they wanted to help the economy they should go shopping. And people
did. Household debt levels rose to $13.9 billion in 2008, almost double what house-
holds owed in 2000, and savings dipped into negative territory. Responsible borrowers
should have thought about what they could afford rather than what bankers would lend
to them. And responsible lenders should have established that borrowers could
actually afford to pay back the loans before lending them money.
4
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

Real Estate Became the Investment of Choice
Of course, people also want to invest in something safe, and what could be safer than
real estate? There had been relatively few instances of real estate values declining, and
when they did the declines were generally shallow and short-lived. A point of pride in
the United States was the high percentage of Americans who owned their own homes.
Investing in a home traditionally had been a very safe investment and one that was slow
to appreciate in value. But suddenly in the early 2000s, real estate investing became a
real moneymaker. With a backdrop of historically low interest rates, real estate became
such a popular way to invest that demand soon outstripped supply and prices soared.
The value of homes skyrocketed—homes that were selling for $300,000 in one year
sold for $450,000 the next. Prices rose so fast that speculation grew tremendously.
People bought houses with almost no down payment, remodeled them or waited a few
months, and then resold the houses for a quick profit. A number of popular television
programs showed viewers how to “flip” real estate properties for profit.
Since the cost of borrowing was so low and home equity had grown so quickly,
many consumers borrowed on the equity in their homes and purchased additional real
estate or a new car or financed a luxury vacation. For example, suppose someone
purchased a house for $500,000 in 2003. By 2005, the home might have been worth
$800,000. The home owner refinanced the mortgage—borrowing as much as the entire
current worth of the house (because its value could only go up, right?), which resulted
in a $300,000 cash infusion for the home owner. This practice was very popular, and it
laid the groundwork for a huge disaster when the housing values fell off a cliff in 2008
and 2009. Imagine the home owner who refinanced the home just described. Imagine
that he took the $300,000 and purchased a summer home and a sports car and paid for
his children’s college educations. Suddenly, home values plummeted and his house
lost 30 percent of its value, which was common in markets such as California, Florida,
Nevada, and Arizona, where the real estate bubble was particularly inflated. After the
real estate bubble burst, his house was worth $560,000. Now suppose he loses his job
and needs to sell his house because he can’t afford the mortgage payments. He can’t
get $800,000 for his home, which is what he owes on his mortgage. His only choice is
to work with the mortgage holder (probably a bank) to refinance (unlikely) or declare
bankruptcy and walk away from the house. This is what a lot of home owners have
done, and it is one of the factors at the heart of the current financial crisis. Lots of folks
were in on this bubble mentality, getting what they could in the short term and not
thinking very much about the likelihood (or inevitability) that the bubble would burst.
Mortgage Originators Peddled “Liar Loans”
In the early 2000s, as housing investments increased in popularity, more and more
people got involved. Congress urged lenders Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae to expand
home ownership to lower-income Americans. Mortgage lenders began to rethink the
old rules of financing home ownership. As recently as the late 1990s, potential home
owners not only had to provide solid proof of employment and income to qualify for a
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
5

mortgage, but they also had to make a cash down payment of between 5 and 20 percent
of the estimated value of the home. But real estate was so hot and returns on
investment were growing so quickly that mortgage lenders decided to loosen those
“old-fashioned” credit restrictions. In the early 2000s, the rules for obtaining a mortgage
became way less restrictive. Suddenly, because real estate values were rising so quickly,
borrowers didn’t have to put any money down on a house. They could borrow the entire
estimated worth of the house; this is known as 100-percent financing. Also, borrowers
no longer needed to provide proof of employment or income. These were popularly
called “no doc” (no documentation) or “liar loans” because banks weren’t bothering
to verify the “truth” of what borrowers were claiming on their mortgage applications.
This complete abandonment of lending standards opened the mortgage market to
rampant fraud, and it was not exactly a secret. The FBI warned of an “epidemic” of
mortgage fraud back in 2004, four years before that epidemic torpedoed the financial
industry.4
Banks Securitized the Poison and Spread It Around
At about the same time liar loans were becoming popular, another new practice was
introduced to mortgage markets. Investors in developing countries were looking
to the United States and its seemingly “safe” markets for investment opportunities.
Cash poured into the country from abroad—especially from countries like China
and Russia, which were awash in cash from manufacturing and oil, respectively. Wall
Street bankers developed new products to provide investment vehicles for this new
cash. One new product involved the securitization of mortgages. (Note: structured
finance began in 1984, when a large number of GMAC auto receivables were bundled
into a single security by First Boston Corporation, now part of Credit Suisse.) Here’s
how it worked: Instead of your bank keeping your mortgage until it matured, as had
traditionally been the case, your bank would sell your mortgage—usually to a larger
bank that would then combine your mortgage with many others (reducing the bank’s
incentive to be sure you would pay it back). Then the bankers sold these mortgage-
backed securities to investors, which seemed like a great idea at the time. Real estate
was traditionally safe, and “slicing and dicing” mortgages divided the risk into small
pieces with different credit ratings and spread the risk around.
Of course, the reverse was also true, as the bankers learned to their horror. This
method of dividing mortgages into little pieces and spreading them around could also
spread the contagion of poor risk. However, starting in 2002 and for several years
thereafter, people couldn’t imagine housing values falling. So much money poured
into the system, and the demand for these mortgage-backed security products was so
great, that bankers demanded more and more mortgages from mortgage originators.
That situation encouraged the traditional barriers to getting a home mortgage to fall
even farther. These investment vehicles were also based upon extremely complex
mathematical formulas (and old numbers) that everyone took on faith and few
attempted to understand. It looks like more people should have followed Warren
Buffett’s sage advice not to invest in anything you don’t understand!
6
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

Add to that toxic mix the relatively new idea of credit-default swaps (CDS). These
complex financial instruments were created to mitigate the risk financial firms took
when peddling products such as securitized mortgages. CDS are insurance contracts
that protect the holder against an event of default on the part of a debtor. One need not
own the loan or debt instrument to own the protection, and the amount of capital tied
up in trading CDS is very small compared to trading other debt instruments. That is a
very significant part in the increase in the popularity of CDS at sell-side and buy-side
trading desks. The insurance company AIG was a huge player in this market, and so
were the large banks. The firms that were counterparties to CDS never stepped back
from the trading frenzy to imagine what would happen if both the structured finance
market and the real estate bubble burst (as all bubbles eventually do) at the same time.
Both underwriters and investors would be left holding the bag when the music stopped
playing—and the U.S. taxpayer has had to bail out most of the financially stressed
firms to save the entire financial system from collapse. Please note that all of this
happened in a part of the market that was virtually unregulated.
Those Who Were Supposed to Protect Us Didn’t
Oneprotection against financialcalamitywasthought to bethe rating agencies, including
Standard and Poor’s and Moody’s. They rate the safety or soundness of securities, in-
cluding those securitized mortgage products. A credit opinion is defined as one which
rates the timeliness and ultimate repayment of principal and interest. But, like everyone
else, the rating agencies say they didn’t foresee a decline in housing prices; and con-
sequently, they rated the mortgage securities as being AAA—the highest rating possible,
which meant that the rating agencies considered these securities to be highly safe.
The agencies are the subject of much criticism for their role in the crisis. If they
had done a better job analyzing the risk (their responsibility), much of the crisis might
have been avoided. But note that these rating agencies are hired and paid by the
companies whose products they rate, thus causing a conflict of interest that many
believe biased their ratings in a positive direction. So, people who thought they were
making responsible investments because they checked the ratings were misled.
Another protection that failed was the network of risk managers and boards of
directors of the financial community. How is it that one 400-person business that was
part of the formerly successful insurance behemoth, AIG, could invest in such a way
that it brought the world’s largest insurance company to its knees? The risk was
underestimated all around by those professionals charged with anticipating such
problems and by the board of directors that didn’t see the problem coming. The U.S.
government (actually taxpayers) ended up bailing out AIG to the tune of $170 billion.
The risk managers and boards of other financial firms such as Citigroup, Merrill
Lynch, Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns, and Wachovia were similarly blind.
On Wall Street, there were other contributing factors. First, bank CEOs and other
executives were paid huge salaries to keep the price of their firms’ stocks at high
levels. If their institutions lost money, their personal payouts would shrink. As a result,
bank executives focused on short-term financial results often to the exclusion of
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
7

long-term planning or organizational strategy. Since their compensation packages were
directly tied to the company stock price, they were paid handsomely for their efforts to
bolster short-term profits. The Wall Street traders were similarly compensated—they
were paid multimillion-dollar bonuses for taking outsized risks in the market. What
seemed to matter most were the short-term profits of the firm and the short-term
compensation of those making risky decisions. The traders took risks, the bets were at
least temporarily successful, and the bankers walked off with multimillion-dollar
bonuses. It didn’t matter that the risk taking was foolish and completely irresponsible
in the long run. The bonus had already been paid. Consequently, a short-term mentality
took firm root among the nation’s bankers, CEOs, and boards of directors.
If you thought that bankers’ behavior would change as a result of the financial
debacle, think again. In 2012, JPMorgan Chase—which in the wake of the financial
crisis was described by many experts as being the best managed U.S. bank—
suffered a huge loss at the hands of a rogue trader in its London office. The initial
losses were estimated to be $2 billion, but later revised to be perhaps as high as
$9 billion—in the same exact type of investments that created the financial
catastrophe just a few years earlier.5
Finally, we cannot examine the financial crisis without questioning the role
of regulatory agencies and legislators. For example, for a decade, investor Harry
Markopolos tried on numerous occasions to spur the Securities and Exchange
Commission to investigate Bernard L. Madoff. The SEC never did uncover the largest
Ponzi scheme in the history of finance. The 65-billion-dollar swindle unraveled
only when Madoff admitted the fraud to his sons, who alerted the SEC and the U.S.
attorney’s office in New York in December 2008.
Others who are culpable in the financial crisis are members of the U.S. Congress,
who deregulated the financial industry, the source of some of their largest campaign
contributions. Among other things, they repealed the Glass-Steagall Act, which had
been passed after the U.S. stock market crash in 1929 to protect commercial banking
customers from the aggression and extreme risk taking of investment bank cultures.
The act created separate institutions for commercial and investment banks, and they
stayed separate until the merger of Citicorp and Travelers to form Citigroup in 1998.
The two companies petitioned Congress to eliminate Glass-Steagall, claiming that it
was an old, restrictive law and that today’s markets were too modern and sophisticated
to need such protection. And Congress listened.
Those 1930s congressmen knew that if the two banking cultures tried to exist
in the same company—the staid, conservative culture of commercial banking (our
savings and checking accounts) and the razzle-dazzle, high-risk culture of investment
banking—the “eat what you kill” investment bank culture would win out. Some said
that staid old commercial banks turned into “casinos.” But, interestingly, casinos are
highly regulated and are required to keep funds on hand to pay winners. In the coming
months, we expect to learn more about the behavior that led to this crisis. As we noted
earlier, much if not most of it was probably legal because of the lack of regulation in
the mortgage and investment banking industries. But look at the outcome! If only
ethical antennae had been more sensitive, more people might have questioned
8
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

products they didn’t understand, or spoken out or refused to participate in practices
that were clearly questionable. As just one tiny example, could anyone have thought it
was ethical to sell a product they called a liar loan, knowing that the customer surely
would be unable to repay (even if it was legal to do so)?
In 2010, the U.S. Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Financial Regulation
Legislation—an attempt to rein in the most egregious practices in the financial industry.
Financial institution lobbyists continue trying to water down the effects of this bill as
regulators work to implement its complex regulations. Several European countries may
be ahead of the U.S. when it comes to comprehensive financial regulation reform.6
What’s increasingly clear is that corruption exists among the world’s leading
financial institutions and that sometimes they collude in that corruption. If you think
that is an exaggeration, please read about the LIBOR scandal that broke during the
summer of 2012. LIBOR, which stands for the London Interbank Offered Rate, is the
interest rate by which banks can borrow from one another. LIBOR is important
because so many of the loans around the world—mortgage rates, car loans, corporate
debt, etc., are pegged to those LIBOR rates. Experts estimate that hundreds of trillions
of dollars worth of financial contracts and derivatives are tied to LIBOR.
Regulators in several countries have accused a number of global financial
institutions with cooperating with one another to rig LIBOR rates to make themselves
appear healthier in the wake of the financial collapse of 2008–2009. As this book goes
to press, two huge banks have already settled charges that they manipulated LIBOR
rates. Barclays paid $450 million and UBS is paying $1.5 billion to U.S., U.K., and
Swiss regulators for their part in the crisis. This crisis is far from over, because the UBS
settlement not only charges that UBS manipulated rates to make itself look healthier,
but also that it colluded with other global banks to make money from the manipulated
rates. This is the equivalent of the big players admitting that the game is fixed. The
banks under investigation include the largest firms in the world: Bank of America,
JPMorgan Chase, Morgan Stanley, Citigroup, and Bank of England, among others.7
One Wall Street veteran described the scandal this way: “It’s like finding out that the
whole world is on quicksand.”8
Let’s delve into the cynicism that this and previous scandals have created and then
try to move beyond it so that you can do things differently in the future.
MOVING BEYOND CYNICISM
After multiple waves of business scandals, some cynicism (a general distrust) about
business and its role in society is probably healthy. However, cynicism about business
has truly become an epidemic in the United States. To be fair, we should note that
although the financial industry screwed up royally, at the same time most other
mainstream American companies were “running their companies with strong balance
sheets and sensible business models.”9 Most companies were responsible, profitable,
and prudent. Because they had serious cash reserves, many of them have actually
managed to weather the recent crises reasonably well. But the attention has not been on
these responsible companies. It’s been on the financial sector and its irresponsibility.
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
9

How bad is the cynicism? According to the 2012 Edelman Trust Barometer10—a
survey of almost 30,000 college-educated people around the world—it’s very bad,
especially in the United States. (Edelman is the world’s largest independent public
relations firm with 53 offices around the world. Its business is helping companies build
and maintain reputations.) Edelman’s study shows that consumer trust in corporations
has declined precipitously. More than half of the respondents stated that they trust
business less than they did four years ago (in 2008). The decrease is particularly acute
in the United States, where citizens have traditionally had higher opinions of business
than they do in Europe. For example, only 35 percent of Americans surveyed trust
banks to be ethical—a 34-point drop since 2008. The only part of the world where trust
levels have not declined is in the developing world—the so-called BRIC nations
(Brazil, Russia, India, China).
The Edelman study also highlights the importance of consumer trust—the degree
to which consumers trust organizations has a direct impact on their buying patterns and
much more. Over a one-year period, 91 percent of consumers stated that they purchased
a product of service from a company they trust, and 77 percent of consumers refused to
purchase a product or service from a company that they mistrusted. These figures
suggest that corporate reputations affect consumer buying patterns, and companies risk
harming their bottom line when they do not act to protect their good name.
However, consistent with our idea that business ethics is not a fad, neither is
public cynicism about business ethics new. We have written about it in every edition
of our book (since 1995). Surely, the factor that has contributed the most to cynicism
in recent years is the highly visible behavior of some of the nation’s leading
corporations and executives, whose activities have garnered so much space in the
business press and on the evening news. How do you watch hour after hour of such
reporting and not walk away jaded? In the last few years, all you had to do was read
about or watch the news to feel cynical, and business school students are no
exception. We also note that business is not alone in its scandalous behavior. In
recent years, we’ve learned about government employees who stole or misused funds,
academics who falsified their research results, ministers who stole from their
congregations, priests who abused children, and athletes who took bribes or used
performance-enhancing drugs. It seems that no societal sector is immune.
Many of our readers are business school students, the current or future managers
of business enterprises. Surveys suggest that many business students are themselves
surprisingly cynical about business (given that they’ve chosen it as their future
profession). They may believe that they’ll be expected to check their ethics at the
corporate door or that they will be pressured to compromise their own ethical
standards in order to succeed.11 Consider this scenario that took place at a large
university: A professor asked his class to name management behaviors that are morally
repugnant. His class struggled to name one! In another of his classes, the professor
asked if the students would dump carcinogens in a river. This time the class agreed that
they would do so because if they didn’t, someone else would. When the professor
asked if they really wanted to live in such a cynical environment, the class insisted that
they already did. The dismayed professor believed that the attitudes of his students
10
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

were formed long before they landed in his classroom. He agreed with other observers
that the problem goes way beyond business and business schools and that our society,
with its emphasis on money and material success, is rearing young people who strive
for achievement at any cost. One symptom: cheating is pervasive in many high schools
and colleges.12
This scenario is enough to make anyone wonder about today’s business students.
But at the same time, we know that students at many colleges and universities,
including business schools, are encouraging their own faculty and administrators to
establish newly invigorated academic integrity policies and honor codes. In an honor
code community, students take responsibility for implementing the academic integrity
policy and for holding each other accountable to it. They manage study-run judiciaries
that mete out serious discipline to their fellow students who tarnish the community by
cheating. These efforts, which are gaining real traction at many schools, suggest that at
least some students have had enough and are willing to turn from cynicism toward a
proactive approach to change things.
A 2008 Aspen Institute study of nearly 2,000 MBA students from 15 leading
international business schools provides some insight into MBA students’ attitudes,
which appear to be moving in a less cynical direction. Similar to the findings they
obtained in a 2002 survey, the results of Aspen’s 2008 survey of MBA students indicate
that the students anticipate facing difficult conflicts regarding values in their jobs, and
they suggest some cynicism about ethics in the workplace. However, about 40 percent
of these students believe that their business education is preparing them to manage
values conflicts “a lot,” and another 50 percent believe that they’re being prepared
“somewhat.” Also, more than a quarter of the respondents said they are interested in
finding a job that gives them the opportunity to contribute to society (compared to only
15 percent in 2002). More than half believe that safe, high-quality products and res-
ponsible governance and transparent business practices are very important in a potential
employer. In addition, more than half said they would advocate alternative values or
approaches in response to values conflicts at work (many more than in 2002).13
The media may be largely responsible for students’ cynical attitudes. Think about
the depiction of business and its leaders in movies and on television. The Media
Research Center conducted a survey of 863 network TV sitcoms, dramas, and movies
in the mid-1990s. Nearly 30 percent of the criminal characters in these programs were
business owners or corporate executives. Entrepreneurs were represented as drug
dealers, kidnappers, or sellers of defective gear to the military.14Fortune magazine
called this “the rise of corporate villainy in prime time.”15 Movies have abounded with
negative messages about corporate America. Think Arbitrage, Avatar, Inside Job, Up
in the Air, The Constant Gardner, Gasland, Wall Street, Boiler Room, Civil Action,
Glengarry Glen Ross, The Insider, Erin Brockovich, Supersize Me, The Corporation,
Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room, Michael Clayton, The International, Quiz
Show, The Insider, and Bowling for Columbine. And there are more such movies every
year; we’re sure you can add to the list. A much tougher exercise is to generate a list
of movies and television shows that actually create a positive ethical impression of
business. Can you think of any? The consistent negative representation of business
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
11

in the media has its effects. Academic research suggests that cynicism toward
American business increased after study participants viewed the film Roger & Me,
which depicted ruthless plant closings and layoffs at General Motors.16 Imagine the
cumulative, daunting effect of viewing countless movies and television programs that
portray business as corrupt and business leaders as ruthless and unethical.
To counter that media-fueled cynicism at least somewhat, we encourage you
to think about your own life and the hundreds of reliable products and services
you trust and depend on every day as well as the people and businesses that produce
them. These good folks are businesspeople too, but it isn’t nearly as exciting or sexy
for the media to portray businesspeople who do the right thing every day. We also
encourage you to talk with businesspeople you know, perhaps people in your own
family who work for businesses. Do they feel pressured to compromise their ethical
standards, or do they see their employer in a more positive light?
Interestingly, the Ethics Resource Center’s 2011 National Business Ethics Survey
found that only 13 percent of employees of for-profit enterprises report feeling
pressured to compromise their ethical standards. That means that more than 87 percent
say that they’re not feeling such pressure. Also, nearly two-thirds of these employees
said that their own company has a strong or strong-leaning ethical culture. What do
these numbers mean? To us, it means that most Americans who work in business think
that their own company and coworkers are pretty ethical. Still, they read the same
media accounts and see the same movies and TV programs as everyone else, and these
offerings influence cynicism about American business in general.17
Finally, we won’t leave a discussion of cynicism without talking about the events
of September 11, 2001. While the business scandals of 2001–02 left many cynical, the
events of September 11, 2001, showed us some of the best in many individuals and
businesses. We have read about the care, compassion, and assistance that countless
American firms gave to those who were harmed by the terrorist attacks. Few firms
were hit as hard as Sandler O’Neill & Partners, a small but profitable Wall Street
investment bank that lost 66 of its 171 employees—including two of the firm’s
leading partners—on September 11. The firm’s offices were on the 104th floor of the
World Trade Center. Despite its dire financial straits, the firm sent every deceased
employee’s family a check in the amount of the employee’s salary through the end of
the year and extended health-care benefits for five years. Bank of America quickly
donated office space for the firm to use. Competitors sent commissions their way and
freely gave the company essential information that was lost with the traders who had
died. Larger Wall Street firms took it upon themselves to include Sandler in their
deals. The goal was simply to help Sandler earn some money and get back on its
feet.18 This is only one of the many stories that point to the good that exists in the
heart of American business. In this book, we offer a number of positive stories to
counterbalance the mostly negative stories portrayed in the media.
The bottom line is this. We’re as frustrated as you are about the media portrayal
of business and the very real, unethical behavior that regularly occurs in the business
community. But we also know that the business landscape is a varied one that is
actually dominated by good, solid businesses and people who are even heroic and
12
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

extraordinarily giving at times. So, for our cynical readers, we want to help by doing
two things in this book: (1) empowering managers with the tools they need to
address ethical problems and manage for ethical behavior, and (2) providing positive
examples of people and organizations who are “doing things right” to offset some of
the media-fueled negativity.
In May 2009, something notable and quite positive happened. A group of 20
second-year students at Harvard Business School created The MBA Oath in an attempt
to articulate the values they felt their MBA degree ought to stand for:
THE MBA OATH
As a business leader I recognize my role in society.
& My purpose is to lead people and manage resources to create value
that no single individual can create alone.
& My decisions affect the well-being of individuals inside and outside
my enterprise, today and tomorrow.
Therefore I promise:
& I will manage my enterprise with loyalty and care, and will not
advance my personal interests at the expense of my enterprise or
society.
& I will understand and uphold, in letter and spirit, the laws and contracts
governing my conduct and that of my enterprise.
& I will refrain from corruption, unfair competition, or business
practices harmful to society.
& I will protect the human rights and dignity of all people affected by my
enterprise, and I will oppose discrimination and exploitation.
& I will protect the right of future generations to advance their standard
of living and enjoy a healthy planet.
& I will report the performance and risks of my enterprise accurately and
honestly.
& I will invest in developing myself and others, helping the management
profession continue to advance and create sustainable and inclusive
prosperity.
In exercising my professional duties according to these principles, I
recognize that my behavior must set an example of integrity, eliciting trust and
esteem from those I serve. I will remain accountable to my peers and to society
for my actions and for upholding these standards.
This oath I make freely, and upon my honor.
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
13

This focus o n posi tive values among busin ess student s and business in general
received sign ificant publici ty and turned int o someth ing of a movement. More than
400 graduate s o f Harvard Bus iness School sign ed the oath , and they wer e joi ned b y
more than 6 ,000 busin ess stud ents from 300 other colleges and universities globally.
For more informat ion, go to www.mbaoat h.org.
CAN BUSINESS ETHICS BE TAUGHT?
Given all that has happened, you may be wondering whether business ethics can be
taught. Perhaps all of the bad behavior we outlined earlier results from a relatively few
“bad apples” who never learned ethics from their families, clergy, previous schools, or
employers.19 If this were so, ethics education would be a waste of time and money,
and resources should be devoted to identifying and discarding bad apples, not trying
to educate them. We strongly disagree, and the evidence is on our side.
Aren’t Bad Apples the Cause of Ethical Problems
in Organizations?
According to the bad apple theory, people are good or bad and organizations are
powerless to change these folks. This bad apple idea20 is appealing in part because
unethical behavior can then be blamed on a few individuals with poor character.
Although it’s unpleasant to fire people, it’s relatively easier for organizations to
search for and discard a few bad apples than to search for some organizational
problem that caused the apple to rot.
Despite the appeal of the bad apple idea, “character” is a poorly defined concept,
and when people talk about it, they rarely define what they mean. They’re probably
referring to a complex combination of traits that are thought to guide individual
behavior in ethical dilemmas. If character guides ethical conduct, training shouldn’t
make much difference because character is thought to be relatively stable: it’s difficult
to change, persists over time, and guides behavior across different contexts. Character
develops slowly as a result of upbringing and the accumulation of values that are
transmitted by schools, families, friends, and religious organizations. Therefore,
people come to educational institutions or work organizations with an already defined
good or poor character. Good apples will be good and bad apples will be bad.
In fact, people do have predispositions to behave ethically or unethically (we
talk about this in Chapter 3). And sociopaths can certainly slip into organizations
with the sole intent of helping themselves to the organization’s resources, cheating
customers, and feathering their own nests at the expense of others. Famous scoun-
drels like Bernie Madoff definitely come to mind. Such individuals have little interest
in “doing the right thing,” and when this type of individual shows up in your organi-
zation, the best thing to do is discard the bad apple and make an example of the
incident to those who remain.
But discarding bad apples generally won’t solve an organization’s problem with
unethical behavior. The organization must scrutinize itself to determine whether
14
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

something rotten inside the organization is spoiling the apples. For example, Enron
encouraged a kind of devil-may-care, unethical culture that is captured in the film
Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room. Arthur Andersen’s culture morphed from a
focus on the integrity of audits to a consulting culture that focused almost exclusively
on feeding the bottom line (you’ll read more about that in Chapter 5). In this book
you’ll learn that most people are not guided by a strict internal moral compass. Rather,
they look outside themselves—to their environment—for cues about how to think and
behave. This was certainly true in the financial crisis when the mantra became
“everyone is doing it” (and making a lot of money besides). At work, managers and the
organizational culture transmit many cues about how employees should think and act.
For example, reward systems play a huge role by rewarding short-term thinking and
profits, as they did in the recent financial crisis. In this book, you’ll learn about the
importance of these organizational influences and how to harness them to support
ethical behavior and avoid unethical behavior.
So, apples often turn bad because they’re spoiled by “bad barrels”—bad work
environments that not only condone, but may even expect unethical behavior. Most
employees are not bad to begin with, but their behavior can easily turn bad if they
believe that their boss or their organization expects them to behave unethically or if
everyone else appears to be engaging in a particular practice. In this view, an
organization that’s serious about supporting ethical behavior and preventing mis-
conduct must delve deeply into its own management systems and cultural norms and
practices to search for systemic causes of unethical behavior. Management must take
responsibility for the messages it sends or fails to send about what’s expected. If ethics
problems are rooted in the organization’s culture, discarding a few bad apples without
changing that culture isn’t going to solve the problem. An effective and lasting
solution will rely on management’s systematic attention to all aspects of the
organization’s culture and what it is explicitly or implicitly “teaching” organizational
members (see Chapter 5).
This question about the source of ethical and unethical behavior reflects the
broader “nature/nurture” debate in psychology. Are we more the result of our genes
(nature) or our environment (nurture)? Most studies find that behavior results from
both nature and nurture. So, when it comes to ethical conduct, the answer is not either/
or, but and. Individuals do come to work with predispositions that influence their
behavior, and they should take responsibility for their own actions—but the work
environment can also have a large impact. In this book, you’ll learn a lot about how that
work environment can be managed to produce ethical rather than unethical conduct.
Shouldn’t Employees Already Know the Difference
between Right and Wrong?
A belief associated with the good/bad apple idea is that any individual of good
character should already know right from wrong and can be ethical without special
training—that a lifetime of socialization from parents, school, and religious institu-
tions should prepare people to be ethical at work. You probably think of yourself as an
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
15

individual of good character, but does your life experience to date prepare you to make
a complex business ethics decision? Did your parents, coaches, and other influential
people in your life ever discuss situations like the one that follows? Think about this
real dilemma.
You’re the VP of a medium-sized organization that uses chemicals in its produc-
tion processes. In good faith, you’ve hired a highly competent scientist to ensure that
your company complies with all environmental laws and safety regulations. This
individual informs you that a chemical the company now uses in some quantity is not
yet on the approved Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) list. However, it has been
found to be safe and is scheduled to be placed on the list in about three months. You
can’t produce your product without this chemical, yet regulations say that you’re not
supposed to use the chemical until it’s officially approved. Waiting for approval would
require shutting down the plant for three months, putting hundreds of people out of
work, and threatening the company’s very survival. What should you do?
The solution isn’t clear, and good character isn’t enough to guide decision making
in this case. As with all ethical dilemmas, values are in conflict here—obeying the letter
of the law versus keeping the plant open and saving jobs. The decision is complicated
because the chemical has been found to be safe and is expected to be approved in a
matter of months. As in many of today’s business decisions, this complex issue requires
the development of occupation-specific skills and abilities. For example, some knowl-
edge in the area of chemistry, worker safety, and environmental laws and regulations
would be essential. Basic good intentions and a good upbringing aren’t enough.
James Rest, a scholar in the areas of professional ethics and ethics education,
argued convincingly that “to assume that any 20-year-old of good general character
can function ethically in professional situations is no more warranted than assuming
that any logical 20-year-old can function as a lawyer without special education.”21
Good general character (whatever that means) doesn’t prepare an individual to deal
with the special ethical problems that are likely to arise in a career. Individuals must be
trained to recognize and solve the unique ethical problems of their particular
occupation. That’s why many professional schools (business, law, medicine, and
others) have added ethics courses to their curricula, and it’s why most large business
organizations now conduct ethics training for their employees.
So, although individual characteristics are a factor in determining ethical behav-
ior, good character alone simply doesn’t prepare people for the special ethical
problems they’re likely to face in their jobs or professions. Special training can
prepare them to anticipate these problems, recognize ethical dilemmas when they see
them, and provide them with frameworks for thinking about ethical issues in the
context of their unique jobs and organizations.
Aren’t Adults’ Ethics Fully Formed and Unchangeable?
Another false assumption guiding the view that business ethics can’t be taught is the
belief that one’s ethics are fully formed and unchangeable by the time one is old enough
to enter college or a job. However, this is definitely not the case. Research has found that
16
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

through a complex process of social interaction with peers, parents, and other significant
persons, children and young adults develop in their ability to make ethical judgments.
This development continues at least through young adulthood. In fact, young adults in
their twenties and thirties who attend moral development educational programs have
been found to advance in moral reasoning even more than younger individuals do.22
Given that most people enter professional education programs and corporations as
young adults, the opportunity to influence their moral reasoning clearly exists.
Business school students may need ethics training more than most, because
research has shown they have ranked lower in moral reasoning than students in
philosophy, political science, law, medicine, and dentistry.23 Also, undergraduate
business students and those aiming for a business career were found to be more likely
to engage in academic cheating (test cheating, plagiarism, etc.) than were students in
other majors or those headed toward other careers.24 At a minimum, professional
ethics education can direct attention to the ambiguities and ethical gray areas that are
easily overlooked without it. Consider this comment from a 27-year-old Harvard
student after a required nine-session module in decision making and ethical values at
the beginning of the Harvard MBA program.
Before, [when] I looked at a problem in the business world, I never
consciously examined the ethical issues in play. It was always sub-
conscious and I hope that I somewhat got it. But that [ethics] was never
even a consideration. But now, when I look at a problem, I have to look at
the impact. I’m going to put in this new ten-million-dollar project. What’s
going to be the impact on the people that live in the area and the
environment. . . . It’s opened my mind up on those things. It’s also
made me more aware of situations where I might be walking down the
wrong path and getting in deeper and deeper, to where I can’t pull back.25
In 2004, Harvard’s MBA class of 1979 met for its 25-year reunion. The alumni
gave the dean a standing ovation when he stated that a new required course on values
and leadership was his highest priority and then pledged to “live my life and lead the
school in a way that will earn your trust.”26
It should be clear from the above arguments that ethics can indeed be taught.
Ethical behavior relies on more than good character. Although a good upbringing may
provide a kind of moral compass that can help the individual determine the right
direction and then follow through on a decision to do the right thing, it’s certainly not
the only factor determining ethical conduct. In today’s highly complex organizations,
individuals need additional guidance. They can be trained to recognize the ethical
dilemmas that are likely to arise in their jobs; the rules, laws, and norms that apply in
that context; reasoning strategies that can be used to arrive at the best ethical decision;
and the complexities of organizational life that can conflict with one’s desire to do the
right thing. For example, businesses that do defense-related work are expected to
comply with a multitude of laws and regulations that go far beyond what the average
person can be expected to know.
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
17

The question of whether ethics should be taught remains. Many still believe that
ethics is a personal issue best left to individuals. They believe that much like
proselytizing about religion, teaching ethics involves inappropriate efforts to impose
certain values and control behavior. But we believe that employers have a real
responsibility to teach employees what they need to know to recognize and deal
with ethical issues they are likely to face at work. Failing to help employees recognize
the risks in their jobs is like failing to teach a machinist how to operate a machine
safely. Both situations can result in harm, and that’s just poor management. Similarly,
we believe that, as business educators, we have a responsibility to prepare you for the
complex ethical issues you’re going to face and to help you think about what you can
do to lead others in an ethical direction.
DEFINING ETHICS
Some of the controversy about whether ethics can or should be
taught may stem from disagreements about what we mean by ethics. Ethics can be
defined as “a set of moral principles or values”—a definition that portrays ethics as
highly personal and relative. I have my moral principles, you have yours, and neither
of us should try to impose our ethics on the other.
But our definition of ethics—“the principles, norms, and standards of conduct
governing an individual or group”—focuses on conduct. We expect employers to
establish guidelines for work-related conduct, including such basic matters as what
time to arrive and leave the workplace, whether smoking is allowed on the premises,
how customers are to be treated, and how quickly work should be done. Guidelines
about ethical conduct aren’t much different. Many employers spend a lot of time and
money developing policies for employee activities that range from how to fill out
expense reports to what kinds of client gifts are acceptable to what constitutes a
conflict of interest or bribe. If we focus on conduct, ethics becomes an extension of
good management. Leaders identify appropriate and inappropriate conduct, and they
communicate their expectations to employees through ethics codes, training programs,
and other communication channels.
In most cases, individual employees agree with their company’s expectations and
policies. For example, who would disagree that it’s wrong to steal company property, lie
to customers, dump cancerous chemicals in the local stream, or not comply with regula-
tions on defense contracts? At times, however, an employee may find the organization’s
standards inconsistent with his or her own moral values or principles. For example, a
highly religious employee of a health maintenance organization may object to offering
abortion as an alternative when providing genetic counseling to pregnant women. Or
a highly devoted environmentalist may believe that his or her organization should go
beyond the minimum standards of environmental law when making decisions about
how much to spend on new technology or on environmental cleanup efforts. These
individuals may be able to influence their employers’ policies. Otherwise, the person’s
only recourse may be to leave the organization for one that is a better values match.
GOOD CONTROL OR BAD CONTROL?
Whether or not we like to admit it, our
ethical conduct is influenced (and to a large degree controlled) by our environment.
18
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

In work settings, leaders, managers, and the entire cultural context are an important
source of this influence and guidance. If, as managers, we allow employees to drift
along without our guidance, we’re unintentionally allowing them to be “controlled”
by others. If this happens, we’re contributing to the creation of “loose cannons”
who can put the entire organization at risk. Guidance regarding ethical conduct is
an important aspect of controlling employee behavior. It can provide essential
information about organizational rules and policies, and it can provide explanations
and examples of behavior that is considered appropriate or inappropriate in a variety
of situations.
But should organizations be “controlling” their employees in this way? B. F.
Skinner,27 the renowned psychologist, argued that it’s all right, even preferable, to
intentionally control behavior. He believed that all behavior is controlled, either
intentionally or unintentionally. Therefore what was needed was more intentional
control, not less. Similarly, ethical and unethical behavior in organizations is already
being controlled explicitly or implicitly by the existing organizational culture (see
Chapter 5). Thus, organizations that neglect to teach their members “ethical” behavior
may be tacitly encouraging “unethical behavior” through benign neglect. It’s man-
agement’s responsibility to provide explicit guidance through direct management and
through the organization’s culture. The supervisor who attempts to influence the
ethical behavior of subordinates should be viewed not as a meddler but as a part of
the natural management process.
To summarize, we believe that educational institutions and work organizations
should teach people about ethics and guide them in an ethical direction. Adults are
open to, and generally welcome, this type of guidance. Ethical problems are not caused
entirely by bad apples. They’re also the product of bad barrels—work environments
that either encourage unethical behavior or merely allow it to occur. Making ethical
decisions in today’s complex organizations isn’t easy. Good intentions and a good
upbringing aren’t enough. The special knowledge and skill required to make good
ethical decisions in a particular job and organizational setting may be different from
what’s needed to resolve personal ethical dilemmas, and this knowledge and skill must
be taught and cultivated.
THIS BOOK IS ABOUT MANAGING ETHICS
IN BUSINESS
This book offers a somewhat unique approach to teaching business ethics. Instead of
the traditional philosophical or legalistic approach, we take a managerial approach.
Between us, we have many years of experience in management, in consulting, and in
management teaching and research. Based on this experience, we begin with the
assumption that business ethics is essentially about human behavior. We believe that
by understanding human behavior in an organizational context, we can better
understand and manage our own and others’ ethical conduct. Kent Druyvesteyn
was vice president for ethics at General Dynamics from 1985 to 1993 and one of the
first “ethics officers” in an American company. He made a clear distinction between
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
19

philosophy and management in his many talks with students and executives over
the years. As he put it, “I am not a philosopher and I am not here to talk about
philosophy. Ethics is about conduct.”
We agree with Mr. Druyvesteyn. After years of study and experience, we’re
convinced that a management approach to organizational ethics is needed. As with any
other management problem, managers need to understand why people behave the way
they do so that they can influence this behavior. Most managers want the people they
work with to be productive, to produce high-quality products, to treat customers well,
and to do all of this in a highly ethical manner. They also want and need help
accomplishing these goals.
Therefore we rely on a managerial approach to understanding business ethics. We
introduce concepts that can be used to guide managers who want to understand their
own ethical behavior and the behavior of others in the organization. And we provide
practical guidance to those who wish to lead their department or organization in an
ethical direction.
We define ethical behavior in business as “behavior that is consistent with the
principles, norms, and standards of business practice that have been agreed upon by
society.” Although some disagreement exists about what these principles, norms, and
standards should be, we believe there is more agreement than disagreement. Many of
the standards have been codified into law. Others can be found in company and
industry codes of conduct and international trade agreements.
Importantly, we treat the decisions of people in work organizations as being
influenced by characteristics of both individuals and organizations. We also recognize
that work organizations operate within a broad and complex global business context.
We will cover individual decision making, group and organizational influences, and
the social and global environment of business. The first part of this perspective, the
influences on individual decision making, is represented in Figure 1.1.
CHARACTERISTICS OF INDIVIDUALS
Individual differences
Cognitive biases
Group and organizational pressures
Organizational culture
CHARACTERISTICS OF ORGANIZATIONS
ETHICAL
AWARENESS
ETHICAL
BEHAVIOR
ETHICAL
JUDGMENT
Process of Individual Ethical Decision Making
FIGURE 1.1 The Ethical Decision-Making Process
20
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

ETHICS AND THE LAW
It’s important to think about the relationship between the law and business ethics,
because if one could just follow the law, a business ethics book wouldn’t be
necessary. Perhaps the easiest way to visualize the relationship between business
ethics and the law is in terms of a Venn diagram (Figure 1.2). If we think of the law
as reflecting society’s minimum norms and standards of business conduct, we can
see a great deal of overlap between what’s legal and what’s ethical. Therefore, most
people believe that law-abiding behavior is also ethical behavior. However, many
standards of conduct are agreed upon by society and not codified in law. For
example, some conflicts of interest may be legal but are generally considered
unethical in our society and are commonly prohibited in codes of ethics. For
example, having an affair with someone who reports to you may be legal, but it is
considered unethical in most corporate contexts.
As we said earlier, much of the behavior leading to the 2008 financial crisis was
legal, but unethical. So the domain of ethics includes the law but extends well beyond
it to include ethical standards and issues that the law does not address. Finally, there
are times when you might encounter a law that you believe is unethical. For example,
racial discrimination was legal in the United States for a long time. But racial
discrimination was, and is, highly unethical. Similarly, many companies do business
in developing countries with few, if any, laws regulating environmental pollution or
labor conditions. They can “legally” pollute the air and water in these countries. Such
companies have to choose between adhering to ethical standards that are higher than
the legal standards in those countries and deciding that it’s okay to harm the well-being
of the people and communities there. The legal and ethical domains certainly overlap,
but the overlap is far from complete.
WHY BE ETHICAL? WHY BOTHER? WHO CARES?
Assuming that you accept the notion that business ethics can be taught, and that as
current or future managers you have a role to play in creating an environment
Ethics
Law
FIGURE 1.2 Relationship between Ethics and Law
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
21

supportive of ethical conduct, you may still wonder why you should care about being
ethical. As workers, we should care about ethics because most of us prefer to work
for ethical organizations. We want to feel good about ourselves and the work we do. As
responsible citizens, we must care about the millions of people who lost retirement
savings because of the greed of those at AIG, Citigroup, Lehman Brothers, Merrill
Lynch, and other financial firms that brought down the global economy in 2008. These
people are our parents, spouses, siblings, children, and friends—they’re us! We live
in a world community, and we’re all inextricably connected to each other and to the
environment that surrounds us. Our future depends on our caring enough.
Most important, it is the right thing to do.
Individuals Care about Ethics: The Motivation To Be Ethical
Classical economists assume that practically all human behavior, including altruism, is
motivated solely by self-interest—that humans are purely rational economic actors
who make choices solely on the basis of cold cost-benefit analyses. However, a new
group of economists who call themselves behavioral economists have found that
people are not only less rational than classical economists assumed, but more moral.
Much evidence suggests that people act for altruistic or moral purposes that seemingly
have little to do with cost-benefit analyses.28 For example, people will mail back lost
wallets to strangers, cash and all; help strangers in distress; and donate blood marrow
for strangers or a kidney to a family member. Also, a large majority of people will
refrain from stealing even if it’s easy to do so.
In his book The Moral Dimension, Amitai Etzioni29 cited many more examples
and research evidence to document his claim that human action has two distinct
sources: the pursuit of self-interest and moral commitments. Accordingly, most human
decisions are based on ethical and emotional considerations as well as rational
economic self-interest. People are motivated by both economic and moral concerns.
In a typical behavioral economics experiment, subject A in the experiment
receives 10 one-dollar bills and can give subject B any number of them. Subject B
can choose to accept or reject A’s offer. They are told that if B accepts, they each get
what was offered. If B rejects the offer, each gets nothing. From a pure economics
perspective, A would do best offering B one dollar and keeping the rest. B should
accept that offer because, in economic terms, getting one dollar is better than nothing.
But most A subjects offer B close to half the total, an average of about four dollars. B
subjects who are offered one or two dollars generally reject the offer.
Economists can’t explain this result based upon rational self-interest. People’s
sense of fairness seems to be driving both subjects’ behavior. Interestingly, when
people play the game with a machine, they are more likely to play as classical
economics would predict because they don’t expect a machine to be “fair.” Autistic A
players (whose autism means that they don’t take others’ feelings into account) also
play as the theory would predict. So, most people expect fair play in their interactions
with other human beings, and the experiments demonstrate they will even forgo
economic benefits in order to maintain a fair system.
22
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

Neuroscience is also beginning to substantiate the moral sense that develops in
humans. New imaging technologies have allowed scientists to locate a unique type
of neuron in the brain—spindle cells—that light up when people perceive unfairness
or deception. Only humans and African apes have these cells. An adult human has
over 82,000 of them, whereas a gorilla has around 16,000 (perhaps explaining why a
gorilla might save a human child). A chimp has less than 2,000. In humans, these
cells appear at around four months of age and gradually increase with moral
development.30
In 2003, neuroscientists used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
look inside the brains of people playing the ultimatum game, and they found that unfair
offers were associated with heightened activity in parts of the brain associated with
strong negative emotions, as well as in other parts of the brain associated with long-
term planning. The subjects who rejected the unfair offers had more activity in the
emotional part of the brain, which is the part that usually wins out.31
Given these research findings, we begin this book with an important
assumption—that, as human beings and members of society, all of us are hardwired
with a moral and ethical dimension as well as self-interested concerns. People care
about ethics for reasons that stem from both of these sources.
Beyond being hardwired for fairness and altruism, employees are also con-
cerned about their personal reputations. In today’s work environment, success
depends on an individual’s ability to work effectively with others. Trust greases
the wheels of working relationships with peers across departments and on project
teams. We disagree with the old adage that “nice guys (or gals) finish last.” If it looks
like bad guys (or gals) come out ahead, this is generally a short-run result. A
reputation for being difficult to work with, dishonest, or mean often catches up with
you as coworkers withhold important information and promotions go to others.
Given the importance of relationships to effectiveness in business today, your
reputation for integrity is an essential ingredient for success and personal satisfac-
tion. This is even truer in an age of social networking that can send news of bad
behavior to a broad audience in seconds.
Employees Care about Ethics: Employee Attraction
and Commitment
Organizations are concerned about their ability to hire and retain the best workers. The
evidence suggests that employees are more attracted to and more committed to ethical
organizations. “People who know that they are working for something larger with a
more noble purpose can be expected to be loyal and dependable, and, at a minimum,
more inspired.”32
Graduating students at nearly 150 colleges and universities now sign or recite the
“Graduation Pledge,” in which they promise to “take into account the social and
environmental consequences of any job” they consider. They also pledge to “try to
improve these aspects of any organizations” where they work. Elite universities such
as Harvard and Cornell are participating. Prospective employers should be very
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
23

interested in these gradu ates and their conce rns, which go beyond just making a
living. 33 (Go to www.grad uationpledg e.org for more inf ormation. )
Recent surveys confirm that it may be important to consider how potential and
current employees are affected by an organization’s ethics. In a survey conducted by
Working Woman magazine, “a strong majority of those polled said that they would
not work for a company with a history of environmental accidents, insider trading or
worker accidents, or a law firm that defends known racketeers.”34 In another survey
conducted by a national opinion research firm, ethical corporate behavior, honest
company communications, and respectful treatment ranked among employees’ five
top-ranked goals—before good pay, which was 11th on the list, and job security,
which ranked 14th. Ethical corporate behavior was ranked so high because “workers
translate the ethics of the company into how they’re personally treated.” People
“want to be proud of where they work.” They “don’t want to work for bandits, and
when companies get negative publicity for their activities, workers suffer.”35
Managers Care about Ethics
Managers care about ethics in part because they face the thorny problem of how to
prevent and manage unethical behavior in their ranks. Ask any manager for examples,
and be prepared to spend the day listening. More than their jobs depend on this
concern—managers can be held legally liable for the criminal activities of their
subordinates. Further, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce estimates that workplace theft
costs U.S. businesses between $20 billion and $40 billion each year, and employees
are thought to be responsible for much of it.36 In addition to such self-interested
behavior, employees may engage in unethical behavior because they think (rightly or
wrongly) that it’s expected or that their behavior is justified because they’ve been
treated unfairly. Or they simply may not know they are doing something that’s
considered to be unethical.37
Whatever its source, subordinates’ unethical behavior is a management problem
that won’t go away. It becomes even more of a challenge as restructuring continues to
reduce management layers, thus leaving fewer managers to supervise more workers.
With more workers to supervise, the manager can’t directly observe behavior.
Restructuring also increases the number of part-time or contingency workers. These
workers are likely to feel less loyalty to the organization and may be more prone to
engage in unethical behaviors such as theft.
In addition, more workers may cross the line between ethical and unethical
behavior in response to fierce business competition and a strict focus on the bottom
line. Employees may believe that they can help the company succeed (at least in the
short term) by fudging sales figures, abusing competitors, or shortchanging customers.
Those who are potential layoff candidates are also more likely to flirt with
impropriety.38 Many perceive the message to be: “reaching objectives is what matters
and how you get there isn’t that important.”39 Therefore, today’s managers may have
to work even harder to communicate the idea that ethical conduct is expected, even in
the midst of aggressive competition.
24
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

Moreover, many managers understand the positive long-term benefit a reputation
for ethics can bring to business dealings. Carl Skooglund, former ethics officer at
Texas Instruments, had this to say:
There are very positive, even competitive, reasons to be ethical. If you
walk into a relationship and somebody says, “I know you, I know your
track record, I can trust you,” that’s important. Two years ago, in a survey
that we sent out to employees, I received an anonymous comment from
somebody who said, “A reputation for ethics which is beyond reproach is a
silent partner in all business negotiations.” I agree and it works in all
personal and business relationships. An unethical company is very diffi-
cult to do business with. You can’t trust them. You’re never sure if a
commitment’s a commitment. At TI, our customers have told us that they
can be sure of one thing: Once TI commits, we’re going to break our tail to
make it happen. That’s an easy company to do business with.
Executive Leaders Care about Ethics
Some of us are understandably cynical about CEO ethics after the widely publicized
scandals, huge compensation packages, and CEO “perp walks” of recent years. But
many business executives do care about ethics in their own organizations and about
business’s image in society.
John Akers,former chairman of the board of IBM, wrote:“No society anywherewill
compete very long or successfully with people stabbing each other in the back; with
people trying to steal from each other; with everything requiring notarized confirmation
because you can’t trust the other fellow; with every little squabble ending in litigation;
and with government writing reams of regulatory legislation, tying business hand and
foot to keep it honest. . . . There is no escaping this fact; the greater the measure of
mutualtrustandconfidenceintheethicsofasociety,thegreateritseconomicstrength.” 40
Jeffrey Immelt, the CEO of General Electric, spoke powerfully about ethics at
Columbia University in October 2008 (available for viewing on YouTube). Immelt
described how, above all else, leaders had to consider their organizations and protect
their organizations for shareholders, employees, and the greater good. “I believe that
ethical behavior in 2008 starts first and foremost, as always, with a real sense of
permanence, excellence, accountability, and safety, making sure that the enterprise
endures no matter how tough the situation becomes.”
Warren Buffett, the legendary investor and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, had
perhaps the best idea about ethics and integrity when he said, “Somebody once said
that in looking for people to hire, you look for three qualities: integrity, intelligence,
and energy. And if they don’t have the first, the other two will kill you. You think about
it; it’s true. If you hire somebody without the first, you really want them to be dumb
and lazy.”41
We believe that organizational ethics is a distinct managerial concern that must be
addressed by management at all levels of the organization.
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
25

Industries Care about Ethics
When companies get bad publicity for ethical scandals, whole industries suffer. So, in
some industries, companies have joined together in voluntary efforts to promote ethical
conduct among organizations in the industry. Prominent among these efforts is the
Defense Industry Initiative. A cynic might say that these initiatives are aimed solely at
preventing more intrusive government regulation and that companies in these industries
don’t truly “care” about ethics. Certainly, these types of initiatives have generally begun
in response to a scandal or crisis. But over the years, they tend to take on a life of their own.
Members internalize beliefs about appropriate conduct, hire support staff, and develop
structures for enforcement that become institutionalized among member organizations.
The Defens e Indus try Initiative on Busine ss Con duct and Ethi cs (DII) is a
major voluntary industry initiative. It is described on the organization’s website
(www.dii.org) as “a consor tium of U.S. defe nse industr y cont ractors which subsc ribes
to a set of principles for achieving high standards of business ethics and conduct.” It
developed out of the President’s Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense Management
(the Packard Commission), which was convened after a number of defense-industry
scandals in the early 1980s. In 1986, the commission concluded that the industry could
be improved by focusing on corporate self-governance. A number of companies
voluntarily joined forces to “embrace and promote ethical business conduct,” and their
work together continues today. As of July 2012, over 85 companies were signatories;
as such, they have agreed to live according to the following obligations:
& Adopt a written code of conduct.
& Conduct employees’ orientation and training with respect to the code.
& Provide employees a mechanism to express concerns about corporate com-
pliance with procurement laws and regulations.
& Adopt procedures for voluntary disclosure of violations of federal procure-
ment laws.
& Participate in Best Practices Forums.
& Publish information that shows each signatory’s commitment to the above.
The organization hosts a two-day Best Practices Forum each year, in which the
industry’s prime customer, the Department of Defense, participates. It also hosts
workshops on specific topics, including an annual one-day workshop to train ethics
professionals, and publishes an annual report to the public and government summa-
rizing DII activities.
Society Cares about Ethics: Business and Social
Responsibility
Business ethics also matters because society cares. From an economic perspective,
businesses are powerful. Wal-Mart’s size and profits make it a more powerful
26
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

economic force than most countries. Business is learning that it must use its power
responsibly or risk losing it. Using power responsibly means being concerned for the
interests of multiple stakeholders—parties who are affected by the business and its
actions and who have an interest in what the business does and how it performs.42
These stakeholders include many constituencies: shareholders, employees, sup-
pliers, the government, the media, activists, and many more. Stakeholders have the
power to interfere with a firm’s activities. For example, employees can strike,
customers can stop buying products, protesters can bring bad publicity, and the
government can act to regulate a firm’s activities. Consequently, it’s a matter of
paramount importance for organizations to consider all of their various stakeholders
and what those stakeholders expect and require before they make decisions that will
affect those various audiences. Increased regulation is an almost certain societal
response to business scandal, and with new regulations comes increased costs and
reduced power for business. In addition, organizations that do not act responsibly risk
criminal liability and the resulting financial damage. Even without criminal liability,
businesses that don’t act responsibly risk their reputations, and a lost reputation is
tough to rebuild. As business becomes more global and business practices more
transparent, it’s almost impossible to hide bad behavior. There is a growing emphasis
worldwide on corporate social responsibility (CSR), and this emphasis and the reasons
for it are covered in much more detail in Chapter 9.
THE IMPORTANCE OF TRUST
A more elusive benefit of ethics is trust. Although it’s difficult to document, trust has
both economic and moral value. Scientists are beginning to understand the “biology
of trust.” In trusting relationships, neuroscientists have found that the brain releases
a hormone, oxytocin, that makes cooperating feel good.
Trust is essential in a service economy, where all a firm has is its reputation for
dependability and good service. Individuals and organizations build trust accounts
that work something like a bank account.43 You make deposits and build your trust
reserve by being honest and by keeping commitments. You can draw on this account
and even make mistakes as long as the reserve is maintained. Having a trust reserve
allows the individual or organization the flexibility and freedom to act without
scrutiny, thus saving a great deal of time and energy in all types of relationships.
Think of a marriage that is based on trust; the partners go about their daily business
without feeling any need to check up on each other or to hire private detectives to
confirm the other’s whereabouts. The same is true of trust-based business relation-
ships, where a handshake seals a deal and a business partner’s word is considered to
be a contract. Corporations also build trust with their customers.
Johnson & Johnson made a huge contribution to its trust account when it
recalled all Tylenol from store shelves after the poisoning crisis in 1982 (a situation
discussed in more detail in Chapter 10). Despite no recall requirement and huge
recall costs, the company put its customers first. Trust may be even more important
in efforts at global collaboration and alliances, and in cross-cultural management
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
27

teams. Trust encourages the open exchange of ideas and information, reduces the
need for costly controls, allows for rapid adjustment to change, and is associated
with willingness to work through cultural differences and difficulties.44
Trust accounts are easily overdrawn, however. And when they are, all flexibility
disappears. Every word and action is carefully checked and double-checked for signs
of dishonesty. In organizations, lawyers are hired, contracts are drawn up and signed,
and CYA (cover your you-know-what) memos fly. Recent corporate ethics scandals
have created a huge gap in the public’s trust. In an essay for Businessweek titled “Can
You Trust Anybody Anymore?” Bruce Nussbaum wrote:
There are business scandals that are so vast and so penetrating that they
profoundly shock our most deeply held beliefs about the honesty and
integrity of our corporate culture. Enron Corp. is one of them. This financial
disaster goes far beyond the failure of one big company. This is corruption
on a massive scale. Tremendous harm has befallen innocent employees who
have seen their retirement savings disappear as a few at the top cashed out.
Terrible things have happened to the way business is conducted under the
cloak of deregulation. Serious damage has been done to ethical codes of
conduct held by once-trusted business professionals . . . Investor confi-
dence is critical to the success of our economic system . . . People increas-
ingly feel the game is rigged . . . Who can come to the rescue? The
reputations of many of the professionals who were counted on to safeguard
the economic system lie in tatters . . . What’s to be done? . . . The lesson
from the Enron debacle should be to restore basic integrity to the bottom
line, ethics to business professionals, and clout to overseers that even a
deregulated economy need.45
The entire American business system relies on the public’s faith and trust. That
trust has been shattered in a manner that could be extremely costly to society. A decade
ago, the public considered the debacles at companies such as Enron, Arthur Andersen,
WorldCom, Tyco, and Adelphia not as an anomaly, but as an example of the workings
of a business culture that has lost its way. Although some strides were made to correct
that not-very-flattering image of business, the financial crisis of 2008 was truly
devastating to public trust in business, government, finance, and the economy. Harris
Interactive, a research company that regularly surveys the public to determine trust
levels, uncovered astoundingly low levels of trust following the financial scandals of
2008. In a survey conducted in May 2009, Harris Interactive found that only 4 percent
of the respondents said that Wall Street firms are honest and trustworthy. The
percentage is higher, but still dismal, for banks in general; 25 percent of those
surveyed would believe a statement made by someone who works for a bank.46
Normally after a crisis, reputations stabilize and improve over time, but Harris
Interactive’s research in 2012 is just as bleak. Four years after the crisis, they recorded
a 35 percent jump in negativity in their research. Eight companies had excellent
reputations in 2012, down from 16 with excellent reputations in 2011. The technology
28
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

and automotive industriesshowedthegreatestimprovement,with technologyleading all
industries in public perception. The industries with the lowest reputations were financial
services, banking, and government. The companies with the lowest reputations—
with scores so low that in the past such scores indicated a real danger of the company’s
viability—were AIG, Goldman Sachs, Bank of America, BP (British Petroleum), and
JPMorgan Chase.47
Unfortunately, all companies have been tainted by the scandals. Blue-chip
companies now face even closer scrutiny and the skepticism of shareholders as
they are being asked to open their books and reveal much more information than
has been recent practice.48 Meeting profit projections or beating them by a penny is
being viewed suspiciously as evidence of accounting chicanery rather than reliabil-
ity.49 Confidence and trust in the system must be restored, or access to capital (the
engine of the entire system) could be cut off.
The good news is that many corporations are responding. Boards of directors are
replacing inside members with outsiders who are seen as more independent. Stock
options are being expensed. CEO compensation packages that are seen as excessive
are being cut. And executives are asking their people whether they are living by the
“spirit of the law” as well as the letter of the law.50
The idea of trust, however, is bigger than business. One reason why so much of our
society appears to be in disarray is that people have so little trust in institutions. Recent
Gallup polls that measure such confidence show that institutional trust has eroded
significantly over the last 25 years. For example, in 1987, 51 percent of those polled
expressed “a great deal or quite a lot of” trust in banks. In 2012, that number had
declined to 21 percent. Similar drops were reported for Congress, the Presidency,
public schools, newspapers, and other institutions that form the basis for our society.
This lack of trust is not a good thing, and the ethical debacles that have occurred over
the last few decades have proven to be a blight on our civic landscape because so many
people trust no one. It has also become increasingly difficult for people to engage in
civil discourse. If people find it difficult to even talk to one another in civil tones, trust
will become even more elusive.51
THE IMPORTANCE OF VALUES
As a theme even broader than trust, you can think of values as a kind of “glue” that
guides our thinking across the book. Values are relevant to individuals, to organiza-
tions, and to societies. For individuals, values can be defined as “one’s core beliefs
about what is important, what is valued, and how one should behave across a wide
variety of situations.” For example, most of us agree that honesty, fairness, and
respect for others are important values. Where individuals differ is in how they
prioritize their values. For example, some people may believe that ambition is more
important than other values. Others may feel that helpfulness predominates. Strongly
held values influence important decisions such as career choices as well as decisions
in particular situations. For example, someone for whom helpfulness is most
important is more likely to choose a “helping” profession such as social work, while
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
29

someone for whom ambition is most important may be more likely to choose a
business career. In Chapter 2, you’ll have the opportunity to think about your own
values and how they influence your ethical decision making.
Values are also relevant at the organizational level. Many of you have seen
organizational values statements that aim to create a shared sense of purpose among
employees and to convey something about the organization’s identity to outsiders. If
you haven’t, just look at company websites and you’ll see that most of them include
values statements. Values lists often include respect, integrity, diversity, innovation,
teamwork, and the like. Just as individual values guide individual thinking and
action, organizational values guide organizational thinking and action. And, just as
with individuals, the key question is how the organization prioritizes its values. For
example, at 3M Corporation, no value is more important and more ingrained in the
culture than innovation. Innovation is encouraged in myriad ways and has been
“baked” into the culture through the commitment of senior executives, thus creating
a culture that rewards collaboration and teamwork and that views mistakes as
opportunities to learn.52
You’ll see in Chapter 5 that organizational values undergird the ethical culture of
an organization and influence how its managers and employees behave. Thus, an
organization that highly values diversity and respect is more likely to make efforts to
hire and retain a diverse workforce and to take diversity into consideration when
making supplier choices and other decisions. We know of an organization with a strong
value for diversity that walked away from business when a customer insisted on
dealing only with white males.
However, organizations don’t always “really” value what they say they value.
That’s why values statements are often the butt of Dilbert jokes. For example, in
Enron’s values statement, the verbiage described an organization where excellence
and respect and integrity were key values. The scandal at Enron showed that what
Enron really cared about—maximizing profits at any cost—was a far cry from what
appeared in print on its values statement. For organizational values to work in a
positive way, the organization must live those values every day.
Societies and cultures also have shared values, and these are an important part of
the business environment and expectations of business and businesspeople. When we
talk about cross-cultural values, we often focus on the differences. But, as you’ll see in
Chapter 11, values across cultures are often more similar than different. Even in
corrupt cultures, if you ask people what they value, they’ll tell you that they would
prefer to live in an environment where everyone can be trusted to do business honestly
and fairly. We’ll return to a discussion of values again and again as a touchstone for
ethical business practice.
HOW THIS BOOK IS STRUCTURED
Section II of this book deals with ethics and the individual. Chapter 2 presents the
reader with an overview of some basic philosophical theories that have formed the
underpinning for the traditional study of individual ethical decision making from a
30
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

prescriptive viewpoint. Chapter 3 presents a more psychological approach to individ-
ual ethical decision making. It provides a “reality check” for Chapter 2 by suggesting
that managers need to understand the individual characteristics that can influence
employees’ ethical decision making and the human cognitive biases that can interfere
with the ideal decision-making process (see Figure 1.1). Chapter 4 categorizes the
common ethical problems individuals face at work and provides an opportunity for
you to apply what you’ve learned. Chapter 4 is also about finding your moral voice to
raise or report ethical issues or to stand up for what you value. Despite the best of
intentions and the most carefully reasoned ethical judgments, doing the right thing can
be difficult.
Section III of the book focuses on the internal life of organizations, how they
develop ethical (or unethical) cultures, and how culture influences employee behavior.
Chapter 5 focuses on business ethics as a phenomenon of organizational culture. It
provides a comprehensive overview of how an organization can build a culture that
reflects a concern for ethics, and how it can change its culture to be more supportive of
ethical conduct. This chapter also emphasizes the importance of executive ethical
leadership in creating a strong ethical culture. Chapter 6 follows with more practical
and specific advice on how organizations can design an ethics infrastructure as well as
effective communications and training programs. It also includes examples of the
programs various companies have implemented to encourage ethical conduct among
their employees. Many of these examples resulted from interviews we conducted with
top managers in these companies.
Chapter 7, “Managing for Ethical Conduct,” introduces management concepts
that can help explain the group and organizational pressures that influence people to
behave ethically or unethically. We also provide practical advice for managers about
how to use these management concepts to encourage ethical conduct and discourage
unethical conduct in their employees. Finally, Chapter 8 explores how culture plays
out at the manager’s level and features a series of cases to test your knowledge of
ethics and management skills.
After considering individuals and organizations, Section IVof this book looks at
organizations in the broader social environment (see Figure 1.3). Chapter 9 focuses on
corporate social responsibility and discusses the environment that organizations are
part of—and what they must do to be considered “good citizens” of the broader world.
Chapter 10 examines some of the classical organizational ethics cases using a
stakeholder framework. Finally, Chapter 11 extends our discussion of business ethics
to the global business environment. Although global examples appear throughout the
book, this issue is important enough to warrant its own chapter.
CONCLUSION
This chapter was designed to pique your interest in business ethics. We hope we have
done that. We also hope that reading this book gives you a better understanding of
ethics from a managerial perspective, and of how you can encourage ethical business
behavior in yourself and others. We aim to help you understand how this aspect of the
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
31

organizational world actually works and what you can do to manage it. We also
provide practical decision-making guidance for facing your own ethical decisions and
for helping others do the same.
It’s critically important that we all understand ethics, because good ethics
represents the very essence of a civilized society. Each of us must understand that
ethics is the bedrock for all of our relationships; it’s about how we relate to our
employers, our employees, our coworkers, our customers, our communities, our
suppliers, and one another. Ethics is not just about the connection we have to other
beings—we are all connected; rather, it’s about the quality of that connection. That’s
the real bottom line and our society is threatened when we ignore it.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.
Before reading this chapter, did you think of ethics as “just a fad”? Why or why
not? What do you think now? Why?
2.
Have you been cynical about business and its leaders? Why or why not? (See the
following cynicism exercise.) How does cynicism affect you, as a business
student or as a manager?
3.
Can you think of something that is legal but unethical, or something that is
ethical but illegal?
FIGURE 1.3 From Individuals to Organizations to Environments
32
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

4.
Do you think business ethics is important? Why or why not?
5.
Identify reasons why a person would be interested in being ethical, and classify
those reasons in terms of whether they represent moral motivation or economic
motivation.
6.
Think about the television programs and films you’ve seen recently that
depicted business in some way. How were business and businesspeople
portrayed? Is there anything business could or should do to improve its media
image? Some businesses try to stay out of the limelight. Why might that be?
What do you think of that strategy?
7.
Do you believe that employees are more attracted and committed to ethical
organizations? Are you? Why or why not? Make a list of the companies you
would prefer to work for, and state the reasons why. Are there also companies
that you would refuse to work for? Why? Are there ethically “neutral” companies
that don’t belong on either list?
8.
Discuss the importance of trust in business. Can you cite examples? What
happens when trust is lost?
9.
What do you think the Harris Interactive research on corporate reputation means
to the companies involved?
10.
What can we learn about business ethics from the recent financial crisis?
11.
How does a lack of trust in institutions affect us? Do you trust institutions? If not,
what effect does that have on you?
EXERCISE
Your Cynicism Quotient
Answer the following questions as honestly as you can. Circle the number between 1
and 5 that best represents your own beliefs about business.
Strongly
Disagree
Disagree
Neither
Agree
nor
Disagree
Agree
Strongly
Agree
1. Financial gain is all
that counts in
business.
1
2
3
4
5
2. Ethical standards
must be
compromised in
business practice.
1
2
3
4
5
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
33

3. The more financially
successful the
bu si ne ss p e rs on , t h e
more unethical the
behavior.
1
2
3
4
5
4. Mora l values are
irrelevant in
bu siness.
1
2
3
4
5
5. The business world
has its own rules.
1
2
3
4
5
6. Busine sspeople care
only about making
profit.
1
2
3
4
5
7. Busine ss is like a
gam e one plays to
win.
1
2
3
4
5
8. In busin ess, people
will do anything to
further their own
intere st.
1
2
3
4
5
9. Compe tition forc es
bu siness manager s
to resort to shady
prac tices.
1
2
3
4
5
10. The profit motive
pres sures manager s
to comprom ise their
ethica l conce rns.
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly
Disagree
Disagree 
Neither
Agree
nor
Disagree
Agree 
Strongly
Agree
Add the total numb er of points. The max imum is 50 points. Total ___.
The higher your score, the more cynical you are about ethical business prac tice.
Think about the reasons for your resp onses. Be prepared to disc uss them in class.
NOTES
1. 
G. Colvin, “Business Is Back!” Fortune, May 14, 2007, 40–48.
2.
Rushworth M. Kidder, “Must Capitalism Be Moral?” Commentary on Ethics Newsline, on Institute for
Global Ethics website (www.globalethics.org), May 4, 2009.
34
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

3. 
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, eds. D. D. Raphael & A. L. Macfie, based on 1790
edition in The Glasgow Edition of the Works and Correspondence of Adam Smith, (Vol. 1), eds. D. D.
Raphael and Andrew Skinner (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1790 [1976]).
4. 
T. Frieden, “FBI Warns of Mortgage Fraud ‘Epidemic,’” CNN Justice, September 17, 2004. (www.cnn.
com).
5. 
J. Silver-Greenberg and S. Craig, “JPMorgan Trading Loss May Reach $9 Billion,” The New York
Times, June 28, 2012 (www.nyt.com).
6. 
V. McGrane, “Senate GOP Leaders: Repeal Dodd-Frank,” Wall Street Journal, April 1, 2011. (www.
wsj.com).
7.
H. Touryalai, “LIBOR Scandal Just Took a Nasty Turn, Collusion Findings Should Make Banks Very
Nervous,” Forbes, December 19, 2012.
8.
M. Taibbi, “Why Is Nobody Freaking Out About the LIBOR Banking Scandal?” Rolling Stone, July 3,
2012.
9.
F. Zakariah, “Greed is good (to a point),” Newsweek, June 22, 2009, 41–45.
10. 
2009 and 2012 Edelman Trust Barometer, www.edelman.com.
11.
J. A. Wood, J. G. Longenecker, J. A. McKinney, and C. W. Moore, “Ethical Attitudes of Students and
Business Professionals: A Study of Moral Reasoning,” Journal of Business Ethics 7 (1988): 249–57; D.
N. DeSalvia and G. R. Gemmill, “An Exploratory Study of the Personal Value Systems of College
Students and Managers,” Academy of Management Journal 14 (1971): 227–38; M. S. Lane, D.
Schaupp, and B. Parsons, “Pygmalion Effect,” Journal of Business Ethics 7 (1988): 223–29; R. M.
Fulmer, “Business Ethics: AView from the Campus,” Personnel Administrator 45, no. 2 (1968): 31–39;
T. M. Jones and F. H. Gautschi, “Will the Ethics of Business Change? A Survey of Future Executives,”
Journal of Business Ethics 7 (1988): 231–48.
12.
Michael Skapinker, “Business Schools Focus on Making Money, Not Martyrs,” Financial Times,
January 5, 2005, 10.
13.
“Where Will They Lead? 2008 MBA Student Attitudes about Business & Society” (Washington, D.C.:
The Aspen Institute Center for Business Education, 2008).
14.
L. Elber, “Bad Guys Wear Business Suits: Businessmen and Women Get a Bad Rap on Television,”
(State College, PA) Centre Daily Times, June 27, 1997, 22C.
15.
“Villains of Prime Time: Business Is TV’s Newest Bad Guy,” Fortune, July 7, 1997, 32.
16.
T. S. Bateman, T. Sakano, and M. Fujita, “Roger, Me, and My Attitude: Film Propaganda and Cynicism
toward Corporate Leadership,” Journal of Applied Psychology 77 (1992): 768–71.
17.
Ethics Resource Center, 2011 National Business Ethics Survey.
18.
K. Brooker, “Starting Over,” Fortune, January 21, 2002, 50–68.
19.
L. K. Trevi~no and A. Youngblood, “Bad Apples in Bad Barrels: A Causal Analysis of Ethical Decision-
Making Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psychology 75, no. 4 (1990): 378–85.
20.
Ibid.
21.
J. R. Rest and S. J. Thoma, “Educational Programs and Interventions,” In Moral Development:
Advances in Research and Theory, ed. J. Rest (New York: Praeger, 1986), 59–88.
22.
J. R. Rest, “Moral Judgment: An Interesting Variable for Higher Education Research,” Paper for the
Annual Convention for the Association for the Study of Higher Education, Baltimore, Maryland,
November 21, 1987.
23.
D. McCabe, and L. K. Trevi~no, “Academic Dishonesty: Honor Codes and Other Situational Influ-
ences,” Journal of Higher Education 64 (1993): 522–38.
24.
D. McCabe and L. K. Trevi~no, “Cheating among Business Students: A Challenge for Business Leaders
and Educators,” Journal of Management Education 19, no. 2 (1995): 205–18.
25.
T. R. Piper, M. C. Gentile, and S. D. Parks, Can Ethics Be Taught? (Boston: Harvard Business School,
1993).
26.
O. Ryan, “Class of ’79: God and Man at Harvard Business School,” Fortune, November 1, 2004, 52.
27.
B. F. Skinner, Beyond Freedom and Dignity (New York: Knopf, 1971).
28.
A. Etzioni, The Moral Dimension: Toward a New Economics (New York: Free Press, 1988).
29.
Ibid.
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCING STRAIGHT TALK ABOUT MANAGING BUSINESS ETHICS
35

30. 
S. Blakeslee, “Humanity? Maybe It’s in the Wiring,” New York Times, December 9, 2003, D1.
31. 
J. Lehrer, “Driven to Market,” Nature 443 (2006): 502–04.
32. 
J. Channon, “Creating Esprit de Corps,” In New Traditions in Business, ed. J. Renesch (San Francisco:
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 1992), 53–68.
33. 
“Get a Job, Save the Planet,” Businessweek, May 6, 2002, 10.
34. 
R. Sandroff, “How Ethical Is American Business?” Working Woman, September 1990, 113–16.
35. 
C. Kleiman, “Heading the List of Worker Wishes Isn’t More Money!” (Allentown, PA) Morning Call,
October 2, 1989, B10.
36. 
R. Zemke, “Employee Theft: How to Cut Your Losses,” Training, May 1986, 74–78.
37. 
J. Collins, “Why Bad Things Happen to Good Companies and What Can Be Done,” Business Horizons,
November–December 1990, 18–22.
38. 
B. Hager, “What’s Behind Business’ Sudden Fervor for Ethics,” Businessweek, September 23, 1991,
65.
39. 
K. Labich, “The New Crisis in Business Ethics,” Fortune, April 20, 1992, 167–76.
40. 
J. F. Akers, “Ethics and Competitiveness: Putting First Things First,” Sloan Management Review,
Winter 1989, 69–71.
41. 
Warren Buffett and Bill Gates at Columbia Business School, CNBC, Summer 2009; available at www
.youtube.com/watch?v¼tgbZzgyHZgI.
42. 
E. Freeman, Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach (Boston: Pitman/Ballinger, 1984).
43. 
S. R. Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989).
44. 
J. Child, “Trust—the Fundamental Bond in Global Collaboration,” Organizational Dynamics 29, no. 4
(2001): 274–88.
45.
B. Nussbaum, “Can You Trust Anybody Anymore?” Businessweek, January 28, 2002, 31–32.
46. 
Harris Interactive, “Ethics Newsline,” July 6, 2009; available at http://www.globalethics.org/newsline/
2009/07/06/banks-honesty-poll/.
47. 
Harris Interactive, “2012 Reputation Quotient.” February 13, 2012; available at http://www.harrisin-
teractive.com/vault/2012_Harris_Poll_RQ_Summary_Report.pdf.
48.
J. A. Byrne, “How to Fix Corporate Governance,” Businessweek, May 6, 2002, 69–78.
49.
J. Useem, “In Corporate America, It’s Cleanup Time,” Fortune, September 16, 2002, 62–72.
50.
Ibid.
51. 
“Confidence in Institutions,” Gallup Polls, June 7, 2012; available at www.gallup.com.
52.
“3M’s Seven Pillars of Innovation,” Businessweek, May 10, 2006.
36
SECTION I
INTRODUCTION

S E C T I O N II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL
37

C H A P T E R2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT:
A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL
This chapter begins the part of the book that focuses on ethical decision making as
something that individuals do. Many if not most ethical decisions in business
organizations are made by individuals like you. In later chapters, we will address
how the organizational context and the broader business environment also affect
individual ethical decision making.
There are two ways to think about individual ethical decision making—the
prescriptive approach and the descriptive approach. This chapter covers the pre-
scriptive approach. It is derived from ethical theories in philosophy and offers
decision-making tools (ways of thinking about ethical choices) that help you decide
what decision you should make as a “conscientious moral agent” who thinks
carefully about ethical choices1 and who wants to make the ethically “right”
decision. Our assumption is that your intentions are good and that your goal is to
do the right thing. So, in this chapter we introduce ethical decision-making tools that
can help you do just that, and we’ll explain how you can integrate them and use them
in a practical way.
We know, however, that people don’t always make the best decision. Prescriptions
aren’t always followed. So it’s helpful to understand how people’s minds work—how
people really make decisions. The descriptive approach, discussed in Chapter 3, relies
on psychological research to describe how people actually make ethical decisions
(rather than how they should make them). It focuses in particular on individual
characteristics that influence how individuals think and on cognitive limitations that
often keep people from making the best possible ethical decisions. Hopefully, if we
understand both approaches, we can improve our ethical decision making. Now let’s
learn about the prescriptive approach.
Ethical Dilemmas
Many ethical choices are clear-cut enough that we can decide what to do rather easily
because they pit “right” against “wrong.” Is deciding whether to embezzle corporate
funds a tough ethical dilemma? Not really, because embezzling is stealing and it’s
wrong, period. There’s not much of a “dilemma” there. But things can get pretty
38

murky in situations where two or more important values, rights, or responsibilities
conflict and we have to choose between equally unpleasant alternatives. We define an
ethical dilemma as a situation in which two or more “right” values are in conflict.
Consider the following ethical dilemma.
This is a true ethical dilemma because two values are in conflict. Two “right”
values that can create significant conflict are truthfulness and loyalty. As illustrated
in the case, telling the truth to your friend would mean being disloyal to the company
that has treated you so well. The value of loyalty can even be in conflict with itself as
you weigh loyalty to your friend against loyalty to your boss and company. In this
chapter, we introduce conceptual tools drawn from philosophical approaches to
ethical decision making that are designed to help you think through these tough
ethical dilemmas from multiple perspectives. None of the approaches are perfect.
In fact, they may lead to different conclusions. The point of using multiple
approaches is to get you to think carefully and comprehensively about ethical
dilemmas and to avoid falling into a solution by accident. At the very least, you can
feel good because you’ve thought about the issue thoroughly, you’ve analyzed it
from every available angle, and you can explain your decision-making process to
others if asked to do so.
Prescriptive Approaches to Ethical Decision Making
in Business
Philosophers have been wrestling with ethical decision making for centuries. We
certainly don’t intend to provide a philosophy course here, but we can distill some
important and practical principles that can guide you toward making the best
ethical decisions. In this section, we outline some of the major contemporary
approaches that we think can provide you with the most practical assistance.2 We
then incorporate them into a series of steps that you can use to evaluate ethical
dilemmas, and along the way, we apply these steps to the short layoff case as well as
other examples.
THE LAYOFF
Pat is the plant manager in one of ABC Company’s five plants. She’s worked
for the company for 15 years, working her way up from the factory floor after
the company sent her to college. Her boss just told her in complete confidence
that the company will have to lay off 200 workers. Luckily, her job won’t be
affected. But a rumor is now circulating in the plant, and one of her workers
(an old friend who now works for her) asks the question, “Well, Pat, what’s the
word? Is the plant closing? Am I going to lose my job? The closing on our new
house is scheduled for next week. I need to know!” What should she say?
What would you say?
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
39

FOCUS ON CONSEQUENCES (CONSEQUENTIALIST THEORIES)
One set of
philosophical theories is categorized as consequentialist (sometimes referred to as
teleological, from the Greek telos for “end” and logos for “reason”). When you’re
attempting to decide what’s right or wrong, consequentialist theories focus attention
on the results or consequences of the decision or action.
Utilitarianism is probably the best-known consequentialist theory. According to
the principle of utility, an ethical decision should maximize benefits to society and
minimize harms. What matters is the net balance of good consequences over bad for
society overall.
A utilitarian would approach an ethical dilemma by systematically identifying
the stakeholders in a particular situation as well as the alternative actions and their
consequences (harms and/or benefits) for each. A stakeholder is any person or group
with a stake in the issue at hand. So who are the stakeholders in the layoff situation?
Key stakeholders would include Pat’s friend, her friend’s family, Pat’s boss, Pat, her
family, other workers, and the company—quite a list! And, what would be the
consequences (societal harms and benefits) for each stakeholder of a decision to tell
or not tell? The consequentialist approach requires you to do a mental calculation of
all the harms and benefits of these consequences, stakeholder by stakeholder. What
would be the consequences if Pat tells her friend what she knows about the layoff?
What would be the consequences (societal harms and benefits) if Pat doesn’t
share what she knows? A potential harm of telling her friend would be that he
or she might tell other workers and send the plant into chaos. Perhaps more people
would lose their jobs as a result. Another potential harm might be that Pat could lose
the trust of her boss (another stakeholder), who provided information to her in
confidence. Pat might even lose her job, which has consequences for her family. A
potential benefit might be that Pat would retain the trust of a valued friend. Another
potential benefit might be that her friend could use the information to make a
decision about going through with buying the new house. After Pat conducts a
thorough analysis that estimates these harms and benefits, the “best” ethical
decision is the one that yields the greatest net benefits for society, and the “worst”
decision is the one that yields the greatest net harms for society. So, if more people
would be ultimately hurt than helped if Pat were to inform her friend of the
impending layoff, a utilitarian would conclude that Pat shouldn’t tell. Keep in mind
that this perspective requires you to think broadly about the consequences for
“society,” not just for yourself and those close to you, as we are often inclined to do.
When conducting such an analysis, you may want to create a table for yourself like
the one below that can help you sort out the complexities by identifying the
stakeholders and the anticipated harms and benefits. But arriving at a bottom-
line conclusion about the action that will serve the greater good of society is easier
said than done. It requires some way to “weight” the harms and benefits and that
requires you to think hard about what you value more and less. We encourage you to
attempt to account for this “weighting” in some way as you complete the table. It
will help you decide where the consequentialist analysis leads in terms of a decision
about what you should do.
40
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Consequentialist Analysis
Stakeholder
Tell—Harms
Tell—Benefits
Don’t Tell—Harms
Don’t Tell—Benefits
1
2
3
4
etc.
Bottom line: the best decision or action is the one that produces the greatest net good and the least net harm
for society overall.
In 2005, Mark Felt, also known as “Deep Throat,” revealed his identity as thesource
who secretly fed information to Washington Post investigative reporters Bob Woodward
and Carl Bernstein. The information ultimately led to the 1974 resignation of President
Richard Nixon over his involvement in the cover-up of the 1972 burglary at the
Democratic headquarters in the Watergate building. Woodward and Bernstein turned
the story into a book and later a film, All the President’s Men. We can’t get inside Felt’s
head to understand his ethical decision-making process at the time. We will never know
his true motivation, because Felt became cognitively impaired in his later years. But we
can imagine that, as the number two person at the FBI, he may have weighed the harms
and benefits of leaking information about the Watergate break-in and the involvement of
Nixon and his aides in criminal wrongdoing. Felt certainly took a huge personal risk and
may have considered the costs to others. Several individuals went to prison as a result of
the investigation, and their families suffered as a result. A president also resigned in
disgrace. If Felt had been discovered, his career would probably have been ruined, and
his family would have experienced the rippling effects. But thosewho believe that he did
the right thing would say that Felt’s decision served the long-term greater good and
ultimately helped preserve democracy in the United States.
The consequentialist approach can be extremely practical and helpful in thinking
through an ethical dilemma. Don’t we generally look at the consequences of our own
and others’ actions in trying to decide what’s right? And don’t we consider who will
benefit and who will be harmed? When the state decides to build a new highway
through your property, aren’t they using a utilitarian rationale when they argue that the
benefits to the greater community (increased development and jobs, reduced traffic,
fewer accidents, etc.) outweigh the harm to the few property holders who will be
inconvenienced by an eyesore in their backyard?
However, a challenge involved in using a strictly consequentialist approach is that
it is often difficult to obtain the information required to evaluate all of the conse-
quences for all stakeholders who may be directly or indirectly affected by an action or
decision. In business (or in life for that matter), when do you have all of the facts?
Could Deep Throat have known what the outcomes of his decision would be? And
even if you have all of the information, it can be extremely cumbersome to calculate all
of the harms and benefits every time you encounter a new ethical dilemma. Try it. Can
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
41

you list all of the potential harms and benefits for everyone who may be directly or
indirectly involved in the layoff situation described above? It’s relatively easy for Pat
to list the potential harms and benefits to herself and those close to her. But can you
envision all of the potential harms and benefits to all of the other people who may be
involved? If you don’t have a crystal ball that allows you to foretell the future (and
most of us don’t), you’re unlikely to arrive at a completely accurate assessment of all
future consequences. Nevertheless, with this approach, it’s important to do your best to
accurately assess the potential consequences. You have a responsibility to gather and
use the best, most up-to-date information available. Remember, according to this
approach, the most ethical decision maximizes benefits and minimizes harm to society.
The challenge of making the best ethical decision is to step outside of oneself and think
as broadly as possible about all of the consequences for all of those affected. Taking
this step is guaranteed to widen your decision-making lens and allow you to take into
account consequences that you otherwise might not consider.
Another difficulty with this type of approach is that the rights of a minority group
can easily be sacrificed for the benefit of the majority. For example, slaveholders in the
Old South argued that the greatest good for the greatest number would be served by
maintaining the system of slavery. But hopefully we all agree that such a system did
not respect the civil or human rights of the people who were enslaved (a deontological
perspective we discuss next).
The consequentialist approach remains particularly important to ethical decision
making in business for a variety of reasons. First, utilitarian thinking—through its
descendant, utility theory—underlies much of the business and economics literature.
Second, on the face of it, most of us would admit that considering the consequences of
one’s decisions or actions for society is extremely important to good ethical decision
making. In fact, studies of ethical decision making in business have found that business
managers generally rely on such an approach.3 As we’ll see, though, other kinds of
considerations are also important.
FOCUS ON DUTIES, OBLIGATIONS, AND PRINCIPLES (DEONTOLOGICAL THE-
ORIES)
The word deontological comes from the Greek deon, meaning “duty.”
Rather than focusing on consequences, a deontological approach would ask, “What
is Pat’s ethical duty now that she knows about the layoff?” Deontologists base their
decisions about what’s right on broad, abstract universal ethical principles or values
such as honesty, promise keeping, fairness, loyalty, rights (to safety, privacy, etc.),
justice, responsibility, compassion, and respect for human beings and property.
According to some deontological approaches, certain moral principles are
binding, regardless of the consequences. Therefore some actions would be considered
wrong even if the consequences of the actions were good. In other words, a
deontologist focuses on doing what is “right” (based on moral principles or values
such as honesty), whereas a consequentialist focuses on doing what will maximize
societal welfare. An auditor taking a deontological approach would likely insist on
telling the truth about a company’s financial difficulties even if doing so might risk
putting the company out of business and many people out of work. A consequentialist
42
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

auditor would weigh the societal harms and benefits before deciding what to do. If
convinced that by lying now he or she could save a good company in the long term, the
consequentialist auditor would be more willing to compromise the truth.
Knowing what values are important to you and how you prioritize them is an
important first step toward understanding and applying this approach in your own life
(now is a good time to complete the end-of-chapter exercise, “Clarifying Your Values”).
Which values are most important to you? Which ones are you willing to adhere to
consistently, and how do you prioritize them if they conflict? Try to keep your list of
values to just a few that you believe are truly the most important. In attempting to decide
which values are most important to you, it’s helpful to think back to recent ethical
dilemmas youhave faced.Which ones guidedyour behavior?Which ones trumped other
conflicting values? Think carefully when selecting your ethical values. For example,
students often select promise keeping as a value. But what if keeping a promise requires
you to breach another more important value such as honesty or justice? If promise
keeping is important to you, be careful what you promise. Should you promise to lie to
authorities for a friend who has broken the law and harmed others? If you select loyalty,
you’ll need to think about “loyalty to whom,” because multiple loyalties can conflict as
they do in the layoff situation we’ve been discussing.
Some deontological theories focus on rights rather than duties, values, or
principles. The concept of rights goes back to classical Greek notions of “natural
rights” that emerge from “natural law.” Rights can be thought of as “negative rights,”
such as the limits on government interference with citizens’ right to privacy or the
pursuit of happiness. Or rights can be thought of in more positive terms, such as
the individual’s rights to health and safety. The rights of one party can conflict with the
rights of another party, as when the rights of a company to seek profits for its
shareholders conflict with the rights of a community to clean air or water or the rights
of a consumer to buy a safe product. Furthermore, the rights of one party are generally
related to the duties of another. So, if we agreed that communities have the right to
clean water, businesses would have the duty to protect that right.
How does a deontologist determine what rule, principle, or right to follow? One
way is to rely on moral rules that have their roots in Western biblical tradition. For
example, the Golden Rule, a basic moral rule found in every major religion, is familiar
to most of us and provides an important deontological guide: The most familiar
version tells us to “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.” In our layoff
situation, the Golden Rule would suggest that Pat should tell her friend what she knows
because she would want her friend to do the same for her if the situation were reversed.
But note that the Golden Rule leads you to the best decision only if you’re highly
ethical. For example, do you think that the Golden Rule would expect you to lie for a
friend who has broken the law because you would want the friend to do that for you?
No, because a highly ethical person wouldn’t ask a friend to lie. The ethical person
would be responsible and would accept the consequences of his or her illegal actions.
The German philosopher Emmanuel Kant provided another useful moral rule with
his categorical imperative: “Act as if the maxim of thy action were to become by thy
will a universal law of nature.” This rule asks you to consider whether the rationale for
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
43

your action is suitable to become a universal law or principle for everyone to follow.
For example, if you break a promise, the categorical imperative asks, “Is promise
breaking a principle everyone should follow?” The answer is no; if everyone did this,
promises would become meaningless. In fact, they would cease to exist.
A practical Kantian question to ask is, “What kind of world would this be if
everyone behaved this way or made this kind of decision in this type of situation?”
What kind of world would this be if everyone broke promises at will? Consider the
following example:
According to the categorical imperative, we must ask whether the rationale for Dr.
Smith’s action (helping his patient by breaking the study rules) is suitable to become a
principle for all to follow. The answer is clearly no. What if other doctors did the same
thing as Dr. Smith? What if those involved in medical research followed their own
preferences or motives rather than the rules guiding the study? Society would be
unable to rely on the results of medical research. What kind of a world would it be if
researchers were routinely dishonest? It would be one where we simply couldn’t
depend on the integrity of scientific research, and most of us would deem that kind of
world unacceptable. Interestingly, given the potential for societal harm of a decision to
be dishonest and enroll the patient in the study, consequentialist thinking would lead to
the same decision. Only the patient would potentially benefit, and society as a whole
would be harmed.
Additional moral rules come from the work of the highly regarded American
political philosopher John Rawls. Rawls proposed that decision makers use a veil of
ignorance exercise to arrive at fundamental principles of justice that should guide
ethical decision making. In his approach, imaginary people come together behind a
hypothetical veil of ignorance. These imaginary people do not know anything about
themselves, their identities, or their status. They don’t know if they (or others they are
thinking about) are male or female, young or old, rich or poor, black or white, the CEO
or a janitor, intelligent or mentally retarded, physically fit or disabled, sick or healthy,
patient or doctor. According to Rawls, rational people who use this veil of ignorance
principle will be more likely to develop ethical rules that do not unfairly advantage or
A DRUG STUDY
A number of physicians are recruited to participate in a large-scale, multi-
center study to investigate the survival rates of breast cancer victims who are
being treated with a new drug. Strict rules are developed regarding inclusion of
patients in the study. Only those who have had surgery within the last three
months can be included. Dr. Smith has a patient who hears about the study and
wants very much to participate. Because Dr. Smith thinks the drug could really
help this patient, he agrees to include her even though her surgery took place
six months ago. He changes the dates on her charts to conform with the study
requirements and reasons that this one little change shouldn’t affect the study
results.
44
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

disadvantage any particular group.4 Because humans are fundamentally risk averse
and wary of being the worst off, such neutral people would arrive at fair principles that
grant all individuals equal rights to basic liberties and equality of opportunity and that
benefit the least advantaged in society. This approach was designed to be used as a
guide in any ethical decision, but it may be most useful when fairness concerns are
central to the decision at hand. It offers yet another way to broaden your view and urges
you to consider the needs of those who are less advantaged than yourself. So, following
Rawls, if a business needs to downsize, what kind of process would the group of
imaginary people behind the veil of ignorance devise for deciding whom to lay off and
when to tell employees? How would doctors decide who will be included in drug
studies? How would lifesaving prescription drugs be priced? Would sweatshop
working conditions ever be acceptable?
A major challenge of deontological approaches is deciding which duty, obliga-
tion, right, or principle takes precedence because, as we said earlier, ethical dilemmas
often pit these against each other. What does the deontologist do if one binding moral
rule clashes with another? Can it be determined which is the more important right or
principle? Because the U.S. Constitution is based on a rights approach, many U.S.
public policy debates revolve around questions such as these. For example, the
abortion debate rests on the question of whether the rights of the mother or the fetus
should take precedence. In ethical dilemmas at work, loyalty to your boss or
organization can easily clash with other strongly held values such as compassion
or fairness. What if your boss tells you that you must lay off a subordinate—an
excellent performer—because he was hired last, and the principle guiding the layoff is
“the last hired is the first fired”? But imagine that this subordinate will lose his health
insurance with the layoff, and you know that his child is seriously ill. Another
subordinate who has been with the company somewhat longer is also a good performer
but is single and has no family obligations. What is the most ethical decision here?
Another difficulty of deontological approaches arises when they conflict with
consequentialist reasoning. First, what happens when following a rule will have
devastating consequences? For example, in World War II Germany, telling the truth to
the Nazis about whether Jews were hiding in your attic would have devastating
consequences—the Jews would be taken and killed. In response to such concerns,
some philosophers argue that deontological principles (i.e., truth telling, promise
keeping) don’t have to be regarded as absolute. For example, one could violate a rule
or principle for a good reason (according to Kant, a reason that you would be willing to
accept for anyone in the same position).5 In the Nazi scenario, Kant’s categorical
imperative would be helpful because most of us would not want to live in a world
where people are expected to tell the truth when doing so means the death of an
innocent human being. Respect for human life trumps honesty.
Consider yet another example of conflict between a consequences approach and a
principles approach. In 2009, the owner of a shipping company had to decide whether
to pay ransom to pirates who were holding his ship and its crew hostage and who
threatened to kill everyone if the ransom were not paid. This business owner
acknowledged that paying the ransom would reinforce the pirates’ behavior and
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
45

would likely lead to more kidnappings and hostage takings, an outcome that is clearly
to the detriment of society overall. However, having considered this, he nevertheless
concluded that he would pay the ransom because he felt strongly that his primary
responsibility as an employer was to his people. His values of respect for human life
and compassion for the employees’ families were more important to him in this
situation than the potential longer-term broader harm.
Sometimes, a decision with good consequences contradicts an important ethical
principle. For example, the Commonwealth of Virginia in the U.S. developed a method
for sentencing criminals that incorporates the risk of recidivism.6 Using factors such as
gender, age, employment status, and prior criminal record, the state learned that it can
predict the likelihood of an individual’s committing another crime. This calculation is
designed to protect the public and save taxpayer money, and many felons are being
released from jail and returned to the community successfully. The system works, and
one could argue, based on consequentialist thinking, that it benefits most people. But
some argue, based on principle, that those who commit a crime deserve to be punished
and that it is unfair to treat offenders who committed the same crime differently. Under
the system, a young, unemployed male is more likely to go to jail than an older woman
who has a job.7 The consequences are good for society, but is the system fair?
FOCUS ON INTEGRITY (VIRTUE ETHICS)
The virtue ethics approach focuses more
on the integrity of the moral actor (the person) than on the moral act itself (the decision
or behavior). The goal here is to be a good person because that is the type of person you
wish to be. Although virtue ethics as a philosophical tradition began with Aristotle, a
number of contemporary ethicists (including business ethicists) have returned it to the
forefront of ethical thinking.8
A virtue ethics perspective considers the actor’s character, motivations, and
intentions (something we didn’t discuss at all under the other two perspectives).
According to virtue ethics, it is important that the individual intends to be a good
person and exerts effort to develop him- or herself as a moral agent, to associate with
others who do the same, and to contribute to creating an organizational context that
supports ethical behavior.9 This doesn’t mean that principles, rules, or consequences
aren’t considered, just that they’re considered in the context of assessing the actor’s
character and integrity. One’s character may be assessed in terms of principles such as
honesty, in terms of rule following (did this actor follow his profession’s ethics code?) or
in terms of consequences (as in the physician’s agreement to, above all, do no harm).
Motivations and intentions are important to ethical decision making, as the law
acknowledges. If a person harms another, society judges that person less harshly if he
or she did not intend to commit harm; i.e., it was an accident. In thinking about Mark
Felt’s decision to provide information to Woodward and Bernstein in the Watergate
affair, virtue ethics would ask us to think about his intentions and motivation. Was he
motivated by revenge because he was passed over for the top job at the FBI (as some
have suggested), or was he guided by broader concerns about doing the right thing as a
conscientious moral agent who was concerned about sustaining the American system
of government?
46
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

In virtue ethics, one’s character may be defined by a relevant moral community, a
community that holds you to the highest ethical standards. Therefore, it’s important to
think about the community or communities in which the decision maker operates.
Mark Felt was an FBI man who was sworn to keep confidences. That makes it hard for
some in the FBI community to accept his talking to journalists, even if the long-term
consequences contributed to the greater good of the country. But the broader
community, the U.S. public at large, likely judges Felt more kindly if they think
of him as someone who took a great personal risk to do what he thought was right.
Think about yourself. What community or communities do you look to for guidance in
deciding whether you have acted as a person of integrity? Are you guided by the
standards of your professional association, the regulatory community, your religious
community, your family, your company’s ethics office, the broader public? Note that
unless you work in a highly ethical organizational context, the relevant moral
community is not your own work group or your organization. A virtue ethics
perspective requires that you look to the community that will hold you to the highest
ethical standard and support your intention to be a virtuous person.
A virtue ethics approach is particularly useful for individuals who work within a
professional community that has developed high standards of ethical conduct for
community members. For example, the accounting profession has developed a code of
conduct for professional accountants. Being a virtuous accountant would mean
abiding by that code of professional responsibility. The same goes for certified
financial consultants, engineers, lawyers, physicians, and psychologists who all agree
to abide by their profession’s rules and standards. Such professional codes are
generally living documents that evolve with changing times. For example, building
on 20 years of thinking about ethics and torture, a committee of the American
Psychological Association (APA) developed new standards in 2009, consistent with its
“do no harm” principle: without exception, the new APA standards prohibit profes-
sional psychologists from participating in torture. Psychologists are required to
disobey orders to torture, intervene to stop torture, and report torture if they become
aware of it.10 A decision maker can often rely on such relevant community standards to
guide decisions and actions. The assumption is that the professional community has
already done this type of thinking and has done it carefully.
Consider this fascinating example from the U.S. legal profession. The rule of
attorney-client privilege requires criminal defense lawyers to keep information shared
by their clients completely confidential. This rule is based on the idea that, in order for
defendants to get the best possible defense, they must feel free to be completely
truthful with their lawyers. The underlying principle of the U.S. system of justice says
that everyone deserves a vigorous defense and that defense lawyers must act in the
interests of their clients. Then it is up to judges and juries to decide guilt and
innocence. That all makes a lot of sense in the abstract. But a recent case in Illinois
(profiled on 60 Minutes)11 was particularly challenging for nonlawyers to understand.
Here’s what happened. Two criminal defense lawyers went public to share information
that their client had committed a murder for which another man, Alton Logan, was
erroneously convicted. When the lawyers went public, Logan had already served
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
47

26 years in prison for a crime he did not commit! Most observers’ immediate reaction
was to say that the lawyers should have spoken up right away because it just isn’t fair
for someone to go to jail for a crime he didn’t commit, and they could and should have
stopped it. But because of attorney-client privilege, a central ethical principle in the
legal profession, the lawyers were not allowed to share this private information. As
lawyers, they understand that the larger system of justice depends on that principle,
even if some individuals are harmed in the process of upholding it. Interestingly, they
also noted that if they had shared the information, it would not have been admissible in
court and could not have helped Alton Logan. The lawyers were able to finally come
forward only because, years before, they had convinced their client to sign an affidavit
saying that they could share the information about his admission of guilt after he died.
That’s what they did when their client died in prison (where he was serving a life
sentence for committing a different crime), and Alton Logan was finally released.
Interviews with the lawyers suggested that they understood and were guided by the
ethics of the legal profession. However, importantly, they also went beyond profes-
sional community expectations when they asked their client to sign the affidavit that
ultimately allowed them to share the information. So from a virtue ethics perspective,
they followed their community’s guidance. But as thoughtful moral agents who were
motivated to do the right thing, they didn’t completely surrender to legal community
standards. Their intentions were good and they used their own thinking to devise a plan
that ultimately resulted in Logan’s release (although a deontologist might say that it
was 26 years too late).
It’s important to do your own thinking because some professional communities
provide limited guidance or none at all. For example, management is not a
“profession” with explicit ethical standards and acknowledged responsibilities to
society (although some influential thinkers believe and argue that it could and should
be).12 In fact, the authors of a 2008 Harvard Business Review article13 offer “A
Hippocratic Oath for Managers” that calls on managers to commit to the following
(adapted from the original):
1.
Service to the Public and Society.
Recognize the manager’s responsibility to
serve the public interest by creating sustainable value for society in the long
term.
2.
Balance Multiple Stakeholders’ Interests.
Recognize that managers must
balance the often-conflicting needs of many stakeholders to enhance enter-
prise value in a way that is consistent with societal well-being. The authors
note that “this may not always mean growing or preserving the enterprise and
may include such painful actions as its restructuring, discontinuation, or sale
if these actions preserve or increase value.”
3.
Acting with Integrity in the Enterprise’s Interest.
Put the interests of the
enterprise ahead of personal interests while behaving as a person of integrity,
consistent with personal values, and leading others to do the same. This
means avoiding behavior that advances personal ambitions that harm either
48
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

the busin ess or society. It also means reporting the ethical or legal violation s
of others.
4. 
Ad herence to the Law. 
Make a commi tment to adhere to the spirit and the
lett er of the law and contracts in p ersonal and ente rprise action.
5. 
Accurate and Transparent Reportin g. 
Report enterpris e performanc e accu-
ratel y and transpa rently to all relevant stakeholders (e.g., investors, consum -
ers, the public, etc.) so that they can make inform ed decisi ons.
6. 
Respec tful and Unbiase d Dec ision Making. 
Make deci sions in an unbia sed
and respectful manner witho ut consider ing race, gender, sexual orient ation,
religio n, n ationality, politics , or soci al status. Th e goal is to protect the
intere sts of the less powerful who are affected by these decisi ons.
7. 
Professi onal Development. 
Comm it to continuo us professio nal develop-
men t for the self and othe rs with the goal of always using the best and most
curr ent availabl e knowledge to make inform ed decisi ons.
8. 
Respons ibilit y to Protect the Professi on. 
Recognize that be ing c onsidered a
professional has privi leg es that c ome wi th responsi bilit ies t o uphold a nd
p r o t e c t t h e s t a n d a r d s , a n d c o n t i n u e t o d evel o p t h e m i n a wa y t h a t c o n t r i b -
utes to the trust, respect , and honor associated with them and with the
prof ession.
Interestingly, if you study these principles carefully, you can find evidence of all
three e thical decision-m aking approaches. Can you identify c onsequentialist think-
ing, deontologi cal thinking, and virtue e thics thinking? Do you think manage ment is
ready t o become a profession that requires its members to adhere to such a code?
Sh o u l d i t ?
Whether o r not your own professiona l com munity provides guida nce, it remai ns
essential that you think for yours elf, becau se a prof essional commun ity can be wrong.
For example, auditors are professional accountants with a fiduciary responsibility to
the public. Their audits provide investors with assurance that public companies’
financial statements can be trusted. The American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants (AICPA) is the national, professional organization for all certified public
accounta nts (www.aicpa.org). It h as a code of conduc t for membe rs and a mission that
includes establishing and enforcing conduct standards. But the institute also acts as a
lobbying organization. During the 1990s, auditing firms got into the business of
providing consulting to their audit clients; this was an ethically dangerous practice
because of its potential for conflict of interest. The firms might feel pressure to go easy
on their audit clients in order to gain these clients’ consulting business. This is exactly
what happened. Because consulting was more lucrative than auditing, firms lobbied
hard to protect their relationships with these clients and their rights to both consult and
provide audit services to the same firms. As a result, the AICPA was blamed for
contributing to an environment that led to financial scandals at Enron, WorldCom, and
other companies.14 So if you’re looking for solid ethical guidance, it’s important to
scrutinize the source and make sure that it is free of conflicts of interest.
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
49

When a professional community isn’t available, doesn’t provide good guidance,
or seems wrong, you can turn to the broader community and societal standards for
guidance. A useful decision-making shortcut based on the broader community as a
guide is known as the disclosure rule. This practical shortcut is widely used by
managers and executives. The disclosure rule asks, “How would you feel if your
behavior appeared on ___? You fill in the blank of a particular media outlet. Is it the
front page of the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, your hometown newspaper,
60 Minutes, CNN? The assumption behind the disclosure rule is that community
standards do exist for most situations, and at a gut level, most of us know what those
are. If our gut tells us it wouldn’t look good to have our behavior appear in one of these
media outlets, we simply shouldn’t be doing it because it means that if we did, we
wouldn’t be considered persons of integrity in society’s view.
If your goal is to be considered a person of integrity, another useful question to ask
yourself is how your harshest moral critic or ethical role model would advise you. Who
serves in that role for you? Is it someone in your family or a respected teacher, coach,
or spiritual adviser? Identify your strongest ethical role model or harshest moral critic
and consider what this individual would think of the behavior you’re contemplating.
Most of us have people in our lives whose integrity we respect and whose moral
judgment of us we value.
Finally, a virtue ethics perspective assumes that your identity as a moral actor is
important to you and that you are devoted to continuously developing that aspect of
yourself. Being an ethical person is just an important part of who you are. Those of us
who have made such a commitment know that life and careers present ongoing ethical
challenges and opportunities to work on the ethical aspect of ourselves. Are you
following an ethical fitness program by practicing good behavior over time and
developing good habits? Just as an exercise program challenges your muscles,
balance, and coordination, an ethical fitness program challenges your ethical thinking
and leads to improvement. Such an ethical fitness program can help you develop your
comfort with speaking up on behalf of your values. It can also reinforce your view of
yourself as a person of integrity and contribute to improving your ethical fitness over
time. Identifying ethical role models in your life, choosing to interact with people of
integrity, and choosing to work in an ethical environment can all be ways to support
this aspect of your personal development.15 We’ve now considered consequentialist,
deontological, and virtue ethics approaches. These are just a few of the philosophical
approaches that may be applied in ethical dilemma situations. We’ve introduced the
approaches we believe have the most practical benefit to business managers, and,
admittedly, we’ve introduced them in a rather general way, without many of the
nuances developed by philosophers over the years. We’ve suggested that all of the
approaches have limitations. No one of them, by itself, provides perfect guidance in
every situation. Obviously, if all of the approaches lead to the same solution, the
decision is a relatively easy one. The tough ones arise when the approaches conflict.
When that happens, it will be up to you to consider the situation as comprehensively as
possible and make the best decision you can based upon societal good, your most
important values and principles, and considerations of what a person of integrity would
50
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

do. Stuart Youngblood, professor of management at Texas Christian University in Fort
Worth, suggested the following example that he has used in his business ethics class:
We certainly won’t resolve the academic controversies over the “best” philo-
sophical approach here. Even so, we believe that the approaches we’ve presented
incorporate important factors that should guide ethical business decisions. All of them
would have provided excellent ethical guidance to those whose actions contributed to
the recent U.S. financial crisis, during which mortgage brokers sold NINJA (no
income, no job or assets) loans to people who clearly couldn’t afford the homes they
were buying, investment bankers packaged these risky mortgages into securities they
touted as safe, and rating agency employees rated the securities AAA (without fully
addressing the underlying risks). A consequentialist perspective would have focused
attention on the potential harms to multiple stakeholders (customers, society) of these
risky mortgages and mortgage-backed securities. A deontological approach would
have focused attention on the importance of responsibility, honesty, and transparency
with customers about these products. A virtue ethics approach would have asked
whether a person of integrity would sell mortgages to people with little or no income or
rate these securities highly despite the lack of experience with them. A serious
consideration of these factors by the actors involved could have averted a systemic
crisis that has harmed all of us.
Next, we offer eight steps that aim to integrate the three types of analysis just
discussed.16 Before presenting them, we’d like to offer a caveat. The eight steps
suggest a linear decision-making process that is necessarily inaccurate. Ethical
decision making is often not linear. Still, it’s helpful to cover all of these points,
even if they don’t always occur in this particular sequence.
Eight Steps to Sound Ethical Decision Making in Business
STEP ONE: GATHER THE FACTS
The philosophical approaches don’t tell us
explicitly to gather the facts. But they seem to assume that we’ll complete this important
step. You might be surprised at how many people jump to solutions without having the
facts. Ask yourself, “How did the situation occur? Are there historical facts that I should
know? Are there facts concerning the current situation that I should know?”17
THE BURNING BUILDING
Assume you approach a burning building and hear voices coming from both
ends, each seeking help. Assume the fire is burning so rapidly you only have
time to go to one or the other end of the building. Initially, you hear multiple
voices at one end and a sole voice at the other end. Which way do you go?
Why? Now include some additional information. The sole voice is that of your
daughter (father, mother, etc.). Do you still choose to go to the end with
multiple voices (to do the greatest good for society)? If not, why not? What has
changed? What will the different approaches advise?
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
51

Fact gathering is often easier said than done. Many ethical choices are particularly
difficult because of the uncertainty involved in them. Facts may simply be unavailable.
For example, in our layoff case, Pat may not have good information about the legal
requirements on informing workers about layoffs. Also, she may not have enough
information to determine how long it would take these 200 workers to find new jobs.
It’s important to recognize these limitations as you do your best to assemble the facts
that are available to you.
In the financial crisis, decision makers not only failed to gather good information,
but it appears that they may have explicitly avoided getting the facts. For example,
mortgage lenders processed mortgages for unemployed people because they required
no documentation to prove employment (as lenders had always done in the past). All
the person had to do was claim to have a job, and the mortgage would be processed.
The mortgage lender earned fees for creating and processing the loan and then sold it
off in the secondary mortgage market, where it was packaged with other mortgages
and sold to investors. The “fact” that the person with the mortgage was unemployed
and would likely not be able to sustain payments was first ignored and then lost as the
mortgage made its way through the mortgage market system.
STEP TWO: DEFINE THE ETHICAL ISSUES
Many of us have knee-jerk responses to
ethical dilemmas. We jump to a solution without really thinking through the ethical
issues and the reasons for our response. For example, in the layoff case, one person
might say, “Oh, that’s easy; promise keeping is the ethical issue. Pat has to keep her
promise to her boss and protect her job.” Another person might say that honesty is the
key ethical issue: “Pat just has to tell the truth to her friend.”
Don’t jump to solutions without first identifying the ethical issues or points of
values conflict in the dilemma. Also recognize that the toughest situations usually
involve multiple ethical issues that go back to the philosophical approaches we just
discussed. For example, in the layoff case, one ethical issue has to do with the rights of
both the workers and the company. How would you define the workers’ right to know
about the plant closing in advance? How much advance notice is appropriate? What
does the law say? Another ethical issue has to do with the company’s right to keep the
information private. Furthermore, what is the company’s obligation to its workers in
this regard? At a more personal level, there are the ethical issues related to principles
such as honesty, loyalty, and promise keeping. Is it more important to be honest with a
friend or to keep a promise to one’s boss? Who is owed more loyalty? Think about the
situation from a justice or fairness perspective: What would be fair to the company and
to those who would be laid off?
Points of ethical conflict may go back to the conflict between consequentialist and
deontological approaches. For example, if I tell the truth (consistent with the principle
of promise keeping), bad things may happen (negative consequences). A consequen-
tialist would think about the ethical issues in terms of harms or benefits. Who is likely
to be harmed? Who is likely to benefit from a particular decision or action? And what
is the bottom line for society overall? Avirtue ethics approach would suggest thinking
about the ethical issues in terms of community standards. Does your relevant moral
52
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

community (the one that would hold you to the highest ethical standards) identify a
particular action as wrong? Why or why not?
Especially when we’re under pressure or in a rush, our inclination is to stop with
the first ethical issue that comes to mind. For example, in our layoff case, we might be
inclined to stop with the issue of loyalty to a friend. Challenge yourself to think of as
many issues as you possibly can. Here’s where talking about the problem with others
can help. Present the dilemma to coworkers, to your spouse, or to friends you respect.
Ask them whether they see other issues that you may have missed.
STEP THREE: IDENTIFY THE AFFECTED PARTIES (THE STAKEHOLDERS)
Both
consequentialist and deontological thinking involve the ability to identify the parties
affected by the decision. The consequentialist will want to identify all those stake-
holders who are going to experience harm and benefits. The deontologist might want
to know whose rights are involved and who has a duty to act in the situation.
Being able to see the situation through others’ eyes is a key moral reasoning skill.
Lawrence Kohlberg, developer of a key theory of moral reasoning, called this skill role
taking. It means putting yourself in others’ shoes and being sensitive to their needs and
concerns. Rawls’s veil of ignorance exercise asks you to do this as well. Frequently,
you have to think beyond the facts provided in a case in order to identify all affected
parties. It often helps to begin with the individuals in the case who are immediately
affected (e.g., in the layoff case, it would be Pat, the worker, and Pat’s boss) and then
progressively broaden your thinking to incorporate larger groups. For example, in this
case, you might include the other workers, the rest of the company, the local
community, and society in general. As you think of more and more affected parties,
additional issues will probably come to mind. For example, think about the local
community. If this is a small town with few other employers, fairness to the entire
community becomes an important issue. Shouldn’t they have as much time as possible
to plan for the impact of this plant closing? Try to put yourself in their shoes. How
would they argue their case? How would they feel?
Earlier, we introduced the concept of stakeholders, all of those individuals or
groups who have a stake in the particular decision or action. In the context of ethical
decision making in business, we should identify the stakeholders affected by the
decision and ask how they are affected. Try to make your thinking as broad as possible
here. Some of the stakeholders affected by the decision may not even be born yet.
The best concrete example of unborn stakeholders might be “DES daughters.” In the
1940s, DES, a synthetic estrogen, was prescribed for pregnant women who seemed to
be in danger of miscarrying. By 1971, it became clear that DES produced a birth defect
in the daughters of these women. Because of the birth defect, DES daughters were
more likely to develop vaginal cancer, especially between the ages of 15 and 22. They
also had a higher than normal rate of cervical cancer.18
Once stakeholders are identified, role-playing can help you see the issue from
different stakeholder perspectives. In your classroom or your department, get indi-
viduals to seriously play the relevant roles. You may be surprised at how perspectives
change based on this simple exercise. What decision would you reach if you were
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
53

someone else (e.g., the customer?) in the situation? This step incorporates the Golden
Rule to treat others as you would like others to treat you. Imagine yourself as each of
the players in a decision situation. What decision would they reach, and why?
Another consideration may be to ask whether you can “test” a potential decision
with affected parties before your prospective course of action is made final. The
objective is to gauge how various audiences will react, so that you can adjust or fine-
tune a decision along the way.19 One question you could ask yourself is, how would
this or that stakeholder react if this decision were made public? For example, imagine
that ABC Co. (in our layoff case) had another thriving plant in another location.
However, in the decision-making process, it was assumed that employees wouldn’t
want to relocate because of their ties to the local community. Wouldn’t it be better to
ask them their preferences than to assume what they would want to do?
STEP FOUR: IDENTIFY THE CONSEQUENCES
After identifying the affected
parties, think about the potential consequences for each party. This step is obviously
derived from the consequentialist approaches. It isn’t necessary to identify every
possible consequence. You should, however, try to identify consequences that have a
relatively high probability of occurring and those that would have particularly negative
consequences if they did occur (even if the probability of occurrence is low). Who
would be harmed by a particular decision or action? For example, in our layoff case,
telling the truth to the worker might cause Pat to lose her job, which would have
negative consequences for Pat and her entire family (especially if she’s a major
breadwinner in her family). However, it would give her worker (and presumably others
who would be told) the benefit of more time to look for a new job and perhaps save
many families from negative financial consequences. Can you determine which
solution would accomplish the most net good and the least net harm for society?
Think about the drug thalidomide. It was prescribed to women in the late 1950s to
treat morning sickness and produced devastating birth defects in 12,000 babies in
Europe, Canada, Australia, and Japan (the Food and Drug Administration never
approved it for use in the United States). Many of the babies died, but others were left
to live with severe deformities. Randy Warren, a Canadian born in 1961, is the founder
of the Thalidomide Victims Association of Canada. His mother took just two doses of
thalidomide, but Warren is only a little over 3 feet tall and has no thumbs, arms that are
2 inches too short, and stumps for legs. The consequences of this drug when prescribed
to pregnant women were obviously devastating; and shortly after Warren was born, the
drug was banned in most places. But continued research produced renewed interest in
thalidomide as an effective treatment for Hansen’s disease (a painful skin condition
associated with leprosy) as well as for “wasting” disease in AIDS patients, arthritis,
blindness, leukemia, and other forms of cancer. This drug that had such terrible
consequences for so many was being considered for approval because it also had the
potential to help many people who were dealing with other devastating illnesses. As
Warren put it, “When I heard . . . that thalidomide takes people out of wheelchairs and
I think of myself and others that were put in wheelchairs . . . tell me we don’t have the
moral quandary of the century.”
54
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

In the end, Warren was consulted and became involved in the decision to return
the drug to the marketplace. In 1998, the FDA approved the drug to treat Hansen’s
disease under the highest level of restriction ever given to a drug. Doctors, pharma-
cists, and patients all must be registered with the manufacturer, Celgene. Two forms of
birth control are required to prevent the possibility of pregnancy and resulting birth
defects. Male patients are required to use condoms. No automatic refills of the drug are
allowed. And Warren has become “something of a company conscience.” Although
extremely difficult, the decision to market thalidomide in the United States was made
with input from those stakeholders most familiar with its potential for both devastating
consequences and remarkable benefits. Regulators at the FDA and company officials
got to know Randy Warren as a real person who continues to suffer consequences that
they might not have been able to imagine just by reading reports and statistics.20
Long-Term versus Short-Term Consequences
In business decisions, it’s
particularly important to think about short-term and long-term consequences.
Are you confident that your behavior will be considered ethical over a long period
of time, even if circumstances or people change? In the layoff case, is the long-term
health of the company and the people who will remain employed more important
than the short-term consequences to the 200 workers who will be laid off? In the
U.S. financial crisis, if people had been thinking about long-term consequences,
they would have been much more likely to question behaviors that focused primarily
on short-term profits.
Symbolic Consequences
In business, it’s also extremely important to think
about the potential symbolic consequences of an action. Every decision and action
sends a message; it stands for something. What message will a particular decision or
action send? What will it mean if it is misunderstood? For example, if Pat doesn’t tell
her worker the truth, and he finds out later that she knew, what will the symbolic
message be to this worker and the others who work for Pat—that she’s more interested
in saving her own hide than in taking care of them? From a leader’s perspective, what
are the symbolic consequences of accepting tickets to a football game from a valued
client when your organization has a rule against accepting gifts from clients? Although
the leader may see going to the game as important for getting the big sale, the symbolic
message it will likely convey to employees is that the rule doesn’t apply to senior
leaders. Such a symbolic message can have dire consequences for the organization
because employees may then feel that the rule shouldn’t apply to them either.
Consequences of Secrecy
If a decision is made in private in order to avoid some
negative reaction, think about the potential consequences if the decision were to
become public. Think about the disclosure rule here. If you’re inclined to keep it a
secret, that should be a clue that something isn’t right. For example, the public was
outraged by the fact that tobacco executives secretly knew about the negative health
effects of cigarette smoking and lied about it to the American people in testimony
before Congress.21
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
55

STEP FIVE: IDENTIFY THE OBLIGATIONS
Identify the obligations involved and the
reasons for each one. For example, in the layoff case, consider Pat’s obligations toward
the affected parties. When identifying Pat’s various obligations, be sure to state the
reasons why she has this duty or obligation. Think in terms of values, principles,
character, or outcomes. For example, if you’re considering Pat’s obligation to keep her
promise to her boss, your reasoning might go like this: “Pat shouldn’t break her
promise to her boss. If she does, the trust between them will be broken. Promise
keeping and trust are important values in superior-subordinate relationships.”
The obligations you identify will vary depending on the people involved and the
roles they play. For example, our faith in our financial system depends in part on
auditors’ obligation to tell the truth about a company’s financial difficulties and our faith
in rating agencies to accurately grade financial instruments. Similarly, our faith in
science as an institution depends on the integrity of the scientific data and how scientists
report it. Individuals in these roles have a particularly strong obligation to tell the truth;
and if they see themselves as moral actors, they will be motivated to do so.
STEP SIX: CONSIDER YOUR CHARACTER AND INTEGRITY
Here, think about
yourself as a person of integrity. Ask yourself what a person of integrity would do in
this situation. In attempting to answer this question, you may find it useful to identify
the relevant moral community and consider what that community would advise. Begin
by identifying the relevant professional or societal community. Then, determine how
community members would evaluate the decision or action you’re considering.
Remember the disclosure rule. It asks whether you would feel comfortable if your
activities were disclosed in the light of day in a public forum like the New York Times
or some other news medium. In general, if you don’t want to read about it in the New
York Times, you shouldn’t be doing it. If you would be uncomfortable telling your
parents, children, spouse, clergy, or ethical role model about your decision, you should
rethink it.
Thomas Jefferson expressed it like this: “Never suffer a thought to be harbored in
your mind which you would not avow openly. When tempted to do anything in secret,
ask yourself if you would do it in public for all to see. If you would not, be sure it is
wrong.”
This kind of approach can be especially valuable when a decision needs to be
made quickly. Suppose someone in your organization asks you to misrepresent the
effectiveness of one of your company’s products to a customer. You can immediately
imagine how a story reporting the details of your conversation with the customer
would appear in tomorrow’s paper. Would you be comfortable having others read the
details of that conversation? The ideal is to conduct business in such a way that your
activities and conversations could be disclosed without your feeling embarrassed.
Another method might be to ask: “How will I be remembered when I’m gone?”22
Many people don’t often think about this question, but it’s a good one. Will you be
remembered as an individual of integrity? Students often don’t realize how small
professional communities can be. This is especially true in today’s world of social
networking. Although you’ll likely change jobs and organizations multiple times over
56
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

the years, many people remain in a single industry where they have developed
industry-specific expertise. A reputation for trustworthiness, respectful interaction,
and integrity will open doors to new clients and career opportunities. But the opposite
is true as well. A stained reputation is extremely difficult to overcome.
STEP SEVEN: THINK CREATIVELY ABOUT POTENTIAL ACTIONS
Perhaps this
should be Step One. Before making any decision, be sure that you haven’t unnecessarily
forced yourself into a corner. Are you assuming that you have only two choices, either A
or B? It’s important to look for creative alternatives. Perhaps if you’ve been focusing on
A or B, there’s another answer: C. In our layoff case, perhaps Pat could work with
management to devise a fair system for alerting employees sooner, or at least she could
advise them that information is forthcoming soon, and they should not make big
financial commitments until the announcement is made. Perhaps she could advise her
boss that she is hearing rumblings from the rumor mill and suggest moving up the
timetable for telling employees. As another example, what if you received an extrav-
agant gift from a foreign supplier? This situation could easily be conceptualized as an A
or B quandary. Should you accept the gift (which is against company policy), or should
you refuse it (which could be interpreted as a slap in the face by this important supplier,
who is from a culture where gift giving is a valued part of business relationships)? A
potential C solution might be to accept the item as a gift to the company that would be
displayed in the headquarters entrance, explaining that large personal gifts are against
company policy. Obviously, you would have to check with your company about the
acceptability of this C solution. The idea here is to think outside the box.
Here is yet another example. In an overseas location, Cummins Engine Company
was having difficulty with local children cutting through a wire fence and stealing
valuable electronic components. The A or B solution was to arrest or not arrest these
young children when they were caught. After involving the community, the managers
were able to arrive at a C solution. They discovered that the children were stealing
because there weren’t enough classrooms at the local school, thus leaving the children
with little to do but get into trouble. Cummins made classrooms available on their site.
The mayor provided accreditation, books, and teachers. This C solution cost the
company very little and accomplished a great deal. A total of 350 students were
accommodated, the stealing problem disappeared, and Cummins became a valued
corporate citizen.
STEP EIGHT: CHECK YOUR GUT
The emphasis in these steps has been on using a
highly rational fact-gathering and evaluation process once you know that you’re faced
with an ethical dilemma. But don’t forget your gut. We are all hardwired to be
empathetic and to desire fairness. Empathy is an important emotion that can signal
awareness that someone might be harmed, and intuition is gaining credibility as a
source for good business decision making. We can’t always say exactly why we’re
uncomfortable in a situation, but years of socialization have likely made us sensitive to
situations where something just doesn’t feel quite right. So, if your gut is sending up
red flags, give the situation more thought. In fact, this may be your only clue that
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
57

you’re facing an ethical dilemma to begin with. Pay attention to your gut, but don’t let
it make your decision for you. Once you recognize that you’re facing an ethical
dilemma, use the rational decision-making tools developed here to help guide your
decision making.
Practical Preventive Medicine
DOING YOUR HOMEWORK
There’s no doubt that you’ll encounter ethical dilem-
mas—every employee probably encounters hundreds of them during a career; the only
thing in doubt is when. Your mission is to be as prepared as possible before you run
into a problem. The more informed you are, the more effective you’ll be in protecting
yourself and your employer. The best ways to do that are to learn the rules of your
organization and your profession, and to develop relationships that can help you if and
when the need arises.
You can learn the rules in various ways. First, read your company’s code of ethics
(if it has one) and policy manual. Since most policy manuals are huge, you obviously
can’t memorize one. If you skim the contents, some of the rules will sink in—you may
not remember the exact policy, but at least you’ll probably remember that one exists
and where to find it.
Second, ask questions. Managers, executives, and peers will admire your initiative
when you ask what they think is “important around here.” Since many organizational
standards are unwritten, and they differ from company to company, the best way to
find out about them is by asking. Query your coworkers (including management) about
what kinds of ethical situations are most common in your organization and how your
organization generally handles those issues. Ask your manager how to raise ethical
issues within your organization. Since he or she will certainly tell you to raise an issue
with him or her first, be sure to find out how you raise an issue in your manager’s
absence. This not only gives you a road map for raising issues, but it also sends a signal
to your manager that ethics are important to you.
Finally, develop relationships with people outside of your chain of command. Get to
know people in human resources, legal, audit, and other departments; they might be able
to provideinformation, helpyou raise anissueordeterminewhether something isevenan
issue, or vouch for your credibility in a crisis. You might also want to join a professional
group or association. Many professions have developed ethical standards apart from
those that may exist in your company, and it can be helpful to know other people in your
profession who can advise you if a crisis arises in your company. Some may say this is
being political, but we think it’s just plain smart to network with people outside of your
immediate job and company. It’s the difference between being a victim of circumstance
and having the power, the knowledge, and the network to help manage circumstances.
After you’ve done your homework and learned about your company’s standards
and values, you may find that your values and your employer’s values are in conflict. If
the conflict is substantial, you may have no choice but to look for work in another
organization. We’ll be addressing issues of company values and codes more in
Chapters 5 and 6.
58
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

WHEN YOU’RE ASKED TO MAKE A SNAP DECISION
Many businesspeople place
value on the ability to make decisions quickly; and, as a result, many of us can feel
pressure to make up our minds in a hurry. This can be a particular issue when people
are inexperienced for whatever reason—this may be their first job or a new company or
industry—and they may feel a need to prove their competence by making decisions
quickly. Obviously, that can be dangerous. The ethical decision-making tools
described earlier in the chapter assume that you’ll have some time to devote to the
decision—to consider multiple sides of the issue and the inherent conflicts with any
one course of action. Do your best to get the time to assess, think through, and gather
more information. Also consider the following guidelines when a quick decision
seems called for:
1.
Don’t underestimate the importance of a hunch to alert you that you’re facing
an ethical dilemma. Your gut is your internal warning system. As one senior
executive at a multinational computer company said, “The gut never lies.”
When your gut tells you something’s wrong, consider it a warning siren.
2.
Ask for time to think it over. Most snap decisions don’t have to be that way. Say
something like, “Let me think about it, and I’ll get back to you soon.”
Bargaining for time is a smart way to give yourself a break—then you can
really think about the decision and consult with others. It’s better to take the
time to make a good decision than it is to make a bad decision quickly and have
lots of time to regret it. Would you rather be known as cautious or reckless?
3.
Find out quickly if your organization has a policy that applies to your
decision.
4.
Ask your manager or your peers for advice. You should consider your
manager the first line of defense when you encounter an ethical dilemma.
Regardless of your level within the organization, never hesitate to ask for
another opinion. This is where a trusted network comes in handy. If you have
friends in human resources or the legal department, you can float the issue
with them on a casual basis to see if there even is an issue.
5.
Use the quick-check New York Times test (the disclosure rule). If you’d be
embarrassed to have your decision disclosed in the media or to your family,
don’t do it.
SHOULD JORDAN ACCEPT THE PRINTER DISCOUNT?
Jordan is upgrading his department’s data processing capabilities and has just
placed an order for four personal computers and two laser printers with a
computer company representative. When he mentions that he wishes he had a
printer at home like the ones he just ordered, the representative tells him that
because of his large order, she can give him a 50 percent discount on a printer
for his home. Jordan feels that this is not quite right, but he’s not sure why and
would like some time to think about her offer.
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
59

In this case, Jordan could have real doubt about whether or not to accept a
50 percent discount on a printer for his home. Even though he feels funny about the
offer, he might be thinking that he does a lot of work at home, so accepting a
discount on a personal printer could be justified. And since the computer repre-
sentative made the offer after the order was placed, there’s no conflict of interest—
Jordan’s decision to purchase obviously wasn’t influenced by the offer of a
discount.
But he should listen to his gut, which is feeling that this isn’t quite right. He can
first stall the computer representative by telling her he’ll get back to her later in the day
or tomorrow. He can find out what his company policy says about making purchases.
(Many companies would equate the discount with a gift and forbid accepting it unless
it’s available to all employees.)
Suppose he finds nothing in the policy manual to prohibit the discount, and other
workers have said “go for it.” Then he can use the New York Times test. How would the
public react to his decision? Some people would probably think that his order was
influenced by the offer of a discount. He knows that’s not true, but it might be difficult
to convince other people of that. This is called an appearance of a conflict of interest,
an appearance can be as damaging as an actual conflict. If someone could think your
judgment has been affected by a relationship—or in this case, a discount—it could be
viewed as the appearance of a conflict and should be avoided. Appearances are
extremely important in business and may not be accounted for by the philosophical
tools provided earlier in the chapter. Whether you appear to be fair may be as
important as whether you’re really fair.
Here’s the bottom line: If you think that your decision could be misinterpreted or
if someone could think the objectivity of your decision has been compromised, rethink
the decision. In the example, Jordan can politely refuse the representative’s offer by
saying something like, “My company doesn’t allow personal discounts,” or “I just
don’t feel right about it.”
If you ever feel that accepting a favor from a vendor will place you under an
obligation to the vendor in the future, be very careful. For example, a public relations
manager, Mary, described an incident with a printing company (we’ll call it Type Co.)
sales representative who was trying to get her business. Type Co. already did business
with a number of departments within her company, but Mary was satisfied with her
current printer and saw no reason to switch. Just before the holidays, Type Co. sent a
popular electronic device (worth about $250) to Mary and to all of its customers in her
company. Mary immediately felt that the gift was inappropriate; but to check out her
judgment, she called one of Type Co.’s other customers in her company. Mary’s
colleague assured her that there was nothing wrong with accepting the gift and that it
was simply a token of good will. (If Mary had been friendly with one of her company’s
lawyers or human resources managers, she probably would have received very
different advice.) Mary listened to her internal warning system, despite what her
colleague said. She sent back the gift.
When asked why she returned the gift, Mary said, “I felt like I was being bribed to
do business with Type Co.” A reader of the New York Times would probably agree.
60
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

CONCLUSION
This chapter has presented a prescriptive approach to individual ethical decision
making. When you’re confronted with an ethical dilemma, you should find it helpful to
inform your choice by considering the ideas and steps offered in this chapter. The end-
of-chapter questions and case should give you some practice in applying these ideas
and steps to real ethical dilemmas.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.
If you had to choose just one of the philosophical approaches discussed in this
chapter to guide your decision making, which would you choose? Why? Or, if
you had to rank them from most to least helpful, how would you rank them?
2.
Some of the steps in the eight-step model might suggest very different courses of
action for resolving your dilemma. How would you choose among these distinct
courses of action? Why?
3.
Think about situations where your values have been in conflict. How have you
resolved those conflicts? Now that you have studied the ethical decision-making
frameworks in this chapter, what should you have done?
4.
Think about an ethical dilemma situation that you’ve faced. Apply the three
approaches and the eight steps recommended in this chapter. Does it change your
thinking about the situation? Would it change your action?
5.
Some corporations and other organizations have designed ethical decision-
making tests that incorporate some of the principles and systems described in
this chapter. For example, Carl Skooglund, former vice president and ethics
director at Texas Instruments, outlined the following Ethics Quick Test recom-
mended for use by Texas Instrument employees:23
& Is the action legal?
& Does it comply with your best understanding of our values and principles?
& If you do it, will you feel bad?
& How will it look in the newspaper?
& If you know it’s wrong, don’t do it, period!
& If you’re not sure, ask.
& Keep asking until you get an answer.
Think about this list in terms of the decision-making guides discussed in the chapter.
Which ones are being used here? Which are not? What recommendations, if any,
would you make to alter this list? If you had to make up a list for your company, what
would be on it? Why?
Do the same with the Rotary International Four-Way Test:
& Is it the truth?
& Is it fair to all concerned?
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
61

& Will it build goodwill and better relationships?
& Will it be beneficial to all concerned?
The Seneca (one of the five tribes of the Iroquois Nation) people’s guidelines for self-
discipline also include these questions:24
& Am I happy in what I’m doing?
& Is what I’m doing adding to the confusion?
& What am I doing to bring about peace and contentment?
& How will I be remembered when I am gone?
Could these tests serve as guides for ethical decision making in business? Why or
why not?
6.
The last question leads us to a useful exercise. If you had to write your own
epitaph, what would it say? How would you like to be remembered? What kind
of life do you hope to lead?
7.
Albert Schweitzer (the philosopher and mission doctor) said, “Success is not the
key to happiness. Happiness is the key to success. If you love what you are doing,
you will be successful.” What do you think? How does this relate to the
prescriptive approaches discussed in the chapter?
8.
What do you think of the proposed Hippocratic oath for managers?25
9.
What limitations, if any, can you think of to the prescriptions provided in this
chapter? Can you think of reasons why they might not work?
10.
If you were to design an ethical fitness program for yourself, what would you
include?
EXERCISE
Clarifying Your Values
If you wish to be better prepared to make tough ethical decisions at work or elsewhere
in your life, it can be extremely helpful to clarify your personal ethical values before
they’re seriously challenged. Following is a selected list of values (in alphabetical
order). Feel free to add one or more if you have a deeply held value that is not
represented on this list (it is not meant to be exhaustive). In priority order (with 1 being
the most important value), list from three to six values that are most important to you
personally in making decisions. That’s the easy part. Next, think seriously about what
happens when two or more of these values conflict. For example, what happens if you
value both honesty and success and they come into conflict? Are you willing to forgo
financial success in order to be completely honest with customers or suppliers? Next, if
you’re working, think about the values of your organization and how those are
prioritized. Are there serious conflicts between your personal values and the
62
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

organization’s values? Finally, list those values that you would choose to serve as the
basis for business dealings in an ideal society. Be prepared to discuss.
Action orientation
Freedom
Responsibility
Altruism
Harmony
Risk taking
Authority
Helpfulness
Security
Compassion
Honesty/Integrity
Self-discipline
Competence
Honor
Status
Conformity
Humility
Success
Creativity
Initiative
Teamwork
Customer satisfaction
Innovation
Tradition
Diversity
Moderation
Wealth
Equality
Novelty
Winning
Excitement
Obedience
Experimentation
Order
Fairness/Justice
Power
Family well-being
Promise keeping
Flexibility/Adaptability
Respect
INTRODUCING THE PINTO FIRES CASE
Next we’ll discuss a case that chronicles events that took place over 30 years ago. You
may ask, why study such an old case? We present this case because it is extremely
important in American business history. In 2005, Fortune Magazine called it one of the
20 business decisions that “helped create the business world as it is today.”26
According to Fortune, the case and ensuing legal battles contributed to the develop-
ment of consumer activism as well as to the consumer protections and class action
lawsuits that we now take for granted. We have also seen aspects of the case play out in
more recent product safety cases.
CASE
PINTO FIRES
by Dennis A. Gioia (used with permission)
On August 10, 1978, three teenage girls died horribly in an automobile accident.
Driving a 1973 Ford Pinto to their church volleyball practice in Goshen, Indiana, they
were struck from behind by a Chevrolet van. The Pinto’s fuel tank ruptured and the car
exploded in flames. Two passengers, Lynn Marie Ulrich, 16, and her cousin, Donna
Ulrich, 18, were trapped inside the inferno and burned to death. After three attempts,
Lynn Marie’s sister, 18-year-old Judy Ann, was dragged out alive from the driver’s
seat, but died in agony hours later in the hospital.
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
63

They were merely the latest in a long list of people to burn to death in accidents
involving the Pinto, which Ford had begun selling in 1970. By the time of the accident,
the car had been the subject of a great deal of public outcry and debate about its safety,
especially its susceptibility to fire in low-speed rear-end collisions. This particular
accident, however, resulted in more media attention than any other auto accident in
U.S. history. Why? Because it led to an unprecedented court case in which the
prosecution brought charges of reckless homicide against the Ford Motor Co.—the
first time that a corporation had been charged with criminal conduct, and the charge
was not negligence but murder. At stake was much more than the maximum penalty of
$30,000 in fines. Of immediate concern, a guilty verdict could have affected 40
pending civil cases nationwide and resulted in hundreds of millions of dollars in
punitive damage awards. Of perhaps greater concern, however, were larger issues
involving corporate social responsibility, ethical decision making by individuals
within corporations, and ultimately, the proper conduct of business in the modern era.
How did Ford get into this situation? The chronology begins in early 1968 when
the decision was made to battle the foreign competition in the small car market,
specifically the Germans, but also the growing threat from the Japanese. This decision
came after a hard-fought, two-year internal struggle between then-president Semon
“Bunkie” Knudsen and Lee Iacocca, who had risen quickly within the company
because of his success with the Mustang. Iacocca strongly supported fighting the
competition at their own game, while Knudsen argued instead for letting them have the
small car market so Ford could concentrate on the more profitable medium and large
models. The final decision ultimately was in the hands of then-CEO Henry Ford II,
who not only agreed with Iacocca but also promoted him to president after Knudsen’s
subsequent forced resignation.
Iacocca wanted the Pinto in the showrooms by the 1971 model introductions,
which would require the shortest production planning period in automotive history to
that time. The typical time span from conception to production of a new car was more
than three and a half years; Iacocca, however, wanted to launch the Pinto in just over
two years. Under normal conditions, chassis design, styling, product planning,
advance engineering, component testing, and so on were all either completed or
nearly completed prior to tooling of the production factories. Yet, because tooling had
a fixed time frame of about 18 months, some of these other processes were done more
or less concurrently. As a consequence, when it was discovered through crash testing
that the Pinto’s fuel tank often ruptured during a rear-end impact, it was too late (in
other words, too costly) to do much about it in terms of redesign.
A closer look at the crash-test reports reveals that Ford was aware of the faulty fuel
tank design. Eleven Pintos were subjected to rear-end collisions with a barrier at
average speeds of 31 miles per hour to determine whether any fuel would be lost after
impact. All eight of the Pintos equipped with the standard fuel tank failed. The three
remaining cars, however, survived the test because special measures had been taken to
prevent tank rupture or fuel leakage. These measures included a plastic baffle placed
between the axle housing and the gas tank, a steel plate between the tank and the rear
bumper, and a rubber lining in the gas tank.
64
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

It should be noted that these tests were done under guidelines established by
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 301, which was proposed in 1968 by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), but not officially adopted
until the 1977 model year. Therefore, at the time of the tests, the Pinto met the required
standards. Standard 301 had been strenuously opposed by the auto industry, and
specifically Ford Motor Co. In fact, the lobbying efforts were so strong that negotia-
tions continued until 1976, despite studies showing that hundreds of thousands of cars
burned every year, taking 3,000 lives annually; the adoption of the standard was
projected to reduce the death rate by 40 percent. Upon approval of Standard 301 in
1977, all Pintos were provided with a rupture-proof fuel tank design.
But for the Pinto’s 1971 debut, Ford decided to go with its original gas tank design
despite the crash-test results. Because the typical Pinto buyer was assumed to be
extremely price conscious, Iacocca set an important goal known as “the limits of
2,000”: the Pinto could not cost more than $2,000 and could not weigh more than
2,000 pounds. Thus, to be competitive with foreign manufacturers, Ford felt it could
not spend any money on improving the gas tank. Besides, during the late 1960s and
early 1970s, American consumers demonstrated little concern for safety, so it was not
considered good business sense to promote it. Iacocca echoed these sentiments when
he said time and time again “Safety doesn’t sell,” a lesson he had learned after a failed
attempt to add costly safety features to 1950s Fords.
Ford had experimented with placing the gas tank in different locations, but all
alternatives reduced usable trunk space. A design similar to that of the Ford Capri was
successful in many crash tests at speeds over 50 miles per hour, but Ford felt that lost
trunk space would hurt sales too much. One Ford engineer, when asked about the
dangerous gas tank said, “Safety isn’t the issue, trunk space is. You have no idea how
stiff the competition is over trunk space. Do you realize that if we put a Capri-type tank
in the Pinto, you could only get one set of golf clubs in the trunk?”
The last of Ford’s reasons for not making adjustments to the fuel tank design,
however, was unquestionably the most controversial. After strong lobbying efforts,
Ford and the auto industry in general convinced NHTSA regulators that a cost-benefit
analysis would be an appropriate basis for determining the feasibility of safety design
standards. Such an analysis, however, required the assignment of a value for a human
life. A prior study had concluded that every time someone died in an auto accident
there was an estimated “cost to society” of $200,725 (detailed in Table 2.1: What’s
Your Life Worth?).27
Having this value in hand, Ford calculated the cost of adding an $11 gas tank
improvement versus the benefits of the projected 180 lives that would be saved (via an
internal memo entitled “Fatalities Associated with Crash-Induced Fuel Leakage and
Fires”). This is presented in Table 2.2: The Cost of Dying in a Pinto.28 As is
demonstrated, the costs outweigh the benefits by almost three times. Thus, the
cost-benefit analysis indicated that no improvements to the gas tanks were warranted.
Ford decided to go ahead with normal production plans, but the Pinto’s problems
soon surfaced. By early 1973, Ford’s recall coordinator received field reports
suggesting that Pintos were susceptible to “exploding” in rear-end collisions at
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
65

very low speeds (under 25 miles per hour). Reports continued to indicate a similar
trend in subsequent years, but no recall was initiated despite the mounting evidence. At
every internal review, those responsible decided not to recall the Pinto.
Prior to the Indiana accident, the most publicized case concerning the Pinto’s gas
tank was that of Richard Grimshaw. In 1972, Richard, then 13, was riding with a
Table 2.1 What’s Your Life Worth?
Component
1971 Costs
Future productivity losses
Direct
$132,300
Indirect
$41,000
Medical costs
Hospital
$700
Other
$425
Property damage
$1,500
Insurance administration
$4,700
Legal and court
$3,000
Employer losses
$1,000
Victim’s pain and suffering
$10,000
Funeral
$900
Assets (lost consumption)
$5,000
Miscellaneous accident cost
$200
Total per fatality
$200,725
The chart, from a 1971 study by the National Highway Trafﬁc
Safety Administration, is a breakdown of the estimated cost to
society every time someone is killed in a car accident. The Ford
Motor Company used the $200,725 total ﬁgure in its own cost-
beneﬁt analysis.
Table 2.2 The Cost of Dying in a Pinto
Beneﬁts
Savings: 180 burn deaths, 180 serious burn injuries, 2,100 burned vehicles
Unit Cost: $200,000 per death, $67,000 per injury, $700 per vehicle
Total Beneﬁt: (180  $200,000) þ (180  $67,000) þ (2,100  $700) ¼ $49.5 million
Costs
Sales: 11 million cars, 1.5 million light trucks
Unit Cost: $11 per car, $11 per truck
Total Cost: (11,000,000  $11) þ (1,500,000  $11) ¼ $137.5 million
These ﬁgures are from a Ford Motor Co. internal memorandum on the beneﬁts and costs
of an $11 safety improvement (applicable to all vehicles with similar gas tank designs)
that would have made the Pinto less likely to burn.
66
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Case Questions
1.
Put yourself in the role of the recall coordinator for Ford Motor Co. It is 1973,
and field reports have been coming in about rear-end collisions, fires, and
fatalities. You must decide whether to recall the automobile.
a. Identify the relevant facts.
b. Identify the pertinent ethical issues and points of ethical conflict.
c. Identify the relevant affected parties.
d. Identify the possible consequences of alternative courses of action.
e. Identify relevant obligations.
f. Identify your relevant community standards that should guide you as a person
of integrity.
g. Check your gut.
What will you decide?
neighbor on a road near San Bernardino, California, when they were hit from the rear.
The Pinto’s gas tank ruptured, causing the car to burst into flames. The neighbor was
burned to death in a crash that would have been survivable if there had been no fire.
Richard suffered third-degree burns over 90 percent of his body and subsequently
underwent more than 60 operations, with only limited success. A civil suit was settled
in February 1978, when a jury awarded a judgment of over $125 million against Ford,
most of which consisted of punitive damages (later reduced to $6 million by a judge
who nonetheless accused Ford of “callous indifference to human life”). This judgment
was based on convincing evidence that Ford chose not to spend the $11 per car to
correct the faults in the Pinto gas tanks that its own crash testing had revealed.
The Pinto sold well until the media called special attention to the Pinto fuel tank
story. As a consequence, in June 1978, in the face of pressure from the media, the
government, pending court cases, and the potential loss of future sales, Ford ordered a
complete recall of all 1.5 million Pintos built between 1970 and 1976. During the 1980
Indiana trial that resulted from the fatal accident of 1978, differing views continued to
be expressed about the Pinto fires case. Ford representatives argued that companies
must make cost-benefit decisions all the time. They claimed that it is an essential part
of business, and even though everyone knows that some people will die in auto
accidents, buyers want costs held down; therefore, people implicitly accept risks when
buying cars.
In a scathing article accusing Ford of criminally mismanaging the Pinto problem,
investigative reporter Mark Dowie framed the case in a different and rather more
sensational way, with this often-quoted speculation: “One wonders how long the Ford
Motor Company would continue to market lethal cars were Henry Ford II and Lee
Iacocca serving twenty-year terms in Leavenworth for consumer homicide.”29
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
67

SHORT CASES
As a counselor in an outplac ement firm, you’ve been wo rking with Irwi n for six
months to find him a new position. During that time , he has com pleted extensive
assessment work to determin e whe ther he’s in an appro priate professio n or if he might
benefit from a care er change. The resu lts of the assessment indicat e that Irwi n has low
self-esteem , proba bly coul d benefit from psycho therapy, and is most likely ill suited
for his current prof ession. Irwi n has been actively interv iewing for a position that’s
very similar to two othe rs he has held and lost. He despe rately wants and needs this job.
The com pany where he’s interv iewing happen s to be one of your most important
clients. You rece ive a call from the head of huma n resource s at the company, who tell s
you that Irwi n sugges ted she call you for inf ormation about his abili ties, intere sts, and
personality style as mea sured by the asse ssment proce ss. She also asks y ou for a
reference for Irwin. Since he has, in effect, asked that you shar e inf ormation with this
woma n, is it okay for you to give her an honest asse ssment of Irwin? What are your
obligatio ns to Irwi n, who is your client in thi s case? Is there a way for you to be honest ,
yet not hurt Irwin’s chances to obtain this job? Or is that important? What will you do?
You have worked in business for several years and you’re now ready for some further
education. You have applied to multiple prestigious MBA programs via a website
called ApplyYourself.com that handles the applica tion process for many of thes e
programs. You’re anxiously awaiting replies and expect to receive them in about a
month. You’re up late one night and, while surfing the Web, you discover instructions
for a “back door” way to take advantage of a technical glitch on the website that would
allow you to check the status of your application and find out if you’ve been accepted
or rejected. Multiple steps are involved, but the instructions provide clear guidance.
Would it be right to take advantage of this information? Why or why not? If you were
the admissions director or dean of one of these schools and you learned that some
applicants had taken advantage of the glitch, what would be the right thing to do?
NOTES
1.
J. Rachels, The Elements of Moral Philosophy (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983).
2.
L. Peach, “An Introduction to Ethical Theory,” in Research Ethics: Cases and Materials, ed. R. L.
Penslar (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994).
3.
D. J. Fritsche and H. Becke, “Linking Management Behavior to Ethical Philosophy: An Empirical
Investigation,” Academy of Management Journal 27 (1984): 166–75.
4.
J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971).
5.
J. Rachels, The Elements of Moral Philosophy (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983).
6.
E. Bazelon, “Sentencing by the Numbers,” New York Times Magazine, January 2, 2005, 18.
7.
Ibid.
8.
R. C. Solomon, Ethics and Excellence (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).
9.
G. R. Weaver, “Virtue in Organizations: Moral Identity as a Foundation for Moral Agency,”
Organization Studies 17 (2006): 341–68.
10.
“Saying It Again: Psychologists May Never Participate in Torture,” American Psychological Associa-
tion (APA) Press Release, April 22, 2009.
68
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

11. 
“26-Year Secret,” CBS News.com (June 16, 2009), at www.cbsnews.com.
12.
R. Khurana, From Higher Aims to Hired Hands (Cambridge, MA: Princeton University Press, 2007).
13.
R. Khurana and N. Nohria, “It’s Time to Make Management a True Profession,” Harvard Business
Review 86, no. 10 (2008): 1–8.
14.
“Bloodied and Bowed,” Businessweek, January 20, 2003, 56–57.
15.
G. R. Weaver, “Virtue in Organizations: Moral Identity as a Foundation for Moral Agency,”
Organization Studies 17 (2006): 341–68.
16.
M. Bebeau, “Developing a Well-Reasoned Moral Response to a Moral Problem in Scientific Research
Ethics,” Paper distributed at the Teaching Research Ethics conference, Poynter Research Center for the
Study of Ethics and American Institutions at Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, May 1994.
17.
L. Nash, “Ethics without the Sermon,” in Ethics in Practice, ed. K. R. Andres (Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 1989).
18.
D. E. Larson, Mayo Clinic Family Health Book (New York: William Morrow, 1990).
19.
L. Nash, “Ethics without the Sermon,” in Ethics in Practice, ed. K. R. Andres (Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 1989).
20.
S. G. Stolberg, “Their Devil’s Advocates: Thalidomide Returns with an Unlikely Ally: A Group of Its
Original Victims.” New York Times Magazine, January 25, 1998, 20–25.
21.
D. M. Messick and B. Bazerman, Ethics for the 21st Century: A Decision Making Perspective.
MIT Sloan Management Review 37, no. 2 (1996): 9–22.
22.
B. Steiger, Indian Medicine Power (Atglen, PA: Whitford Press, 1984), 92.
23.
C. Skooglund, “Ethics in the Face of Competitive Pressures,” Business Ethics Resource (Fall 1992): 4.
24.
B. Steiger, Indian Medicine Power (Atglen, PA: Whitford Press, 1984), 92.
25.
R. Khurana and N. Nohria, “It’s Time to Make Management a True Profession,” Harvard Business
Review 86, no. 10 (2008): 1–8.
26.
J. Useem, K. Bonamici, N. D. Schwartz, and C. Murphy, “20 That Made History,” Fortune, June 27,
2005, 58 (14 pages).
27.
M. Dowie, “How Ford Put Two Million Fire Traps on Wheels,” Business and Society Review 23 (1977):
51–55.
28.
Ibid.
29.
Ibid.
CHAPTER 2
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH
69

C H A P T E R3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A
PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
C
hapter 2 introduced prescriptive ethical theories, developed by philosophers,
which are designed to help individuals decide what they should do in response
to ethical dilemmas. But psychology teaches us that people often don’t even
recognize the ethical dimensions of the situation at hand. And, when they do, they
often don’t think about it in expected ways. So, this chapter is designed to help you
understand how people actually think and what people actually do by introducing the
psychological factors—the individual differences and mental processes that influence
how people think and behave. It also explains some factors that can keep well-
intentioned people from making good ethical decisions and suggests some ways to
overcome them. Finally, this chapter introduces relevant new neuroscience research
and research on the role of emotions in ethical decision making.
ETHICAL AWARENESS AND ETHICAL JUDGMENT
If a decision maker is to engage in ethical judgment processes (like those discussed in
Chapter 2) that will eventually lead to ethical action, she or he must first recognize the
ethical nature of the situation at hand.
Ethical Awareness ! Ethical Judgment ! Ethical Action
We refer to this initial step in the ethical decision-making process as ethical awareness.
With ethical awareness, a person recognizes that a situation or issue is one that raises
ethical concerns and must be thought about in ethical terms. It is an important step that
shouldn’t be taken for granted. Sometimes people are simply unaware that they are
facing an issue with ethical overtones. And, if they don’t recognize and label the issue
as an ethical one, ethical judgment processes (like those we studied in Chapter 2) will
not be engaged. In fascinating new research, parts of the brain that are associated with
recognizing the ethical nature of an issue were differentiated from those involved in
other kinds of thinking. Researchers used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) in a study showing that when Executive MBA students identified “an
important point or issue” in scenarios, a different part of the brain was more active
70

when the issue had ethical overtones compared to more neutral issues.1 In a different
study, a part of the brain associated with emotional processing was activated when
participants viewed morally relevant pictures compared to more neutral ones.2 So, it
seems that something different happens in our brains when we begin thinking about an
issue we recognize as having ethical overtones.
Consider the following ethical awareness example. Students are doing online
research for classroom assignments. The technology makes it easy to find up-to-date
information, download it, and cut and paste it right into a paper that then gets
submitted to a professor for a grade. Perhaps you have done this without thinking too
much about it. However, in this process, students often overlook the fact that they may
be plagiarizing—“stealing” someone else’s intellectual property. Intellectual property
is protected by copyright and patent laws in the United States. These laws are
important because there would simply be no incentive to write a book, publish a
magazine, or develop a new product if anyone could simply reproduce it freely without
any attention to the rights of the person or company that invested time and resources to
create it. The education community has adopted academic integrity rules that guide
how students can fairly use intellectual property. In keeping with those rules, students
are expected to paraphrase and then carefully reference all sources of information.
When you’re quoting someone else’s words, these words must be put in quotation
marks, and the exact citation to the source must be provided. In the pre-Internet days,
this kind of research meant physically going to the library, searching the shelves for
information, copying pertinent information by hand, making careful notes about the
sources, and then organizing the information into a paper that had to be typed from
scratch. Plagiarism actually required conscious effort in those days. Now, information
is so accessible and it’s so easy to simply cut and paste that it can be harder to
recognize the ethical issues involved. But if your college has an academic integrity
policy or honor code, and your professor takes the time to explain the importance of
academic integrity, the role of intellectual property in our society, the definition of
plagiarism, and your responsibilities as a member of the higher education community,
you should be more aware of the ethical issues involved. Under those circumstances,
when you’re tempted to just cut and paste, you’ll be more likely to think about the
ethical dimensions of your actions—the rights of the intellectual property owner, and
whether your actions would be considered plagiarism by your professor and others in
your academic community.
Now for a work-related example.
You’ve just started a new job in the financial services industry. One afternoon,
your manager tells you that he has to leave early to attend his son’s softball
game, and he asks you to be on the lookout for an important check that his boss
wants signed before the end of the day. He tells you to do him a favor—simply
sign his name and forward the check to his boss.
To a naive employee, this may seem like a straightforward and easily accommo-
dated request. But if the company trained you well, you would immediately be aware
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
71

of the ethical nature of the situation. Your manager has asked you to engage in forgery,
a serious ethical lapse, especially in the financial services industry where the validity
of signatures is essential to system functioning and trust. Recognizing the ethical
nature of the situation would likely lead to some very different thinking about how to
respond.
Research has found that people are more likely to be ethically aware, to recognize
the ethical nature of an issue or decision, if three things happen: (1) if they believe that
their peers will consider it to be ethically problematic; (2) if ethical language is used to
present the situation to the decision maker; and (3) if the decision is seen as having the
potential to produce serious harm to others.3
Let’s take these factors one at a time. First, as we’ll see later, most people look
to others in their social environment for guidance in ethical dilemma situations. So,
if you believe that your coworkers and others around you are likely to see a decision
as ethically problematic, it probably means that the issue has been discussed,
perhaps in a company-sponsored ethics training program or informally among
coworkers or with your manager. Such discussions prime you to think about
situations in a particular way. When a similar situation arises, it triggers memories
of the previous ethics-related discussion, and you are more likely to categorize and
think about the situation in ethical terms.4 Using the forgery example, perhaps a
company training program provided instruction on the importance of signatures in
the financial industry and labeled signing for someone else as forgery. Perhaps the
company even presented a similar problem to trainees and you all agreed that
signing someone else’s name to the check would be wrong. Having participated in
such a discussion, you would recognize that signing the check would be ethically
problematic and you would be more likely to see your boss’s request as an ethical
problem.
Second, situations can be represented or “framed” in different ways—using
ethical language or more neutral language. Using ethical language (positive words like
integrity, honesty, fairness, and propriety, or negative words such as lying, cheating,
and stealing) will trigger ethical thinking because these terms are attached to existing
cognitive categories that have ethical content. For example, if the manager in the
example above had asked you to forge the check for him, the word forge would be
more likely to trigger legal or ethics-related concerns than if he simply asked you to
sign the check (more neutral language). In response to the term forgery, you would
more likely wonder if signing the check was ethically wrong, if anyone was being hurt,
and what the consequences would be if you did or didn’t do it. The term plagiarism
would likely trigger similar thinking.
Think about the power of the word genocide. If you’ve seen the film Hotel
Rwanda, you know about the horrible killing in 1994 of some 800,000 Tutsi men,
women, and children by Hutu extremists while the rest of the world, including the
United States, did nothing to help. According to President Clinton’s national security
advisor, the administration refused to allow use of the word genocide for six weeks
because “if you used the word, then you’re required to take action.”5 Former President
Clinton has said that failing to help in Rwanda is one of his “greatest regrets.”6
72
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Avoidance of the morally powerful term genocide likely contributed to the admin-
istration’s inaction and the public’s lack of support.
Neutral language can be used to make an unethical action seem less problematic.
The use of euphemistic language can easily keep individuals from thinking about the
ethical implications of a decision or action. With euphemistic language, we name or
label actions in ways that minimize their ethical overtones. For example, troubled
assets don’t seem nearly as problematic as “toxic” assets. And the term no-doc loans
(used to describe new high-risk loans that were made to mortgage customers who were
not required to provide documentary evidence of their job security or income) raises
ethical antennae much less than does the term liars’ loans. The latter term (actually
used by some in the mortgage industry before the meltdown) acknowledges that
borrowers were lying about their incomes on their loan applications. The use of
euphemistic language may not be intentionally unethical, but it certainly has the effect
of allowing us to feel okay about what we’re doing when perhaps we should be
thinking much harder about the ethical overtones.
Here is a great business example of euphemistic language. In 2006, Hewlett-
Packard’s (HP) then chairwoman of the board of directors, Patricia Dunn, was upset
about boardroom leaks to the press about HP’s strategy. In an attempt to learn the
leaker’s identity, the company hired investigators who were allowed to misrepresent
their identities to the phone company (they lied) in order to obtain cell phone records
of board members and a journalist; they referred to this behavior as “pretexting.”
When the press learned about it, they (perhaps more properly) used ethically charged
language to label the behavior as spying, and a high-profile scandal ensued. Dunn was
replaced, along with two other board members and the executive heading the company
ethics program (who knew about the investigation). The CEO testified in congressio-
nal hearings, and HP (a company that had long claimed privacy as a core value) had to
scurry to try to overcome the company’s association with spying, lying, and invasion
of privacy.7 If someone involved in approving this investigation had labeled the
behavior using ethical language (lying, spying, invasion of privacy) instead of
the more neutral-sounding pretexting, red flags would more likely have gone up to
stop the investigators’ behavior.
Finally, and perhaps most important, an issue or situation that has the potential to
produce serious harm to others is more likely to be seen as an ethical issue. If HP
executives could have imagined the potential damage to board members or the
journalist, or the resulting scandal and implications for the company’s reputation,
they would have been more likely to raise ethical concerns. In the forgery example, if
you see that forging the check could result in serious harm to customers, you would
more likely see it as a serious issue than if no one would be harmed. Thomas Jones
proposed that individuals are more likely to recognize the ethical nature of issues that
are morally intense.8 The moral intensity of an issue is higher when the consequences
for others are potentially large, the consequences are relatively immediate and likely to
occur, and the potential victims are psychologically or physically close to the decision
maker. For example, a decision to allow toxic chemicals to leak into the local water
supply is very likely to harm many people in one’s own community. Such a decision is
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
73

“morally intense,” and therefore the decision maker is more likely to see it as an ethical
issue. In contrast, a decision that might require laying off a few individuals in a foreign
subsidiary would be less likely to trigger ethical awareness. Only a few people will be
affected, the consequences will occur in the future, and these individuals are both
psychologically and physically distant from the decision maker.
So, managers can encourage employees to be ethically aware by providing
training and by talking with employees about the types of ethical issues they’re
likely to face and why these issues are ethically problematic. They can also encourage
employees to have these discussions themselves, to use ethical language in such
interactions, and to think about the consequences of their actions and take responsi-
bility for the consequences of the decisions they make.
On the other hand, all of us should be on the lookout for situations that are likely to
reduce our chances of seeing the ethical overtones in a situation. For example,
downloading music from the Internet may seem benign if one doesn’t recognize
that the American economy loses an estimated $12.5 billion dollars a year from it. That
includes jobs and tax revenues that are lost because of what the industry has termed
“music piracy.”9 Investment bankers who pay for mutual fund managers to go to the
Super Bowl and lavishly entertain clients are not likely to think that they are engaged
in “bribery” or that their behavior is anything more than what “every one else does.”
Never mind that the average investor is likely disadvantaged by the wining and dining.
If we think about issues in ethical terms, the ethical judgment processes we discuss
next are more likely to be triggered.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES, ETHICAL JUDGMENT,
AND ETHICAL BEHAVIOR
Once people are aware of the ethical dimensions of a situation or decision, they engage
in ethical judgment processes that can contribute to ethical (or unethical) conduct. By
ethical judgment, we mean making a decision about what is the right thing to do. As
with ethical awareness, neuroscience (fMRI) research is finding that certain parts of
the brain are activated more during ethical decision making compared to when the
same individuals are making other kinds of decisions.10 These findings suggest that
ethical judgment is truly a unique form of decision making.
The next part of this chapter focuses on individual differences that influence
ethical judgment and action. Much of this book will focus on situational pushes and
pulls. For example, people follow leaders or their peers. They tend to do what’s
rewarded. Yet, despite these powerful pushes and pulls, people do bring something of
their unique selves to situations. Heroes emerge when you least expect it. People blow
the whistle despite fear of retaliation. Others embezzle funds or lie to customers
despite all of management’s efforts to support good conduct. One way to explain these
ethical and unethical behaviors is to focus on characteristics of individuals that
differentiate one person from another, making one person more predisposed to think
and behave ethically while another is predisposed to think and behave unethically.
74
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Research has uncovered a number of individual differences that influence the way
people think and behave in response to ethical dilemma situations. In this section, we
discuss several of these differences and how they influence ethical judgment and/or
ethical action. They’re illustrated below:
Individual Differences
Ethical decision-making style
Cognitive moral development
Locus of control
Machiavellianism
Moral disengagement
Ethical Awareness ! Ethical Judgment ! Ethical Action
Ethical Decision-Making Style
In Chapter 2, we introduced different frameworks for making ethical decisions and
advised that individual decision makers should use these in combination if they wish to
make the best decisions. But research suggests that individuals have preferences for
particular prescriptive ethical theories. Forsyth proposed that we think about these
individual preferences in terms of two factors: (1) idealism or the person’s concern for
the welfare of others; and (2) relativism or the person’s emphasis on ethical principles
being dependent on the situation rather than being applicable to all situations.11
Idealism is related to what we referred to as thinking about consequences in Chapter 2.
For example, individuals who are keen on idealism believe that one should always
avoid harming other people in ethical dilemma situations, while non-idealists believe
that “it depends” because “harm is sometimes . . . necessary to produce good.”12
Relativism is more related to deontological theories and our focus on principles in
Chapter 2.
For example, individuals who are low on relativism believe that all situations are
subject to universal ethical principles (such as honesty). On the other hand,
individuals who value relativism believe that people should weigh the particular
circumstances in a situation when making decisions, because there are no universal
ethical principles that determine right action in every situation. Research suggests
that those who focus on idealism are more likely to have ethical intentions and to be
critical of unethical behavior.13 This is probably because idealists are more con-
cerned about anything they might do that would harm others.14 By contrast, high
relativism has been found to be associated with unethical intentions, perhaps because
relativists who do not follow clear ethical principles find it easier to rationalize
unethical behavior.15
You can discover your own style by taking a survey that your professor may make
available to you. The relationship between ethical decision style and ethical action has
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
75

not yet been tested, but it seems logical that the way an individual thinks about a
situation and that person’s ethical or unethical intentions will influence the action he or
she takes. As we did in Chapter 2, we continue to strongly recommend systematically
considering ethical dilemma situations from multiple perspectives. Still, it can be
useful to understand that you (or the people who work with you or for you) likely have
a preference for one approach over another. If so, you may be able to improve your
own ethical decision making by forcing yourself to consciously consider all angles.
You may also be able to influence ethical decision making in discussions with others
by pointing them to these alternative perspectives.
Cognitive Moral Development
One important explanation for both ethical judgment and action based on individual
characteristics comes from the moral reasoning research of Lawrence Kohlberg.16
When people respond to ethical dilemma situations, they must, among other things,
decide what course of action is ethically right (as we discussed in Chapter 2), and they
must choose the ethically right path over others.17 In other words, if they decide that
blowing the whistle is the ethically right path, they must follow through and do it (take
the ethical action).
Kohlberg’s moral reasoning theory is a cognitive developmental theory that
focuses primarily on how people think about and decide what course of action is
ethically right. His research began by following 58 American boys ranging in age
from 10 to 16 years old. He interviewed them regularly, asking for their open-
ended responses to hypothetical moral dilemmas. Their responses were analyzed,
and the findings contributed to our understanding of how moral reasoning in human
beings gradually develops over time through brain development and life
experience.
Kohlberg’s cognitive moral development theory proposes that moral reasoning
develops sequentially through three broad levels, each composed of two stages. As
individuals move forward through the sequence of stages, they are cognitively capable
of comprehending all reasoning at stages below their own, but they cannot compre-
hend reasoning more than one stage above their own. Development through the stages
results from the cognitive disequilibrium that occurs when an individual perceives a
contradiction between his or her own reasoning level and the next higher one. This
kind of development can occur through training, but it generally occurs through
interaction with peers and life situations that challenge the individual’s current way of
thinking. You can think of those conversations parents sometimes have with children at
the dinner table as attempts to challenge the child’s thinking and influence moral
reasoning and moral development. According to Kohlberg, the actual decision an
individual makes isn’t as important as the reasoning process used to arrive at it.
However, he argued—and this is an important concept—that the higher the reasoning
stage, the more ethical the decision, because the higher stages are more consistent with
prescriptive ethical principles of justice and rights (like those discussed in the
deontological approach in Chapter 2).
76
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Kohlberg’s theory has been successfully applied to studies of adults in business
settings.18 For example, James Weber interviewed business managers about their
responses to the following hypothetical dilemma:
Evelyn worked for an automotive steel casting company. She was part of a
small group asked to investigate the cause of an operating problem that
had developed in the wheel castings of a new luxury automobile and to
make recommendations for its improvement. The problem did not directly
create an unsafe condition, but it did lead to irritating sounds. The vice-
president of engineering told the group that he was certain that the
problem was due to tensile stress in the castings. Evelyn and a lab
technician conducted tests and found conclusive evidence that the prob-
lem was not tensile stress. As Evelyn began work on other possible
explanations of the problem, she was told that the problem had been
solved. A report prepared by Evelyn’s boss strongly supported the tensile
stress hypothesis. All of the data points from Evelyn’s experiments had
been changed to fit the curves, and some of the points that were far from
where the theory would predict had been omitted. The report “proved” that
tensile stress was responsible for the problem.19
A number of questions were presented to the interviewees. For example, they were
asked whether Evelyn should contradict her boss’s report and why. We will use
this hypothetical dilemma to understand the theory and how responses to the above
question (along with others) help identify an individual’s placement in Kohlberg’s
moral reasoning stage framework. Table 3.1 outlines the levels and stages
involved.
LEVEL I: PRECONVENTIONAL
A level I individual (labeled the preconventional
level and including stages 1 and 2) is very self-centered and views ethical rules as
imposed from outside the self. Unfortunately, a small percentage of adults never
advance beyond this stage, and managers must be ready for that possibility. As you
read the following descriptions, see if you know anyone who thinks this way.
Stage 1 individuals are limited to thinking about obedience to authority for its own
sake. Avoiding punishment by authority figures is the key consideration. It’s easy to
imagine a child thinking, “I should share my toy because, if I don’t, Mom will yell at
me” (i.e., I’ll be punished). A stage 1 response to the Evelyn situation might argue that
it would be wrong to contradict her boss because she must obey her superiors, and she
would certainly be punished if she disobeyed.
At stage 2, concern for personal reward and satisfaction become considerations in
addition to a kind of market reciprocity. What is right is judged in terms of a “you
scratch my back, I’ll scratch yours” reciprocal relationship. A stage 2 child might
think, “If I share my toy with my brother, he might share his with me later.” A stage 2
response in the Evelyn situation might argue that Evelyn should support her boss
because he is responsible for her performance appraisals; and, if she lets this one go, he
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
77

might overlook some of her problems from the past. Also, if her boss has been kind or
helpful to her in the past, she may consider her obligation to repay the favor.
In general, a level I person can be expected to consider questions like “What’s in it
for me?” At stage 1, the questions might be “Can I get away with it?” or “Will I get
caught, punished?” At stage 2, the questions might be “How will I benefit or what will
I get in return if I do this?”
LEVEL II: CONVENTIONAL
At level II (labeled the conventional level and including
stages 3 and 4), the individual is still externally focused on others but is less self-
centered and has internalized the shared moral norms of society or some segment like a
family or work group. What’s ethically right is explained in terms of living up to roles
and the expectations of relevant others, fulfilling duties and obligations, and following
rules and laws.
At stage 3, what’s right is thought to be that which pleases or helps others or is
approved by those close to you. Interpersonal trust and social approval are important.
For example, a stage 3 response to the Evelyn dilemma might say that Evelyn
Table 3.1 Levels of Cognitive Moral Development According to Kohlberg
Stage
What Is Considered to Be Right
Level I: Preconventional
Stage 1: Obedience and
Punishment Orientation
Obedience to authority for its own sake.
Sticking to rules to avoid punishment.
Stage 2: Instrumental Purpose and
Exchange
Following rules only when it is in one’s immediate
interest. Right is an equal exchange, getting a
good deal.
Level II: Conventional
Stage 3: Interpersonal Accord,
Conformity, Mutual Expectations
Stereotypical “good” behavior. Living up to what
is expected by peers and people close to you.
Stage 4: Social Accord and System
Maintenance
Fulﬁlling duties and obligations of the social
system.
Upholding laws and rules except in extreme cases
where they conﬂict with social duties.
Level III: Postconventional or Principled
Stage 5: Social Contract and
Individual Rights
Upholding rules because they are the social
contract if they are consistent with values such as
fairness and rights and the greater good (not
because of the majority opinion).
Stage 6: Universal Ethical Principles Following ethical principles of justice and rights.
Acting in accord with principles when laws violate
principles.
Source : Adapted from L. Kohlberg, “Moral Stages and Moralization: The Cognitive-
Developmental Approach,” in Moral Development and Behavior: Theory, Research, and
Social Issues, ed. T. Lickona (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston), 34–35.
78
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

shouldn’t contradict her boss because he would perceive her as disloyal, and she might
lose the social approval and trust of her boss and peers. On the other hand, what if
Evelyn shares her dilemma with close family members whose opinions are important
to her, and they feel strongly that she must contradict her boss? In this case, she would
likely reason that she should contradict her boss because the people she trusts and
whose approval she values say that it’s the right thing to do.
At stage 4, the perspective broadens to consider society. The individual is
concerned about fulfilling agreed-upon duties and following rules or laws that are
designed to promote the common good. A stage 4 person recognizes that rules and
laws often exist for good reason, and she follows them because the social system works
better when everyone does that. Therefore, a stage 4 response might say that Evelyn
should contradict her boss because of her duty to society. What if the noises do
represent a safety problem? She has a responsibility as a good member of society to
report it. She would feel particularly strongly about this if she were aware of product
safety laws that required her to report the problem.
So, a level II person is looking outside the self for guidance when deciding what
to do. A stage 3 person would likely ask, “What would my peers do?” or “What
would my trusted supervisor advise?” At stage 4, the considerations would be
broader, such as “What do the rules or laws prescribe?” Kohlberg’s research placed
most American adults at this conventional level, and Weber’s research found that
most managers’ responses to the Evelyn dilemma were at the conventional level as
well.
LEVEL III: POSTCONVENTIONAL
A level III (postconventional, sometimes called
principled reasoning—stages 5 and 6) principled individual has developed beyond
identification with others’ expectations, rules, and laws to make decisions more
autonomously. Such an individual looks to ethical principles of justice and rights
(similar to the deontological principles we discussed in Chapter 2). Note that stage 6 is
thought to be a theoretical stage only, so we focus below only on stage 5.
At stage 5, the emphasis is still on rules and laws because these represent the
recognized social contract, but stage 5 thinkers are willing to question the law and to
consider changing the law for socially useful purposes. A stage 5 individual would
take into account moral laws above society’s laws, such as considering what
decision would create the greatest societal good. A stage 5 Evelyn might reason
that she should contradict her boss because doing so would be consistent with the
ethical principle of the greatest societal good, particularly if she considered the
safety of the automobiles to be a potential problem. Her responsibility goes beyond
that of a good law-abiding member of society and certainly beyond doing what her
boss thinks is right. A stage 5 Evelyn is also responsible to principles of justice and
rights. So, even if no law requires her to report what she knows, a stage 5 Evelyn
would consider the automobile consumers’ rights to safety as an important reason
for her to tell. When deciding what to do, a stage 5 person would likely ask, “What
does the law say?” and then “Is the law consistent with principles of justice and
rights? and “What’s best for society?”
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
79

Students sometimes get confused by this idea of what it means to be principled
according to Kohlberg. We’re often asked questions such as, weren’t the 9/11 hijackers
principled? Although a definitive answer would require probing interviews with the
hijackers to determine the reasoning for their behavior (not possible now), the answer
is that their thinking likely represented lower-level reasoning (e.g., the leader told me
to do it; I did it to receive a reward in heaven, etc.). So, it’s important to note that
Kohlberg is quite precise about the kinds of principles that qualify as principled
thinking. Broadly defined, level III principles are principles of justice and rights
similar to the principles introduced in Chapter 2 under deontological theories.
Wrongdoers often appeal to what they call principles, such as when the members
of a violent Mexican drug cartel claimed to train its members in ethical principles. But
the purpose of these principles (e.g., sobriety) was to keep members in line and
obedient to cartel authorities. The ethical trainer in this case is accused of ordering
murders and running prostitution rings with young girls; such behavior is not
supported by principles of justice and rights.20
Finally, the principle “I always do what my religion tells me to do because the
deity will punish me if I don’t” would not qualify as principled thinking. In Kohlberg’s
model, this type of thinking actually represents a low level of cognitive moral
development because it is based on unquestioning obedience and fear of punishment.
Often religious prescriptions such as the golden rule are consistent with theories of
justice and rights. To be considered a principled decision maker, an individual would
have to be capable of thinking through the ethical situation on his or her own
(reasoning according to principles of justice and rights), and not just blindly follow
a particular religious authority.
So don’t be confused just because someone uses the term principled. To be
principled in terms of cognitive moral development theory, one must have arrived at
the decision autonomously based on principles of justice, rights, and the greater good.
To understand Kohlberg’s theory, you must also remember that it is a cognitive
theory. What matters are the reasoning processes and considerations involved in a
decision. Although these considerations are likely to affect the decision made, it is the
reasoning process that counts.
The cognitive moral development exercise at the end of the chapter will test your
understanding of cognitive moral development. You may want to try it now.
ARE WOMEN AND MEN DIFFERENT?
In 1982, the psychologist Carol Gilligan
published In a Different Voice, a book about women’s cognitive moral development.
Gilligan claimed that Kohlberg’s theory was flawed because he had studied only boys.
Her research led Gilligan to question the almost exclusive focus on justice in
Kohlberg’s higher moral reasoning stages. She argued that females were more likely
to use a “morality of care” that emphasized relationships—raising issues related to
caring for others, responsibility to others, and the continuity of interdependent
relationships.21
Gilligan’s claims received a great deal of attention, but the applicability of her
ideas to adults working in business organizations is quite limited. Gilligan’s own
80
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

research comparing the moral reasoning of male and female medical students found no
significant difference between the genders, suggesting that both men and women are
strongly influenced by the powerful socialization and cultural norms of medical
practice.22 Similarly, an interview study of business managers based on Gilligan’s
theory found no gender differences.23 All but one of the managers (male and female)
who described a moral conflict at work based their moral reasoning on rights, not care.
Finally, many cognitive moral development studies based on Kohlberg’s theory have
found only small, if any, gender differences. Interestingly, when differences have been
found, females generally have scored higher than men in justice-based reasoning.24
Business ethics researchers now advise that additional research on the question of
gender differences is likely unnecessary.25
We can now begin to address the second requirement for ethical behavior: doing
what’s right, or ethical action. Recall that to behave ethically, people must first decide
what course of action is ethically right, probably depending to a large degree on their
ethical awareness and ethical judgment (stage of cognitive moral development). Then
they must choose the ethically right path over others.
LOOKING UP AND LOOKING AROUND
One reason understanding cognitive moral
development is so important is that most adults are at the conventional level of
cognitive moral development (level II). This means they’re highly susceptible to
external influences on their judgment about what is ethically right and their subsequent
action. Their decision about what’s ethically right, and therefore their likely action, is
inextricably linked with what others think, say, and do. We call this “looking up and
looking around” for ethical guidance.26
These individuals aren’t autonomous decision makers who strictly follow an
internal moral compass. They look up and around to see what their superiors and their
peers are doing and saying, and they use these cues as a guide to action. Therefore most
people are likely to do what’s expected of them as a result of the reward system, role
expectations, authority figure demands, and group norms. That’s why the remainder of
this book focuses so heavily on these external influences on ethical action and why it’s
so important that managers structure the work environment to support ethical conduct
and lead followers in the right direction. The large majority of employees will be
looking for guidance, and they’ll do what’s right if guided and supported along those
lines by managers and peers.
AUTONOMOUS PRINCIPLED THINKING AND ACTION
Higher-stage thinking is
more independent of these external influences. The postconventional principled
thinker looks to justice and rights-based principles to guide ethical decision making.
Research has demonstrated that these individuals are also more likely to behave
consistently with their principle-based decisions—they’re more likely to carry through
and do what they think is right. More principled individuals also have been found to be
less likely to cheat, more likely to resist pressure from authority figures, more likely to
help someone in need, and more likely to blow the whistle on misconduct.27 So the
theory suggests that whistle-blowers such as Sherron Watkins, who tried to convince
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
81

Kenneth Lay (Enron’s CEO) to address the company’s financial shenanigans before it
was too late, are likely principled thinkers. But it’s important for managers to
remember that level III individuals are in the minority in most organizations.
Autonomous decision making based on principles of justice and rights is the exception
rather than the rule.
Also keep in mind that cognitive moral development represents a cognitive
“capacity” to reason about ethical dilemmas at a particular level, and that it is possible
to act below one’s capacity. However, cognitive moral development theory argues that
this inconsistency would be difficult to sustain over time because of the cognitive
strain that would come from thinking at one level and acting at another.28 Such a
person might think, “I know this is wrong—why am I doing it?” So a principled-level
individual who found himself or herself in a situation that required unethical action
would be more likely to try to change that situation or leave.
The bottom line for managers is this: Cognitive moral development theory and
research tell us that most of the people you manage are going to be strongly influenced
by what you do, say, and reward. They can be thought of as “good soldiers” who are
looking up and looking around for guidance from you and their peers, and they’re
likely to mimic what they see around them. Therefore, it’s the manager’s responsi-
bility to structure the work environment in a way that supports ethical conduct. If you
avoid this responsibility, these people will look elsewhere for guidance, probably to
their peers, and the guidance they receive may not support ethical conduct at all.
A small percentage of individuals may never advance beyond preconventional
thinking. Such individuals can be thought of as “loose cannons.” They will do
whatever they can get away with. People like this require close supervision and clear
discipline when they get out of line.
Those individuals who have reached principled levels of moral reasoning
should be singled out to lead key decision-making groups, to manage situations
where ethical ambiguities are likely to arise, and to lead organizations. Research on
ethical decision making in groups has found that when less-principled individuals
lead a group, the group’s ethical decision-making performance decreases. On the
other hand, groups with leaders higher in moral reasoning either improve or stay the
same.29 Also, when an organization’s leader is high in cognitive moral development,
the entire ethical climate of the organization is stronger. This is particularly true for
leaders whose choices are consistent with their ethical reasoning capacity and for
leaders who run young organizations that are more open to their influence. Finally,
when employees and the organization’s leader are similar in their level of cognitive
moral development, the employees are more satisfied and more committed to the
organization. Employee satisfaction and commitment are especially negative when
the leader’s cognitive moral development is lower than the moral development of
employees.30
Cognitive moral development can be assessed by using instruments designed by
cognitive moral development researchers. Moral reasoning can also be increased
through training. Over the years, Kohlberg and his students and colleagues have
designed training approaches based on cognitive moral development theory. In this
82
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

type of training, facilitators give participants hypothetical ethical dilemmas for
discussion. The facilitator promotes movement through ethical reasoning stages by
challenging participants’ thinking and by exposing individuals to reasoning higher
than their own. This approach creates cognitive conflict, leading the participant to
question and eventually revise his or her own reasoning upward. Research has
supported the effectiveness of this type of training with adults in dental, medical,
and business schools.31 Managers may want to consider incorporating these ideas into
their firms’ ethics training.
Locus of Control
Another individual characteristic that has been found to influence ethical action is
locus of control.32 Locus of control refers to an individual’s perception of how much
control he or she exerts over life events. Locus of control can be thought of as a single
continuum from a high internal locus of control to a high external locus of control. An
individual with a high internal locus of control believes that outcomes are primarily the
result of his or her own efforts, whereas an individual with a high external locus of
control believes that life events are determined primarily by fate, luck, or powerful
others.
Internal Locus of Control
External Locus of Control
Locus of control develops over a long period of time through interactions with
other people and the social environment. At any particular time, however, locus of
control can be thought of as a stable individual characteristic that differentiates people
from each other. Some individuals are more internal and others are more external in
their locus of control. In that way, locus of control is similar to a personality trait that
characterizes a person’s thinking and action across situations. It does not shift from
one situation to another. Therefore it’s not appropriate to say, “My locus of control was
external in this situation because my boss made me fudge the numbers.” What has
shifted in this situation is the control exerted by the boss, not the employee’s locus of
control.
An employee with an internal locus of control who has a controlling boss will be
uncomfortable with the boss’s request to do something inappropriate. So, due to that
high internal locus of control, this employee will be more likely to resist the boss’s
influence and more likely to look for an opportunity to leave and find a more
compatible boss and work situation. An employee with an external locus of control
is more likely to see his or her fate in the boss’ hands and simply do what the boss asks.
You can test your own locus of control through a survey measure that your professor
may make available to you.
A caveat: although locus of control does not shift easily, it can change over time
due to strong life interventions or compelling situations. For example, if someone with
a very high internal locus of control became a prisoner of war with little chance of
escape, he or she would likely develop a more external locus of control over time.
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
83

RELATIONSHIP TO ETHICAL JUDGMENT AND ACTION
How is locus of control
related to ethical judgment and action? It likely has a lot to do with taking
responsibility for one’s behavior. First, in their judgment, individuals with a high
internal locus of control see the relationship between their behavior and its outcomes
more clearly than do those with an external locus of control. Internals see themselves
as being in control of things that happen in their lives. Thus they’re more likely to take
responsibility for the consequences of their actions. It would be more difficult for such
an individual to say, “Well, it’s not my responsibility; I just work here,” or “I’m just
following orders.” If an individual takes personal responsibility for his or her behavior,
it seems likely that person will also behave more ethically. For example, studies have
found that internals are more likely to help another person, even if there’s a penalty for
doing so.33
Internals see themselves as being in charge of their own fates. Therefore, they
should also be less willing to be pressured by others to do things they believe to be
wrong. One interesting study asked subjects to complete a story in which the main
character was pressured to violate a social norm.34 The more internal the subject’s
locus of control, the more likely the story completion had the hero resisting the
pressure. In an obedience-to-authority experiment (explained in more detail in
Chapter 7), externals were more likely than internals to give apparently (but not
truly) harmful electric shocks to someone if told to do so by the experimenter.35
For managers, it may be helpful to know where you stand and where your workers
fit on the locus of control continuum. It can help you understand how they think and
how they might react in a variety of situations, including ethical situations. For
example, workers who constantly blame bad luck and other external factors for
performance failures or ethical lapses may be doing so because of an external locus of
control—that’s the way they view the world. Managers can work with such individuals
to help them see the relationship between their actions and the outcomes by
consistently holding them responsible and accountable for what they do. As a result,
their locus of control may shift over time, and they will take more responsibility for the
consequences of their actions.
Machiavellianism
Whereas an internal locus of control and more principled thinking are generally
associated with ethical action, another individual difference, Machiavellianism,
has been associated with unethical action. Perhaps you have heard the term
Machiavellian used to describe individuals who act in self-interested, opportunistic,
deceptive, and manipulative ways to win no matter what the cost or how it affects
other people. The personality trait known as Machiavellianism was named after
Niccolo Machiavelli, a sixteenth-century philosopher, statesman, and political
theorist who is associated with promoting a pragmatic leadership style that included
amoral, if not clearly unethical, behavior with the aim of achieving self-interested
outcomes. The idea that “the ends justify the means” is often associated with
Machiavelli. In his most famous publication, The Prince, Machiavelli famously said
84
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

that a ruler should “do good if he can, but . . . commit evil if he must.”36 Research
using a survey that assesses an individual’s Machiavellianism has found that
individuals high on Machiavellianism are significantly more likely to have unethical
intentions and to engage in unethical action such as lying, cheating, and accepting
kickbacks.37 Managers should be on the lookout for employees who they think
might be Machiavellian because they are likely to engage in self-interested action
that can put the entire organization at risk. Organizations may also want to consider
including Machiavellianism among other personality characteristics when assessing
job applicants.
Moral Disengagement
The idea behind moral disengagement38 is that most of us behave ethically most of the
time because we’ve internalized standards of good conduct and judge our behavior
against these standards. If we consider behaving unethically, we feel guilty and stop
ourselves. All of us probably recognize that process. But research has found that
individual people have a higher (or lower) propensity to deactivate that self-control
system through eight moral disengagement mechanisms. These moral disengagement
mechanisms allow individuals to engage in unethical behavior without feeling bad
about it.
Moral disengagement mechanisms can be organized into three categories. One of
these categories involves ways of thinking about our behavior that makes bad behavior
seem more acceptable. A mechanism in this category is the use of euphemistic
language (discussed earlier in relation to ethical awareness). Another is called moral
justification, whereby unethical behavior is thought to be okay because it contributes
to some socially valued outcome. For example, mortgage lenders may have believed
that it was okay to sell those no-doc loans to people because they were helping
individuals who would otherwise not be able to purchase a home to take part in the
“American dream.” A related moral disengagement tactic is called advantageous
comparison, whereby people compare their own behavior to more reprehensible
behavior and thus make their own behavior seem more okay. For example, the same
mortgage lender may feel okay about selling these loans because she counsels clients
to be sure to pay the mortgage every month and avoid credit card debt, while
colleagues in her office don’t bother to do any counseling and care only about
making their commissions.
A second category of moral disengagement mechanisms has to do with distorting
consequences or reducing personal responsibility for bad outcomes. For example, with
displacement of responsibility, individuals will reduce personal accountability by
thinking of their actions as resulting from an authority figure’s dictates (“my boss
made me do it”). With diffusion of responsibility, individuals will reduce personal
accountability by looking to others or the group (“it’s not my job,” or “my team made
the decision”). With distorting consequences, individuals will think of negative
consequences as less serious than they are (it’s “no big deal” to fudge the numbers
on my expense report).
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
85

The third category of moral disengagement mechanisms reduces the per-
son’s identification with the victims of unethical behavior. With dehumanization,
individuals make those who would be harmed less worthy of ethical considera-
tion because they’re thought to be different, stupid, or not even human. This
mechanism characterizes thinking among those who commit genocide. One can
also imagine mortgage lenders thinking that people who took out loans they
clearly couldn’t afford were just dumb and not worthy of concern. Attribution of
blame lays blame on the victims of harm for a variety of reasons (“it’s their own
fault”).
Some of these mechanisms lend themselves to certain situations more than
others. So if you have an authoritarian and unethical boss, displacement of
responsibility (“my boss made me do it”) may be used more than other tactics.
Still, research does show that some individuals are more likely to engage in this
kind of thinking overall, regardless of the situation. And those individuals with a
high propensity to morally disengage have been found to have reduced empathy
for other people, to be more cynical, to see their behavior as resulting from
chance or fate (a more external locus of control), and to have a reduced moral
identity relative to their other identities—a weaker sense of themselves as
ethical beings. Most important, these individuals are more likely to behave
unethically.39
You can test your own propensity to morally disengage with a short survey that
your professor may make available to you. And you can reduce that propensity by
being on the lookout for certain justifications that come up in your own mind or in
discussions with others. When you find yourself thinking the following (or hear
something like this in a meeting), “stop and think” about whether what you’re doing
is right:
STOP
AND
THINK
STOP
AND
THINK
It’s not my responsibility—my boss told me to do it.
It’s not my responsibility—my team decided this.
It’s no big deal.
It’s not as bad as (what someone else) is doing.
They deserve whatever they get.
They brought this on themselves.
86
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

FACILITATORS OF AND BARRIERS TO GOOD ETHICAL
JUDGMENT
In the previous section, we discussed characteristics that distinguish individuals from
each other. But individual differences aside, as human beings, we all share ways of
thinking about the world that can facilitate or interfere with good ethical judgment.
The steps offered in Chapter 2 assume a rational and ethical decision-making process
that prescribes how an ethical decision should be made. However, studies have found
that actual human decision making doesn’t match this rational ideal. Although people
generally intend to be rational in their decision making, they’re often not.
In recent years, psychologists have discovered a number of weaknesses and biases
in how human beings make decisions.40 Some of these decision-making weaknesses
have direct implications for ethical decision making in organizations and for the
advice given in Chapter 2.41 So think of this part of the chapter as a kind of reality
check. If you’re going to manage your own and others’ ethical behavior, you need to
understand how people really think in addition to how they should think.
As a backdrop, recognize that the cognitive weaknesses and biases we will be
discussing operate primarily because people try to reduce uncertainty and simplify
their world. Although uncertainty is a fact of organizational life, businesspeople want
very much to deny the uncertainty they face. Therefore they tend to act as if the world
is rational and they’re in control. Being “in charge” and able to predict events is a
highly valued characteristic, especially in business. But this focus on being in charge is
an illusion that can get managers into trouble. What if you really don’t know all of the
facts about the risks, the potential affected parties, and all the consequences of your
decisions? You’ll see below that the best way to avoid decision-making weaknesses
and biases is to become aware of them and to incorporate steps into your decision
making that are explicitly aimed at reducing their impact.
Thinking about Fact Gathering
In Chapter 2, we advised you to “get the facts” as an important first step in good ethical
decision making. Be aware, though, that your thinking about the facts is likely to be
biased. Research evidence suggests that you may look for the wrong ones or stop
looking too soon because you think you already have all the facts you need.
We know that most people, including business students and business executives,
are overconfident about their knowledge of the facts. For example, in research studies,
people were asked factual questions. Then they were asked to judge the probable truth
of their answers. For example, in response to the question, “Is Rome or New York
farther north?” most people chose New York, and they believed that the probability
was about 90 percent that they were right. Actually, they were wrong. Rome is slightly
north of New York. Being overconfident can make you fail to search for additional
facts or for support for the facts you have.42
Even if you gather additional facts or support, another cognitive bias termed the
confirmation trap may influence your choice of which facts to gather and where to
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
87

look.43 All of us have the tendency to look for information that will confirm our
preferred answer or choice and to neglect to search for evidence that might prove us
wrong. If you were an investment banker who wanted to believe that mortgage-backed
securities were safe (because they were so profitable at the time), you were more likely
to look for supportive information and ask a question like, “Historically, what
percentage of mortgages have defaulted?” Given that question, the banker will
probably underestimate the risk involved. Because of no-doc loans and other new
and riskier subprime mortgages, relying on historical default patterns no longer made
sense. The meeting might take a very different turn if the banker were to ask, “What
future problems are possible with this type of new product? What has changed? What
haven’t we thought of?”44
In an attempt to overcome the confirmation trap, it’s important that you
consciously try to think of ways you could be wrong. Incorporate questions in
your individual and group decision-making processes such as, “How could I/we be
wrong?” “What facts are still missing?” and “What facts exist that might prove me/us
to be wrong?” You may still miss some important facts, but you’ll miss less of them
than if you didn’t ask these questions at all.
Thinking about Consequences
In Chapter 2, we also advised you to think about all the potential consequences of your
decision for a wide variety of stakeholders. Who can argue with such sage advice?
However, psychologists have found a number of problems with how people think
about consequences.
REDUCED NUMBER OF CONSEQUENCES
One way people simplify their decisions
andmake themmoremanageableistoreducethenumberofconsequencestheyconsider.
They’re especially likely to ignore consequences that are thought to affect only a few
people. But consequences that affect only a few people can be serious. For example, a
highly beneficial drug may have positive consequences for many and adverse conse-
quences for only a few people, but what if those few people could die from side effects of
the drug?45Obviously,youwouldn’twanttoignoresuchseriousconsequencesnomatter
howfewpeopleareaffected.Inattemptingtoconsciouslydealwiththissituation,ithelps
to consult a broad range of peoplewho have a stake in the decision you’re making. Invite
input from all interested parties, especially those who disagree with you and those with
the most to lose. Ask them what consequences they’re concerned about and why. Then,
incorporate these consequences in your decision making.
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE SELF VERSUS CONSEQUENCES FOR OTHERS
Con-
sequentialist theories require us to think about costs and benefits for society—for
multiple stakeholders. However, psychological research suggests people tend to make
decisions in a self-interested manner. For example, they’re inclined to give more
weight to the consequences of a decision or action for themselves (or those close to
them) than for others. That may be because consequences to the self are more
88
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

immediate or more imminent. In addition, when the consequences of multiple
alternatives are ambiguous, people tend to choose the alternative they personally
prefer rather than the one that is more just. To make matters worse (from an ethics
perspective), people underestimate the extent to which they are self-interested and the
extent to which they rationalize their own behavior. They just aren’t aware of their own
cognitive biases. Again, it can help to consciously consider those outside of yourself
who are going to be affected by a decision or action. As a manager, you can ask your
people to make a list of those individuals or groups who might be affected and seek
their input, or have your employees try to imagine themselves in the shoes of those
stakeholders. How would they react?46
Consequences as Risk
One way to think about consequences is to think in terms of decision making about
risk. Managers are in the business of assessing risk. But, research suggests that people
tend to underestimate potential risks because of an illusion of optimism. They
overestimate the likelihood of good future events and underestimate the bad. For
example, even though around one-half of marriages end in divorce, newlyweds are
highly optimistic that their own new marriages will be everlasting. And, although
some analysts may knowingly have lied about the future prospects of mortgage-
backed securities, it’s likely that many were simply overly optimistic and believed that
the housing market would never simultaneously crash everywhere in the country,
bringing down an entire market and the U.S. economy with it.
People also generally believe that they’re less susceptible to risks than other
people are. This belief is supported by the illusion of control, the general belief that we
really are in charge of what happens. And if we think we can control events, we also
think bad things are less likely to happen. This illusion of control has been
demonstrated to exist in MBA students from top U.S. business schools, suggesting
that managers are certainly vulnerable.47 Managers whose judgment is influenced by
these cognitive biases are likely to underestimate the risk facing the firm as a result of a
particular decision. But if managers ignore risks, they’re also ignoring important
consequences. So it’s important to recognize this tendency to ignore risk, and design
risk analysis into your decision-making processes.
Even if we attend to risks, we still have difficulty thinking about them in a
completely rational way. One tendency that can contribute to downplaying risk was
already discussed—the tendency to attend to information that will help confirm the
decision we would prefer to make (confirmation bias). In the famous space shuttle
Challenger disaster that killed all the astronauts on board, everyone knew that risk
existed. The question was how much, and was it too much? Many economic and political
factorswerepushingNASAtolaunchthisshuttle.Themediawerepayingmoreattention
tothe launchthantheyusuallywouldbecauseaschoolteacherwasonboard.Researchers
now believe that confirmation bias may have influenced decision makers to focus on the
information that confirmed their preference, which was to launch, and to discount
available information about risks that would have supported a delay.48
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
89

CONSEQUENCES OVER TIME: ESCALATION OF COMMITMENT
The prescrip-
tion to think about consequences also fails to account for the fact that decisions are not
isolated choices, but often become part of a series of choices within the context of a
larger decision or project. Consider the following scenario:
You finally graduated from college and landed a great job, and you’ve invested
most of your savings in the car of your dreams—a used BMW. But in a short
time, the car begins having mechanical problems. Every time you bring it to
the mechanic, he claims that it is fixed for good; but the problems continue and
your bank account is being drained. Should you quit trying to fix the car?
Because you’ve already made the decision to buy the car, and you’ve already invested
a lot of money in it, your tendency will be to continue your commitment to this
previously selected investment. This tendency has been called “escalation of com-
mitment to a losing course of action” or “throwing good money after bad.”49 A
perfectly rational decision maker would consider the time and expenses already
invested as “sunk costs.” They aren’t recoverable and shouldn’t be considered in a
decision about what to do. Only future costs and benefits should be considered. But
this is difficult. Norms in our society and in our organizations support trying,
persisting, and sticking with a course of action. Also, if others are involved, we’re
likely to feel the need to justify our original decision—whether it was to buy a car, a
piece of equipment, or land.
So when you’re in a situation that involves decisions about whether to continue
to invest in an ongoing project, be careful! One way to overcome escalation of
commitment is, as with many biases, to recognize that it exists and try to adjust for
it. Ask yourself explicit questions about whether you’re committed to a decision just
because failure would make your original decision look bad. Ask yourself, “If I took
over the project today, with no personal investment, would I support the project?”
Another approach is to bring in outsiders and ask for their opinions, or turn the
project over to them completely. That gets your own ego out of the decision-making
process.
Thinking about Integrity
In Chapter 2, you were also advised to think about your own character and integrity—
to ask yourself what a person of integrity in a highly ethical community would do in
the particular situation. But cognitive biases can get in the way here too. First, if your
thoughts about yourself are controlled by illusion rather than reality, how can you
make a good decision about your integrity? The basic idea here is that individuals are
likely to think positively about their own ethics. They will unconsciously filter and
distort information in order to maintain a positive self image. Psychologists know that
people have an illusion of superiority or illusion of morality. Surveys have found that
people tend to think of themselves as more ethical, fair, and honest than most other
people.50 It’s obviously an illusion when the large majority of individuals claim to be
90
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

more honest than the average person, or more ethical than their peers. It’s a little like
Garrison Keillor’s mythical Lake Wobegon, where all the children are above average.
There isn’t a whole lot you can do here except try to be honest with yourself. But this
kind of illusion can lead to bad decisions—when physicians take gifts from sales-
people because they’re sure they’re ethical and their decisions won’t be affected,51 or
when mortgage lenders selling subprime loans convince themselves that what they’re
doing is contributing to the American dream.
Second, the virtue ethics approach suggests that you rely on the ethics of your
profession (or other relevant moral community) to guide you. But consider the
accounting professionals in recent cases, as when Arthur Andersen auditors signed
off on audits that misrepresented the finances of companies such as Waste Manage-
ment, Enron, and Adelphia Communications.
Certified public accountants are supposed to be guided by the AICPA code of
professional ethics. The code says that, as professionals, auditors have a responsibility
to act in the public interest to provide objective opinions about the financial state of the
organization—be free of conflicts of interest, not misrepresent facts, or subordinate
professional judgment to others. Given human cognitive limitations, however, this
expectation is probably unrealistic. Consider what is likely to go through an auditor’s
mind when deciding whether to provide a negative audit opinion on the financial
statements of a big client. Auditors work closely with their audit clients, often over a
long period of time. By contrast, auditors have no personal relationship with the
“public” they are supposed to represent. Therefore, as biased information processors,
their thinking is likely to emphasize the potential negative consequences of a qualified
(or negative) audit opinion for themselves and the client—not for the public. The
negative consequences for themselves and the client are clearer and more immediate.
The auditor who offers a qualified audit may very well lose the client (and the money
associated with that client) as well as the personal relationships forged over time. On
the other hand, the consequences for the public of a qualified audit opinion are more
ambiguous and likely spread over more people and time. It isn’t clear how much
specific members of the public will gain or lose, especially if the misrepresentation is
deemed to be small or unclear. So auditors can easily rationalize a decision that is
consistent with their own and their company’s self-interest and downplay the potential
consequences to an ambiguous, unknown public.52
What is a professional organization to do? It is important to recognize that
auditors (and other professionals) are human beings who are affected by cognitive
limitations and biases. Given what we know about these biases, here are some potential
solutions. First, auditors should be discouraged from developing personal relation-
ships or socializing with their clients. Companies should change auditors every few
years to avoid forging such personal ties. Second, audit firms should work hard to
sensitize auditors to the likely negative consequences of financial misrepresentation
for their own firms and the public. The Enron bankruptcy contributed to huge financial
losses to its employees and investors and to the ultimate demise of Arthur Andersen.
Regular attention to the importance of maintaining the integrity and long-term
reputation of the audit firm is essential, as is the leader’s role in creating a strong
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
91

ethical climate. The reward system (discussed more fully in later chapters) can be used
to send important signals about what’s expected. For example, auditors who turn down
client business or risk losing a client by providing a negative audit opinion should be
supported and reinforced for doing so. Those auditors who risk the reputation of the
firm should be disciplined.
STOP
AND
THINK
STOP
AND
THINK
Given the above discussion, we might suggest other “red flags” for you to be on
the lookout for. If you find yourself thinking (or others saying) the following,
consider whether your biases are showing!
The facts support our decision.
Nothing bad will happen.
We’re ethical—we wouldn’t do anything bad.
We’ve already invested so much—we can’t afford to quit now.
Thinking about Your Gut
Our last piece of advice in Chapter 2 was to listen to your gut. But in this chapter,
we’ve spent a great deal of time telling you that your gut may well be wrong—led by
cognitive limitations and biased thinking.
Yet, your gut can still be useful in alerting you that something might be wrong—
that you’re facing an ethical dilemma—in the first place. But once that decision is
made, you should temper your gut with careful analysis guided by the knowledge
gained in this chapter and the rest of the book. Hopefully, the combination of your gut
and an informed brain will help you make better decisions.
YOUR GUT—“AUTOMATIC” ETHICAL DECISION MAKING
In Chapter 2, we
treated ethical decision making mostly as a systematic and rational step-by-step
process. Even in this chapter, we have thus far discussed how ethical awareness leads
to ethical judgment, which then leads to ethical action in a seemingly systematic and
deliberative way. But we suggested in Chapter 2 that your gut can be a useful way of
waving a red flag at yourself. In fact, new research from moral psychology, which is
often backed up by neuroscience and brain imaging studies, finds that ethical judg-
ments are often more intuitive, impulsive, and automatic than deliberative. Jonathan
92
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Haidt, a psycho logist at New York University, has argued that muc h ethica l judgmen t
occurs “qui ckly, effortlessly, and automa tically,” 53 often operating below consc ious
awaren ess. Haidt has been particula rly intere sted in people’s automatic reac tions of
disgust. For example, in his research, he has used a vigne tte about a family that
accidentall y runs over and kills the family dog and then reacts by cooki ng and eating
it! Most of us reco il instant ly at the thoug ht. It seems disgu sting to us and wrong to eat
the family dog. When asked why, however, we can’t explain our very strong gut
reactions. After all, mos t of us eat other animals. So , clearly, someth ing besides a
purely ration al process is at work—s omethin g that’s more intuitive and emo tional.
Even more intrigui ng is rese arch sugges ting that individua ls who rely only on
more consc ious, deliber ative approache s to ethica l deci sion mak ing may arrive at
worse ethica l deci sions than do thos e who use moral intuiti on and who have strong
emotional resp onses to ethica l situatio ns. 54 Much more research will be required to
fully understa nd these important processe s, whe n they opera te, and when they
interfere with good ethica l decisio n mak ing rather than actual ly improve it.
Unconscious Biases
O n e r e l a t ivel y n ew r e s e a r c h t o o l t h a t c a n h e l p u s u n d e r s t a n d t h e p o t e n t i a l ( o f t e n
negative ) r ole of the unconscious in a certai n t ype o f e thical thinking i s t he Im p licit
A s s o c i a t i o n Te s t ( I AT ) . R e s u l t s r evea l m o s t p e o p l e ’s p r e f e r e n c e s f o r young peopl e
over old, s traight people over gay, able people ove r disabled, and a variety of other
categories. For ex ampl e, hundreds of s tudi es with the “race IAT” lead to the
concl usion that the large m ajority of us have an unconscious tendency to value
w h i t e p e o p l e m o r e t h a n b l a c k p e o p l e even i f w e c o n s c i o u s l y d i s avow s u c h v i ews a n d
t r u l y b e l i eve t h a t w e h ave n o r a c i a l b i a s . H e r e ’s h ow t h e r a c e I AT wo r k s . Pa r t i c i p a n t s
are asked to pr ess a key on the computer keyboard when they see a black person’s
face or a word that has negative connotations (e .g., ro t t e n , bad) a nd t o pr e ss a no th e r
key when they see a white person’s face or a word with positive connotations (lov e,
go o d ) . T h e n t h e t a s k i s r ever s e d , a n d p a r t i c i p a n t s a r e t o l d t o p r e s s t h e s a m e
keyboard key in response to bl ac k faces and pleasant words or white fa ce s a nd
unpleasant wo rds. It turns out that most of us respond more quickly when we’r e
l i n k i n g t h e b l a c k fa c e s w i t h n eg a t ive wo r d s a n d w h i t e fa c e s w i t h p o s i t ive wo r d s
because such links are cognitively easier for us—they fit with our unconscious,
implicit attitudes. Some have criticized these studies as simply representing higher
familiarity with some groups than others, and as unable to predict behavior in real-
life situations. Our goal is not to defend or criticize the IAT. Rather, we use it to point
out that unconscious attitudes probably influence our behavior more than we think.
Given the importance of fair treatment in all kinds of ethical decisions at work
(hiring, performance appraisal, layoffs, compensation, etc.), understanding the
potential impact of such unconscious bias should help us understand why we
need to put organizational procedures in place that provide less opportunity for these
unconscious biases to influence our decisions.55 (To experience the IAT for yourself,
go to https:// impli ci t.harvar d.edu/ impli cit /.)
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
93

Emotions In Ethical Decision Making
Age-old philosop hical prescript ions assum e cool, ration al, ethical decisi ons, but we
are als o beginning to understand how import ant emo tions are to the ethical decisi on-
making proce ss.56 Important ly, emotions are not just an interference to good ethica l
judgmen t, as many used to believe. Inst ead, emo tions often lead to rig ht action. 57 For
exampl e, when we consi der hurting someone, o ur brain reacts with a visceral negative
emotion (“an internal alarm”) that keeps violenc e in check. 58 And these reactions tend
to happen very quic kly, before we even have time to engage in ration al thought.
Consider two c lassic philosophical dile mmas. In one, a runawa y t rain is headed
for five people w ho will die i f nothing is done. You can s ave the five by dive rting
t h e t r a i n t o a d i ffe r e n t t r a c k , w h e r e i t wo u l d k i l l o n l y o n e p e r s o n . S h o u l d y o u d iver t
the trai n?
In the secon d dilemma , you’re standin g next to a strange r on a bridge over the
tracks. Th e only way to save the five peopl e is to push the strange r onto the tracks,
where his body would stop the train. Should you push the stranger?
To philosop hers, the rational logic in these scena rios is simi lar; in both cases, you
would be intention ally sacrificing one person in order to save five people. But, when
asked, most peopl e say that you shoul d divert the train in the first dilemma but not push
the strange r onto the tracks in the second. Psychologi sts now tell us that emoti ons
explain the difference betwee n the scenari os becau se the secon d scenario engage s
emotions mor e than the first. This hypot hesis was supporte d in an experiment that used
brain scans to track brain activity during decisi on making. In dilemma s like the second
one, parts of the brain assoc iated wi th emotional p rocessing were more active, and
those who deci ded that pushing the strange r would be rig ht took longe r to make a
decision becau se emotions slowed down their thought processe s. 59 Most normal
people would find it difficult , if n ot imposs ible, to act ually take anot her’s life in such a
situation. Th is reluctance is attributed to the strong feelings of revulsion that com e u p
from just thinking about taking a human life. These reactions are likely hardwired into
human beings through evolution because they aid our survival. Interestingly though,
people who have damage to the prefrontal cortex of the brain have no such reaction.
They are much more likely to simply make the utilitarian analysis and say they would
kill one person to save the others.60 (If you want to get a “feel” for this type of exercise,
try taking the mor al sense test at http:/ /moral.wj h.harvard.edu. It present s com plex
ethical dilemmas that have no clearly right answer.)
So, emotions are clearly important in ethical decision making, and continuing
research will help us more fully understand the process. It seems clear that emotions
can aid us in doing the right thing when they alert us to ethical concerns, cause us to act
to help others in need, or keep us from violent reactions (because of sympathy for
another, pangs of guilt, or automatically triggered negative feelings).61 Feelings of
betrayal or moral outrage can also cause people to act in the interest of fairness.62
For example, people may be more willing to speak up about the unfair treatment of a
coworker if they feel moral outrage about it.63 Interestingly, research has found that
people will even forgo financial benefits if they feel they’re being unfairly treated.
94
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

In some fascinating experiments, researchers have demonstrated that individuals will
punish another individual they perceive to be unethical even if there is nothing for
them to gain and something to lose. They will do this even if they don’t know the
person who has been offended.64 Accordingly, research has shown that the parts of our
brains associated with feeling satisfaction are activated when we consider retaliating
against someone who has unfairly harmed us.65
The bottom line here is that we often act not because we have coolly and rationally
decided on the best course of action, but rather because it “feels” like the right thing to
do at the time. Often, emotions can lead us to act ethically. But emotions can also
interfere with good decision making when they lead to a (perhaps irrational) desire for
revenge. For example, when a competitor “poaches” one of your best people, do you
try to recruit someone away from the competitor just to get even or to do damage to the
competitor when you should be focusing more rationally on who is best prepared to do
the job?66
Consider how General Motors managers handled a four-year legal battle with
Volkswagen over their allegation that a 56-year-old GM executive, Jose Lopez,
took 20 boxes of GM proprietary documents when he left GM to join Volkswagen
in 1993. In 1992, Lopez was GM’s worldwide purchasing czar, known for his
ability to cut costs ruthlessly. The missing documents included information about
GM’s suppliers and their prices for auto parts, as well as information about
upcoming Opel car models in the GM Europe division. Fortune magazine referred
to the four-year legal battle that ensued as a tale of “betrayal” and “revenge.” Lou
Hughes, head of GM Europe, was furious that Lopez would take proprietary
documents to its fiercest competitor. He insisted that there would be no settlement
with VW as long as Lopez remained there. When asked what he hoped to gain from
the litigation, Hughes replied, “Look, this is not a question of business. This is a
question of ethics.”67
Years of investigation yielded no hard evidence to suggest that anyone at VW had
actually used the secret GM information. Fortune suggested that at the time, “one
might have expected GM to act pragmatically, find some face-saving exit, and return
its attention to the car business.”68 That might have been the “rational,” coolheaded
thing to do. Instead, GM escalated the fight, bringing a racketeering suit that was
expected to drag on for years and cost tens of millions of dollars. When pragmatic
board members questioned the action, the board chairman insisted that the company
had to pursue the suit because it “had been terribly wronged.” “Some things aren’t
measured in time and money. They’re just who we are.”69
Finally, in January 1997, the two companies settled the case. Lopez, who had
already resigned from Volkswagen, was barred from doing any work for VW through
the year 2000. Volkswagen paid GM $100 million and agreed to buy $1 billion worth
of GM parts over seven years. Fortune asked, “But what, in the end did the long, bitter,
and costly struggle accomplish? In the cold light of day, the answer seems simple and
shocking: not much.”70 A huge company devoted years of attention and spent millions
of dollars because its managers were morally outraged that their former friend had
betrayed them. It was obviously an emotional reaction.
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
95

Clearly, anger and other emotions can influence thoughts and actions. Whether
that is good or bad depends on whether the emotion leads to “right” or “wrong” action.
If empathy or guilt lead you to recognize an ethical issue or think about the
consequences of your actions for others, that’s a good thing. If moral outrage leads
you to seek justice, that’s good as well. But moral outrage can also lead to a desire for
revenge, and that may be the time to bring cooler heads to the decision to determine
whether action based upon revenge is a good ethical (and business) decision. Those
who are not as emotionally involved in the interpersonal issues may be able to offer a
more rational and balanced assessment of the situation. In the GM–Volkswagen case,
those pragmatic board members may have been right to support a quick settlement.
TOWARD ETHICAL ACTION
Most of this chapter has focused on ethical awareness and ethical judgment processes.
We’ve seen that these also influence ethical action. For example, those with stronger
ethical awareness are more likely to make ethical choices because they think about the
harm they’re doing, they use ethical language to label the situation, or they recognize
that others would see an action as ethically problematic. Also, we know that some
individuals are more prone to think in ways that make ethical action more likely.
Individuals who score higher in cognitive moral development, internal locus of
control, and idealistic decision-making style, and those who are lower in Machiavel-
lianism and less prone to use morally disengaged thinking are all more likely to behave
ethically.
But we’ve also seen that, as human beings, we’re all prone to cognitive biases that
can get in the way of good thinking and interfere with ethical action. Beyond that, it’s
sometimes hard to do what’s right even for those of us with the best thinking and
intentions. We may have an unethical boss who insists that we do inappropriate things,
we may find ourselves in an unethical culture, or we may fear repercussions for
speaking the truth. Next, you’ll read an article that addresses some of these issues:
Dennis Gioia’s reflections on his involvement in the Pinto Fires case. In future
chapters, we’ll focus more on how you can find your moral voice and do what’s right
despite the challenges.
REFLECTIONS ON THE PINTO FIRES CASE
(SEE CHAPTER 2)
by Dennis A. Gioia (used with permission)
Chapter 2 ended with the provocative Pinto Fires case, highlighting some of the sordid events in
the history of the Pinto fires problem. As the authors indicate later in this chapter, I was involved
with this infamous case in the early 1970s. They have asked me to reflect on lessons learned
from my experience.
I take this case very personally, even though my name seldom comes up in its many
recountings. I was one of those “faceless bureaucrats” who is often portrayed as making
96
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

decisions without accountability and then walking away from them—even decisions with life-
and-death implications. That characterization is, of course, far too stark and superficial. I
certainly don’t consider myself faceless, and I have always chafed at the label of bureaucrat as
applied to me, even though I have found myself unfairly applying it to others. Furthermore, I
have been unable to walk away from my decisions in this case. They have a tendency to haunt—
especially when they have such public airings as those involved in the Pinto fires debacle
have had.
But why revisit 20-year-old decisions, and why take them so personally? Here’s why:
because I was in a position to do something about a serious problem—and didn’t. That simple
observation gives me pause for personal reflection and also makes me think about the many
difficulties people face in trying to be ethical decision makers in organizations. It also helps me
to keep in mind the features of modern business and organizational life that would influence
someone like me (me, of all people, who purposefully set out to be an ethical decision maker) to
overlook basic moral issues in arriving at decisions that, when viewed retrospectively, look
absurdly easy to make. But they are not easy to make, and that is perhaps the most important
lesson of all.
The Personal Aspect
I would like to reflect on my own experience mainly to emphasize the personal dimensions
involved in ethical decision making. Although I recognize that there are strong organiza-
tional influences at work as well, I would like to keep the critical lens focused for a moment
on me (and you) as individuals. I believe that there are insights and lessons from my
experience that can help you think about your own likely involvement in issues with ethical
overtones.
First, however, a little personal background. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, I was
an engineering/MBA student; I also was an “activist,” engaged in protests of social
injustice and the social irresponsibility of business, among other things. I held some pretty
strong values that I thought would stand up to virtually any challenge and enable me to
“do the right thing” when I took a career job. I suspect that most of you feel that you also
have developed a strongly held value system that will enable you to resist organizational
inducements to do something unethical. Perhaps. Unfortunately, the challenges do not
often come in overt forms that shout the need for resistance or ethical righteousness. They
are much more subtle than that, and thus doubly difficult to deal with because they do not
make it easy to see that a situation you are confronting might actually involve an ethical
dilemma.
After school, I got the job of my dreams with Ford and, predictably enough, ended up on
the fast track to promotion. That fast track enabled me to progress quickly into positions of
some notable responsibility. Within two years I became Ford’s vehicle recall coordinator,
with first-level responsibility for tracking field safety problems. It was the most intense,
information-overloaded job you can imagine, frequently dealing with some of the most
serious problems in the company. Disasters were a phone call away, and action was the
hallmark of the office where I worked. We all knew we were engaged in serious business, and
we all took the job seriously. There were no irresponsible bureaucratic ogres there, contrary to
popular portrayal.
In this context, I first encountered the neophyte Pinto fires problem in the form of
infrequent reports of cars erupting into horrendous fireballs in very low-speed crashes and
the shuddering personal experience of inspecting a car that had burned, killing its trapped
occupants. Over the space of a year, I had two distinct opportunities to initiate recall activities
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
97

concerning the fuel tank problems, but on both occasions I voted not to recall, despite my activist
history and advocacy of business social responsibility.
The key question is how, in the space of two short years, I could have engaged in a decision
process that appeared to violate my own strong values—a decision process whose subsequent
manifestations continue to be cited by many observers as a supposedly definitive study of
corporate unethical behavior. I tend to discount the obvious accusations: that my values weren’t
really strongly held; that I had turned my back on my values in the interest of loyalty to Ford; that
I was somehow intimidated into making decisions in the best interests of the company; that
despite my principled statements I had not actually achieved a high stage of moral development,
and so on. Instead, I believe a more plausible explanation for my own actions looks to the foibles
of normal human information processing.
I would argue that the complexity and intensity of the recall coordinator’s job required that
I develop cognitive strategies for simplifying the overwhelming amount of information I had to
deal with. The best way to do that is to structure the information into cognitive “schemas,” or
more specifically “script schemas,” that guide understanding and action when facing common or
repetitive situations. Scripts offer marvelous cognitive shortcuts because they allow you to act
virtually unconsciously and automatically, and thus permit handling complicated situations
without being paralyzed by needing to think consciously about every little thing. Such scripts
enabled me to discern the characteristic hallmarks of problem cases likely to result in recall and
to execute a complicated series of steps required to initiate a recall.
All of us structure information all of the time; we could hardly get through the workday
without doing so. But there is a penalty to be paid for this wonderful cognitive efficiency: We do
not give sufficient attention to important information that requires special treatment, because the
general information pattern has surface appearances indicating that automatic processing will
suffice. That, I think, is what happened to me. The beginning stages of the Pinto case looked for
all the world like a normal sort of problem. Lurking beneath the cognitive veneer, however, was a
nasty set of circumstances waiting to conspire into a dangerous situation. Despite the awful
nature of the accidents, the Pinto problem did not fit an existing script; the accidents were
relatively rare by recall standards, and the accidents were not initially traceable to a specific
component failure. Even when a failure mode suggesting a design flaw was identified, the cars
did not perform significantly worse in crash tests than competitor vehicles. One might easily
argue that I should have been jolted out of my script by the unusual nature of the accidents (very
low speed, otherwise unharmed passengers trapped in a horrific fire), but those facts did not
penetrate a script cued for other features. (It also is difficult to convey to the layperson that bad
accidents are not a particularly unusual feature of the recall coordinator’s information field.
Accident severity is not necessarily a recall cue; frequently repeated patterns and identifiable
causes are.)
The Corporate Milieu
In addition to the personalized scripting of information processing, there is another important
influence on the decisions that led to the Pinto fires mess: the fact that decisions are made by
individuals working within a corporate context. It has escaped almost no one’s notice that the
decisions made by corporate employees tend to be in the best interest of the corporation, even by
people who mean to do better. Why? Because socialization processes and the overriding
influence of organizational culture provide a strong, if generally subtle, context for defining
appropriate ways of seeing and understanding. Because organizational culture can be viewed as
a collection of scripts, scripted information processing relates even to organizational-level
considerations. Scripts are context bound; they are not free-floating general cognitive structures
98
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

that apply universally. They are tailored to specific contexts. And there are few more potent
contexts than organizational settings.
There is no question that my perspective changed after joining Ford. In retrospect, I would
be very surprised if it hadn’t. In my former incarnation as a social activist, I had internalized
values for doing what was right, as I understood rightness in grand terms; but I had not
internalized a script for applying my values in a pragmatic business context. Ford and the recall
coordinator role provided a powerful context for developing scripts—scripts that were inevita-
bly and undeniably oriented toward ways of making sense that were influenced by the corporate
and industry culture.
I wanted to do a good job, and I wanted to do what was right. Those are not mutually
exclusive desires, but the corporate context affects their synthesis. I came to accept the idea that
it was not feasible to fix everything that someone might construe as a problem. I therefore shifted
to a value of wanting to do the greatest good for the greatest number (an ethical value tempered
by the practical constraints of an economic enterprise). Doing the greatest good for the greatest
number meant working with intensity and responsibility on those problems that would spare the
most people from injury. It also meant developing scripts that responded to typical problems, not
odd patterns like those presented by the Pinto.
Another way of noting how the organizational context so strongly affects individuals is to
recognize that one’s personal identity becomes heavily influenced by corporate identity. As a
student, my identity centered on being a “good person” (with a certain dose of moral
righteousness associated with it). As recall coordinator, my identity shifted to a more corporate
definition. This is an extraordinarily important point, especially for students who have not yet
held a permanent job role, and I would like to emphasize it. Before assuming your career role,
identity derives mainly from social relationships. Upon putting on the mantle of a profession or a
responsible position, identity begins to align with your role. And information processing
perspective follows from that identity.
I remember accepting the portrayal of the auto industry and Ford as “under attack” from
many quarters (oil crises, burgeoning government regulation, inflation, litigious customers, etc).
As we know, groups under assault develop into more cohesive communities that emphasize
commonalities and shared identities. I was by then an insider in the industry and the company,
sharing some of their beleaguered perceptions that there were significant forces arrayed against
us and that the well-being of the company might be threatened.
What happened to the original perception that Ford was a socially irresponsible giant that
needed a comeuppance? Well, it looks different from the inside. Over time, a reasonable value
for action against corporate dominance became tempered by another reasonable value that
corporations serve social needs and are not automatically the villains of society. I saw a need for
balance among multiple values, and, as a result, my identity shifted in degrees toward a more
corporate identity.
The Torch Passes to You
So, given my experiences, what would I recommend to you, as a budding organizational
decision maker? I have some strong opinions. First, develop your ethical base now! Too
many people do not give serious attention to assessing and articulating their own values.
People simply do not know what they stand for because they haven’t thought about it
seriously. Even the ethical scenarios presented in classes or executive programs are treated
as interesting little games without apparent implications for deciding how you intend to
think or act. These exercises should be used to develop a principled, personal code that you
will try to live by. Consciously decide your values. If you don’t decide your values now, you
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
99

Revisiting the Pinto Fires Case: Script Processing and
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis
Dennis Gioia, management scholar and expert on social cognition, has provided us
with a rare opportunity to look inside the head of someone who was involved in a
widely publicized business ethics situation. He has analyzed his own thoughts and
behavior as vehicle recall coordinator at Ford Motor Company shortly after the Ford
Pinto was introduced in both an article in the Journal of Business Ethics71 and in his
“Reflections” that you just read.
In 1972, Gioia graduated with an MBA. His value system included opposition
to the Vietnam War and deep concerns about the ethical conduct of business.
are easy prey for others who will gladly decide them for you or influence you implicitly to
accept theirs.
Second, recognize that everyone, including you, is an unwitting victim of his or her own
cognitive structuring. Many people are surprised and fascinated to learn that they use schemas
and scripts to understand and act in the organizational world. The idea that we automatically
process so much information so much of the time intrigues us. Indeed, we would all turn into
blithering idiots if we did not structure information and expectations, but that very structuring
hides information that might be important—information that could require you to confront your
values. We get lulled into thinking that automatic information processing is great stuff that
obviates the necessity for trying to resolve so many frustrating decisional dilemmas.
Actually, I think too much ethical training focuses on supplying standards for contemplat-
ing dilemmas. The far greater problem, as I see it, is recognizing that a dilemma exists in the first
place. The insidious problem of people not being aware that they are dealing with a situation that
might have ethical overtones is another consequence of schema usage. I would venture that
scripted routines seldom include ethical dimensions. Is a person behaving unethically if the
situation is not even construed as having ethical implications? People are not necessarily stupid,
ill-intentioned, or Machiavellian, but they are often unaware. They do indeed spend much of
their time cruising on automatic, but the true hallmark of human information processing is the
ability to switch from automatic to controlled information processing. What we really need to do
is to encourage people to recognize cues that build a “Now Think!” step into their scripts—
waving red flags at yourself, so to speak—even though you are engaged in essentially automatic
cognition and action.
Third, because scripts are context-bound and organizations are potent contexts, be aware of
how strongly, yet how subtly, your job role and your organizational culture affect the ways you
interpret and make sense of information (and thus affect the ways you develop the scripts that
will guide you in unguarded moments). Organizational culture has a much greater effect on
individual cognition than you would ever suspect (see Chapter 5).
Last, be prepared to face critical responsibility at a relatively young age, as I did. You need
to know what your values are, and you need to know how you think so that you can know how to
make a good decision. Before you can do that, you need to articulate and affirm your values now,
before you enter the fray. I wasn’t really ready. Are you?
For a more thorough description and analysis of Dennis Gioia’s experiences, see his article, “Pinto Fires and
Personal Ethics: A Script Analysis of Missed Opportunities,” Journal of Business Ethics 11, nos. 5, 6 (1992):
379–89.
100
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

“I cultivated my social awareness; I held my principles high; I espoused my
intention to help a troubled world; and I wore my hair long. By any measure I
was a prototypical ‘Child of the ’60s.’”72 A car enthusiast, Gioia was hired by the
Ford Motor Company as a “problem analyst.” Within two years he became Ford’s
field recall coordinator, in charge of organizing current recall campaigns and
identifying developing problems.
SCRIPT PROCESSING
In analyzing his participation in the decision not to recall
the Pinto, Gioia suggests that his behavior was highly influenced by script
processing. Scripts are cognitive frameworks that guide human thought and action.
Although they are generally not written down, scripts contain information about
the appropriate sequence of events in routine situations. For example, most of us
have a fairly complex script for how to behave in a fancy restaurant, from
approaching the ma^ıtre d’ to tasting the wine to choosing a fork to use to leaving
the appropriate tip. Information processing is made much more efficient because a
cognitive script allows the individual to call on an established behavior pattern and
act automatically without contemplating every decision or action in great detail.
Active thinking is not required, because the situation fits the mental prototype,
which in turn triggers the script and the prescribed behaviors. According to Gioia,
this is something like “cruising on automatic pilot.” Many of us discover that we
have been cruising on automatic pilot when we drive to a familiar destination, but
we can’t recall how we got there. We were following an established behavior
pattern. The route was so familiar that we didn’t have to think about it anymore.
Somehow we were magically there. Similar things happen at work. Behaviors
become routine or “scripted,” and we do them pretty much without thinking. Many
jobs have scripts associated with them. For example, insurance claims adjusters
have a set of criteria they use to make decisions about claims, and emergency
medical personnel have a script for deciding which medical problems require the
most immediate attention. If a symptom is not a part of the accepted script, it is
likely to be overlooked.
Given the huge information load expected of someone who was simultaneously
managing hundreds of files on potential safety problems, scripts provided a great
information processing advantage to the Ford recall coordinator. Rather than
treating every potential problem situation as unique, Gioia could save time and
mental energy by making quick and efficient decisions about problems as they
arose. As early reports about the Pinto began to trickle in, they didn’t raise any red
flags because they fit the scripted criteria for a “normal” accident and didn’t fit the
scripted criteria for a recall. Among other criteria, Gioia was taught to look for a
large number of cases, a pattern of component failure, and a traceable cause to a
design or manufacturing problem before proposing a recall. Therefore, he filed the
claims automatically and gave seemingly more important problems his active
attention.
Besides contributing to information processing efficiency, however, script proc-
essing clearly has some disadvantages. Gioia admittedly “looked right past” potential
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
101

problems because he had seen similar information patterns hundreds of times before.
The scripted definition of a crisis case was not met by the information he received, so
the Pinto wasn’t singled out for attention. Consistent with research on script
processing, he selectively perceived information that was consistent with the script
and ignored information that didn’t fit the pattern.
Muffled emotions can also become part of a script. Many jobs require the
control of emotions, particularly negative emotions. The recall coordinator’s job
fit this category, as would the job of a health professional in the emergency room
or an insurance claims handler who reads constantly about terrible accidents and
the disabilities that result. For Gioia to function in his job every day, his
emotions had to be squelched to some degree. Even when one event penetrated
his script, it didn’t lead to recall of the Pinto. He had received a photograph of a
burned Pinto and subsequently saw in person the burned hulk of an actual
automobile. These powerful visual images triggered an emotional response and
moved him to bring the case before members of the field recall office. However,
at the meeting, it became clear that the characteristics of the Pinto problem
didn’t meet the group’s shared scripted criteria for a recall. For example, only a
few field reports had come in about the Pinto, much fewer than the number that
would generally support a recall decision. All members, including Gioia, voted
not to recall.
Script processing can be particularly problematic for ethical decision making.
First, ethical decision making requires active consideration of the moral dimensions of
the situation and a “custom” decision, tailored to the complexities of that particular
case. Yet, Gioia argues, in many situations organizational members are not even aware
they are dealing with an ethical dilemma. In terms of our previous discussion, they are
ethically unaware. They handle situations by following scripts that are likely to
exclude ethical considerations. In other words, ethical dilemmas do not lend them-
selves to “automatic pilot” decisions. But the realities of our hectic work lives make
this sort of default decision making very common.
Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis
Frequently, in addition to the cognitive processing limitations of individual decision
makers, institutionalized decision-making processes can powerfully influence the
decisions made by individuals or groups. In the Pinto fires case, a controversial
decision-making process was used to justify the decision not to change the gas tank
design. The National Traffic Safety Association had approved the use of cost-benefit
analyses to establish automotive safety design standards. This process involved the
assignment of a dollar value for a human life—in 1970, the value was deemed to be
approximately $200,000 (it’s over $3 million today). As an internal memo revealed,
Ford had tabulated the costs of altering the tank design (for all similarly designed
vehicles) to be $137 million, or $11 per vehicle. The benefits were calculated to be
$49,530,000. These included the savings to society that would be accrued by
102
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

preventing 180 deaths at $200,000 each, plus 180 projected burn injuries at $67,000 per
injury and 2,100 burned cars at $700 per car. Using the cost-benefit analysis made the
decision seem straightforward. The costs of redesign outweighed the benefits and would
therefore not be undertaken. Ethical considerations didn’t figure into the equation.
Attempts to reduce complex decision making to quantitative terms aren’t
uncommon, especially in a highly competitive business environment. In this way,
complex decisions can be simplified—apparently, an advantage. Today, insurance
companies and many government agencies still assign a value to human life as they
attempt to calculate the costs and benefits of new regulations. And those managing
relief efforts after the World Trade Center terrorist attack had to decide how much
money should be given to families who lost loved ones. What is a life worth? Are some
people’s lives “worth” more than others because they would have had more earning
potential had they lived? Unfortunately, this kind of decision making is a part of our
modern lives. Decisions like this are made in courtrooms and by insurance companies
every day. But the potential disadvantages of reducing the value of human life to
quantitative terms should be clear. Such simplification can remove moral criteria from
the decision-making process and reduce ethical awareness.
The Pinto fires example also points to the importance of multiple ethical selves
and role behavior that will be discussed further in Chapter 7. Gioia was an idealistic
young student, but he admittedly dropped his idealism at the corporation door. In
performing his job of recall coordinator, Gioia was heavily influenced by the role
expectations and guiding scripts. As he says:
The recall coordinator’s job was serious business. The scripts associated
with it influenced me more than I influenced [them]. Before I went to Ford
I would have argued strongly that Ford had an ethical obligation to recall.
After I left Ford, I now argue and teach that Ford had an ethical obligation
to recall. But, while I was there, I perceived no obligation to recall and I
remember no strong ethical overtones to the case whatsoever. It was a very
straightforward decision, driven by dominant scripts for the time, place,
and context.73
Clearly, these processes that individuals and organizations use to simplify complex
decisions can have significant implications for the ethical decisions managers make.
Although script processing and quantitative decision-making criteria clearly help us
do our jobs more efficiently, they can also strip ethical considerations from the
decision-making process.
One way to address this problem is to make ethical considerations part of the script.
Gioia suggests that this may be possible, although he warns that “it will take substantial
concentrationontheethicaldimensionofthecorporateculture(seeChapter5),aswellas
overt attempts to emphasize ethics in education, training, and decision making before
typical organizational scripts are likely to be modified to include the crucial ethical
component.”74You can helpyour subordinates by workingwith them to make thescripts
explicit and to analyze them for their ethical components.
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
103

You can also require decision-making groups to analyze the ethical aspects of
their decisions and to include this analysis in their reports. Just as environmental
impact statements are now a routine part of many business decisions, an ethical
analysis could require that managers focus on the influence of a particular decision
on stakeholders’ rights and consequences for the community or communities
affected by the decision. You can also require groups to justify their decision-
making process (e.g., decision-making criteria and weighting) in moral as well as
quantitative terms.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has introduced you to individual differences that can influence ethical
decision making. It has also outlined the cognitive limitations and biases that can
interfere with good ethical decision making. Hopefully, knowing about these and how
they can be overcome will help you be a better individual decision maker. Chapter 4
provides some guidance regarding how you can find your moral voice and actually do
what you think is right. Much of the remainder of the book moves beyond the
individual focus to look at the group and organizational influences that can have a
profound influence on your decisions and actions, sometimes making it difficult to do
the right thing.
EXERCISE
Understanding Cognitive Moral Development
Molly has been a local newspaper reporter for over 10 years. She learned that Joe
Thompson, a candidate for governor, had been arrested for shoplifting 20 years earlier.
She also learned that early in his life, Thompson went through a confused period when
he did things he later regretted. The shoplifting was treated as a minor offense and
removed from his record. Since then, Thompson has had a distinguished career
helping people and leading important community projects. Many people consider him
to be the best candidate who will likely go on to other important leadership positions.
Molly wonders whether she should write a story about Joe’s earlier troubles that could
ruin his chance to win.
Can you characterize Molly’s thinking in terms of cognitive moral development
levels? Which of the following questions represents preconventional, conventional,
and principled thinking?
& Are there any laws against writing the story?
& Would getting “the scoop” help or hurt my career?
& If I don’t publish the story, wouldn’t another reporter write the story anyway?
& What action would best serve society in the long term?
& How would my boss react if I wrote, or didn’t write, the story?
104
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

& Aren’t reporters expected to report all the news regardless of the circumstances?
& Would Thompson pay me not to write the story?
& Would the election process be more just with or without reporting the story?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Note that these questions apply to Gioia’s “Reﬂections” as well
as the rest of the chapter.
1.
Steven F. Goldstone, chairman and CEO of RJR Nabisco (one of the four biggest
U.S. cigarette manufacturers), said in a 1998 magazine interview, “I have no
moral view of this business . . . I viewed it as a legal business. You shouldn’t be
drawing a moral judgment about a business our country says is perfectly legal
and is taxed like crazy by it.”75 Think about Goldstone’s statement in terms of
ethical awareness. What might happen if he began thinking about his business in
ethical, and not just legal, terms?
2.
Evaluate yourself in terms of cognitive moral development, locus of control,
ethical decision-making style, moral disengagement, and Machiavellianism.
What does this evaluation tell you about your own ethical decision making?
Do the same for someone you know well.
3.
Can you think of times when you have used morally disengaged thinking?
4.
Identify a situation in which you have used script processing in a work or other
life situation.
5.
Do you believe that scripts can override an individual’s value system?
6.
Answer the question posed in Gioia’s “Reflections”: Is a person behaving
unethically if the situation was not even construed in ethical terms—if there
was no ethical awareness?
7.
Who should make the decision about taking risks with others’ lives in designing
products?
8.
Should a person be permitted to place a value on a human life? Should a
company? Should the government? If not, how would decisions be made about
whether to market certain products (that might be risky for some, but helpful for
others), how much those who have lost family members in disasters should be
compensated, and so on?
9.
How do you feel about the use of cost-benefit analysis where human life is part of
the cost calculation? Might the infusion of moral language have changed the
decision makers’ thinking? For example, what if decision makers had talked
about their responsibility for killing 180 human beings?
10.
Given that all automobiles are unsafe to some degree, where do you draw the line
on product safety? How safe is safe enough—and who decides?
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
105

NOTES
1.
D. Robertson, J. Snarey, O. Ousley, K. Harenski, F. D. Bowman, and R. Gilkey, “The Neural Processing
of Moral Sensitivity to Issues of Justice and Care,” Neuropsychologia 45 (2007): 755–66.
2.
J. Moll, R. deOliveira-Souza, P. J. Eslinger, I. E. Bramati, J. Mourao-Miranda, P. A. Andreiuolo et al.,
“The Neural Correlates of Moral Sensitivity: A fMRI Investigation of Basic and Moral Emotions,”
Journal of Neuroscience 22 (2002): 2730–36; R. Salvador and R. G. Folger, “Business Ethics and the
Brain,” Business Ethics Quarterly 19, no. 1 (2009): 1–31.
3.
K. Butterfield, L. K. Trevi~no, and G. R. Weaver, “Moral Awareness in Business Organizations:
Influences of Issue-Related and Social Context Factors,” Human Relations 53, no. 7 (2000): 981–1018.
4.
S. T. Fiske, and S. E. Taylor, Social Cognition, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991).
5.
J. Darnton, “Revisiting Rwanda’s Horrors with a Former National Security Advisor,” New York Times,
December 20, 2004, B1.
6.
W. J. Clinton, My Life (New York: Knopf, 2004).
7.
D. Darlin, “H.P., Red-Faced but Still Selling,” New York Times, October 1, 2006.
8.
T. M. Jones, “Ethical Decision Making by Individuals in Organizations: An Issue-Contingent Model,”
Academy of Management Review 16 (1991): 366–95.
9.
S. E. Siwek, The True Cost of Sound Recording Piracy to the U.S. Economy (Lewiston, TX: Institute for
Policy Innovation, 2007).
10.
S. Rommel, and R. G. Folger, “Business Ethics and the Brain,” Business Ethics Quarterly 19 (2009): 1.
11.
D. R. Forsyth, “A Taxonomy of Ethical Ideologies,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39
(1980): 175–84.
12.
D. R. Forsyth, “Judging the Morality of Business Practices: The Influences of Personal Moral
Philosophies,” Journal of Business Ethics 11, nos. 5, 6 (1992): 461–70.
13.
T. Barnett, K. Bass, and G. Brown, “Ethical Ideology and Ethical Judgment Regarding Ethical Issues in
Business,” Journal of Business Ethics 13, no. 6 (1994): 469–80; D. R. Forsyth, “Individual Differences
in Information Integration during Moral Judgment,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 49
(1985): 264–72.
14.
C. A. Henle, R. A. Giacalone, and C. L. Jurkiewicz, “The Role of Ethical Ideology in Workplace
Deviance,” Journal of Business Ethics 56 (2005): 219–30.
15.
J. Kish-Gephart, D. Harrison, and L. K. Trevi~no, “Bad Apples, Bad Cases, and Bad Barrels: Meta-
analytic Evidence about Sources of Unethical Decisions at Work,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95
(2010): 1–31.
SHORT CASE
Mary, the director of nursing at a regional blood bank, is concerned about the declining
number of blood donors. It’s May, and Mary knows that the approaching summer will
mean increased demands for blood and decreased supplies, especially of rare blood
types. She is excited, therefore, when a large corporation offers to host a series of blood
drives at all of its locations, beginning at corporate headquarters. Soon after Mary and
her staff arrive at the corporate site, Mary hears a disturbance. Apparently, a nurse
named Peggy was drawing blood from a male donor with a very rare blood type when
the donor fondled her breast. Peggy jumped back and began to cry. Joe, a male
colleague, sprang to Peggy’s defense and told the donor to leave the premises. To
Mary’s horror, the male donor was a senior manager with the corporation. What is the
ethical dilemma in this case, and what values are in conflict? How should Mary deal
with Peggy, Joe, the donor, and representatives of the corporation?
106
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

16. 
L. Kohlberg, “Stage and Sequence: The Cognitive-Developmental Approach to Socialization,” in
Handbook of Socialization Theory and Research, ed. D. A. Goslin (New York: Rand McNally, 1969),
347–80.
17. 
M. Rest, Moral Development: Advances in Research and Theory (New York: Praeger, 1986).
18. 
L. K. Trevi~no and S. A. Youngblood, “Bad Apples in Bad Barrels: A Causal Analysis of Ethical
Decision-Making Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psychology 75, no. 4 (1990): 378–85.
19. 
J. Weber, “The Relationship between Managerial Value Orientations and Stages of Moral Develop-
ment: Theory Development and Empirical Investigation with Behavioral Implications” (Unpublished
dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1998).
20. 
“Cartel Tells Smugglers to Live ‘Clean’ Life,” Yahoo! News, April 20, 2009.
21. 
C. Gilligan, In a Different Voice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982).
22. 
C. Gilligan and J. Attanuci, “Two Moral Orientations,” in Mapping the Moral Domain, eds. C. Gilligan,
J. V. Ward, and J. M. Taylor (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988), 73–86.
23. 
R. Derry, “Moral Reasoning in Work-Related Conflicts,” Research in Corporate Social Performance
and Policy 9 (1987): 25–50.
24. 
M. Rest, Moral Development: Advances in Research and Theory (New York: Praeger, 1986).
25. 
M. L. Ambrose and M. Schminke, “Sex Differences in Business Ethics: The Importance of Perceptions,”
Journal of Managerial Issues 11, no. 4 (1999): 454–74; Kish-Gephart et al., “Bad Apples, Bad Cases.”
26. 
This phrase was used with different meaning by R. Jackall in Moral Mazes (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1988).
27. 
L. K. Trevi~no, “Moral Reasoning and Business Ethics,” Journal of Business Ethics 11 (1992): 445–59.
28. 
S. J. Thoma, and J. R. Rest, “The Relationship between Moral Decision Making and Patterns of
Consolidation and Transition in Moral Judgment Development,” Developmental Psychology 35
(1999): 323–34.
29. 
J. Dukerich, M. L. Nichols, D. R. Elm, and D. A. Vollrath, “Moral Reasoning in Groups: Leaders Make
a Difference,” Human Relations 43 (1990): 473–93.
30. 
M. Schminke, M. L. Ambrose, and D. O. Neubaum, “The Effect of Moral Development on Ethical
Climate and Employee Attitudes,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 97 (2005):
135–51.
31. 
L. K. Trevi~no, “Moral Reasoning and Business Ethics,” Journal of Business Ethics 11 (1992): 445–59.
32. 
J. B. Rotter, “Generalized Expectancies for Internal versus External Control of Reinforcement,”
Psychological Monographs: General and Applied 80 (1966): 1–28.
33. 
E. Midlarski, “Aiding under Stress: The Effects of Competence, Dependency, Visibility, and Fatalism,”
Journal of Personality 39 (1971): 132–49; E. Midlarski, and M. Midlarski, “Some Determinants of
Aiding under Experimentally Induced Stress,” Journal of Personality 41 (1973): 305–27; E. M.
Ubbink, and S. W. Sadava, “Rotter’s Generalized Expectancies as Predictors of Helping Behavior,”
Psychological Reports 35 (1974): 865–66.
34. 
R. C. Johnson, J. M. Ackerman, H. Frank, and A. J. Fionda, “Resistance to Temptation and Guilt
Following Yielding and Psychotherapy,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 32 (1968):
169–75.
35.
L. R. Propst, “Effects of Personality and Loss of Anonymity on Aggression: A Re-evaluation of
Deindividuation. Journal of Personality 47 (1979): 531–45.
36.
“Niccolo Machiavelli,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy online (Metaphysics Research Lab,
CSLI, Stanford University); at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/machiavelli/.
37.
Kish-Gephart et al., “Bad Apples, Bad Cases”; W. H. Hegarty and H. P. Sims, “Organizational
Philosophy, Policies, and Objectives Related to Unethical Decision Behavior: A Laboratory
Experiment,” Journal of Applied Psychology 64 (1979): 331–38; S. Flynn, M. Reichard, and S. Slane,
“Cheating as a Function of Task Outcome and Machiavellianism,” Journal of Psychology 121 (1987):
423–27; G. E. Jones and M. J. Kavanagh, “An Experimental Examination of the Effects of Individual
and Situational Factors on Unethical Intentions in the Workplace,” Journal of Business Ethics 15
(1996): 511–23.
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
107

38. 
A. Bandura, Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory (Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1986).
39. 
J. R. Detert, L. K. Trevi ~no, and V. L. Sweitzer, “Moral Disengagement in Ethical Decision Making: A
Study of Antecedents and Outcomes,” Journal of Applied Psychology 93 (2008): 374–91.
40. 
M. H. Bazerman, Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1994).
41. 
D. M. Messick and M. Bazerman, “Ethical Leadership and the Psychology of Decision-Making,” Sloan
Management Review (Winter 1996): 9–22.
42. 
Ibid.
43. 
M. H. Bazerman, Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1994).
44. 
D. M. Messick and M. Bazerman, “Ethical Leadership and the Psychology of Decision-Making,” Sloan
Management Review (Winter 1996): 9–22.
45. 
Ibid.
46. 
G. Loewenstein, “Behavioral Decision Theory and Business Ethics: Skewed Trade-offs between
Self and Other,” in Codes of Conduct: Behavioral Research into Business Ethics, eds. D. M. Messick
and A. E. Tenbrunsel (New York: Russell Sage, 1996).
47. 
D. M. Messick and M. Bazerman, “Ethical Leadership and the Psychology of Decision-Making,” Sloan
Management Review (Winter 1996): 9–22.
48. 
Ibid.
49. 
B. M. Staw and I. Ross, “Understanding Escalation Situations,” in Research in Organizational
Behavior, Vol. 9, eds. B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1987).
50. 
D. M. Messick and M. Bazerman, “Ethical Leadership and the Psychology of Decision-Making,” Sloan
Management Review (Winter 1996): 9–22.
51. 
R. A. Prentice, “Ethical Decision Making: More Needed than Good Intentions,” Financial Analysts
Journal 63, no. 6 (2007): 17–30.
52. 
G. Loewenstein, “Behavioral Decision Theory and Business Ethics: Skewed Trade-offs between Self
and Other,” in Codes of Conduct: Behavioral Research into Business Ethics, eds. D. M. Messick and A.
E. Tenbrunsel (New York: Russell Sage, 1996).
53. 
J. Haidt, “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to Moral
Judgment,” Psychological Review 108, no. 4 (2001): 814–34.
54. 
S. Rommel, and R. G. Folger, “Business Ethics and the Brain,” Business Ethics Quarterly 19 (2009): 1.
55. 
B. Bower, “The Bias Finders,” Science News, April 22, 2006, 250–51, 253.
56. 
N. Eisenberg, “Emotion, Regulation, and Moral Development,” Annual Review of Psychology 51
(2000): 665–97; A. Gaudine and L. Thorne, “Emotion and Ethical Decision Making in Organizations,”
Journal of Business Ethics 31, no. 2 (2001): 175–87.
57. 
S. Rommel, and R. G. Folger, “Business Ethics and the Brain,” Business Ethics Quarterly 19 (2009): 1.
58. 
J. Lehrer, “Hearts and Minds,” Boston Globe, April 29, 2007; available at www.boston.com; Rommel
and Folger, “Business Ethics and the Brain.”
59. 
J. D. Greene, R. B. Sommerville, L. E. Nystrom, J. M. Darley, and J. D. Cohen, “An fMRI Investigation
of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment,” Science 293 (2001): 2105–8.
60. 
R. L. Hotz, “Scientists Draw Link between Morality and Brain’s Wiring” (May 11, 2007), Science
Journal at WallStreetJournal.com; available at http://online.wsj.com/article/SB117884235401499300.
html.
61.
Eisenberg, “Emotion, Regulation, and Moral Development”; Gaudine and Thorne, “Emotion and
Ethical Decision Making in Organizations.”
62.
R. Folger, R. Cropanzano, and B. Goldman, “What Is the Relationship between Justice and Morality?”
in Handbook of Organizational Justice, eds. J. Greenberg and J. A. Colquitt (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum,
2005), 215–46.
63.
J. Kish-Gephart, J. Detert, L. K. Trevi~no, and A. Edmondson, “Silenced by Fear: The Nature, Sources,
and Consequences of Fear at Work,” Research in Organizational Behavior 29 (2010), 163–193.
64.
C. J. Turillo, R. Folger, J. J. Lavelle, E. E. Umphress, and J. O. Gee, “Is Virtue Its Own Reward? Self-
Sacrificial Decisions for the Sake of Fairness,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 89 (2002): 839–65.
108
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

65.
J. McGregor, “Sweet Revenge,” Businessweek, January 22, 2007, 62–70.
66.
Ibid.
67.
P. Elkind, “Blood Feud,” Fortune, April 14, 1997, 90–102.
68.
Ibid.
69.
Ibid.
70.
Ibid.
71.
D. Gioia, “Pinto Fires and Personal Ethics: A Script Analysis of Missed Opportunities,” Journal of
Business Ethics 11, nos. 5, 6 (1992): 379–89.
72.
Ibid.
73.
Ibid.
74.
Ibid.
75.
J. Goldberg, “Big Tobacco’s Endgame,” New York Times Magazine, June 21, 1998, 36–42, 58–60.
CHAPTER 3
DECIDING WHAT’S RIGHT: A PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH
109

C H A P T E R4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’
COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
H
ere’s the bad news about business ethics: your career can be irrevocably
damaged if you mishandle an ethical issue. But there’s also good news: many
ethical issues in business are quite predictable. You can be fairly certain that
during the course of your career, you’ll run into myriad ethical problems such as a
customer who asks for a special deal or terms in order to make the sale, or questions
about the appropriate use of corporate resources, or discrimination of one sort or
another. Since many ethical issues are somewhat predictable, you have a better chance
of dealing appropriately with ethical problems if you think about what’s likely to
happen before it occurs. And you should now have tools to help you make better
decisions.
Before we get into a discussion of ethical issues, however, it’s important to look at
the relationship that exists between you and your employer. Although most people
don’t sign a written contract on the day they join a company or organization, there is an
implied contractual relationship of sorts between workers and employers. Both parties
have expectations, and rights, and offer consideration to the other—all are character-
istics of a contractual relationship. Your employer pays you in salary and benefits to
perform a job, and your organization expects you to behave in a certain way; you have
a responsibility to be “part of the family” and exhibit loyalty and other corporate
“virtues” and to refrain from other, less desirable behaviors. On the other hand, you
expect not only a salary for the work you perform but also a modicum of fairness. Most
people expect employers to treat them decently and to provide an appropriate work
environment. Whenever we discuss the employer-employee contract in this chapter,
it’s this complicated set of expectations that we’re referring to.
So what are some typical ethical problems individuals face at work? We’ve compiled
some of the more obvious ones and divided them into broad categories, including human
resources issues, conflicts of interest, customer confidence issues, and the use of
corporate resources. We address a number of specific topics under each broad category.
To make it easy to follow, each topic contains the following information:
& What it is (a definition of the issue)
& Why it is an ethical problem
& How we can think about the issue
110

& Professional costs and possible penalties for ethical or legal transgressions
& Special notes and some topics that may include important information related
to the topic
Identifying Your Values—and Voicing Them
Before we explore the various types of ethical problems covered in this chapter, we
would like you to think again about what’s important to you—in other words, what do
you value? In Chapter 2, we discussed the various philosophical approaches to ethics,
all of which can help you think through a dilemma. The principle-based approach
encouraged you to think about your most cherished values. So, what happens if you
think through a situation, figure out what to do based upon those values, and then
hesitate to say or do what you believe to be ethical because of pressure that you feel
from your organization’s reward system or your boss or your peers? Once you’ve
determined the right thing, how do you then do it? Well, according to some ethics
experts at the Aspen Institute, it helps to practice.1
After World War II, researchers found that many of the people in Europe who had
risked their own well-being to help others who were threatened by the Nazis did so
because they had “practiced” making ethical decisions earlier in their lives by imagining
themselves in hypothetical situations that challenged their values. They not only
imagined these situations, but they also discussed their potential actions with
others—what they might actually do if they encountered such a situation. Researchers
theorize that this was a kind of “pre-scripting” that laid the groundwork for these
people’s later heroic actions. It was as if thinking about ethical issues long before they
were actually confronted by the issues gave people a sort of head start in the moral
courage department. The “Giving Voice to Values” program at the Aspen Institute is
rooted in this interesting, worthwhile premise. Mary C. Gentile, the program developer,
writesthattheapproachstartswith“theassumptionthatweknowwhatwewanttodoand
then figuring out how we might make that happen—and then practicing our voice.”
The program encourages students of all ages to first consider their values (as we
encouraged you to do in Chapter 2). What do you care about? When you think deeply
about your life, what are the values that attract you or stir deep feelings within you?
Most people, for example, gravitate toward honesty, respect, responsibility, compas-
sion, fairness, and other similar values.
In addition to values, we all have a personal narrative, a self-story that can help us
when we face tough ethical issues. As you think about your life story, it can be helpful
to look back on your life and search for experiences that might provide a source of
passion or strength in difficult times. We often think of these as life situations that build
character. Many of the best leaders say that difficult life experiences were transform-
ative and provided new meaning and direction to their lives. For example, surviving a
life-threatening illness can make other workplace threats seem much less dire. You
might say to yourself, “Speaking up to my boss in a respectful way isn’t going to kill
me,” so why not? Daniel Vasella, Chairman of the Board (and CEO for 14 years) of the
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
111

pharmaceutical company Novartis, had his first hospital experience at age 4 as a result
of food poisoning. He contracted tuberculosis and then meningitis at age 8 and spent a
year in a sanatorium. At age 10, he lost his older sister. These are just a few of the
challenges Vasella faced as a boy. He vividly recalls the loneliness and pain of these
experiences, but he also remembers the powerful impact of a few special people who
treated him with care and compassion and who fueled his desire to help other people,
ultimately by becoming a physician. He later decided that by becoming a leader in a
healthcare business, he could have even more impact and help more people than he
could as a single practitioner.2 So think about what your personal narrative is. What
aspects of it might help give you the courage to do the right thing in tough situations?
Here’s an abbreviated list of other self-assessment questions students are
encouraged to consider as part of the Giving Voice to Values program:
1.
Questions of purpose. What are your personal and professional goals? What
do you hope to accomplish? What would make your professional life
worthwhile?
2.
Questions of risk. What is your risk profile? Are you a risk taker, or are you
risk averse? What are the greatest risks you face in your line of work? What
levels of risk can you live with, and which ones can’t you live with?
3.
Questions of personal communication style or preference. Do you deal well
with conflict, or are you nonconfrontational? Do you prefer communicating
in person or in writing? Do you think best from the gut and in the moment, or
do you need time to reflect on and craft your communication?
4.
Questions of loyalty. Do you tend to feel the greatest loyalty to family, work
colleagues, your firm/employer, or other stakeholders, such as customers?
5.
Questions of self-image. Do you identify yourself as being shrewd or naive?
As idealistic or pragmatic? As a learner or as a teacher?
The point of this self-analysis is to first identify your own “self-story” or
narrative—we all have one or are able to build one. Then, consider other personal
characteristics that will help you find ways of behaving that align with your image of
yourself. For example, if your own image of yourself is one of a bold, courageous
character, you might be able to find a brave way of reacting to a situation—one that is
aligned with the bold person you believe you are. And the converse is also true. If you
are risk averse and timid, you may be able to find a way of reacting to a situation that is
more “compliant” and that aligns with who you really are. The objective here, as you
have probably already guessed, is to make it easier for you to voice your values and
beliefs by creating a response and behavior that reflects your unique personality.
Evaluating a dilemma through the lens of your own story makes it more likely that you
will voice your values, and playing to your strengths makes it more likely that you’ll
stand up for what you believe.
The Giving Voice to Values program also encourages students to understand that
values conflicts are absolutely normal. Far from being unusual or rare, ethical
112
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

dilemmas happen all the time to everyo ne. The ethica l dilem mas that we face every
day test our ability to make good choi ces. If we anticipat e the need to take risks—to
make decisions that might turn out to be good ones or not—we will prepare ourselves.
We’ll intern alize the idea that these situations are normal and survivable and that
others are experiencing the same thing. These situatio ns won’t paralyz e us.
Another import ant eleme nt of the p rogram is to understa nd various com munica -
tion tec hniques. Voice can mea n dialogue or listenin g o r other commun ication
techniques such as researc hing and providing new data, quest ioning, negotiating,
leading by example, identifyin g alli es, and so forth. Th e point is that voice is not
always about soundi ng off. In fact, it’s more often about analyzi ng the situatio n, your
audience , your own motivations and style, and then figur ing out the best way to get
your point across to othe rs. In organi zations , it can help grea tly to find alli es to suppor t
your viewpoin t instea d of bein g a lone voice, espec ially if you’r e bucki ng the system.
Taking the time to convinc e allies to sta nd up with you for what you think is right can
increase the chance that your viewpoin t will prevail in the end.
The program als o addre sses the barr iers we encoun ter in mak ing decisi ons and
voicing our belief s—the reasons and rationaliza tions that can short-c ircuit our reso lve.
This part of the program asks us to iden tify the argume nts that we’re trying to counter,
what’s at stake for the various participa nts in the situatio n, how we might influe nce
those we disa gree with, and what is our most powerful argume nt. Some of thes e
argume nts are likely influe nced by the barrie rs to good ethical judgmen t we discussed
in Chapter 3.
Finally, the Giving Voice to Value s progr am encour ages stud ents to consider
choice: we all are capable of acting on our values, but som etimes we don’t. The point
of thinki ng about the iss ue o f choi ce is to ensure that we under stand that even the most
ethical person may not always do the right thing. We make choices all the time that can
reinforce our decision-making patterns or change them. If and when we make a
mistake, we are capable of redefining ourselves the next time. The important point is to
be self-aware, to acknowledge mistakes, and to be able to learn from them. To find out
more about this impre ssive p rogram, go to www.aspen cbe.org/teac hing/gvv/ index.
html.
Sometimes, voicing your values at work takes significant courage because of the
risks involved. We’ll talk later in this chapter about some of the potentially riskiest
situations, where whistleblowing (on your boss or your organization) becomes a
possibility.
PEOPLE ISSUES
We use the term people issues to describe the ethical problems that occur when people
work together. The problems may concern privacy, discrimination, sexual and other
types of harassment, or simply how people get along.
The word to remember when considering these issues is fairness. When most
people think about fairness, they mean equity, reciprocity, and impartiality.3 A
situation is said to be equitable when something is divided between two people
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
113

according to the worth and inputs of the two individuals. For example, in a situation
where two people have shared responsibility for a project, one might ask: “Did we
work equally hard? Did we receive equal shares? Most people think it’s unfair when
two people have performed the same duty but receive a different share of the reward.
Another measure of fairness is reciprocity, or the fairness of exchanges: “You did this
for me and I’ll do that for you.” Most people perceive a situation as being unfair if one
person fails to hold up his or her part of a bargain. A third measure of fairness is
impartiality: “Is the person who’s going to listen to my story biased in some way, or
has he or she prejudged the situation?” Most people think of fairness as being
inconsistent with prejudice and bias.
Most protective legislation and corporate human resources policies also try to
incorporate thoseelements.Thegoalistohire,treat,promote,appraise,andlayofforfire
employees based on their qualifications and not on factors like sex, race, or age. Thegoal
is to level the playing field and create a fair environment where performance is the only
factor that counts (equity), where employer-employee expectations are understood and
met (reciprocity), and where prejudice and bias are not factors (impartiality).
It’s important to remember that, to employees, fairness is not just about the
outcomes they receive (pay, promotion, etc.). Employees care at least as much about
the fairness of decision-making procedures and about the interpersonal treatment they
receive when results are communicated. People are more likely to accept bad news if
they believe the decision was made fairly and if the supervisor or organization explains
the decision with sensitivity and care. An organization that uses fair procedures and
treats employees with sensitivity sends a powerful message to all employees that it
values them as important members of the community.4
Discrimination
You and Lisa met five years ago when you were hired into the management
training program of a large utility. Although you’re now in different parts of
the organization, you have managed to stay close over the years. Lisa recently
had a baby and plans to take advantage of the full six months of maternity
leave the company offers. She told you that she’s definitely coming back to
work after her leave and that her department has promised to hold her job for
her. Meanwhile, you’ve seen a posting for her job on the company’s website.
You run into one of Lisa’s colleagues in the hall and ask about the posting. He
says, “Oh yeah, they’re going to fill that job. But don’t tell Lisa. She’s got five
more months to be a happy mom. Besides, they’ll find something for her to do
if she decides to come back.”
Since discrimination by race, religion, national origin, sex, disability, and age is
prohibited by federal law in the United States, many companies have defined policies
prohibiting any kind of discrimination. Unfortunately, there can be quite a gulf
between where corporate policy leaves off and reality begins. When people from
various backgrounds get together to provide a service or manufacture a product, there
114
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

surely will be people who have conscious or unconscious biases toward various
groups, and there will be others who are simply ignorant of the effect their behavior has
on others.
WHAT IS IT?
Discrimination occurs whenever something other than qualifications
affects how an employee is treated. Unequal treatment, usually unfavorable, can take
many forms. Older workers who suddenly find themselves reporting to younger ones
can be resentful since they feel younger workers lack experience. Younger employees
can be tempted to ignore advice from older workers, who they feel are out of touch.
The attitudes toward age will most likely become increasingly important over the next
decade as the general population grows older.
Racial, ethnic, religious, or sexual stereotypes can creep into the behavior of even
the most sophisticated individuals, even without their conscious awareness. The
importance of being able to manage different types of people can’t be overstated.
In the United States, ethnic and racial minorities are growing faster than the population
as a whole, and the U.S. workforce is becoming increasingly diverse.
In the case involving Lisa, the new mother, her maternity leave could result in
discrimination. Although pregnant employees are protected by law (see “Why Is It an
Ethical Problem?” which follows), in this case her time away from her job is clearly
being viewed as a liability. Of course, employers have the right to replace workers who
are on extended leave because of illness, disability, or other reasons such as finishing
an education. The problem in Lisa’s case is that her department seems to be doing an
end run around her by keeping her in the dark while her job is filled. If Lisa knew what
the department’s plans were, she might shorten her leave or arrange a part-time
working situation for a few months. But unless you, her colleague, tell her what you
have found out, the job she left won’t be the one she comes back to. It seems unfair to
keep Lisa in the dark.
Discrimination can be a subtle or not-so-subtle factor not only in working
relationships but also in hiring, promotions, and layoff decisions. People who don’t
fit a “corporate profile” may be passed over for advancement because they’re female,
or a member of a minority group, or too old, or for other reasons that may or may not be
covered in protectionist legislation. Surely there are many barriers in the workplace,
not just the glass ceiling that refers to barriers to female advancement. There probably
are also barriers for people who are over 50 years old, or who have medical problems,
or who are short, disabled, overweight, bearded, balding, or homosexual—any quality
that varies from the “norm.” And some employers create job requirements that could
automatically eliminate certain employees, not because of their qualifications, but
because of personal circumstances.
HOW WE CAN THINK ABOUT THIS ISSUE
We can use the various theories
described in Chapter 2 to analyze the situation. These theories can serve as various
“lenses” that we can use in viewing a problem. None of these theories are likely to give
us the perfect answer, but they’ll help us think through the implications of an issue so
that we can make a good decision.
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
115

Suppose we look though the consequentialist lens? Who are the stakeholders, and
what are the harms and benefits to each? What could we do in this situation that would
benefit the most people? If we think about it in that way, we might conclude that it’s
better to say nothing to Lisa. We might imagine that more people would benefit (at
least in the short term) by Lisa’s manager filling her old job right away. After all,
Lisa’s being away could cause problems for her coworkers. However, a longer-term
perspective might cause us to ask how other women employees would respond to
Lisa’s seemingly unfair treatment. Their dissatisfaction could seriously harm the
company. So, what is the best decision for society overall?
Looking through a deonotological lens would cause us to ask whether we have a
duty or obligation to Lisa, our employer, or both. What values or principles are
involved in this case? Using the Golden Rule, think of how you would want Lisa or
your colleague to behave if the situation was reversed. Following Kant’s categorical
imperative, what kind of world would it be if employers routinely treated employees in
this way? And, using Rawls’s veil of ignorance, how would you make this decision if
you had no idea if Lisa was a man or a woman?
Finally, if we think about virtue ethics and our own character, we would consider
our intentions and motivations. We would also consider how professional human
resources managers would think about this decision. We would ask ourselves how our
decision would look to others if it were made public. What would our ethical role
model or harshest moral critic think? If you consider your own character and what you
value, what decision feels best? We might also consider some of the psychological
issues described in Chapter 3. Are we considering all of the consequences of telling
Lisa, or not? What could happen to her and to you if you tell, or if you don’t tell?
This situation could test what you as an individual really care about, which is
important if you’re going to lead an ethical life. It’s also a way to begin assessing your
own values and asking how you can act more consistently with those values, as we
suggested earlier in this chapter when discussing the Giving Voice to Values program.
If you decided that the right thing to do was to take action on Lisa’s behalf, how
might you go about it? Whom would you approach, and what would you say? Or, would
you consider providing Lisa with information so that she could act on her own behalf?
WHY IS IT AN ETHICAL PROBLEM?
Discrimination is an ethical issue—beyond any
legal protections—because it’s at the core of fairness in the workplace. While concepts
of fairness are incorporated in business law around the world, in the United States
fairness is considered to be an inalienable right.5 The U.S. government has attempted
to ensure fairness and justice; the word trust is on every piece of currency, and the
Pledge of Allegiance declares “with liberty and justice for all.” In addition, the entire
U.S. legal system has justice and the protection of individual rights as its cornerstone.
Consequently, people expect fairness from organizations in general and specifically
from their employers.
COSTS
While laws and regulations governing fairness differ around the world, in the
United States victims of discrimination can file under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
116
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

of 1964 with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) or bring suit
under tort or contract law. This legislation specifically prohibits discrimination based
on race, religion, sex, color, and national origin. Groups specifically protected by Title
VII include women, African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and Asian
Pacific Islanders. (Some states and local communities have added more protections,
like sexual orientation and marital status, to that list.) The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act of 1978 prohibits discrimination against pregnant women. The 1967 Age
Discrimination in Employment Act extends protection to people 40 years of age
and older. The 1973 Rehabilitation Act was the first federal legislation to protect
disabled Americans against discrimination by federal, state, and local governments,
agencies, and contractors. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990
extended protection to the private sector by requiring all companies with more
than 15 employees to make reasonable accommodations to employ workers with
disabilities. Although the law doesn’t list conditions or diseases that are protected—
since people react differently to disease, some may be disabled and some may not be—
some conditions are specifically included or excluded. HIV infection, for example, is
considered a disability; people who have it are protected by the ADA. Indications of
how costly bias suits can be for corporations are evident in several recent judgments: in
2005, UBS (Europe’s largest bank) was ordered to pay damages of $29 million to a
single plaintiff—a woman who complained of unequal treatment.6 In other cases, a
judge awarded $70 million for gender discrimination to 2,800 female employees of
Morgan Stanley who were registered financial advisors,7 and an arbitration panel in
New York ordered Merrill Lynch to pay more than $100 million to a group of women
who were found to have been discriminated against.8
Discrimination lawsuits can be costly for employers not simply in terms of legal
fees and damages and media coverage. The morale of victims certainly suffers as they
endure discrimination lawsuits, but the morale of other employees can also suffer. It’s
embarrassing for employees when the company they work for is publicly accused of
wrongdoing.
If you’re an individual accused of discriminating against another employee, the
least you’ll endure is an investigation. If you’re found guilty, you’ll probably be
penalized or even fired. If you’re found innocent, you or your accuser will most likely
be counseled about your behavior and its effects, and one or both of you may be
transferred to another area. If you manage someone who has been accused of
discrimination, expect a lot of questions concerning why you were unaware of it
or tolerated it. If you were aware of it and didn’t do anything about it, be prepared for
disciplinary action, particularly if a lawsuit results.
SPECIAL NOTE
The many programs that train employees to “value diversity” can
seem at odds with the efforts to assimilate various groups and especially with the laws
and policies that prohibit discrimination. Learning to appreciate differences flies in the
face of what many of us are taught from the time we’re children—that we should “fit
in.” Many of us are taught not only to downplay our own uniqueness in an effort to
blend in but also to ignore differences in other people. We usually are taught “not to
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
117

notice” different colo rs, religions , acce nts, ways of dres sing, and physical disabili ties
or abilities. Even sexual difference s, which can be hard to ignore, have been play ed
down in the not-too -dista nt past.
Valuing diversity means treating people equally while inco rporating their diverse
ideas. Discrimi nation mea ns tre ating peopl e unequally becau se they are, or appear to
be, different. Valuing diversity is a p ositive action, whi le discriminati on is a negative
action. Valuing diversity tries to incorpor ate more fairness into the system, while
discriminat ion incorpor ates unfairness into the syst em. The key to valuing diversity is
understand ing that different doesn’t mea n deficient, and it doesn’t mea n less. Different
means different .
Harassment, Sexual and Otherwise
As women began to enter the workforce in grea t numbers in the 1970s and 1980s, and
as social and busin ess mores began to change , sexu al hara ssment became an iss ue in
the workplace. Forty years later, it is still an issue and many compani es have paid huge
fines in sexual hara ssment lawsuits. As a resu lt, the EEOC now require s all organiza-
tions with more than 15 emp loyees to have a sexual harassment policy and to train
employees in these issues. Another result was a growing apprehens ion by employees,
especially men , toward workers of the oppo site sex. Some times the line between
friendly and offens ive is blurry.
One of your coworkers is Joanne , a com puter whiz with an offbea t style and a
great sense of humor. Two of Joanne’s favori te “targets” are you and Bill,
another coworker who tends to be quite standoffish in his business relation-
ships. Joanne is the d epartment clown and is forever goading you and Bill;
you, becau se you’r e a grea t audience and clearly think she’s hilarious ; Bill,
becau se she likes to try to get him to be more approacha ble. Joanne freq uently
alludes to sexual subjects and has cal led both you and Bill “littl e alley cats”
and “st uds.” While Joanne ’s behavior doesn’ t offend you at all, you’re
surprised when Bill approaches you in the men’s room and bitterly complains
about Joanne’s constant teasing.
WHAT IS IT?
Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexually oriented behavior
that makes someone feel uncomfortable at work. It usually involves behavior by
someone of higher status toward someone of lower status or power. Sexual harassment
claims are no t initiat ed only by women; the EEOC (ww w.eeoc .gov) reporte d receiving
11,364 sexual harassment claims in 2012, and more than 16 percent were made
by men.
Federal law has defined two types of sexual harassment: quid pro quo and hostile
work environment. Quid pro quo harassment means that sexual favors are a require-
ment—or appear to be a requirement—for advancement in the workplace. Hostile
work environment means that a worker has been made to feel uncomfortable because
of unwelcome actions or comments relating to sexuality. This type of sexual
118
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

harassment is especially murky because it is like beauty: it’s in the eye of the beholder.
What constitutes sexual harassment for one person may not be so for another. Putting
an arm around a person’s shoulder may feel like harassment to one individual, and
someone else may be comfortable with such a gesture. This type of sexual harassment
includes not only physical gestures but also remarks of a sexual nature—even
compliments—and displays of sexually provocative material, like nude or revealing
photographs, in an office.
In both types of sexual harassment, the decision about whether the behavior
constitutes harassment is determined from the viewpoint of a “reasonable” person, and
the harasser’s intentions aren’t considered. This is why sexual harassment issues can
be confusing. Since sexual harassment is determined by the reaction of the victim, you
have to consider not what you mean by your comments or actions, but how they might
be interpreted by the other person.
Most people will readily agree that patting a coworker on the rear end is sexual
harassment. But are you sexually harassing someone if you compliment her appear-
ance, or touch his arm, or make jokes of a sexual nature? In Joanne’s case, she hasn’t
done a very good job of considering exactly who her audience is and how each of her
two coworkers might react to her jokes. While you might think it’s funny to be called a
little stud, Joanne probably should think more carefully about how someone like Bill
might react to being called a name with sexual connotations. Is Joanne out of line? Is
Bill overreacting? According to the law, it doesn’t matter if you and Joanne think Bill
is overreacting. The yardstick for determining whether sexual harassment occurred
will be how uncomfortable a reasonable person would be with Joanne’s comments,
and not what Joanne intended with her remarks. How Bill felt will be considered more
than what Joanne intended.
HOW WE CAN THINK ABOUT THIS ISSUE
Consider how a consequentialist might
think about this situation. Can you identify all of the stakeholders and the harms and
benefitstoeach?Whatareyouroptions?Whatactiononyourpartwouldbenefitthemost
people andharmtheleast,thuscontributingthemost tosocietalgood?Forexample,have
you thought about the potential effects on Joanne if she continues such behavior? Daniel
Goleman, thewell-known psychologist and author of numerous books on emotional and
social intelligence, describes three qualities that differentiate great leaders from average
ones:(1)selfawareness—knowingyourownstrengthsandlimitsandstrengtheningyour
inner ethical radar, (2) self-management—being able to manage your emotions in ways
that allow you to effectively lead yourself, and, (3) empathy—understanding the
emotional reactions of others in order to lead them effectively. If Joanne is unable to
see how her remarks might upset a coworker, she is unlikely to be promoted to a
supervisory or management position. If she can’t self-regulate her behavior, it’s unlikely
that the organization will promote her to a leadership position where that unregulated
behavior will affect other employees.9 So, intervening in a thoughtful and sensitive way
may help everyone involved, even Joanne.
Now use another lens: Do you have ethical duties or obligations here? What are
those and to whom? What ethical principles apply to this situation, and what rules
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
119

would help you decide what’s right? For example, if the situation was reversed and you
were in either Bill’s or Joanne’s shoes, how would you like them to help you?
You might think about the “reasonable person standard” as providing insight
into the relevant ethical community. How would a reasonable person assess the
situation and determine the right thing to do? How would you feel if Bill spoke to a
reporter and this situation appeared in the local newspaper? If you do nothing in this
case, would you be chagrined to read about it in the newspaper? Could you proudly
describe your actions to your mother or your priest (or minister, rabbi, imam, etc.)
without embarrassment?
Think about your organization’s culture. What values does your organization hold
dear? Most companies pride themselves on being places where all employees can feel
respected. If you look at your company’s values statement, you’ll likely find verbiage
about respect. Given that value of respect, what would your manager and others in
positions of authority in your organization want you to do?
If you decide to act on your values, you have quite a few options. One option is to
nip this issue in the bud by helping Bill address it with Joanne. Perhaps Joanne is
unaware of the effect her comments are having on Bill. You could encourage Bill to
talk with her, explain his reaction, and request that she stop. You could role-play
Joanne to give Bill the opportunity to practice what he is going to say. What could Bill
say to Joanne, and how could he say it in a way that will likely achieve his intended
result and allow the parties to continue working together in the future? If Bill is
unwilling to do this, what other options do you have? You could report the issue to the
organization’s ethics help line, but would it be appropriate to do that without Bill’s
permission? Under what circumstances would you report something that affected a
coworker without that person’s permission?
WHY IS IT AN ETHICAL PROBLEM?
Harassment (sexual or otherwise) is considered
to be a form of discrimination. It is therefore an ethical issue because it unfairly
focuses job satisfaction, advancement, or retention on a factor other than the employ-
ee’s ability to do the job. Most instances of sexual harassment have nothing to do with
romance and everything to do with power and fairness.
COSTS
Victims of sexual harassment can file under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 with the EEOC, or they can bring suit under tort or contract law. An employer
can be held liable for an employee’s sexual harassment activities if the employer had
knowledge of the conduct and did nothing to correct it. As a result, most companies
take a sexual harassment charge very seriously.
Responsible companies will launch an immediate investigation if someone is
accused of sexually harassing another employee. If this is a first-time event and the
incident that prompted it is not determined to be lewd or violent—think of the scenario
featuring Joanne, discussed earlier—the employee may be warned, disciplined, or
transferred to another area. (However, in some major companies a first-time offense is
enough to get someone fired.) If the behavior is judged to be lewd or forceful, or if
there’s evidence that the employee has demonstrated a pattern of behavior, the
120
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

employee will most likely be fired—and often very quickly. (One corporation was able
to conduct an investigation, find evidence of a pattern, and terminate the harasser in
less than 48 hours.) If the accused is found innocent, or if it’s determined that a
misunderstanding exists between the two parties, the accused and the accuser will
probably be counseled by human resources professionals. If necessary, one of the
parties may be transferred to another area. The manager of a sexual harasser can expect
a lot of questions. If the manager was aware of harassment and did nothing about it, he
or she should be prepared for disciplinary action, particularly if a lawsuit results.
Nearly a third of the claims filed with the EEOC are sexual harassment claims.
And sexual harassment lawsuits are very expensive for corporations. Awards to
victims have been substantial, as is the toll such charges can take on coworker’s
morale and on the firm’s ability to hire qualified candidates. For example, in June
1998, Mitsubishi Motors’ North American division agreed to pay $34 million to settle
its sexual harassment case. The settlement was based on charges brought by 350
female factory workers at an Illinois factory. The women alleged that coworkers and
supervisors kissed and fondled them, called them “whores” and “bitches,” posted
sexual graffiti and pornography, demanded sex, and retaliated if they refused. They
also complained that managers did nothing to stop the harassment. Besides paying the
fine, Mitsubishi fired 20 workers and disciplined others. The company also agreed to
provide mandatory sexual harassment training, revise its sexual harassment policy, and
investigate future sexual harassment allegations within three weeks of a complaint.10
A NOTE ABOUT OFFICE ROMANCE
Flirtations and office romance are a part of
work life. After all, we spend most of our time at work, interacting with people who
share our interests, and we have an opportunity to really get to know them. So why not
engage in a consensual relationship with a coworker? Well, it’s true that most office
romances are benign, and quite a few of them either end quietly or may even lead to
happy marriages. But such relationships can also be dangerous; in fact, these are the
stories we end up hearing about. For example, if a relationship ends badly, one party
may accuse the other of sexual harassment or retaliation, thus requiring the company
to get involved after the fact.
From an ethics perspective, it’s most important to avoid romance with anyone you
supervise or who supervises you because of the conflict of interest involved and the
potential for unfair treatment of other direct reports (and most companies have
antinepotism policies). The supervisor’s judgment is likely to be compromised by
the relationship, and others in the work group are likely to lose respect for both parties
and be concerned about preferential treatment. Honesty is another ethical issue that
emerges. Because you don’t know where the relationship is going, it’s tempting to
keep it to yourselves at first. Even if you’re discreet, word travels fast in work groups,
and others are likely to find out via the grapevine. It’s best to be honest and keep your
supervisor in the loop. If you work in the same department, the organization may want
to move one of you to avoid any negative repercussions. And finally, remember—if
you don’t think your behavior would look good on the front page, it’s best not to
engage in it.11
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
121

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
People and corporations are naturally involved in a tangle of relationships, both
personal and professional. Your personal reputation and the reputation of your
company are inextricably tied to how well you handle relationships with other
employees, customers, consultants, vendors, family, and friends. Your ability to act
impartially, and to look as if you are acting impartially, is key to your fulfilling your
end of the employer-employee contract.
Your daughter is applying to a prestigious university. Since admission to the
school is difficult, your daughter has planned the process carefully. She has
consistently achieved high marks, taken preparatory courses for entrance
exams, and participated invarious extracurricular activities. When you tell one
of your best customers about her activities, he offers to write her a letter of
recommendation. He’s an alumnus of the school and is one of its most active
fund-raisers. Although he’s a customer, you also regularly play golf together,
and your families have socialized together on occasion.
What Is It?
A conflict of interest occurs when your judgment or objectivity is compromised. The
appearance of a conflict of interest—when a third party could think your judgment has
been compromised—is generally considered just as damaging as an actual conflict.
A recent example of a conflict of interest likely contributed significantly to our
financial crisis. Rating agencies such as Standard & Poor’s rated the complex
mortgage-backed securities we described in Chapter 1. A triple-A rating made
investors feel secure about buying these securities. As Americans learned the hard
way, however, many of these securities were not deserving of anything near such a
high rating. Many factors contributed to the debacle (including the fact that rating
agencies were using old methods to rate these newfangled products). A major
contributor was a serious conflict of interest—the rating agencies are paid by the
companies whose securities they rate, thus making it difficult or impossible to assign
truly objective and unbiased ratings.
Another example might be of particular interest to college students. In 2007, the
University of Texas fired its director of financial aid when it learned that he had
financial ties to particular student loan companies that he then touted to students and
peers. Students were not steered toward companies that provided the best loans or
service, but toward those that provided gifts (including stock) to the director of
financial aid.12
If a customer offers to do a favor for you—or your daughter or another family
member—here are some of the questions you’ll need to ask yourself: Would your
customer’s offer influence your business relationship? Would someone think your
business judgment had been compromised by accepting your customer’s offer? Is your
relationship more than just a business one, so that accepting an offer could be
interpreted as a simple act of friendship?
122
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Some corporations have a policy that permits the acceptance of favors from
customers or vendors if there’s also a “friendship” present; and these companies
usually define friendship as a long-standing relationship that’s well known in the
community. For example, in small towns where everyone knows everyone else, many
of a business owner’s customers are also his or her friends; it’s unrealistic to expect
anything else. Other organizations (including government agencies) would discourage
accepting a favor like this one under any circumstances. Here are some things to
consider when making your decision in this case: How long have you been friends with
your customer? How well known is the relationship in your community? What is his
knowledge of your daughter’s qualifications? Does your customer expect anything in
return for his recommendation, or is the letter simply a gesture of friendship with no
strings attached? How would others perceive his recommendation?
Almost every business situation can involve conflicts of interest. A conflict can
occur when a vendor lavishly entertains you or when you entertain a customer—if the
object is influence. Both situations could prompt an observer to think that a special
deal or advantageous terms are part of the relationship. Conflicts of interest can occur
when people who report to you observe that you have an especially close friendship
with one of their coworkers. (This is one reason why it is never a good idea to date
someone who reports to you!) Conflicts can occur when you’re asked to judge the
creditworthiness of your neighbor or if you perform consulting work for your
employer’s competitor. They can involve accepting handtooled cowboy boots from
an advertising agency, being sponsored for membership in an exclusive private club by
a consulting company, or allowing a supplier to give you a discount on equipment for
your home when you place an order for your office.
Common conflicts of interest include overt or covert bribes and the trading of
influence or privileged information.
OVERT BRIBES OR KICKBACKS
Anything that could be considered a bribe or
kickback is a clear conflict of interest. It doesn’t matter whether the bribe or kickback
is in the form of money or something else of substantial value that is offered in
exchange for access to specific products, services, or influence.
SUBTLE “BRIBES”
Bribes can be interpreted to include gifts and entertainment.
Some organizations have instituted policies that allow no gifts at all, even gifts of
nominal value. For example, we know of one teaching hospital that does not allow its
employees to accept even a notepad or pen from pharmaceutical company representa-
tives. They asked themselves, how will patients feel when we write a prescription for a
productwithapenfromthemanufacturer?Won’tthepatientwonderifwe’rewritingthat
prescription because it’s really needed or because we’ve accepted such gifts? Many
organizations have a policy that allows gifts of small value and places a ceiling of $25 to
$100 on the value of gifts employees can accept from, or give to, customers or vendors.
Reciprocity is oneyardstickoftenused fordetermining whether a gift or entertainmentis
acceptable. If you can’t reciprocate with the same kind of gift or entertainment being
offered to you, it’s probably inappropriate to accept it. For example, if a supplier offers
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
123

you tickets to the Super Bowl, or a weekend of golf, or dinner for four at a $200-per-
person restaurant, it’s probably inappropriate for you to accept under any circumstances.
The emphasis on reciprocity is to maintain a fair, even playing field for all suppliers, so
that you (as a purchaser) will be unbiased when making a decision about a supplier. As
mentioned earlier, both reciprocity and impartiality are elements of fairness.
Accepting discounts on personal items from a vendor will also be interpreted as a
conflict. The formula to use when determining whether to accept a discount is simple:
if it’s a formal arrangement between your company and a supplier and it’s offered to all
employees, it’s probably acceptable; if the discount is being extended only to you, it’s
generally not considered acceptable.
INFLUENCE
Your relationship with someone in itself can constitute a conflict of
interest. For example, if you’re in charge of purchasing corporate advertising and your
cousin or neighbor or college friend owns an advertising agency, it will be considered a
conflict if you make the decision to hire that firm. That doesn’t preclude the firm from
bidding, but it does preclude you from making the decision. If a decision involves anyone
you have a personal relationship with, you should recuse yourself from the decision
making. Another way to avoid the appearance of a conflict in a situation like this one,
which is chargedwith issues of partiality, is toarrange for a “blind” competition, where the
identity of various bidders is known only by someone not involved in the decision-making
process. However, since any decision made by you in such a case will be suspect—even in
blind evaluations—you should include other employees in the decision-making process.
PRIVILEGED INFORMATION
As an employee, you’re naturally privy to information
that would be valuable to your employer’s competitors. That’s why it’s generally
considered a conflict of interest if you hold a full-time job for ABC Insurance
Company and decide to do some consulting work for XYZ Insurance Company. There
are certainly exceptions to this rule of thumb. If you’re a computer programmer at
Green’s Restaurant, for example, it probably isn’t a conflict to wait on tables at Red’s
Restaurant. Two factors could make such a situation acceptable: if the work you
perform at your second job doesn’t compromise the work you do at your first one, and
if both employers are aware of your activities. Transparency is the best policy.
In addition, it can appear as if you’re involved in a conflict if you and a close
relative or friend work for competitors, or if one of you works for an organization—
such as a media company—that might have a particular interest in your company’s
activities. For example, if you work as an investment banker for Goldman Sachs and
your sister holds the same position at Morgan Stanley, you both should alert your
managers to the situation. These are potential problems that can be defused when your
manager knows about the relationship. Full disclosure removes substantial risk.
How We Can Think about This Issue
The prescriptive ethical decision-making lenses can be helpful when considering
conflicts of interest. For example, using a consequentialist approach encourages us to
124
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

think about what would benefit the most people. Suppose that your brother owns an
advertising agency, and you have to place ads as part of your job at another firm. Will
hiring your brother benefit anyone other than your brother? Might it not harm your
organization’s reputation if others learn about the relationship? Using the deontologi-
cal approach raises other issues. It’s probably most relevant to consider what’s fair.
What decision would place all bidders on a level playing field? What could you do that
would make the bidding absolutely fair and unbiased? Isn’t that the kind of world you
would most like to live in?
In fact, the veil of ignorance would ask you to act as if you didn’t know that the
person leading the advertising agency was your brother. What if you were the CEO of a
competing advertising firm? Wouldn’t you want a shot at the business? Think about
looking at this issue through the lens of virtue ethics. What could you do that you
wouldn’t mind reading about in your local newspaper? You probably would want to
read about your impartiality as a purchaser and as a representative of your company.
You would not want to read that the contracts you enter into are rigged to benefit your
family and friends.
This is also a good place to think about how you might handle these issues and to
discuss your ideas out loud and with others. You will absolutely experience some of
these conflicts—everyone does—and just as “rehearsals” helped the World War II
rescuers, thinking about these situations in advance could greatly help you when the
time comes—as it surely will. Imagine that your brother’s company is experiencing
rough times, and he tells you that he expects you to help. Once you have decided that it
is unethical to do so, what will you say to him to explain your decision? Do you think
you can do it in a way that will preserve your relationship? Here is where company
policy can actually help employees a great deal. If you work for a company with a clear
policy regarding conflict of interest, you could point to that and explain to your brother
that you’re obligated to abide by the policy and remove yourself from the decision
making.
Why Is It an Ethical Problem?
The basis of every personal and corporate relationship is trust, and it exists only when
individuals and corporations feel they’re being treated fairly, openly, and on the same
terms as everyone else. Conflicts of interest erode trust by making it look as if special
favors will be extended for special friends; that attitude can enhance one relationship,
but at the expense of all others.
Costs
Depending on the offense, myriad federal and state laws cover conflicts of interest.
Certain professions, such as banking, accounting, law, religion, and medicine, have
special obligations—often spelled out in professional codes of ethics—commonly
referred to as fiduciary responsibilities. These professions are widely known as the
trust professions, meaning that these practitioners have been entrusted with sensitive,
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
125

confidential information about their clients. Fiduciary responsibilities concern the
obligations resulting from relationships that have their basis in faith, trust, and
confidence. After the financial debacle of 2008, much attention is being paid to
fiduciary responsibilities.
A recent survey of private banks and wealth management companies by the
accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) indicated that the “economic crisis
has presented client relationship managers with challenges that they have neither the
experience nor the skills to deal with.” In the survey, only 7 percent of the
relationship managers felt they had enough training to meet the highest standards
expected of them. The PwC survey noted that the old model for managers, which
focused on sales, was being replaced by a model that focuses on fiduciary
responsibilities.13
If you’re suspected of a conflict of interest, the least you can expect is an
investigation by your company. If it determines that your behavior demonstrates a
conflict or the appearance of a conflict, you may be warned, disciplined, or even fired
depending on the nature of your behavior. If you’ve accepted a bribe or kickback, you
could face termination and even arrest. Being involved in a conflict of interest means
that your judgment has been compromised, and this can severely damage your
professional reputation.
Consider that in 2006, the Jeffries Group was fined $5.5 million by the National
Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) (now the Financial Industry Regulatory
Association—FINRA) for conflicts of interest concerning Fidelity Investments. A
Jeffries trader with a $1.5 million expense account lavished gifts and entertainment on
Fidelity traders, including trips to Las Vegas and Palm Beach, cases of wine, and
custom golf clubs. Throwing money at Fidelity apparently worked: Jeffries ranked
50th in 2002 in brokerage commissions received from Fidelity. By 2005, Jeffries had
moved up to 15th place. As a result of this activity, the Jeffries broker was fired, the
firm and the industry were investigated, the firm was fined, and the practice has
received reams of negative press.14
CUSTOMER CONFIDENCE ISSUES
We’ve all heard the saying, “The customer is always right,” and companies like L.L.
Bean and Sears have benefited by weaving that slogan into the fabric of their corporate
cultures. But excellent customer service is more than being able to return a defective
refrigerator or having cheerful customer service representatives (although that helps).
Excellent customer service also means providing a quality product or service at a fair
price, honestly representing the product or service, and protecting the customer’s
privacy.
What Is It?
Customer confidence issues include a range of topics such as confidentiality, product
safety and effectiveness, truth in advertising, and special fiduciary responsibilities.
126
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

You work for a consulting company in Atlanta. Your team has recently
completed an analysis of Big Co., including sales projections for the next
five years. You’re working late one night when you receive a call from an
executivevicepresident atBigCo. inLosAngeles,who asks youtoimmediately
fax to her a summary of your team’s report. When you locate the report, you
discover that your team leader has stamped “For internal use only” on the report
cover. Your team leader is on a hiking vacation, and you know it would be
impossible to locate him. Big Co. has a long-standing relationship with your
company and has paid substantial fees for your company’s services.
CONFIDENTIALITY
Privacy is a basic customer right. Privacy and the obligation to
keep customer information in confidence often go beyond protecting sales projections
or financial information. It can also mean keeping in strict confidence information
concerning acquisitions, mergers, relocations, layoffs, or an executive’s health or
marital problems. In some industries, confidentiality is so important an issue that
companies prohibit their employees from publicly acknowledging a customer rela-
tionship. In the financial services industry, for example, it’s common practice to refuse
to divulge that XYZ Company is even a customer.
In the case involving Big Co., an executive is demanding access to a confidential
report. First, are you absolutely certain that the caller is indeed a Big Co. executive?
Competitive intelligence work often involves deceptively impersonating a client or
someone else. If you have conclusively verified her identity, do you know whether she
has clearance from Big Co. to examine your team’s report? If she does have clearance,
is your team’s report in a format that your company wants to share with Big Co., or
does it need revision? Think about what you read in Chapter 2—how would you feel if
your actions in this case were reported on the front page of your local newspaper? Do
you think readers would be critical of what you plan to do? What would they say?
Whenever you see “For internal use only,” that’s what it means, and it can be
enormously risky to release the report to anyone—including the customer—without
permission from someone within your company who has responsibility for that client.
In a case like this one, you should track down someone who’s in a position of authority
in your company—your manager’s manager, perhaps—before you override the
warning on the report and release any information.
On occasion, third parties may ask for customer information. For example, a
reporter or a client may ask you about customer trends. It’s never acceptable to discuss
specific companies or individuals with a third party or provide any information that
might enable a third party to identify a specific customer. If you want to provide
information, you can offer aggregate data from a number of companies, as long as the
data doesn’t allow any one customer to be identified.
You’re the head of marketing for a small pharmaceutical company that has just
discovered a very promising drug for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. You
have spentmonthsdesigninga marketingcampaignthat containsprintedmaterials
and medication sample kits for distribution to almost every family physician and
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
127

gerontologist in the country. As the materials are being loaded into cartons for
delivery to your company’s representatives, your assistant tells you that she has
noticed a typographical error in the literature that could mislead physicians and
theirpatients.Inthesectionthatdiscussessideeffects,diarrheaandgastrointestinal
problems are listed as having a probability of 2 percent. It should have read 20
percent. This error appears on virtually every piece of the literature and kits, and
ads containing the mistake are already in press in several consumer magazines.
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY
Another basic customer right involves our taking
personal honesty and responsibility for the products and services that we offer. There’s
probably no issue that will more seriously affect our reputation than a failure of
responsibility. Many ethical disasters have started out as small problems that mush-
roomed. Especially in service businesses, where the “products” are delivered by
individuals to other individuals, personal responsibility is a critical issue.
In the case concerning the typographical error about a new drug’s side effects, the
head of marketing faces a nasty dilemma. If she reproduces all of the printed material,
it could be at a very great cost to this small company, and it may result in a significant
delay in getting the drug to physicians. However, since many elderly people are prone
to gastrointestinal upsets and can become very ill and even die as a result, this typo is a
significant one. The material cannot go out as-is. Certainly the ideal solution would be
to redo all of the marketing materials. However, if time and financial considerations
prohibit that, there are other solutions. One solution might be to quickly produce a
“correction” to be inserted into every kit. Also, a letter could be distributed to every
physician to explain the correction as well as emphasize your company’s commitment
to quality and full disclosure. This solution will still be costly, but not nearly as costly
as doing nothing and letting the kits go out with an error. What do you suppose would
be the cost of even one wrongful death lawsuit? How about a class action? How about
the accompanying publicity?
TELLING THE TRUTH
Many salespeople simply exaggerate their product’s (or
service’s) benefits to consumers. Do fast sports cars automatically turn every young
man into a James Bond? Will investing in a certain bond ensure you a safe retirement?
Hype is generally a part of most sales pitches, and most consumers expect a certain
amount of hype. In other cases, however, fudging the truth about a product is more than
just hype—it’s unfair.
Imagine that your financial firm is offering a new issue—a corporate bond with an
expected yield of 7 to 7.5 percent. In the past, offerings like this one have generally
been good investments for clients, and you have sold the issue to dozens of large and
small clients. You’re leaving on a two-week vacation and have only a few hours left in
the office when your firm announces that the yield for the bond has been reduced; the
high end will now be no more than 7 percent. The last day of the issue will be next
week, while you’re away on vacation. What should you do?
The fact is that your customers have been misled (albeit unintentionally) about the
yield on that particular bond, and now you are under an obligation to tell the truth
128
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

about the instrument before the issue closes. Why? Because another basic consumer
right is to be told the truth about the products and services purchased. Failure to tell the
truth about a product can be devastating for an organization, and it also can cause big
problems for the company employees who are involved in perpetuating the false
information.
SPECIAL FIDUCIARY RESPONSIBILITIES
As discussed earlier in this chapter,
certain professions, such as banking, accounting, law, religion, and medicine have
special obligations to customers. These obligations are commonly referred to as
fiduciary responsibilities. The law and the judicial system have recognized these special
obligations, and they are spelled out in the codes of ethics for those professions.
Fiduciary responsibilities hold these professionals to a high standard, and when they
violate those responsibilities, the punishment is often harsh. For example, some
employees of Arthur Andersen’s Houston office failed Enron shareholders when
they allowed the high-risk accounting practices used by Enron to continue.
Although David Duncan, leader of the Andersen auditing team at Enron,warned the
Enron board of directors in 1999 that the firm’s accounting practices were “high risk, ”
he apparently did not take the extra steps that would have been required to get the board
to take action (in fact, the board did nothing in response to his warning).15 For example,
Duncan could have threatened to withdraw Andersen’s services or to turn the company
in. At the time this would have looked risky because Enron might simply have fired the
auditors, and Andersen would have lost a huge client. But in hindsight, exercising
appropriate fiduciary responsibility could have saved two companies, thousands of jobs,
and a huge amount of shareholder wealth. Al Bows, an accountant who helped open the
Arthur Andersen office in Atlanta in 1941, said that the founder of his old company, the
original Arthur Andersen, would be “disgusted with what these guys did to his
company.” Bows went on to tell a story about a big juice company in Atlanta. He
discovered that “the CEO was starting another juice company on the side to profit for
himself.Itoldhimhe’dbettercutitoutorI’dturnhimin.Hestopped.Buthewasmad.”16
Of course, Bows is describing the fiduciary responsibilities of accountants—one of
which is to ensure the financial integrity of publicly traded companies. When Arthur
Andersen employees breached their fiduciary responsibilities in 2001, they contributed
to the collapse of a major company.
Here’s another case:
For 12 years,you’ve been thefinancial advisor for both an elderly manin hislate
70s who is an active investor of his own portfolio, and for a trust that will benefit
his two children. In the last few months, you’ve noticed a subtle yet marked
change in his behavior. He has become increasingly forgetful, has become
uncharacteristically argumentative, and seems to have difficulty understanding
some very basic aspects of his transactions. He has asked you to invest a sizable
portion of his portfolio and the trust in what you consider to be a very risky bond
offering. You are frank about your misgivings. He blasts you and says that if you
don’t buy the bonds, he’ll take his business elsewhere.
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
129

If you work for a large electronics chain, it’s not your responsibility to assess the
mental stability of a customer who’s purchasing a new television. You’re selling; he’s
buying. However, individuals in fiduciary professions have a responsibility to protect
their customer’s assets—and that entails “knowing” their customers; frequently, that
can mean assessing behavior and saving customers from themselves. In this case, if a
customer wants to make a risky investment against your advice, there’s little you can
do but wish him or her well. Who knows? You might be wrong, and the customer might
make a fortune. However, if a financial professional sees clear signs of incompetence
in a longtime customer who’s suddenly interested in making a risky bet, he or she is
under some obligation to seek help.
Cases involving the mental stability of a longtime customer are one of the most
common dilemmas encountered by financial advisors. As this gentleman’s advisor,
you could try again to dissuade the client from making the investment, or you could
involve the firm’s senior management in negotiations with the client. You could
contact a member of the client’s family—one of the children perhaps—and explain
your reservations. You could also possibly contact the client’s lawyer or accountant,
who also would be bound by confidentiality constraints because of the fiduciary nature
of their professions. However, most financial executives will agree that something
must be done to help this long-time customer.
How We Can Think about This Issue
It’s hard to imagine that any of us would find encouragement to ignore product safety
or fiduciary responsibilities in any of the ethical theories. Producing safe products
clearly benefits the most and harms the fewest. Customer confidence is rooted in trust.
Trust is very much built slowly, over time, experience by experience. We can’t trust
something that we don’t know or that we lack confidence in. Again, this is an area
where you will no doubt experience difficulties and conflicts as you go out into the
business world. It’s another great area to discuss out loud and ahead of time—to
practice making your decisions now, and voicing your arguments aloud, as a way to
prepare for challenges you may face in the future.
Why Is It an Ethical Problem?
We use the term customer confidence issues as an umbrella to address the wide range
of topics that can affect your relationship with your customer. These are ethical issues
because they revolve around fairness, honesty, responsibility, truth, and respect for
others. Customer relationships can’t survive without these basics of trust.
Costs
On the organizational level, there are severe penalties for being dishonest in advertis-
ing or for misleading the public about the effectiveness or safety of a product or
service. While individual failures in the area of trust usually don’t warrant a lot of
130
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

publicity (although sometimes they do—think about Bernie Madoff), nothing can
destroy an individual’s reputation as much as dishonesty. When you’re a student who
hasn’t entered the workforce yet, it’s difficult to imagine that the world of work is
small, but it is. In some industries—like banking and biotech—it’s a very small world
indeed, and your reputation will follow you around like your shadow. Anyone who has
been in business for even a few years can regale you with stories of colleagues who are
as “honest as the day is long” or, conversely, “can’t be trusted as far as you can throw
them.” Your reputation is built slowly with countless gestures, actions, and conversa-
tions over time, but it can be destroyed in an instant by one foolish mistake. You need
to safeguard your reputation carefully—it is without question the most valuable thing
you have in business.
USE OF CORPORATE RESOURCES
As discussed in the introduction, you and your employer have a special relationship,
and each owes the other a modicum of loyalty based on that relationship. In addition,
since you’re a corporate representative, you’re considered an “agent” of your
company. This means that your actions can be considered as the actions of the
corporation. This section of the chapter presents the flip side of the above section on
human resources issues—your employer’s responsibilities to you are described in that
section, and your responsibilities to your employer are described here.
What Is It?
The use of corporate resources involves your fulfilling your end of the employer-
employee “contract.” It means being truthful with your employer and management and
being responsiblein the use of corporate resources, including its finances and reputation.
A young woman who works for you is moving with her husband to another
city, where she’ll be looking for a new job. She’s an excellent worker and when
she asks you for a reference, you’re glad to do it for her. She specifically asks
for a written recommendation on your corporate letterhead.
USE OF CORPORATE REPUTATION
Whenever you identify yourself as an
employee of your company, people can infer that you are speaking on behalf of it,
which is why you have to be careful how you link yourself to your company. For
example, if you use corporate letterhead to write a recommendation for someone or
simply to complain to the telephone company, it can be construed as a “corporate”
position. Consequently, corporate letterhead should be used only for corporate
business. If, as in the case of the recommendation, you need to identify yourself
as an employee, use your personal stationery and attach your business card. The
objective is to differentiate between your personal opinions and any official stance of
your organization.
Recommendations, in particular, present a challenge for employers and individ-
uals. Many companies attempt to check with former employers when hiring someone.
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
131

This can present a problem since most companies prohibit their personnel from
officially supplying this type of information because of lawsuits that have resulted
from employer-supplied recommendations. Today, some social networking sites allow
people to write posts about others in their professional network. But be careful,
especially if writing about someone you supervise. What if your flattering post online
differs from the more critical performance evaluation that’s on file, and what if the
employee is subsequently let go? The person’s lawyer could use the post in an unjust
termination lawsuit. (To protect themselves, many employers supply only the follow-
ing information concerning former employees: name, date of employment, and job
title. Most employers also require the former employee’s written consent before they
supply any salary information to a third party. That raises another ethical issue: If one
can’t get good, honest recommendation information about prospective employees
from their former employers and supervisors, poor employees can just be passed off to
other unsuspecting organizations. Is that right?)
Similarly, if you’re asked to make a speech, write an article, serve on the board of
a nonprofit organization, or participate in any activity that would identify you (and
your personal opinions) with your company, be sure to get permission from your
manager, the legal department, or human resources. You may unwittingly be support-
ing a position or organization with which your company may not wish to be associated.
For example, while it might seem like a great idea for you to serve on the board of your
local Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA), if you work for a
pharmaceutical company that tests drugs on animals, you may be placing your
employer in an embarrassing position. Of course, you can serve on the board as a
private citizen, but not as an employee of XYZ Drug Company unless you’ve received
corporate authorization. Social networking, blogging, and twittering are all adding
complexity to such issues, and more and more organizations are developing policies to
guide appropriate employee conduct in these new arenas.
You joined one of the country’s largest retail chains, and already you’ve been
promoted to department manager in one of your employer’s largest stores in an
upscale shopping mall. Imagine your surprise when you log on to Facebook and
see that one of your “friends”—a young woman who heads one of the other
departments in your store—has posted confidential store sales on her wall and
has also posted sexual comments about a young man who reports to her.
Social networking sites and other social media present new and thorny problems.
What happens when an employee posts confidential company information on a pubic
site? Is it okay to post sexual comments about a coworker or your boss on a public site?
This kind of behavior can reflect poorly on an employer as well as make the author of
such comments look like an idiot or worse. The scariest part of this scenario is that
items posted on the Internet last forever. You can’t just “erase” them and ensure that
they’re really obliterated forever. Organizations take this behavior very seriously. One
recent college graduate hired into a plum job by a national retailer was fired for posting
inappropriate content about his employer on his Facebook wall. In a similar situation,
132
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

an employee posted vacation pictures on her Facebook wall—taken while she was on a
company-paid medical leave—showing the employee horseback riding, playing
tennis, and climbing a Hawaiian volcano. Everyone she worked with saw the photos
and her boss immediately launched a fraud investigation to determine if the employee
falsely used a medical leave to take a vacation. She ended up having to make a choice:
pay back the company for the paid leave or resign from her job.
Another difficult issue involving social media is when an employee already has an
online personality—perhaps he is a well-known blogger, or perhaps she has made a name
for herself providing “color” or “background” or “observations” on an industry website.
Howdoyouhandlesomethinglikethat?It’sonethingwhenhiscommentsarenotterribly
visible or when her observations track with her employer’s views and interests. But what
happens when a visible employee begins advocating a position that is diametrically
opposed to his or her employer’s views? Can you ask him to reconsider his views? Can
her reputation be separated from her employer’s? Could you instruct the employee to
specify somewhere on the site that his or her views are personal and do not represent the
views of his/her employer? What if the employee is tweeting on the job? Can you or
should you set limits on this kind of activity? How can you set clear expectations about
what is acceptable? How can you handle potential coworker resentment? If you’re the
employee in this situation, it’s a good idea to speak with your manager (and your
coworkers) about all of this in advance and negotiate a plan that works for everyone.17
Here’s another thorny case:
You’re an employment counselor at a large outplacement firm. Your company
is currently negotiating with Black Company to provide outplacement services
to 500 employees who are about to lose their jobs as the result of a layoff. Your
neighbor and good friend is a reporter for the local newspaper, who mentions
to you over coffee one Saturday that she’s writing a story about Black
Company. According to her sources, 1,500 employees are about to lose their
jobs. You know her numbers are incorrect. Should you tell her?
Dealing with the press—even when the reporter is a friend or relative—is a tricky
business that shouldn’t be attempted by a novice. In a case like the one above, where
you may think your friendly reporter might have incorrect numbers, silence is truly the
best policy. Her numbers may in fact be correct, and your numbers may represent only
the employees who are eligible for outplacement services, not the total number who
are losing their jobs.
Another issue that can be confusing to businesspeople is what “off the record”
means. For the most part, off the record means that a reporter won’t quote you directly or
attribute any remarks to you. You can’t, however, tell a reporter that your remarks are off
the record after the fact. The way to tell a reporter that remarks are off the record is to
inform him or her before offering your information. But the very best way to make sure
something is off the record is to keep your mouth shut in the first place. Reporters with
the best of intentions can very innocently get their sources into trouble by providing
information that only the source would know, thereby identifying the source.
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
133

If you are contacted by the press, immediately alert your company’s public
relations department. Unless you’re trained to answer press inquiries and receive
authorization to do it, you should not comment to the press. It’s easy to innocently
supply confidential information or cast a negative light on your company when you’re
untrained to deal with probing or ambiguous questions posed by a skilled journalist.
You’ve been working very long hours on a special project for the chairman of
your company. Your company policy states that employees who work more
than 12 hours in one day may be driven home by a company car at company
expense. Policy also states that employees who work longer than two hours
past the regular end of their day can have a meal delivered to the office at
company expense. You and your colleagues who are also working on the
project are arriving at the office at 8:00 a.m. and order dinner at 7:00 p.m.; then
you enjoy dinner and conversation for an hour and are driven home by
company cars. Is this okay?
CORPORATE FINANCIAL RESOURCES
In a game entitled “Where Do You Draw
the Line: An Ethics Game,” produced by Simile II, players explore the differences
between taking $10 worth of pencils from their company and distributing them to poor
children, making $10 worth of personal long-distance calls at work, and taking $10
from their company’s petty cash drawer. Do you think these scenarios are different, or
pretty much the same thing? Most people eventually conclude that all of them,
regardless of the employee’s intentions, involve stealing $10 worth of corporate
resources. The bottom line is that corporate equipment and services should be used
only for company business. Whether it involves making personal phone calls, padding
expense reports, appropriating office supplies, sending personal mail through the
company mail room, or using copy equipment to print a flyer for your scout troop,
personal or inappropriate use of corporate resources is unethical and violates most
corporate policy.
In a case like the one above, where you and colleagues are working long hours to
complete a special project for the company’s chairman, you are following corporate
policy to the letter, so your actions are probably acceptable to most organizations.
However, if you and your coworkers are stretching out the last hour of dinner so that you
can take a company car home, you’re getting into ethical hot water. Are you also
stretching out the work in order to have a free meal? If you would have no problem
explaining your actions to the chairman, or if youwouldn’tmind if he or she satin on one
ofthose dinner hours, then themeals andthecars are perfectly acceptable. Theimportant
thing is to treat your company’s resources with as much care as you would your own.
Your manager is being transferred to another division of the company in early
January. He calls a meeting in early November and asks that every department
head delay processing all invoices until after January 1. He wants to keep
expenses low and revenues high so that his last quarter in your area shows
maximum revenue.
134
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

PROVIDING HONEST INFORMATION
Another key issue concerns truth. We dis-
cussed truth with customers earlier in this chapter, but now we’re talking about telling
the truth within your organization and providing honest information to others within
your company. Although everyone will agree that telling the truth is important,
someday you may have a manager who says something like, “These numbers look too
negative—let’s readjust them so it looks better to senior management. We’ll make up
the difference in the next quarter.” Many managers feel it necessary to put a positive
spin on financial reports before submitting them up through the ranks. As a result,
some companies have suffered serious financial penalties because their numbers have
been positively spun on so many succeeding levels, they bear no resemblance to reality
by the time they reach the top. “Fudging” numbers can have serious consequences
since senior management may make crucial decisions based on flawed data. (Corpo-
rations are fined by regulators if inaccurate financial information is submitted to
regulators or incorporated into formal financial statements.) If you’re asked to skew
any kind of corporate information, you should consult with someone outside your
chain of command—such as the legal, human resources, or audit department—and
then decide whether it’s time to move on. Serious corporate scandals, sometimes
leading to jail terms for those involved, often begin with these “one-time” requests.
Once you’re involved, it’s almost impossible to extricate yourself from an almost
inevitable downward spiral. Ask employees at HealthSouth and WorldCom; some of
them spent years in prison for going along with such requests.
In the case about a manager wishing to delay paying expenses until after he leaves
the area, think about it from a consequentialist perspective. Such creative bookkeeping
harms not only the person who is taking his place in January, but also the suppliers who
are relying on prompt payment of their invoices. It’s grossly unfair to ask suppliers to
wait almost 60 extra days before getting paid. One solution might be to approach the
other department heads and gain their cooperation in refusing to follow your
manager’s request. Another course of action would be to relate the incident to the
audit department, which would surely be interested in your manager’s shenanigans.
How We Can Think about This Issue
Once again, using the various theoretical approaches can be extremely helpful.
Thinking broadly about potential harms and benefits for all stakeholders will
inevitably lead you to be honest in your dealings. From a deontological perspective,
most of us put honesty and integrity at or near the top of our values lists. We would
certainly want to be treated that way if the tables were reversed. And that’s certainly
the ethical standard we would want to guide our world.
Even more important, however, may be thinking about how to live your values in
this particular area. If you seriously consider who you are and what you want to be
known for, your decision making in this area will be much easier. For example, if you
want to be known as a straight shooter who can be trusted at high levels and with
delicate customer accounts, would you ever consider misusing corporate resources or
fudging the numbers? What would that say about you, and how would it affect your
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
135

reputation? It would undermine everything else you were trying to do in your
professional life. In this arena, doing the right thing often requires standing up for
your values—especially standing up to those at higher levels who might be requesting
or even demanding that you go along. In such cases, you’ll need to summon up courage
to stand up for what you believe. You have a better chance of doing that if you practice
what you’re going to say. Find a coworker who agrees with you and practice. You may
be surprised to find that once you get clear about your ethical stance and can express it
in a clear and nonaccusatory way, you won’t get such a request again. If you fear for
your job because you won’t go along, that’s the time to polish your resume and begin
looking elsewhere.
Why Is It an Ethical Problem?
Your use of corporate resources is an ethical issue because it represents fulfilling your
end of the employer-employee contract. Its roots are in fairness and honesty.
Costs
Obviously, if you’ve stolen corporate assets or filed an inflated expense report, you’ll
almost certainly be fired—and you may be arrested. If you have divulged confidential
information to another corporation (as in supplying a recommendation for a former
employee), your company may be placed at risk for a lawsuit. If you’ve posted
derogatory remarks about your boss, coworkers, or company on a social networking
site, you may short-circuit your career and cause people around you to mistrust you.
If you fail to uphold your end of the employer-employee loyalty contract, your
career at your company can be damaged. Ethical corporate cultures place tremendous
importance on honesty, loyalty, and teamwork. Generally, successful corporations are
communities where a sense of family has been encouraged. Just as family members try
to protect one another and keep family information private, the company community
tries to encourage the same behavior. Individuals who violate the corporate “family”
trust by squandering resources, being dishonest, or misusing the family reputation are
frequently isolated or fired.
WHEN ALL ELSE FAILS: BLOWING THE WHISTLE
A section on ethics and the individual wouldn’t be complete without a discussion of
what happens when you suspect serious wrongdoing within your organization. If your
observations are serious and keeping you awake at night, you may have to report the
problem—blow the whistle—and you need to proceed with great caution. This also is
why understanding what you value and practicing living your values is so important. If
you haven’t practiced living your values by the time you get embroiled in a sticky
dilemma at work, the situation will be much more difficult for you to handle. With
practice (and a bit of luck), you may have been able to stop the problem from
developing into a serious one. We hope so. But occasionally you may find yourself
136
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

with knowledge about serious wrongdoing, and blowing the whistle (either internally
or externally) may seem like your only option.
In these really tough situations, voicing your values at work takes significant
courage because of the increased risks involved. Kathleen Reardon encourages us to
think about courage at work as “calculated risk taking.”18 She recommends that you do
the following:
1.
Ask yourself how strongly you feel about the particular issue. When people
are asked, “where do you draw the ethical line?” the most important issues are
clearly over the line either because acting in a certain way or not acting at all
is likely to cause great harm or breach our most cherished values. According
to Reardon, these are “spear in the sand” issues that compel action. So, ask
yourself which kind of issue you’re facing. Is this a “spear in the sand” issue
for you?
2.
Ask yourself about your intentions. Are you just advancing a personal agenda,
or do your goals serve the greater good? If you see a coworker being treated
unfairly by an abusive supervisor, what should you do? For example, will
rescuing your coworker by reporting the abusive supervisor serve the greater
good?
3.
Consider power and influence. As we noted above, unless you’re the CEO,
you’re rarely in a position to make a decision for the organization. If you feel
strongly about something, you’re likely going to have to convince others. So
think about how your social network might help convince your manager or
organization to do the right thing. This usually isn’t about following the
organization chart. Rather, it’s about knowing where the power rests and
developing good, trusting relationships with those people. But you can’t do
this at the last minute. Trusting relationships are developed over time. If you
have developed these, you should be able to address the issue before it
becomes a whistleblowing possibility.
4.
Weigh the risks and benefits of action. This isn’t quite the same as the
consequentialist analysis of harms and benefits to multiple stakeholders
(discussed in Chapter 2). That analysis is more wide-ranging and focuses
on societal good. Here, you’re looking more pragmatically at the people
involved, at whether reputations or standing in the organization (yours or
others’) will be tarnished by taking action. Perhaps you can reduce the risks
and increase the potential benefits by finding a creative way to address the
issue. For example, can you report an incident anonymously rather than
confronting someone directly? Can you offer apologies for something you
have done in the past, in hopes that the person at fault in this situation is
inspired to do the same?
5.
Think about timing. If the issue isn’t urgent, and especially if it isn’t a spear-
in-the-sand issue, ask yourself whether you can put off action a bit to better
prepare and to ensure that you’ve reflected on the risks and what you’re
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
137

considering doing. Have you given yourself the opportunity to practice what
you would say in a meeting with your boss, for example? Have you looked for
allies who might join you in attempting to address the issue?
6.
Develop alternatives. In dicey situations, it’s extremely helpful to have
alternatives in mind. What will you do if you don’t get your desired outcome?
Do you have an alternative in mind? For a spear-in-the-sand issue, are you
willing to either lose your job or leave it, if it comes to that?
Once you decide to blow the whistle, you need to think carefully about how to go
about it. How not to blow the whistle might be best illustrated by a case that involves a
high-level investment banker who discovered that some of his colleagues were
engaged in unethical dealings with several customers. The investment banker brought
the situation to the attention of his manager, who told him to forget it. Determined to
raise the issue, the banker wrote an irate memo to his company’s CEO outlining the
situation and naming names. The banker copied the memo to several other top
managers. Even though there were only three levels of management between the
banker and the CEO, and even though the banker was right about his colleagues and
they were eventually fired, the banker was also fired.
In another large, multinational company, a young trainee in an Asian country felt
he was being treated unfairly by his local management. In a fit of anger, he wrote a long
message outlining his grievances on his company’s e-mail system (today, he might
have posted something on his blog or sent a Twitter message about his situation).
Although he addressed his message to the company CEO, president, and head of
human resources (all three senior managers were based in New York), he copied
everyone else on the system—approximately 30,000 managers worldwide. The trainee
was fired not because of the message, but because of how he communicated it. The
head of human resources commented, “He was being groomed for management, and
we couldn’t have someone with such poor judgment in that role. If he had complained
only to senior management, he would have been heard, he would have been protected,
and we would have corrected the situation. After copying the world with his complaint,
we felt he was a loose cannon and we had no choice but to get him out.”
Unless you want to be branded as someone with poor judgment, you have to be
very careful about how you raise ethical concerns. Usually, the CEO is one of your last
resorts, to be approached only after you’ve exhausted every other internal resource.
There are exceptions to this guideline. A notable exception occurred at PPG Industries,
where former CEO Vince Sarni asked and encouraged employees to contact him
directly with issues. A hotline for that purpose sat on his desk, and he personally
answered that phone. Warren Buffett, the CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, also used the
“call me” approach when he served as a director of Salomon Brothers back in 1991. As
the company became embroiled in a bid-rigging scandal (see Chapter 10 for the
details), Buffett stepped in as interim CEO. He wrote a letter to Salomon Brothers
managers that said, “Here’s my home phone number in Omaha. If you see anything
unethical, give me a call.” Managers did call him, and they were able to devise a plan
to save Salomon Brothers from Andersen’s fate.19
138
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

So how do you blow the whistle? First, let’s talk about when.
A long-time customer approaches you for financing for a new business
venture. The customer offers as collateral a piece of property he has purchased
in a rural location for the purpose of building a housing development. You send
an appraiser to the property, and he accidentally discovers that this property
holds toxic waste. You’re sure this customer is unaware of the waste; in fact,
the waste is migrating and in a few years will invade the water table under a
nearby farmer’s fields. You explain the situation to your manager, who
naturally instructs you to refuse to accept the property as collateral, but he
also forbids you to mention the toxic waste to the customer. “Let them find out
about it themselves,” he says. Do you alert the customer to the toxic waste? Do
you alert government regulators?
When Do You Blow the Whistle?
Let’s assume first that your concern involves a serious issue. Reporting toxic materials,
for example, is a serious issue, because of the potential for serious harm. Recall that
serious harm raises the moral intensity of an issue. So your ethical antennae are likely
to be highly sensitized in this situation, and you’re going to feel more compelled to do
something. A colleague padding an expense report a bit on one occasion isn’t quite as
serious. Once you’ve informed your manager about a fudged expense report, your
responsibility is probably fulfilled. However, one colleague fudging an expense report
one time is a far cry from a group of employees systematically altering all of their
expense reports with their manager’s knowledge. If you suspect something of that
magnitude, of course you should report it to someone outside your chain of command,
such as the ethics office or your organization’s internal auditor.
Many might disagree with this approach, but few people in business have the time
to be “on patrol.” Once a manager is alerted, it’s his or her responsibility to deal with
issues like expense reports, except in extraordinary circumstances. This could be
termed “picking your battles” and responding appropriately to your gut feelings.
Obviously, you should use the prescriptive frameworks to help you decide what to do.
But let’s also consider a number of simple triggers that can help you determine
whether an issue is serious.
Some of the triggers to help you determine whether an issue is serious enough to be
raised beyond your immediate manager include an issue that involves values such as
truth, employee or customer (or other stakeholder) rights, trust, fairness, harm, your
personal reputation or the reputation of your organization, and whether the law is being
broken or compromised. In the toxic dump case, for example, serious harm could
certainly result; customer (and other stakeholder) rights are involved; your organ-
ization’s reputationisatrisk;a public trustmay beviolated;andthelaw may very wellbe
compromised or broken if you keep quiet about toxic waste under a proposed housing
development,becausethetoxicwastecouldultimatelyaffectthefoodsupply.Asituation
like this has all the earmarks of a serious ethical dilemma that requires action.
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
139

Suppose your manager asks you to supply inaccurate numbers in a financial report
to another level of management. That situation involves not only a breach of truth but
also potential fraud and harm; it could damage your reputation and ultimately your
company’s reputation. It’s a serious issue that you’ll probably want to report.
How to Blow the Whistle
Let’s assume that you’re dealing with a serious issue, you’ve assembled the facts,
they’re accurate to the best of your knowledge, you’ve asked your peers or your
manager for advice, and there’s a law or company policy about to be violated, or one of
the other triggers discussed earlier indicates a serious problem. Now what?
1.
Approach Your Immediate Manager First If You Can (your manager
isn’t involved in the problem)
If your manager tells you to ignore a
situation or belittles your concern, approach him or her again. The second
time you approach your manager, you may want to write a memo and spell out
your concerns in black and white so it’s more difficult for your manager to
ignore or dismiss them. Writing a memo is frequently enough to convince
your manager that this is serious, and so you’ll get a more favorable response.
You should also do some soul searching to make sure your decision to pursue
this issue is an objective one, and not based in any feeling of revenge you
might have for your manager, coworkers, or company. This is also a good time
to rehearse out loud and to others (maybe a trusted coworker, your parents, or
your spouse) what you want to say. It is helpful to state the problem in terms
of your concerns for people and the company and why those are concerns for
you (rather than pointing fingers). Also, you should find out exactly how your
company wants issues raised and if there is a special process for doing it. If
there is, follow the process to the letter.20
2.
Discuss the Issue with Your Family
Since any whistleblowing activity can
affect your family as well as yourself, it’s imperative that they know what’s
going on. It’s also the time to document your activities. Obtain copies of
correspondence that relate to the issue and any memos you’ve written in an
attempt to alert management. Keep a diary to track activities related to the
issue and describe any conversations you’ve had concerning the issue.21
3.
Take It to the Next Level
If you receive no satisfaction from your manager,
it’s time to go to the next level of management. The most diplomatic way of
going around your manager is to say to your manager something like, “I feel
so strongly about this that I’d like a meeting with you and your manager to
discuss it.” The positive aspect of asking your manager to go with you to the
next level is that he or she will be less likely to feel betrayed, and you’ll
appear to be a team player. The negative aspect is that your manager may
forbid you to approach his or her manager. If that happens, or if you’re still
not satisfied after meeting with the next level of management, you’ll need to
consider going outside your chain of command.
140
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

4.
Contact Your Company’s Ethics Officer or Ombudsman
Find out if
your state has any special legislation regarding whistleblowing. Your state
may have legislative protection for whistleblowers, but it may require you to
follow certain procedures to protect yourself.22 You may choose to go to these
officials first, especially if your manager is part of the problem. As a result of
the U.S. Federal Sentencing Commission Guidelines (see Chapter 6) and
Sarbanes-Oxley legislation, most large organizations now have reporting
systems that allow you to report problems and to do so anonymously.
5.
Consider Going Outside Your Chain of Command
If your company has
no formal department or process for handling such complaints, think about
other areas that would be receptive to your concerns. If your issue is human
resources related—if it involves relationships or activities within your
company such as discrimination or sexual harassment—you may be able
to approach your human resources officer or department. If the issue is
business related—if it involves external relationships such as those with
customers, suppliers, regulators—you can still approach human resources,
but a better choice would probably be the legal department or your company’s
internal auditors. Obviously, if the issue involves the law or an actual or
potential legal issue, you should contact the legal department. And if the issue
concerns a financial matter, it’s probably better to approach your organ-
ization’s auditors. Most auditors have a system of internal checks they can
trigger that will confirm or refute your suspicions and even protect you. Also,
some auditors in some industries have an underground network of sorts; there
are relationships that exist among auditors from various organizations. They
can quietly investigate situations and keep them from blowing out of
proportion if that’s indicated and appropriate.
Since the role of human resources, legal, and audit departments is to
protect the corporation, they should be receptive to any concerns that could
put the company at risk. If, however, the activity you’re concerned about has
been approved or condoned by the highest levels of management, these
internal departments may be inclined to go along with “business as usual.”
And since their role is to protect the company, you’re likely to find that their
first allegiance is to the company, and not to you.
It’s usually safe to approach these departments, but it’s not completely
without risk. You can reduce the risk if you can persuade one or more of your
colleagues to joinyouin the process. Having an ally can encourage lawyers and
auditors to takeyoumore seriously. It also maybewise to consult your personal
lawyer or a law firm thatspecializesinrepresenting whistleblowers at this point
in the process. According to Hoffman and Moore, your attorney can “help you
determine if the wrongdoing violates the law, aid you in documenting
information about it, inform you of any laws you might be breaking in
documenting it, assist you in deciding to whom to report it, make sure reports
are filed on time, and help you protect yourself against retaliation.”23
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
141

Once you’ve approached your management, the ethics or compliance
office (if your company has one), and human resources, legal, or audit, you
should have received some satisfaction. The vast majority of whistleblowing
cases are resolved at one of those levels. However, if you’re still concerned,
the risks to you personally escalate significantly from this point on. Your last
resort within your company is your organization’s senior management,
including the CEO, president, or board of directors. Obviously, you should
contact whoever has a reputation for being most approachable. Understand
that your immediate management will most likely be irate if you approach
senior management. However, if you’re right about your concerns, you may
end up a hero if the issue you’re raising is a localized problem and senior
management is unaware of what’s going on.
Before contacting your senior management, be sure to have your facts
straight and documented. (This is where a diary and copies of correspondence
are useful.) If you’re wrong, few people are going to understand or forgive
you. You may be harassed, reprimanded, or penalized, or some pretext may
be found to fire you. However, there is evidence that you can contact the CEO
and keep your job. For example, Sherron Watkins, vice president of corporate
development at Enron, still had her job at Enron one year after CEO Ken Lay
received her fearful letter about accounting irregularities and months after the
executive team resigned. However, she wrote her letter to the CEO and not to
the local newspapers.24 Like many other whistleblowers, Sherron Watkins is
now making her living as a public speaker and consultant.
6.
Go Outside of the Company
If you’ve raised the concern all the way to the
top of your company, still have a job, and are still unsatisfied, your only
choice now is to go outside. If your company is part of a regulated industry,
such as defense contracting and commercial banks, you can contact the
regulators who are charged with overseeing your industry. Or you can contact
the press. However, if you’ve already contacted numerous individuals in your
company about the issue, it won’t take a genius to figure out who is talking
outside of the company. Even if you contact the press or the regulators
anonymously, your coworkers and management probably will know it’s you.
Recent legislation has made it easier and potentially more lucrative for
employees to blow the whistle to regulators when companies are government
contractors or when the federal government has somehow been defrauded.
Under the False Claims Act, whistleblowers who report corporate wrong-
doing against the government to prosecutors can be awarded 15 to 30 percent
of whatever damages the federal government recovers, which are to be three
times the damages the government has sustained. Because the government
has recovered billions of dollars since the law’s inception, this has become a
powerful incentive for some employees to tell all to prosecutors. For
example, Jim Alderson was fired from his accounting job at Quorum Health
Group when he refused to go along with the company practice of keeping two
142
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

sets of books for Medicare reimbursements, one for the government and one
marked “confidential.” He filed a wrongful termination lawsuit that devel-
oped into False Claims Act lawsuits against his employer and its parent
company for overbilling the government. The government recovered almost
$2 billion, and Alderson received $20 million. The number of such lawsuits
has grown significantly in recent years. In one of the biggest suits ever, TAP
Pharmaceuticals paid $875 million to the government for engaging in illegal
pricing and marketing practices with a cancer drug (you’ll read more about
TAP Pharmaceuticals in the end-of-chapter case for Chapter 5).25
An even bigger case involves four whistleblowers from GlaxoSmith-
Kline, which will pay $3 billion to settle a fraud case. According to the
whistleblower advocacy group Taxpayers Against Fraud, the pharmaceutical
industry will pay $10 billion to settle various fraud cases in the fiscal year
ending in September 2012. That’s a lot of money going to whistleblowers.26
In 2002 Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), which, among
other things, provides whistleblowers in publicly traded companies with
revolutionary new protections if they “make a disclosure to a supervisor, law-
enforcement agency, or congressional investigator that could have a ‘material
impact’ on the value of a company’s shares.”27 Under the law, board
committees must set up procedures for hearing whistleblower concerns;
executives who retaliate can be held criminally liable and can go to prison for
up to 10 years; the Labor Department can force a company to rehire a
whistleblower who has been fired; and workers who have been fired can
request a jury trial after six months. Corporate attorneys are now required to
report misconduct to top management and to the board if executives don’t
respond. But, unlike the False Claims Act, SOX did not provide for financial
incentives. And it does not protect employees at private companies.
Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
(passed in the wake of the 2008–2009 financial crisis), the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) will pay 10 to 30 percent of the amount the
government recovers fromfinancialfraud ifthewhistleblowerprovides original
information leading to a recovery of more than a million dollars. During fiscal
2012,theSECreceivedover3,000tips.Thatsoundslikealotbutisactuallyonly
a very small percentage of potential calls, according to Ethics Resource Center
data about observed misconduct of the type covered by the Act.28
In a survey of chief audit executives in 2012, the executives had
confidence in their internal systems. Fewer than five percent expected
internal whistleblowers to blow the whistle to regulators. Also, in the annual
report submitted by the SEC to Congress that outlines whistleblowing
activities, the total amount paid to whistleblowers in 2012 was a bit over
$45,000 to just one person making a complaint. So, while the SEC Investor
Protection Fund (to pay whistleblowers) contains $450 million, almost none
of it has been paid out.29 Perhaps corporate programs to encourage internal
whistleblowing are working (we hope so).
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
143

You may be wondering whethe r peopl e shoul d be paid to blow the
whist le, to esse ntially do the right thing. This is certainl y a debatabl e iss ue
and one you may want to discuss in class. However, we believe that mos t
whist leblowers are not motivated prima rily or initially by these finan cial
rewards, and this is consist ent with findings of the Nati onal Business Ethi cs
Survey. When asked why they reported, 82 percent of the respondent s said
they would report if the crime were big enough. 30 Once they learn about the
rewards, however, they may feel more embolde ned to act. We do know that
many whist leblowers have lost their livelihoods as a result of whistleblowing.
So, perha ps we should think about these rewards as a means to tide
whist leblowers over until they can find a new way of earn ing a living.
For addi tional guidance about whi stleblowing, several websites can
answer myria d questions; just type the keyword whistleblo wer in your
Interne t search engine. Probab ly the mos t compreh ensive web site for
whistleblowers is the National Whistleblower’s Center, a nonprofit, tax-
exempt organization that is dedicated to providing educational and advocacy
serv ices to whistle blowers (www.whi stleblowers.org).
7.
Leave the Company
Some situations might be so disturbing to you that you
have no alternative but to quit your job. The toxic dump situation described
earlier might be one of those situations. Frankly, the stress involved in
blowing the whistle is so intense that you might consider quitting your
job after step 3 or 4, and you’ll need all of the prescriptive ethical decision-
making frameworks to help you decide whether you are ethically obligated to
report the problem to someone or whether simply leaving is okay.
Whistleblowing is so stressful that in one study, one-third of the whistle-
blowers surveyed would advise other people not to blow the whistle at all.31
Senator Charles Grassley likened whistle-blowers to “a skunk at a picnic.”32
However, note that two-thirds of those whistleblowers would not provide such
advice.Manypeoplewouldfinditextremelydifficult—perhapsimpossible—to
live with certain situations on their conscience. The knowledge of a toxic dump
about to poison private wells would probably be almost impossible for most
people to live with without reporting. When knowledge becomes unbearable,
blowingthewhistleandultimatelyquittingyourjobmaybetheonlysolution(or
the other way around—find another job and then blow the whistle).
CONCLUSION
This chapter highlights some of the most common ethical problems you might
encounter during your career and provides some advice on raising issues if you
feel the need. Although ethical problems can be difficult to evaluate, it can be easier to
decide what to do when you’ve spent some time thinking about them ahead of time—
before they happen. We also strongly believe that identifying what you value, thinking
about various ethical situations, and practicing your responses in advance are effective
ways to prepare you to live an ethical professional life.
144
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.
What do you value? Can you make a list of the three or four values you would
stand up for? How will you explain to others what your values are and why?
2.
Have you ever practiced raising an ethical issue to a professor or to your
manager? What did you do? What were the results?
3.
Have antidiscrimination laws helped or hurt the fair treatment of workers?
4.
Is diversity management an ethical issue?
5.
Is sexual harassment as important an issue for men as it is for women?
6.
What conditions would make accepting a gift from a vendor or a client
acceptable?
7.
Describe the conditions under which you could hire a college friend.
8.
Why do certain professionals—bankers, accountants, lawyers, physicians,
clergy—have fiduciary responsibilities?
9.
What would you do if a former subordinate asked you to write him or her a letter
of reference on corporate letterhead?
10.
Do employers have a responsibility to alert other employers to an employee’s
wrongdoing by supplying an unfavorable reference? Why or why not? Discuss
the conflict between community responsibility and self-protection.
11.
What conditions would have to be present for you to blow the whistle about
unethical conduct you observed at work? How would you go about it?
12.
If Sherron Watkins had blown the whistle to the Houston Chronicle and not to
Enron’s CEO Ken Lay, do you think she would have kept her job at Enron?
13.
Research a story of whistleblowing. Relate what “your” whistleblower did with
the seven steps recommended in the chapter. What have you learned from the
comparison?
14.
Do you think that “paying” whistleblowers encourages people to look for ethical
misdeeds or to “game up” ethical misdeeds?
SHORT CASES
Think about what you most value. For each of the ethical dilemmas below, describe at
least two courses of action you might take and state the pros and cons of each course.
Describe your actions out loud to someone else in class or to a friend. What can you
say or do that would be consistent with your personal values?
VOICING YOUR VALUES
You’re a trader who joined a large investment bank two years ago. Pat, one of your
fellow traders, is well known on the Street for being a big risk taker and a big money
maker for the firm. Consequently, he is popular among your firm’s senior
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
145

management. You see him at a party one night and notice that he surreptitiously used
cocaine several times. Several weeks later in the office, you notice that he seems
exceptionally high-spirited and that his pupils are extremely dilated—you know that
both are signs of drug use. You’re thinking of mentioning something about it to his
managing director, Bob, when Pat makes a particularly impressive killing in the
market for your firm’s own account. Bob jokes that he doesn’t know how Pat does it,
but he doesn’t care. “However he is pulling this off, it’s great for the firm,” Bob laughs.
You feel strongly that this is a problem and that it places your firm at risk. You’ve
already raised the issue to Pat’s manager, Bob, who ignored the issue. Do you raise it
further? How can you voice your values in this case?
PEOPLE ISSUE
Your division has formed a committee of employees to examine suggestions and create
a strategy for how to reward good employee ideas. The committee has five members,
but you are the only one who is a member of a minority group. You’re pleased to be
part of this effort since appointments to committees such as this one are viewed
generally as a positive reflection on job performance. At the first meeting, tasks are
assigned, and all the other committee members think you should survey minority
members for their input. Over the next few weeks, you discover that several committee
meetings have been held without your knowledge. When you ask why you weren’t
notified, two committee members tell you that survey information wasn’t needed at the
meetings and you’d be notified when a general meeting was scheduled. When you visit
one committee member in his office, you spot a report on the suggestion program that
you’ve never seen before. When you ask about it, he says it’s just a draft he and two
others have produced.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST ISSUE
You’ve justcementedadeal betweena $100millionpensionfundand GreenCompany, a
large regional money manager. You and your staff put in long hours and a lot of effort to
close the deal and are feeling very good about it. As you and three of your direct reports
are having lunch in a fancy restaurant to celebrate a promotion, the waiter brings you a
phone. A senior account executive from Green is calling and wants to buy you lunch in
gratitude for all your efforts. “I’ll leave my credit card number with the restaurant
owner,” he says. “You and your team have a great time on me.”
CUSTOMER CONFIDENCE ISSUE
You’re working the breakfast shift at a fast-food restaurant when a delivery of milk,
eggs, and other dairy products arrives. There’s a story in the local newspaper about
contaminated milk distributed by the dairy that delivers to your restaurant. Upon
reading the article more closely, you discover that only a small portion of the dairy’s
milk is contaminated, and the newspaper lists the serial numbers of the affected
146
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

NOTES
1. 
Mary C. Gentile, “Giving Voice to Values,” The Aspen Institute, www.aspencbe.org/teaching/gvv/
index.html.
2. 
B. George, P. Sims, A. N. McLean, and D. Mayer, “Discovering Your Authentic Leadership,” Harvard
Business Review 85, no. 2 (2007): 1–8.
3. 
J. Q. Wilson, The Moral Sense (New York: Free Press, 1993), 55–78.
4. 
E. A. Lind and T. R. Tyler, The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice (New York: Plenum Press,
1988).
5. 
B. Sheppard, R. Lewicki, and J. W. Minton, Organizational Justice: The Search for Fairness in the
Workplace (New York: Lexington Books, 1992).
6. 
Eduardo Porter, “UBS Ordered to Pay $29 Million in Sex Bias Lawsuit,” New York Times, April 7,
2005, www.nytimes.com.
7. 
Insider Exclusive, “Wall Street Women Win $70 Million Against Morgan Stanley,” 2013, http://www
.insiderexclus ive.com/ just ice-in-ameri ca/legal-wall-street-women-w i n-70-mi ll io n-agai nst - morgan-st a nl ey.
8. 
Jenny Anderson, “After She Sued Merrill, It’s Back on the Job,” New York Times, July 22, 2005, www
.nytimes.com.
9.
D. Schawble, “Daniel Goleman on Leadership and the Power of Emotional Intelligence,” Forbes,
September 15, 2011, www.forbes.com
10.
E. Warren and N. Millman, “Abuse on the Line for Years, Women at Mitsubishi Say They’ve Endured
the Degrading Deeds and Words of Co-workers. Now They’re Doing the Talking,” February 15, 1998.
11.
J. Lever, G. Zellman, and S. J. Hirschfeld, “Office Romance: Are the Rules Changing?” Across the
Board, March–April 2006, 33–37.
12.
J. D. Glater, “University of Texas Fires Director of Financial Aid,” New York Times, May 14, 2007.
containers. When you point out the article to your manager, he tells you to forget it. “If
you think we’ve got time to go through every carton of milk to check serial numbers,
you’re crazy,” he says. “The article says right here that the chances are minuscule that
anyone has a contaminated carton.” He also explains that he doesn’t have the workers
to check the milk, and what’s more, destroying the milk would require him to buy
emergency milk supplies at the retail price. So he tells you to get back to work and
forget about the milk. He says, “I don’t have the time or the money to worry about such
minor details.”
USE OF CORPORATE RESOURCES ISSUE
You work for Red Company. You and a colleague, Pat Brown, are asked by your
manager to attend a weeklong conference in Los Angeles. At least 25 other employees
from Red Co. are attending, as well as many customers and competitors from other
institutions. At the conference, you attend every session and see many of the Red Co.
people, but you never run into Pat. Although you’ve left several phone messages for
her, her schedule doesn’t appear to allow room for a meeting. However, when you get
back to the office, the department secretary, who is coordinating expense reports,
mentions to you that your dinner in L.A. must have been quite the affair. When you
ask, “What dinner?” she describes a dinner with 20 customers and Red Co. employees
that Pat paid for at a posh L.A. restaurant. When you explain that you didn’t attend, she
shows you the expense report with your name listed as one of the attendees.
CHAPTER 4
ADDRESSING INDIVIDUALS’ COMMON ETHICAL PROBLEMS
147

13. 
Paul Sullivan, “In Search of Competent (and Honest) Advisers,” New York Times, August 1, 2009, www
.nytimes.com.
14. 
J. Hechinger and S. Craig, “SEC Tells Fidelity Probe May Yield Civil Complaint,” Wall Street Journal,
July 26, 2005, A3.
15. 
J. A. Byrne, “No Excuses for Enron’s Board,” Businessweek, July 29, 2002, 50.
16. 
I. J. Dugan, “Auditing Old-Timers Recall when Prestige Was the Bottom Line,” Wall Street
Journal, July 15, 2002.
17. 
A. Samuel, “Meet your newest management headache: the co-branded employee,” Wall Street Journal
online. October 29, 2012.
18. 
K. Reardon, “Courage as a Skill,” Harvard Business Review, January 2007, 2–7.
19. 
H. Wee, “Corporate Ethics: Right Makes Might,” Businessweek, April 11, 2002.
20. 
R. Webber, “Whistle Blowing,” Executive Excellence, July 1989, 9–10.
21. 
Ibid.
22. 
A. Dunkin, “Blowing the Whistle without Paying the Piper,” Businessweek, June 3, 1991, 138–39.
23. 
W. M. Hoffman and J. M. Moore, Business Ethics: Readings and Cases in Corporate Morality
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984), 257.
24. 
F. Pellegrini, “Person of the Week: ‘Enron Whistleblower’ Sherron Watkins,” Time, January 18, 2002.
25. 
R. Rothracker, “Whistle-blower law reap big payoffs for U.S. Treasury.” Legi-Slate, August 29, 1997,
1; S. McDonough, “Wanted: Snitch for good pay.” Centre Daily Times, November 29, 2004, B9; D. B.
Caruso, “Whistleblowers help feds to build cases.” Centre Daily Times, August 25, 2004, B9.
26.
K. Thomas and M. Schmidt, “Glaxo Agrees to Pay $3 Billion in Fraud Settlement,” New York
Times, July 2, 2012, www.nytimes.com
27.
P. Dryer, and D. Carney, “Year of the Whistleblower,” Businessweek, December 16, 2002, 107–10.
T. Wilkinson, “After Eight Years, An Insider Gets His Reward Thanks to Whistleblower’s Efforts, U.S.
Government Reaps Largest Single Cash Award Under False Claims Act,” Todd Wilkinson Special to
the Christian Science Monitor. The Christian Science Monitor. Boston, Mass.: July 24, 2001, 4.
28.
P. Harned. “Putting whistleblowing in perspective,” Huffington Post, December 5, 2012.
29.
Eric Krell, “Whistle-Blowers Not a Top Concern,” Business Finance Magazine, December 13, 2012.
30.
P. Harned. “Putting whistleblowing in perspective,” Huffington Post, December 5, 2012.
31.
K. L. Soeken and D. R. Soeken, “A Survey of Whistleblowers: Their Stressors and Coping Strategies,”
Proceedings of the Hearing on H.R. 25 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1987),
156–66; M. Miceli and J. Near, Blowing the Whistle (New York: Lexington Books, 1992), 303.
32.
P. Dryer, and D. Carney, “Year of the Whistleblower,” Businessweek, December 16, 2002, 107–10.
148
SECTION II
ETHICS AND THE INDIVIDUAL

S E C T I O N III
MANAGING ETHICS
IN THE ORGANIZATION
149

C H A P T E R5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL
CULTURE
INTRODUCTION
Thus far, we have discussed business ethics primarily in terms of how individual
employees think and respond. But anyone who has ever worked knows that employees
are not “just” individuals. They become part of something larger; they’re members of
an organizational culture that affects how they think and behave. Here, we apply this
culture concept to organizational ethics. You can think about the ethical culture of an
organization as a “slice” of the larger organizational culture that represents the aspects
of organizational culture that affect the way employees think and act in ethics-related
situations.
In terms of how we’ve been thinking about ethical decision making, you can
consider ethical culture to be a significant organizational influence on individuals’
ethical awareness, judgment, and action, along with the individual differences and
other influences already discussed in Chapter 3. Recall that most employees are at the
conventional level of cognitive moral development, meaning that they are looking
outside themselves for guidance about how to think and act. Ethical culture is a source
of a good bit of that guidance and can influence employees to be aware of ethical issues
(or not), to make good or bad judgments, and to do either the right thing or the
wrong thing.
Individual Differences
Ethical Awareness → Ethical Judgment → Ethical Action
Ethical Culture
150

ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AS CULTURE
What Is Culture?
Anthropologists define culture as a body of learned beliefs, traditions, and guides for
behavior shared among members of a group.1 This idea of culture has been particularly
useful for understanding and differentiating among work organizations and the
behavior of people in them.2 It’s a way of differentiating one organization’s
“personality” from another. The organizational culture expresses shared assumptions,
values, and beliefs3 and is manifested in many ways, including formal rules and
policies, norms of daily behavior, physical settings, modes of dress, special language,
myths, rituals, heroes, and stories.4 To assess and understand an organization’s culture
requires knowledge of the organization’s history and values, along with a systematic
analysis of multiple formal and informal organizational systems.
Organizational cultures can vary widely, even within the same industry (consider
Wal-Mart, Target, and Costco—all big-box retailers that have very different cultures).
In the computer industry, IBM was known for many years for its relative formality,
exemplified by a dress code that mandated dark suits, white shirts, and polished shoes.
Apple Computer, on the other hand, was known for its informality. Particularly in its
early days, T-shirts, jeans, and tennis shoes were the expected Apple “costume.”
Fortune magazine described IBM as “the sensible, wingtip, Armonk, New York
computer company, not part of that sneaker-wearing, tofu-eating Silicon Valley
crowd.”5 Although that characterization was made a long time ago, it’s still pretty
applicable today.
Strong versus Weak Cultures
Organizational cultures can be strong or weak.6 In a strong culture, standards and
guidelines are widely shared within the organization, providing common direction for
day-to-day behavior. This is likely because all cultural systems, formal and informal,
are aligned to provide consistent direction and to point behavior in the same direction.
In the 1980s, Citicorp’s culture was so strong that when Katherine Nelson, a coauthor
of this text and former vice president and head of human resources communications at
Citicorp, traveled to the firm’s offices in the Far East to deliver ethics training, she felt
right at home (despite huge differences in national culture). “You could tell that you
were in a Citicorp facility,” she said, “whether you were in London, Tokyo, or New
York.” When Nelson facilitated an ethics training session for Japanese managers, she
presented them with a common ethical dilemma—what do you do if you have raised an
important ethical issue with your manager and nothing is done? Moreover, the
manager discourages you from pursuing the issue. The potential answers included
do nothing, go around the manager to the next level, raise the issue in writing to the
manager, or take the issue to a staff department such as human resources.
The Japanese managers unanimously gave the “correct” answer according to
Citicorp culture and policies at the time. They said they would go around their
manager and take the issue to the next level. Nelson was surprised at their response,
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
151

thinking that it conflicted with the wider Japanese culture’s deference to authority and
seniority. So she asked these managers, “Doesn’t this conflict with Japanese culture?”
To which they responded, “You forget—we are much more Citicorp than we are
Japanese.” Citicorp’s culture proved to be so strong that standards and guidelines
spanned continents and superseded national culture. (Citicorp merged with Travelers
in 1998 to form Citigroup, and its culture changed significantly as a result.)
This type of experience has since been echoed by some of our international
students who worked for U.S.-based multinationals before returning to school for
their MBA degree. For example, one student worked for Baxter Healthcare in a
country known for corruption and bribery. Baxter’s strong ethical culture didn’t
allow such conduct, and employees were proud to be a part of such an organization
and happy to comply (even or perhaps especially in the midst of a corrupt
business culture).
In a weak organizational culture, strong subcultures exist and guide behavior that
differs from one subculture to another. Many large public universities can be thought
of as having weak cultures. For example, for faculty, departmental subcultures are
often stronger than the overall college or university culture; the romance languages
department differs from the accounting department. Among students at a large state
university, the fraternity-sorority subculture coexists with the political activist sub-
culture, the devout religious subculture, the jock subculture, and many other sub-
cultures, and behavior is quite different within each. It’s important to note that weak
doesn’t necessarily mean bad. In some situations, weak cultures are desirable. They
allow for strong subcultures featuring diversity of thought and action. However, in a
weak culture, behavioral consistency across the organization is tough to achieve. Look
around your own school or work organization. Would you characterize its culture as
strong or weak?
How Culture Inﬂuences Behavior: Socialization
and Internalization
Employees are brought into the organization’s culture through a process called
enculturation, or socialization.7 Through socialization, employees learn “the ropes.”
Socialization can occur through formal training or mentoring, or through more
informal transmission of norms of daily behavior by peers and superiors. New
members learn from observing how others behave or through informally transmitted
messages. When effectively socialized into a strong culture, employees behave in
ways that are consistent with expectations of the culture (or subculture). They know
how to dress, what to say, and what to do.
With socialization, people behave in ways that are consistent with the culture
because they feel they are expected to do so. Their behavior may have nothing to do
with their personal beliefs, but they behave as they are expected to behave in order to
fit into the context and to be approved by peers and superiors.8 As an example, the
president of a huge financial firm once took a young, high-potential manager out to
lunch and walked him right over to Brooks Brothers for a new suit. “You can’t get
152
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

where you’re going in a cheap suit,” the president told the young man, who continued
to buy his suits at Brooks Brothers.
But individuals may behave according to the culture for another reason—because
they have internalized cultural expectations. With internalization, individuals have
adopted the external cultural standards as their own. Their behavior, though consistent
with the culture, also accords with their own beliefs. They may come into the
organization sharing its values and expectations, thus making for a very smooth
transition. Or, they may internalize cultural expectations over time. In the above
example, the young manager may have initially bought the Brooks Brothers suit
because he felt compelled to; but over time, he continued to buy those suits perhaps
because he had internalized the expectation and wanted to do so.
The concepts of socialization and internalization apply to understanding why
employees behave ethically or unethically in an organization. Most people prefer to
behave ethically. When they join an organization with a strong ethical culture, the
messages about honesty and respect resonate with their personal beliefs and are easily
internalized. They act ethically because it’s natural for them to do so and consistent
with the cultural messages they’re receiving. But unfortunately, most employees can
be socialized into behaving unethically, especially if they have little work experience
to contrast with the messages being sent by the current unethical culture. If everyone
around them is lying to customers, they’re likely to do the same as long as they remain
a member of the organization.
ETHICAL CULTURE: A MULTISYSTEM FRAMEWORK
We said earlier that ethical culture can be conceptualized as representing a slice of the
organization’s broader culture. Ethical culture is created and maintained through a
complex interplay of formal and informal organizational systems (Figure 5.1).
Formally, executive leader communications, selection systems, orientation and
INFORMAL SYSTEMS
FORMAL SYSTEMS
Executive Leadership
Selection system
Policies/Codes
Orientation/Training
Performance
management
Authority structure
Decision processes
Role Models/Heroes
Norms
Rituals
Myths/Stories
Language
Ethical and
Unethical
Behavior
Alignment?
FIGURE 5.1 A Multisystem Ethical Culture Framework
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
153

training programs, rules, policies and codes, performance management systems,
organizational structures, and formal decision-making processes all contribute to
creating and maintaining ethical culture. Informally, heroes and role models, norms of
daily behavior, rituals, myths, stories and language indicate whether the formal ethics-
related systems represent reality or facade. The next section provides examples of each
of these important ethical culture systems. Although we discuss these systems
separately, keep in mind that they are all interconnected.
Alignment of Ethical Culture Systems
To create a consistent ethical culture message, the formal and informal systems must
be aligned (work together) to support ethical behavior. To have a fully aligned ethical
culture, the multiple formal and informal systems must all be sending employees
consistent messages that point in the direction of ethical behavior. For example,
imagine a company whose formal corporate values statement and ethics code tell
employees that honesty is highly valued in the organization and that employees should
always be truthful with customers and each other. Consistent with that values
statement, the selection system does background checks on potential employees,
incorporates ethics-related questions in interviews, and highlights the company’s
values to recruits. Once hired, new employees are further oriented into the ethical
culture by learning about the values of the founder, how the history of the company
supports those values, and how the current executive team is carrying on that tradition.
They’re also trained in the specific kinds of ethical issues they could face in their jobs
and how to handle them ethically. They learn that the performance management
system will assess them on values-related criteria, including honest and trustworthy
interactions, and that these assessments will be important to decisions about compen-
sation and promotion. They are also encouraged to take personal responsibility and
speak up about any ethical concerns. On the informal side, they learn that high-level
managers routinely tell customers the truth about the company’s ability to meet their
needs and that the company celebrates employees of exemplary integrity at an annual
awards dinner. Employees in such an organization receive a consistent message about
the organization’s commitment to honesty, and their behavior is likely to be honest as
well because these formal and informal systems are aligned and supporting their
ethical behavior.
But opportunities for misalignment abound in these complex systems. For
example, if the same organization touts its honesty in its values statement but regularly
deceives customers in order to land a sale, and the organization gives a highly
“successful” but highly deceptive sales representative the firm’s sales award, the
organization’s formal and informal systems are out of alignment. The formal
statements say one thing while company actions and rituals say quite another.
Employees perceive that deceit is what the organization is really about, despite
what the ethics code says. Cultures can range from strongly aligned ethical cultures
(where all systems are aligned to support ethical behavior) to strongly aligned
unethical cultures (where all systems are aligned to support unethical behavior) to
154
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

those that are misaligned because employees get somewhat mixed messages due to
conflicts between the formal and informal systems.
DOW CORNING: AN ETHICAL CULTURE OUT OF ALIGNMENT?
Developing a
strongly aligned ethical culture is easier said than done. Managers need to be careful
because an organization may easily be lulled into thinking that its ethical house is
soundly constructed, only to find that the roof has been leaking and it’s about to cave
in. This may be what happened to Dow Corning.
Dow Corning had been recognized as a corporate ethics pioneer. It was among the
first, in 1976, to establish an elaborate formal ethics program and structure. Then-
chairman John S. Ludington set up a Business Conduct Committee comprised of six
company executives, each of whom devoted up to six weeks a year to the committee’s
work and reported directly to the board of directors. Two of these members were given
responsibility for auditing every business operation every three years. In addition,
three-hour reviews were held with up to 35 employees who were encouraged to raise
ethical issues. The results of these audits were reported to the Audit and Social
Responsibility Committee of the board of directors. John Swanson, manager of
corporate internal and management communication at the time, headed this effort
and was quoted as saying that the audit approach “makes it virtually impossible for
employees to consciously make an unethical decision.”9
This apparently impressive formal program failed to help the organization avoid its
problem with breast-implant safety, however, despite documented warnings from a
company engineer in 1976 that suggested that the implants could rupture and cause
medical problems. It isn’t entirely clear why this well-intentioned ethics program failed.
It’s likely that, although it was designed to cultivate an overall environment of ethical
conduct,aspectsoftheethicalculturewereoutofalignment—sendingemployeesdifferent
messages.10 “Layering in a bureaucracy is no substitute for a true corporate culture.
Workers have a genius for discovering the real reason for a system and learn
quickly how to satisfy its minimum requirements.”11 The system relied on managers to
identify the key ethical issues covered by the auditors. Were these managers likely to
alert the auditors to their most serious ethical problems? What would the consequences
be? The system also relied on periodic planned audits. Did commitment to ethics peak
during the planned audit sessions, only to disappear into the woodwork after the
auditors left?12 We don’t know, but a comprehensive multisystem audit of the ethical
culture might have provided the answer.
Leaders should be interested in creating a strongly aligned ethical culture because
American employees strongly prefer working for such an organization. A 2006 study
found that 82 percent of Americans would actually prefer to be paid less but work for
an ethical company than be paid more but work for an unethical company. Importantly,
more than a third of people say that they’ve left a job because they disagreed with the
company’s ethical standards. So having a strong ethical culture is an important way to
retain the best employees.13
Another reason leaders need to create and maintain a strongly aligned ethical
culture is that the U.S. Sentencing Commission revised its guidelines for sentencing
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
155

organization al defendant s in 2004 (see www.ussc.gov and Chapte r 6 for more
information about these guide lines). When the U.S. Sente ncing Comm ission
(www.ussc .gov) evaluate d the effect of the origina l 1991 guide lines, it note d that
many organizations seemed to be engaging in a kind of “check-off approach” to the
guidelines. In responding to guideline requirements to qualify for reduced sentencing
and fines, these organizations would establish formal ethics and/or legal compliance
programs, including ethics offices, codes of conduct, training programs, and reporting
systems. But the commission learned that many of these formal programs were
perceived to be only “window dressing” by employees because they were inconsistent
with the employees’ day-to-day organizational experiences. The commission subse-
quently revised its guidelines to call for developing and maintaining a strong ethical
culture. As a result, many companies are now assessing their ethical cultures to
determine how they’re doing in relation to ethics so if they do get into legal trouble,
they can demonstrate that they have been making sincere efforts to guide their
employees toward ethical conduct.
ETHICAL LEADERSHIP
Executive Leaders Create Culture
Executive leaders affect culture in both formal and informal ways. Senior leaders can
create, maintain, or change formal and informal cultural systems by what they say, do,
or support.14 Formally, their communications send a powerful message about what’s
important in the organization. They influence a number of other formal culture
dimensions by creating and supporting formal policies and programs with resources,
and they influence informal culture by role modeling, the language they use, and the
norms their messages and actions appear to support.
The founder of a new organization is thought to play a particularly important
culture-creating role.15 Often, the founder has a vision for what the new organization
should be. He or she often personifies the culture’s values, providing a role model for
others to observe and follow, and guides decision making at all organizational levels.
For example, Thomas Jefferson founded the University of Virginia. Although he’s
long gone, it’s said even today that when the governing board of the university is faced
with a difficult decision, they’re still guided by “what Mr. Jefferson would do.”
Founders of small businesses frequently play this culture-creating role.
Herb Kelleher is the legendary founder of Southwest Airlines. The no-frills airline
started in 1971 and has been growing and flying pretty high ever since, despite many
difficulties in its industry. Southwest Airlines has never served a meal, and its planes
are in and out of the gate in 20 minutes. During Kelleher’s tenure as CEO and
chairman, other airlines went bankrupt, suffered strikes, or disappeared. But South-
west continued to succeed even after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, that
sent the entire industry reeling. The secret is thought to be the company’s culture and
an esprit de corps inspired by Kelleher—he believed in serving the needs of employ-
ees, who would then take great care of customers and ultimately provide shareholder
156
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

returns. The culture continues to combine efficiency, a family feeling, and an emphasis
on fun. In support of efficiency, pilots have been known to load luggage or even clean
planes if necessary.
During a fuel crisis, Kelleher asked employees to help by providing money-saving
ideas. The response was immediate: within only six weeks after Kelleher’s request,
employees had saved the company more than $2 million. In the area of fun, Kelleher
was known for his crazy antics, jokes, and pranks. He settled business disputes by arm
wrestling; and when a fellow airline CEO criticized Southwest’s promotion that
featured Shamu, the killer whale, Kelleher sent him a huge bowl of chocolate pudding
(meant to resemble whale poop) with a note reading, “With love, from Shamu.”16
Employees are encouraged to make flying fun, so that customers leave every
Southwest flight with a smile, and they’re encouraged to do that in a way that’s
spontaneous, emotional, and from the heart.17 Southwest is seen as a leader in its
industry and regularly shows up near the top of Fortune magazine’s most admired
companies. It continues to perform well even after Kelleher stepped down as CEO in
2001. In explaining how they have remained so successful, Colleen Barrett (who
stepped down as president in 2008) referred to the culture, saying that Southwest does
“everything with passion. We scream at each other and we hug each other . . . we
celebrate everything.”18 The walls at Southwest’s headquarters are covered with
photos of employees dressed in crazy outfits or with their pets. But the company is also
financially conservative and cost-conscious, and these cultural attributes contribute to
their ongoing success.
Leaders Maintain or Change Organizational Culture
Current executive leaders can also influence culture in a number of ways.19 They can
help maintain the current culture, or they can change it by articulating a new vision and
values; by paying attention to, measuring, and controlling certain things; by making
critical policy decisions; by recruiting and hiring personnel who fit their vision of the
organization; and by holding people accountable for their actions.
Sometimes new leaders significantly change long-standing corporate culture.
Jack Welch, retired CEO of General Electric Company, radically changed the formerly
staid bureaucratic culture of GE into a lean and highly competitive organization during
his leadership tenure. Welch began the culture change effort by clearly articulating his
vision that the new GE would be number one or number two in the world in each of its
businesses. Businesses that could not measure up would be sold.
Traditional GE employees had been attracted to the job security of the old GE. But
Welch wanted to encourage competitiveness, risk taking, creativity, self-confidence,
and dynamism. He recruited managers who were interested in doing a great job and
then moving on, if GE no longer needed them. Many of the old-line GE employees
found themselves unhappy, out of sync—and, frequently, out of a job.
Welch also focused on identifying and eliminating unproductive work in the
organization. He told managers to eliminate reports, reviews, and forecasts; to speed
decision cycles; and to move information more quickly through the organization by
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
157

eliminating unnece ssary bureaucrati c layers. All of this cont ributed to the “leaner and
meaner” GE cultur e he created.
Welch’s successor, Jeff Immelt (w ho became CEO in 2001), has changed the
GE culture yet again. He announced in 2004 that four things would be r equired to
ke e p t h e c o m p a ny o n t o p : exe c u t i o n , g r owt h , g r e a t p e o p l e , a n d v i r t u e . T h e fir s t t h r e e
w e r e c o n s i s t e n t w i t h t h e G E ever yone knew. However, m o s t p e o p l e d o n ’t ex p e c t t h e
wo r d virt ue t o b e a s s o c i a t e d w i t h a c o m p a ny t h a t e a r n s b i l l i o n s i n r even u e . B u t
Immelt had l earned that people perceive d G E t o be “a l aggard” on the social
responsibi lity front , and h e vow ed to change that. H e h as sai d t hat, in a wo rld o f
business e thics scandals, people don’t a dmire business as they used to a nd that the
g u l f b e t w e e n r i c h a n d p o o r i s g r owi n g . A s a r e s u l t , h e b e l i eves t h a t c o m p a n i e s a r e
obliga ted to provide solutions to the world’s problems—not to just make money for
shareholders and obey the law. “Good leaders give back . . . It’s up to us to use our
pl atform to be a good citi zen.”20
In line with this new focus on virtue, Im melt appoi nted GE’ s first vice pres ident
for corporate citizenship and has been publishing corporate citizenship annual reports.
The company is committing itself to becoming a leader in environmental cleanup and a
catalyst for change. You may be familiar with its “Ecomagination” initiative that
focuses on green initiatives and concern about climate change. This initiative even has
its own devo ted web site (http://w ww.ecomaginat ion.com /), as does the GE Citize n-
ship initiative more general ly (www.ge.com /citizenshi p). Th e com pany also now
audits suppliers in developing countries to ensure compliance with labor, environ-
mental, and health and safety standards. And the company has increased its focus on
diversity, including granting domestic partner health benefits to employees, and has
entered into dialogue with socially responsible mutual funds.
In response to a request from African American employees to do more in Africa,
GE has worked with the public health service in Ghana, where it has provided
equipment, water treatment, and leadership training. In a previous edition of this book,
we noted that GE’s foreign subsidiaries were still doing business with Iran.21 But in
2008, the company decided it would not do business in any of the countries that the
U.S. State Department designates as sponsors of terrorism (including Iran). This move
suggests that the company is engaged in ongoing evaluations about where in the world
it should and should not be doing business, based upon its values and concern about its
reputation (a topic we will discuss more in Chapter 11).
ETHICAL LEADERSHIP AND ETHICAL CULTURE
Clearly, employees take their
cues from the messages sent by those in formal leadership roles. But most employees
don’t know the senior executives of their organization personally. They only know
what they can make sense of from afar. Therefore senior executives must develop a
“reputation” for ethical leadership by being visible on ethics issues and communicat-
ing a strong ethics message. Research22 has found that such a reputation rests upon
dual dimensions that work together: a moral person dimension and a moral manager
dimension (see Figures 5.1 and 5.2). In this section, first we explain what each
dimension represents and then we combine these dimensions into a matrix that shows
158
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

how leaders can develop a reputation for ethical leadership, unethical leadership,
hypocritical leadership, or ethically neutral leadership.
The moral person dimension represents the “ethical” part of the term ethical
leadership and is vital to developing a reputation for ethical leadership among
employees. As a moral person, the executive is seen first as demonstrating certain
individual traits (integrity, honesty, and trustworthiness). For example, one executive
described ethical leaders as “squeaky clean.” But probably more important are visible
behaviors.
These include doing the right thing, showing concern for people and treating them
with dignity and respect, being open and listening, and living a personally moral life.
To some extent, senior executives live in glass houses. They are often public figures
who are active in their communities. So they need to be particularly careful about their
private behavior. Rumors can begin quickly and taint an otherwise solid reputation.
Finally, an important contributor to being perceived as a moral person is to make
decisions in a particular way—decisions that are explicitly based on values, fairness,
concern for society, and other ethical decision rules.
But being a moral person is not in itself enough to be perceived as an ethical
leader. Being a moral person tells employees how the leader is likely to behave, but it
doesn’t tell them how the leader expects them to behave. So to complete the ethical
Hypocritical
leader
Strong
Weak
Moral Person
Executive Ethical Leadership
Reputation Matrix
Executive Ethical Leadership
Is about Reputation, Which Rests
on These Two Pillars
Moral Person
Traits
Rewards/Discipline
Behaviors
Communicating
Decision making
Tells followers
how leader
behaves
Honesty
• 
Openness
• 
Values-based
• 
Fair
• 
Sends an “ethics
and values”
message
Holds people
accountable for
ethical conduct
Concern for
• 
people
 
Personal
• 
morality
 
Integrity
• 
Trust
• 
Role Modeling
Takes visible
ethical action
Tells followers
how they should
behave and holds
them accountable
Moral Manager
Weak
Moral Manager
Strong
Unethical
leader
?
Ethical
leader
Ethically neutral leader
FIGURE 5.2 Executive Ethical Leadership
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
159

leadership picture, executives must also act as “moral managers”—they must focus on
the “leadership” part of the term ethical leadership by making ethics and values an
important part of their leadership message and by shaping the firm’s ethical culture.
They do that by conveying the importance of ethical conduct in a variety of ways.
Most of the messages employees receive in business are about bottom-line goals.
Therefore, senior executives must make ethics a priority of their leadership if ethics is
to get attention from employees. Moral managers do this by being visible role models
of ethical conduct, by communicating openly and regularly with employees about
ethics and values, and by using the reward system to hold everyone accountable to the
standards. This “moral person/moral manager” approach is similar to what executive
headhunters Thomas Neff and James Citrin list as their number one strategy (of six) of
corporate stars: “Live with Integrity, Lead by Example.” They say, “Integrity builds
the trust in senior management that is critical for high-performing organizations.”23
James Burke, former CEO of Johnson & Johnson, is probably the best-known
example of a highly visible ethical leader. Soon after being appointed CEO in the late
1970s, he challenged his senior managers to revisit and update the company’s age-old
credo (discussed later in more detail). He wasn’t willing to have it hanging on the wall
unless his senior managers were committed to living it. After much disagreement,
discussion, and input from J&J sites around the world, the credo was revised and its
commitment to customers first and foremost was intact. Less than three years later, the
Tylenol poisoning occurred (described in Chapter 10), and the credo guided corporate
decision making successfully through the crisis. Following that crisis, Burke initiated a
regular credo survey process in which employees were asked about the company’s
performance regarding the credo—and that process continues to this day.24 It was clear
to employees that Burke really cared about the credo and the values it represented.
When Paul O’Neill first became CEO at Alcoa, he brought with him a profound
concern for worker safety. Although Alcoa already had an enviable safety record at the
time based on industry standards, O’Neill created a goal of zero lost work days from
accidents—a goal that flabbergasted even the safety director. When O’Neill visited
plants, he told employees that the company was no longer going to budget for safety—
if a hazard was fixable, they should do it and the company would pay for it, no
questions asked. Then he gave the hourly workforce his telephone number at home and
told them to call him directly about safety problems. He created an accident reporting
system that required reporting within 24 hours of any accident, no matter how small,
and he used the reports as an opportunity for learning so that future accidents could be
avoided. He also got on an airplane and visited employees who had been seriously
hurt, no matter where in the world they were. Safety messages were everywhere,
including woven into the carpets at some Alcoa sites. And when employees in the
Pittsburgh headquarters crossed the street, they were careful not to jaywalk because it
was “unsafe.” Years after O’Neill retired, Alcoa continued to improve until it became
the safest company in the world. And Alcoa employees tell us that the emphasis on
safety continues today.
In the completely different arena of diversity, O’Neill again stood out for his
principled leadership. In his first week on the job, his secretary asked him to sign
160
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

papers to join a country club. This had been standard procedure in the past because
CEO membership was required in order for other Alcoa executives to join and use the
club. Upon asking for certification that the club did not discriminate, he learned that
the club did not have an open membership policy. O’Neill refused to sign the papers
and developed a new policy saying that Alcoa would not reimburse any employee
expenses at a place that did not allow admission to anyone who wanted it. O’Neill was
encouraged not to rock the boat and to wait before making such a huge change. His
response was, “What excuse am I going to use six or twelve months from now? I’ve
just discovered my principles? They were on vacation . . . when I first came?” He
explained that you have to have the courage of your convictions and insist on them all
of the time, not just when it’s convenient.25
Business executives are subject to immense pressure to win, and it can be tempting
to put intense pressure on their people to bend or even break the rules. Ethical leaders
maintain their principles through good times and bad. Bill George, retired CEO of
Medtronic, a maker of medical devices, recounts a story about the time he had to tell
analysts that, despite growing 15 percent for the quarter, the company’s earnings would
fall short of analysts’ expectations. The analysts berated him and called him a liar. Such
experiences drive some executives to fudge the numbers to meet Wall Street expect-
ations. But true ethical leaders are not dominated by this pressure. They learn to ignore
these outside voices and begin to listen more to their own inner voice and values. In
George’s case, he learned an important lesson when he visited a doctor who was
performing an angioplasty with one of the company’s balloon catheters that literally fell
apart during the procedure. The doctor was so angry that he took the blood-covered
catheter and threw it at George. What was the lesson for this ethical leader? Medtronic
workers don’t make pacemakers to please Wall Street. Their goal is to save lives.
According to George, “the CEO can’t have the shareholder centrally in mind when
makingdecisions. . . . America’sleadingcorporationsbecamegreatnotbygettingtheir
share prices up but by doing what they were set up to do incredibly well.”26
UNETHICAL LEADERSHIP
Unfortunately, unethical leaders can just as strongly
influence the development of an unethical culture. In terms of our matrix, unethical
leaders have reputations as weak moral persons and weak moral managers. Al Dunlap
was a senior executive with a reputation for unethical leadership. John Byrne of
Business Week wrote a book about Dunlap (Mean Business, 1997) and published
excerpts in the magazine. Dunlap became famous for turning struggling companies
around. When hired at Sunbeam, he was considered such a celebrity CEO that the
stock price spiked 49 percent in one day. But while at Sunbeam, he was also known for
“emotional abuse” of employees—being “condescending, belligerent and disre-
spectful.” “At his worst, he became viciously profane, even violent. Executives
said he would throw papers or furniture, bang his hands on his desk, and shout so
ferociously that a manager’s hair would be blown back by the stream of air that rushed
from Dunlap’s mouth.”
Dunlap also demanded that employees make the numbers at all costs, and he
rewarded them handsomely for doing so. As a result, they felt pressure to use
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
161

questionable accounting and sales techniques. Dunlap also lied to Wall Street, assuring
them that the firm was making its projections and would continue to reach even higher.
After just a couple of years, Dunlap couldn’t cover up the real state of affairs, and
Sunbeam’s board fired him in 1998. But he left the company crippled.27 In 2002,
Dunlap settled a civil suit filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). He
paid a $500,000 fine and agreed that never again would he be an officer or a director of
a public company. Investigators learned that allegations of accounting fraud on
Dunlap’s watch go back to the 1970s and follow him through a number of companies.
HYPOCRITICAL LEADERSHIP
Perhaps nothing can make us more cynical than a
leader who talks incessantly about integrity and ethical values but then engages in
unethical conduct, encourages others to do so either explicitly or implicitly, rewards
only bottom-line results, and fails to discipline misconduct. This leader is strong on the
communication aspect of moral management but clearly isn’t an ethical person—
doesn’t “walk the talk.” It’s a “do as I say, not as I do” approach. Al Dunlap made no
pretense about ethics. All that mattered was the bottom line, and he didn’t pretend to be
a nice guy. But hypocritical leadership is all about ethical pretense. The problem is that
by putting the spotlight on integrity, the leader raises expectations and awareness of
ethical issues. At the same time, employees realize that they can’t trust anything the
leader says. That leads to cynicism, and employees are likely to disregard ethical
standards themselves if they see the leader doing so.
Jim Bakker remains the best public example of hypocritical leadership. In the late
1970s and early 1980s, Bakker built his Praise the Lord (PTL) ministry into one of the
world’s biggest religious broadcasting empires. At its peak, Bakker’s television
ministry reached more than 10 million homes and had 2,000 employees. Bakker,
along with his wife, Tammy Faye, claimed to be doing “the Lord’s work” as he raked
in millions of dollars, convincing the faithful to purchase a limited number of lifetime
memberships in two hotels he claimed would be built at the PTL’s Heritage USA
Christian theme park. The problem was that the 25,000 lifetime memberships
(promising a free annual family stay for four days and three nights) in the Heritage
Grand Hotel morphed into 66,683 memberships. And, instead of the limited 30,000
memberships at the proposed Heritage Towers, PTL sold 68,755 memberships. You do
the math. It would be impossible to provide promised services to this many people. On
top of that, the second hotel was never completed.
The funds donated for these projects were being tapped to support PTL operating
expenses, including huge salaries and bonuses for the Bakkers and other top PTL
officials. When questioned at times about PTL’s finances, Bakker referred to the
organization’s annual audits conducted by big auditing firms. Unfortunately, PTL filed
for bankruptcy in 1987, three months after Bakker resigned in disgrace. The IRS
revoked PTL’s tax-exempt status, and in 1989 Bakker was convicted on fraud and
conspiracy charges. He spent eight years in prison.28
A more recent example of hypocritical leadership is Lord John Browne, formerly
the CEO of BP. Under Browne’s leadership, the company launched a $200 million
“Beyond Petroleum” campaign to promote its image as a highly socially responsible
162
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

company that would deliver performance without trading off worker safety or
environmental concerns. But when BP’s Texas City plant exploded (killing 15 workers
and injuring many more) and two big oil spills occurred in Alaska, regulators and
employees cited cost cutting on safety and negligence in pipeline corrosion prevention
as causes. It seemed that the Beyond Petroleum campaign was more about words than
action. Greenpeace awarded Browne the “Best Impression of an Environmentalist”
award in 2005, and the CEO was finally asked to resign in 2007 after a scandal in his
personal life surfaced.29 The lesson is pretty clear. If leaders are going to talk ethics
and social responsibility (as they should), they had better “walk the talk” or risk
cynicism or worse.
ETHICALLY NEUTRAL OR “SILENT” LEADERSHIP
The fact is that many top
managers are not strong leaders either ethically or unethically. They fall into what
employees perceive to be an ethically “neutral” or ethically “silent” leadership zone.
They simply don’t provide explicit leadership in the crucial area of ethics. They are
perceived to be silent on this issue, and employees aren’t sure what the leaders think
about ethics, if anything. This may be because the leader doesn’t realize how important
executive ethical leadership is to the organization’s ethical culture, isn’t comfortable
with talking about ethics issues, or just doesn’t care that much. On the moral person
dimension, the ethically neutral leader is not clearly unethical but is perceived to be
more self-centered than people oriented. On the moral manager dimension, the
ethically neutral leader is thought to focus on the bottom line without setting
complementary ethical goals. Little or no ethics message is coming from the top.
But it turns out that silence represents an important message. In the context of all the
other bottom-line-oriented messages being sent in a highly competitive business
environment, employees are likely to interpret silence to mean that the top executive
really doesn’t care how business goals are met (only that they are met), and they’ll act
on that message.30
Consider Sandy Weill, former charismatic CEO of Citigroup. Well before the
current financial crisis, a Fortune magazine article described the firm as a “blockbuster
money machine.” But the article also recounted scandalous allegations about Cit-
igroup and its Salomon Smith Barney unit (now sold off). “Citi helped Enron hide
debt; Salomon peddled worthless WorldCom debt; Star analyst Jack Grubman
recommended Winstar as it was heading for bankruptcy; Salomon rewarded telecom
execs with hot IPOs,” and more.31 In 2004, Japan shut down Citigroup’s private bank
in Japan that had made $84 million for the company in 2003. Regulators listed a long
series of transgressions including money laundering, sales of unsuitable products to
customers, and generally sloppy business practices.32 The company spent lots of time
and money playing defense with the media, responding to ugly headlines on a regular
basis. According to Fortune, Weill eventually became contrite and “got religion,” if a
bit late. Weill told his board that . . . his most important job . . . was “to be sure that
Citigroup operates at the highest level of ethics and with the utmost integrity.”33
However, the article also cited widespread cynicism about that statement, noting that
Weill was often “tone deaf” on these ethics issues.
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
163

At least from the perspective of outside observers, Weill exemplified “ethically
neutral” leadership. Being tone deaf on ethics issues is exactly what ethically neutral
leadership is about. Weill’s public statement that the “company is too big to micro-
manage” applies to his approach to managing ethics. He said a CEO relies on “very
competent people” and trusts them to do a good job. In the case of ethics management,
that meant leaving it to the executives running Citi’s various businesses. If the head of
a division thought ethics was important, ethics got resources and attention. If the head
didn’t promote ethics, attention turned elsewhere, and most likely to financial
performance goals. So, with a kind of benign neglect, Weill provided little explicit
ethical leadership. And with corporate rewards focused on the bottom line, managers
(and ultimately employees) had little motivation to attend to other issues.
This approach to ethics is in sharp contrast to prior CEO John Reed’s leadership
on ethics issues. Reed spent almost his entire career at Citicorp and was its CEO when
the huge American financial powerhouse merged with Weill’s Travelers organization
to form Citigroup. Reed, who was a banker his entire life, understood in his gut how
important reputation is to a financial institution. As a result, he encouraged and
supported the development of a strong, centralized corporate ethics program with
global reach. Interestingly, the people associated with that program were quickly gone,
and much of the program itself was dismantled after Weill took over.
Weill stepped down in 2003 and handed the CEO reins to Chuck Prince, who was
left to address the ongoing scandals—including $8 billion in scandal-related charges
that had to be absorbed. Prince fired high-level people involved in scandals, including
the chairman of Citigroup International who had been credited with a 30 percent
increase in international earnings in 2003. In an interview with Fortune magazine,
Prince said:
John Reed [CEO before Weill] told me once that culture is a set of
shared, unspoken assumptions. . . . I think the larger the company has
become, the more we need to speak about those unspoken assumptions.
We need to add to our celebration of financial performance a focus on
long-term compliance activities, long-term franchise building, being in it
for the long term. So one of the things we’re going to put into place, starting
in 2005, is a series of activities—training, communications, performance
appraisals—that will lend a little more balance to the aggressive financial
culture that we have always celebrated, and that I still do.
Short-term growth at the cost of long-term growth is a very bad trade. Some
people make that bad trade when they only hear one instrument in the orchestra. If they
hear the full orchestra, the full panoply of messages, then people have “no excuses”—
that’s the sign on my desk—no excuses.34
The more Prince scrutinized the organization, the more concerned he became
about loose internal controls. He began to add resources to legal compliance. He even
moved his office, from next to Weill’s to the floor below, and began consulting more
with John Reed.35 But Prince seemed to feel powerless to really change the culture that
164
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Weill had planted and that had taken root. Prince once confessed that he knew the
bank’s aggressive deal making could mean big trouble if the easy money stopped
flowing. But, he also said, “As long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and
dance,” he told the Financial Times in summer 2007, even as credit markets began to
shudder. “We’re still dancing.”36
The firm suffered severe performance problems under Prince’s leadership, and he
was replaced by Vikram Pandit in late 2007 (Pandit then resigned in 2012 under board
pressure over perceived mismanagement). Citigroup, along with several other financial
institutions considered “too large to fail,” was rescued in the fall 2008 U.S. government
bailout of financial institutions. The firm was in trouble because of losses related to risky
mortgage-backedsecurities,whichwespeculatemayhavesomethingtodowiththelaxity
around ethical standards created under Weill. Many point to the repeal of the Glass-
SteagallAct,whichseparatedcommercial banksfrominvestmentbanksandinsurance,as
one of the root causes of the 2008–2009 financial crisis. Weill had championed this
deregulation,and it madeCitigroup possible.When JohnReed expressedregretat his role
in urging repeal of Glass-Steagall, Weill would have none of it at the time. “When asked
aboutReed’s apology,Mr.Weill said,‘I don’t agreeatall.’ Suchdifferences, hesaid,were
‘part of our problem.’”37Recently, however, Weill softened his stance and now advocates
reinstatement of the Glass-Steagall law he fought so successfully to repeal.38
Research has found that executive ethical leadership is critical to employees. In
firms that have an ethical culture characterized by top executives who are strong
ethical leaders, unethical behavior is lower, and employees are more committed to
their organization, more ethically aware, and more likely to engage in positive helping
behaviors (including reporting problems to management).39 Research has also
revealed evidence that executive ethical leadership flows down through the organiza-
tion, affecting supervisors’ ethical leadership behavior and finally employee behav-
ior.40 But interestingly, senior executives are often not aware of how important their
ethical leadership is. Many believe that being an ethical person who makes ethical
decisions is enough. But it isn’t enough. Executives must lead on this issue (be moral
managers) if it is to register with employees. In a highly competitive environment of
intense focus on the bottom line, employees need to know that the executive leaders in
their organization care about ethics at least as much as financial performance. An
ethical leader makes it clear that strong bottom-line results are expected, but only if
they can be delivered in a highly ethical manner. Leaders may talk in terms of
reputation or values, or use other language they find comfortable. But the message
must be that the firm’s long-term reputation is an asset that everyone must protect.
OTHER FORMAL CULTURAL SYSTEMS
Selection Systems
Selection systems are the formal systems that are in place for recruiting and hiring new
employees. Selection systems are vital to hiring people who fit the culture of the firm.
For example, all employees at Southwest Airlines (including pilots) are selected based
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
165

on their personalities (traits that include cheerfulness, optimism, and team spirit)
among other credentials. So it’s not surprising to find flight attendants throwing gate
parties on Halloween and telling jokes to passengers over the plane’s loudspeakers.41
When considering the ethical culture, organizations can avoid ethical problems
by recruiting the right people and by building a reputation that precedes the
organization’s representatives wherever they go. Companies can conduct back-
ground checks, check references, administer integrity tests, and survey applicants
using some of the individual differences discussed in earlier chapters. For example,
they should be wary of hiring someone high on Machiavellianism if they’re trying
to create a cooperative culture where people help and support each other. Inter-
viewers can also ask ethics-related questions in interviews, for example, by asking
candidates about ethical issues they’ve confronted in the past and how they’ve
handled them.
In an article entitled, “Can You Interview for Integrity?” William Byham42
offered a series of questions an interviewer concerned about ethics might ask a
recruit. Here are adaptations of some of them:
1. We sometimes have to choose between what we think is right and what’s best
for the company. Can you give an example of such a time and tell how you
handled it?
2. Can you describe your current employer’s ethics? Are there things you feel
good about? Bad about?
3. Please provide an example of an ethical decision you’ve made at work and tell
how you handled it. What factors did you consider?
4. Can you provide an example of some past work behavior that you’ve regretted?
How would you behave differently today?
5. Have you ever felt the need to exaggerate or bend the truth to make a sale?
6. Have you ever observed someone else stretching the rules at work? What did
you do, if anything?
7. People are often tempted to make something seem better than it is. Have you
ever been in such a situation?
8. Have you ever had to go against company policies in order to accomplish
something?
9. Have you ever managed someone who misled a client? How did you handle it?
10. What’s your philosophy of how to think about policies? Are they guidelines, to
be followed to the letter?
Our students have been asked similar types of questions in interviews with the best
companies. Are you prepared to answer questions like these?
Recruiters can also inform prospective employees about the importance of
integrity in their organization and what happens to those who break the rules.
Companies that are serious about integrity can include statements about their values
166
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

and expectations in recruiting literature, in the scripts recruiters use when interviewing
job candidates, in offer letters to candidates, and in new-hire orientation programs.
These days, companies also need to be very selective when recruiting leaders who
are being considered for important decision-making roles in the firm. Many recent
business scandals have zeroed in on company chief financial officers (CFOs) who
played with the numbers to make it look as if profit goals expected by Wall Street had
been achieved when, in reality, they had not. Such individuals must display the
strongest moral character in order to withstand marketplace pressures to make the
numbers look good. Questions about how they would respond to such pressures and
how they have handled them in the past can be useful in selecting these key players.
Values and Mission Statements
Once employees are on board, many organizations aim to guide employees’ behavior
through formal organizational value statements, mission statements, credos, policies,
and formal codes of ethical conduct. Value and mission statements and credos are
general statements of guiding beliefs. Most companies have them, but it’s important that
thevalues and mission statement be closely aligned with other dimensions of the culture.
According to James Collins, coauthor of Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary
Companies, “the words matter far less than how they are brought to life. The mistake
most companies make . . . is not setting up procedures to make sure the mission is
carried out.” If the policies and codes are followed in daily behavior and people are held
accountable to them, this is another example of a strong ethical culture in alignment.
In the year 2000, Verizon’s published core values were integrity, respect,
imagination, passion, and service. But consider this. Customer service representatives
were expected to finish each call with the following question (in precisely these words)
to the customer: “Did I provide you with outstanding service today?” During a strike in
the fall of 2000, workers cited this disconnect between values and operating proce-
dures as a source of stress and cynicism. Asking customer service representatives to
follow a specific “script” (that sometimes led to irate customers becoming even more
irate) did not respect the individual customer service representative’s ability to serve
the customer in a more natural way, and it certainly didn’t allow the employee to use
imagination or passion in providing customer service. The script may have been well
intentioned, but it conflicted with several of the core values professed by the company
and appeared hypocritical to employees. Stated values that are inconsistent with
management practice can quickly generate employee cynicism.43 Wouldn’t it be better
and more consistent with the value of respect to simply ask service representatives to
end their calls with a question about whether the customer was satisfied with the
quality of service, but let the representatives choose their own words?
Probably the most famous example of a mission and values statement is the Johnson
& Johnson credo, which outlines the pharmaceutical company’s commitments.Probably
most important is the statement that the company’s “first responsibility is to the doctors,
nurses and patients, to the mothers and fathers and all others who use our products and
services.” Other responsibilities follow, for example, to employees, suppliers,
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
167

communities, and finally stockholders. Notably, stockholders are listed last under the
assumption that if the other responsibilities are taken care of, stockholders will do well.
On its website (www.jnj.com), the company includes information about the credo.
Most famously, the corporation drew on its credo for guidance during the Tylenol
crises of the 1980s, when the company’s product was adulterated with cyanide by
someone who was never identified. Company managers and employees made countless
decisions (including recalling all Tylenol at huge cost) that were inspired by and
consistent with the credo’s guidance. Today, company employees participate in a
periodic survey and evaluation of how well the company performs its credo responsi-
bilities. Survey results are then fed back to the senior management, and corrective action
is taken to correct any shortcomings. As one recent example, in 2007, the company
reported itself to the SEC and Justice Department when it discovered possibleviolations
of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (the FCPA is discussed further in Chapter 11).
It takes little for a company to make a formal statement like the J&J Credo, but it
takes quite an ongoing commitment to actually follow it.44 Questions have arisen
about whether J&J has sustained that commitment, because of some serious legal and
ethical problems in recent years. We speculate that it is a monumental management
challenge to integrate a credo (and the rest of a strong ethical culture) across such a
large decentralized organization with many divisions and subunits even if the chief
executive is strongly committed to doing so. But when we talk to current J&J
employees, we find that most (if not all) still talk easily about the credo, its importance
in the J&J culture, and how it guides ethical conduct in the organization.
When you are considering joining an organization, look for the organization’s
values statement and ask employees for examples of how the organization lives its
values (or doesn’t). Such a question can provide useful insight into cultural alignment
and misalignment by making clear whether the values statement represents lofty
formal statements with little basis in reality or “values in use” that represent how
people really behave every day. It’s important to ask yourself whether your own stated
values (you should have assessed them in Chapter 2) match up with the organization’s
values. If they do, and you have evidence that this is an organization that lives its
values, you’re on your way to a job you’ll find satisfying.
Policies and Codes
Formal ethics policies (often called codes of ethics or codes of conduct) are longer and
more detailed than broad values and mission statements. They provide guidance about
behavior in multiple specific areas. For example, most ethics codes address issues of
respectful treatment of others, conflicts of interest, expense reporting, and the
appropriateness of giving and receiving gifts. Policy manuals are even lengthier
than codes and include more detailed lists of rules covering a multitude of job
situations that are specific to the industry, organization, and type of job. An extended
discussion of policies and codes follows in Chapter 6.
In a 2007 Ethics Resource Center study, 83 percent of respondents from a wide
variety of private sector employers across the United States reported that the
168
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

organizations they work for have formal ethics policy standards. That percentage was
98% for public sector employees.45 So it’s fair to say that most employers are making
an effort to provide formal guidance to their employees regarding ethical and legal
conduct. It’s also important to note that these codes are living documents that are
revised regularly in response to changing conditions. For example, early ethics codes
said nothing about Internet privacy or social networking guidelines, but these topics
are much more common in today’s codes.
Most companies with codes now distribute them quite widely. A 1995 survey of
Fortune 1000 firms found that 75 percent of responding companies reported
distributing their code or policy to at least 80 percent of their employees.46 This
finding may be a by-product of the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines (discussed at length
in Chapter 6), which specify communication of compliance standards to all
employees as a guiding principle. Research has found that when employees are
familiar with the code and refer to it for guidance, they are less likely to engage in
unethical behavior, more likely to seek advice about ethical issues, and more likely
to report ethical rule violations.47 But, to have real influence on behavior, a code
must be enforced and aligned with other culture components.48 Otherwise, codes of
conduct are more likely to be viewed as mere “window dressing” rather than guides
for actual behavior.
Many firms post their codes on their websites. Some firms also distribute their
codes beyond their own employees to vendors and suppliers who are explicitly asked
to comply. For example, a supermarket company distributed its code to its suppliers
along with a letter, signed by the president:
Dear Business Associate:
As the holidays draw near, we are mindful of the mutually satisfying and
mutually profitable relationship which exists between our company and
our suppliers. We look forward to many more years of successful growth
together through our joint efforts to provide our customers with quality
products, excellent service and low price.
In recent years, we have found many of our staff members embar-
rassed by well-intentioned gifts from those with whom we do business.
Our Board of Directors approved the enclosed Code of Ethics which
clearly states our policy prohibiting our Associates from accepting gifts
from our suppliers and customers. We feel that this policy should apply
during the holidays as well as throughout the year.
With so much attention being given to practices which bring the
business community’s ethics into question, we urge your support of our
efforts to maintain the respect and confidence of the industry for the
objectivity of our dealings with suppliers.
Since failure to comply with our policy will result in disqualification
from further business dealings with us, we request that you distribute this
letter to those in your company who have business dealings with our
corporation and its subsidiaries.
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
169

The most significant means of expressing your appreciation to our
staff continues to be your efforts to help us grow together by anticipating
and meeting the changing consumers’ needs and wants.
If you have any questions regarding this policy, please contact. . . .
With our best wishes for happy holidays and a healthy and prosperous
New Year.
Companies are also taking more responsibility for the behavior of suppliers, even
if those suppliers are in foreign countries. If Nike or Wal-Mart buys shoes or clothes
from a factory in Asia, these firms are increasingly aware that the supplier’s actions are
their responsibility. As an example, Wal-Mart requires its suppliers to agree to comply
with its code of ethical conduct and requires that suppliers post its free 1-800 reporting
telephone number at work sites. We’ll discuss this topic further in Chapter 11.
The idea of guiding behavior with codes of conduct extends to higher education
institutions, where many colleges have honor codes that apply to academic (e.g., test
cheating, plagiarism) and sometimes even nonacademic (job search) behavior. Research
onhonor codes incolleges and universitiessuggeststhat students cheat less in institutions
that have honor codes.49 However, students’ perceptions of their peers’ cheating has an
even stronger influence on cheatingbehavior than the existence ofa code. In addition, the
certainty of being reported and the severity of penalties are important because they
support the idea that the code alone is not the most important influence.50
Remember, cognitive moral development research tells us that most people are
looking outside themselves for guidance, and stated organizational policy can be an
important source of that guidance. To determine where policy is needed, the
organization can ask or survey employees and managers about areas of ethical
concern and their perception of the need for policy in each area. In one study,
managers made it clear that policy was needed in such areas as expense claims, gifts
and bribes, and treatment of competitor information.51
Orientation and Training Programs
Socialization into the ethical culture is often begun through formal orientation programs
for new employees and is reinforced through ongoing training. The organization’s
cultural values and guiding principles can be communicated in orientation programs.
Employees often receive an introduction to the values and mission statements as well as
the company’s history and current code of conduct. But new employees are so over-
whelmed with information that it’s important to follow up regularly with training
programs that offer more specific guidance. An increasing number of firms have added
ethics to their list of training programs. Some have done so as a result of the revision of
the U.S. Sentencing Commission Guidelines and the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation that
requires public companies to conduct compliance training at all levels, including senior
executives and the board of directors. Most Fortune 1000 firms provide some ethics
training,52 and many of them do so annually. In the 2007 Ethics Resource Center study,53
75 percent of people surveyed said that their employers provide ethics training and that
170
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

this training is generally mandatory. Some companies use online ethics training; others
use classroomface-to-facetraining.InChapter6,we’llpresentmorespecificsabouthow
different firms conduct ethics training.
It’s important to note that the ethics training must be consistent with other ethical
culture systems, because a training program that is out of alignment with other culture
systems is thought of, at best, as a pleasant day away from the office. At its worst, the
ethics training is seen as an obstacle to getting “real” work done—or even as a joke.
For example, a young man who worked in mortgage lending in 2006 said that his
company had provided a high-quality weeklong training program to prepare him for
his job. Among other more technical aspects of his job, he was taught to advise clients
to be sure that they could afford their payments and to avoid incurring additional credit
card debt. He felt that this was smart and caring advice, and he felt good about his new
role. But when he returned to the office, his “mentor” (who had been in the job only six
months longer than he had) told him that all that mattered was closing the deal and
making money for himself and the company, and that “advising” clients was a waste of
time. If his “advisor” role had been reinforced by his mentor, the cultural message
would have been entirely different. Perhaps the company’s fate would have been
different too—it no longer exists. And, to his credit, this young man left the job
voluntarily after considering the harm that was being done to the firm’s clients.
Performance Management Systems
Performance management systems involve the formal process of articulating
employee goals, identifying performance metrics, and then providing a compensation
structure that rewards individual—and frequently team—effort in relation to those
goals. Performance management systems also include formal disciplinary systems that
are designed to address performance problems when they arise. An effective per-
formance management system is a key component of the ethical culture. The system
plays an essential role in alignment or misalignment of the ethical culture because
people pay attention to what is measured, rewarded, and disciplined. So if employees
with integrity are the ones who get ahead, and unethical behavior is disciplined, that
process goes a long way toward promoting an ethical culture.
DESIGNING A PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS THAT SUPPORTS
ETHICAL CONDUCT
Because people “do what’s measured and rewarded,” the
best way for an organization to design a comprehensive performance management
system is to spend time identifying which factors drive the results the organization
strives to achieve. This type of corporate soul-searching generally results in a list of
these factors, both financial and nonfinancial. Just as Fortune magazine considers
reputation when designing its famed “lists” of admired companies, many sophisticated
companies understand that reputation, in many cases, drives long-term financial
results. However, many companies continue to design performance management
programs that consider only short-term financial results. They ignore the nonfinancial
drivers that can actually serve as the underpinning of the numbers. These companies
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
171

focus on what business results are delivered, and they ignore how those results were
achieved. That is probably the fastest way for an organization’s ethical culture to get
out of alignment.
Here’s how performance management systems can be designed to get great results
the right way. First, an organization needs to focus on the mechanics. For example,
once an organization understands what is necessary to drive results, it needs to set
goals to achieve those desired results and metrics to determine whether the goals are
being met. Real success in this area comes when organizations effectively communi-
cate those goals to every employee, helping employees identify how each person can
create value for the organization and then rewarding employees fairly for their
contribution to achieving those corporate goals.
Once the mechanics are in place, the next challenge is to marry the what with the
how, and that’s where an organization’s articulated values come in. Those values—
probably concerning the importance of people, integrity, diversity, customer service,
and so forth—need to be translated into behavior metrics that every employee is held
accountable for. When such a process is in place, high fliers who exceed all of their
numbers can be held accountable for how they met those numbers because this step is
built right into their performance expectations and rewards process.
A good example is an account executive with a leading consulting company who
managed her firm’s relationship with many of the largest companies in New York City.
Her clients generated revenues in the millions for her firm, and that fact alone would
ordinarily be enough to ensure that she was named a partner in the firm. However, the
senior management team was so upset at how she trounced the firm’s stated value of
“treating people with respect”—she was extremely abusive to her coworkers—that
they repeatedly denied her promotion. Of course, one could argue that she shouldn’t
have a job at all. But at least her behavior—the how involved in attaining her huge
results—prevented her from being promoted and esteemed as a partner.
American Express has tied its performance appraisal system directly to its values
and code of conduct. The values are associated with a culture that focuses on long-term
results as well as the desire to be an “employer of choice.” The company’s ethics code
states the expectation that leaders will be ethical role models who exhibit the highest
standards of integrity, develop employees, communicate the company’s ethical
expectations and their own support for those expectations, and create an open
environment so that employees feel free to express their concerns. The company’s
360-degree performance management process for senior leaders then identifies a
number of leadership competencies, including explicit examples of high performance
such as the following:
& Treats others with respect at all times; is fair and objective
& Actively listens and incorporates input from others
& Acts with integrity
& Inspires the trust of the team, is reliable and consistent
& Talks openly and honestly—says it as it is
172
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Examples of poor performance are also part of the system (e.g., “breaks promises,
is inconsistent, fails to show respect for others”).
The ratings of these competencies are weighted substantially in promotion and
compensation decisions, thus making it difficult to get promoted if one is rated poorly
on these ethical leadership competencies and important to be rated highly if an
employee wants to advance. Finally, the company is investing resources in providing
leaders with the necessary skills so that they can effectively fulfill the company’s
expectations consistent with its values.54
Alignment of the goals and rewards with the organization’s values is essential
because employees will generally do what’s measured and rewarded, and they’ll
assume that the behaviors that are rewarded represent the “real” ethical culture. So, in
the American Express example, behavior consistent with the company’s stated values
is measured and rewarded with promotions and compensation. This is a great example
of ethical culture alignment.
But misalignment of rewards with other aspects of the ethical culture is quite
common. For example, imagine an organization where everyone knows that the top
sales representative’s sales depend on lying to customers about delivery dates despite
an ethics code that talks about customer satisfaction as a key value. Not only does the
unethical conduct go undisciplined, but the sales representative receives large bonuses,
expensive vacations, and recognition at annual sales meetings. Members of the sales
force recognize that information about what is rewarded carries the “real” cultural
message, and so the code becomes meaningless—or worse yet, an example of top
management’s hypocrisy.
For an ethical culture to be in alignment, poor performance against stated ethical
goals must also be addressed quickly and fairly. For example, dishonest or dis-
respectful behavior (or any behavior inconsistent with ethical values) should be
disciplined using a progressive disciplinary system that employees perceive to be
fair. A first offense (unless it is particularly serious) is usually addressed in a
constructive manner that gives the employee the opportunity to provide input and
to change the behavior. Subsequent misconduct is addressed more severely, and
dismissal is the ultimate outcome for repeat or serious offenses.
It’s also important that employees be disciplined equally across organizational
and performance levels. That means the successful star executive as well as the lower-
level employee must be disciplined for knowingly breaking the rules. In fact, at that
higher level, the discipline should probably be quicker and harsher because the higher
in the organization one goes, the more responsibility one holds, and the more one is a
role model for others. As a result of recent scandals and increased scrutiny by
regulators, companies are taking discipline more seriously. Even the perception of
unethical behavior can lead companies to dismiss high-level executives in the current
environment.
The bottom line is that performance management systems are important in
themselves because they provide guidance about expected behavior, but they’re
particularly important in the sense that people look to them to reflect the “real”
message about what is valued in the organization. The essential question is whether
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
173

consistency exists between what the organization says (e.g., values statements, codes)
and what it actually measures, rewards, and punishes.
Organizational Authority Structure
Ethical cultures should guide individuals to take responsibility for their own behavior,
question orders to behave unethically, and report misconduct or problems. A strong
ethical culture incorporates a structure that emphasizes and supports individual
responsibility and accountability at every level. Employees are encouraged to take
responsibility for their own actions and to question authority figures if they have
concerns. And individuals are held accountable for negative consequences when they
occur and for reporting problems they observe. One manager we know created the idea
of “Velcro” to convey the importance of responsibility. She tells her direct reports, if
you know about a problem, it’s yours until you address it. It’s stuck to you like Velcro!
Most modern organizations are bureaucratic,55 meaning that they have a hierarchy
of authority, a division of labor or specialization, standardization of activities, and a
stress on competence and efficiency. Bureaucracy provides many advantages, and
large organizations require a certain amount of bureaucracy in order to function. The
bureaucracy can also be used to create a structure that supports ethics, and you’ll learn
more about this in Chapter 6. For example, ethics and legal compliance offices in
organizations signal to everyone that these are important issues worthy of resources,
expertise, and staff. However, certain characteristics of bureaucracy—such as spe-
cialization, division of labor, and hierarchy of authority—can present problems for the
organization’s ethical culture.
AUTHORITY, RESPONSIBILITY, AND ETHICAL CULTURE
With bureaucracy
comes the idea of legitimate authority. Look at any organizational chart. It will
tell you who supervises whom—who has authority over whom. These authority
figures serve important bureaucratic roles. They direct work, delegate responsibility,
conduct performance appraisals, and make decisions about promotions and raises.56
But the idea of legitimate authority can present problems for the ethical culture.
First, as you’ll learn in Chapter 7, people tend to obey authority figures no matter what
they are ordered to do.57 This natural tendency toward unquestioning obedience can be
a real threat to the organization’s attempt to build individual responsibility into its
ethical culture. In attempting to control employee behavior, many firms expect loyalty;
some demand unquestioning obedience from their employees. You might think that’s a
good idea—that authority figures have more experience and should know what’s right,
and employees should follow their orders. But even the military with its authoritarian
structure expects soldiers to question unethical orders. Loyalty is generally a good
thing, but you shouldn’t be expected to be loyal or obedient to an unethical boss or
organization.
Unquestioning obedience to authority means that employees are not expected to
think for themselves, to question bad orders, or to take responsibility for problems they
observe. Therefore, a “do as you’re told” and “don’t ask any questions” culture that
174
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

expects unquestioning obedience from employees can become involved in serious
ethical problems. Research has found that the more a firm demands unquestioning
obedience to authority, the higher the unethical conduct among employees, the lower
their tendency to seek advice about ethical issues, and the lower the likelihood that
employees would report ethical violations or deliver “bad news” to management.58
Some managers create a structure designed to help them avoid blame.59 Their
greatest fear is that when it comes time to blame someone, the finger will point their way,
and their job will be at risk. By delegating responsibility to those at lower levels in the
organization, the authority figure can often avoid personal blame for mistakes or ethical
blunders. When it comes time to blame someone, the finger of blame frequently points
down. Underlings, in particular, can become the scapegoat for mistakes made at higher
levels. CYA (cover your a—)memosproliferate as managers look to blame someone in a
relatively powerless position who is considered to be expendable.
The structure of an organization can also fragment jobs and roles.60 It isn’t
necessarily that individuals don’t want to take responsibility. But jobs and roles get so
divided up that they simply can’t see the big picture.61 We’ll see in Chapter 7 how
military bureaucrats passed the buck for responsibility during an investigation of the
My Lai massacre in Vietnam. Those involved saw themselves only as cogs in a
machine. No one felt responsible for the larger outcomes of their actions.
NEW ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURES
Organizations today are developing struc-
tures designed to remove bureaucratic layers, push responsibility down, and empower
individuals to make decisions at every organizational level. Take the example of office
furniture manufacturer Herman Miller, Inc. (HMI), which is committed to the values of
“opencommunication,” “thedignityofeachindividual,” and“qualityrelationshipsbased
on mutual trust and integrity.” Kevin Knowles, a crew leader for six years, said, “What
always surprises me is that everyone in the company . . . is free to talk with anyone in
management about whatever they’d like to talk about.” Managers at HMI cite workers’
ability to go over their managers’ heads as a major reason for the company’s success.
“There’snofearofretributionifyoucallsomeonethreelevelsabove.”HMItoutsaprocess
itschairmancalls“rovingleadership”thatallowsanyonetobealeaderonaparticularissue.
Here is an example of how roving leadership was tested successfully. In the years
when AIDS was still a highly feared disease with much misinformation flowing, an
employee with AIDS decided that he should let others know about his illness. A
coworker took the roving leader responsibility and informed the human resources
manager. Quickly, the entire plant was informed, and a physician from headquarters
flew in with a training videotape and a question-and-answer session. According to the
roving leader, what’s important is that HMI’s value system “allows us to act on our
instincts and know the company will support us. Because the value of each individual
is important to us, we were able to stop the manufacture of furniture for one day to take
care of Peter.”62 Such a culture likely contributes to the ongoing success of the
company. These recent changes in organizational structure have powerful implications
for taking responsibility and for ethical decision making, and they increase the
importance of having a strongly aligned ethical culture. When individuals are
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
175

independently making decisions, with less direct supervision, they need a strongly
aligned ethical culture to guide them. An important part of this culture is a structure
that supports taking individual responsibility for ethical action.
STRUCTURES TO SUPPORT REPORTING OF PROBLEMS
In today’s organiza-
tions, fewer employees are directly supervised and organizations rely increasingly on
employees to alert them to problems or report misconduct. Yet employees are often
reluctant to do so. Therefore, most large organizations have set up formal structures
and systems for making suggestions and for reporting misconduct internally. These
systems use intranets and phone systems to answer employees’ concerns and take
complaints and reports about observed wrongdoing.
As we all know, powerful norms exist against reporting on peers or superiors
(internal whistleblowing). The words we use to describe this behavior—tattling,
squealing, snitching, informing, and ratting—all have negative connotations. In fact,
there isn’t a nice or even a neutral word to describe it. Can you come up with one? As
suggested in Chapter 4, whistleblowers frequently suffer retaliation, particularly when
they report managerial or organizational misconduct.63 They perceive (often rightly)
that they are punished rather than rewarded for doing what they think is right.
Therefore, employee fear of reporting misconduct is widespread and silence is the
default.64 If an organization claims that it’s attempting to develop a strongly aligned
ethical culture, retaliation against a whistleblower is a powerful example of mis-
alignment. Again, the workers view this “punishment” of the whistleblower as an
example of the organization’s “real” ethical beliefs.
The ethical organization, however, should view an employee who takes respon-
sibility for reporting a problem or misconduct as important to an effective control
system and must find ways to make such activity safe and encouraged. Some
organizations have even rewarded whistleblowing. For example, in 1996, Fortune
magazine published memos from the chairman of a Wall Street financial services firm.
The following memo was addressed to senior managing directors, managing directors,
and associate directors.
We need your help. Please help us get a message out to every associate. It
is essential that once again we stress that we welcome every suspicion or
feeling that our co-workers might have about something they see or hear
that is going on . . . that might not measure up to our standards of honesty
and integrity. . . .
We want people . . . to cry wolf. If the doubt is justified, the reporter
will be handsomely rewarded. If the suspicion proves unfounded, the
person who brought it to our attention will be thanked for their vigilance
and told to keep it up.
Forget the chain of command! That is not the way [the company] was
built. If you think somebody is doing something off the wall or his/her
decision making stinks, go around the person, and that includes me. . . .
Get these messages out loud and clear.
176
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

We have had some senior people who resented “end runs.” They quickly became
associated with more conventional firms—you can draw your own conclusions about
whether their career change worked out for the best.65
This leader sent a clear message that whistleblowing was encouraged and
rewarded. In the second memo, he shared information about a specific instance in
which two administrative assistants detected that fictitious taxicab vouchers were
being submitted by an employee. The employee was terminated, and the administra-
tive assistants were provided a cash award.
Decision-Making Processes
The organization’s formal decision-making processes are another important part of the
ethical culture. In an aligned ethical culture, leaders make ethical concerns a formal
and expected part of decision making. This emphasis on ethics in decision making can
be reinforced by regularly addressing ethical concerns in meetings and by making
them an expected part of managers’ reports regarding new products or new business
ventures. For example, managers may be asked to consider potential harm to multiple
stakeholders when proposing a new product or process.
As one example, environmental impact is now an expected and routine part of
corporate decision making in many firms. Some organizations such as hospitals are
also creating special high-level “ethics” committees charged with reviewing major
organizational level decisions from an ethical perspective.66 For example, one can
imagine a responsible pharmaceutical company making such assessments about
whether to launch a new drug that has serious side effects even after the FDA has
approved it. Some have advocated the implementation of moral quality circles, groups
set up to assess the morality of business decisions.67
OVER-RELIANCE ON QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
Decision-making processes can
contribute to unethical behavior by relying exclusively on quantitative analysis and
focusing only on financial outcomes. For example, in Chapter 3 we discussed the
decision-making process that kept the Ford Pinto from being recalled. In that situation,
exclusive reliance on a quantitative cost-benefit analysis to the exclusion of ethical
considerations had disastrous consequences. In another example, Johns Manville, the
former corporate giant and producer of asbestos, was brought down by decision-
making processes that focused on the bottom line to the exclusion of worker health.
Decades ago, top management began to receive information implicating asbestos
inhalation as a cause of severe lung disease in workers. Managers and medical staff
suppressed the research and concealed the information from employees. During
testimony, a lawyer reported on a confrontation with the corporate counsel about
the failure to share X-ray results with employees. The lawyer reported asking, “You
mean to tell me you would let them work until they dropped dead?” The Johns
Manville lawyer replied, “Yes, we save a lot of money that way.” It was apparently
cheaper to pay workers’ compensation claims than to develop safer working
conditions.
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
177

A New Jersey court found that the company had made a “conscious, cold-blooded
business decision to take no protective or remedial action.”68 Obviously, organiza-
tional decision makers must rely on quantitative analyses in making business deci-
sions. But their reliance on numbers, to the exclusion of ethical considerations, is
problematic and contributes to an unethical culture. Discussions about whether the
decision is the “right” thing to do must accompany discussions about the effect of a
particular decision on the bottom line. Important decisions should be subjected to a
discussion of ethical concerns, especially potential impacts on stakeholders.
BURDEN OF PROOF
In 1986, Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation, the second-largest
U.S. baby food manufacturer, pleaded guilty to 215 felony counts and admitted to
selling apple products that were a blend of synthetic ingredients. How did this happen?
There were many causes, among them the company’s financial difficulties, the belief
that other companies were selling fake juice (industry norms), and the belief that the
juice was perfectly safe.
A chief cause may also have been the decision-making processes that were used.
When Jerome LiCari, director of research and development, recommended changing
suppliers in 1981 (because he suspected adulteration), Operations Head John Lavery
turned the traditional burden of proof around. Generally, baby food manufacturers
would switch suppliers if the supplier couldn’t demonstrate that the product was
genuine. In this case, Lavery said that if LiCari wanted to go with a more expensive
supplier, he would have to prove that the concentrate they were buying was adulterated
(rather than genuine). Given the technology available at the time, this was difficult, and
the supplier was retained.69
A similar decision-making criterion was used in the decision to launch the space
shuttle Challenger despite engineers’ concerns about O-ring failure in cold weather. In
previous launches, engineers had been required to show evidence that the launch was
safe (which would have been difficult, if not impossible). In the case of the Challenger,
the burden of proof was changed. Engineers who balked at the impending launch
decision were asked to prove that it was unsafe (rather than that it was safe).
These examples suggest that it’s relatively easy to alter decision-making pro-
cesses to support whatever decision managers have already made. That’s why it’s
extremely important that organizations design formal decision-making processes in
good financial times and before a crisis occurs. Then, when trouble strikes, they can
rely on these effective decision-making processes to guide them. The space shuttle
Challenger might never have been launched if engineers had been required to prove
that the launch would be safe, rather than unsafe. Managers must be particularly alert
to changes in traditional decision-making criteria, especially in times of crisis.
INFORMAL CULTURAL SYSTEMS
In addition to the formal systems described previously, ethical culture is kept alive
informally and symbolically through informal norms, heroes, rituals, myths, and
stories. Employees experience the “real” organization through these informal systems,
178
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

and information about them is carried through informal communication systems such
as the grapevine and water cooler gatherings. In this way, people come to know what
behaviors are “really” rewarded, how decisions are “really” made, and what organi-
zational leaders “really” care about and expect. If messages from the formal and
informal cultural systems differ, the ethical culture is out of alignment. It’s important
to note that employees are more likely to believe the messages carried by the informal
system. Research has found that employees’ perceptions of informal cultural systems
influence their ethics-related behavior more than the formal systems do.70 Therefore
the management of these informal systems is extremely important.
Role Models and Heroes
Much socialization about ethics is informally conducted by role models and mentors.
Role models may be senior managers, immediate superiors, or just more experienced
coworkers. Kent Druyvesteyn, former staff vice president of ethics, General Dynamics
Corporation, made an important point about senior leaders as ethical role models.
“People in leadership need to . . . set the tone by the example of their own conduct.
We could have had all the workshops in the world. We could have even had Jesus and
Moses and Mohammed and Buddha come and speak at our workshops. But, if after all
of that, someone in a leadership position then behaved in a way which was contrary to
the standards, that instance of misconduct by a person in a leadership position would
teach more than all the experts in the world.” By contrast, if senior leaders consistently
model behavior of the highest integrity, employees learn that the formal messages
about ethics are real.
Mentoring occurs at all levels in the organization and is an informal process of
socialization whereby a more senior person takes a junior person under wing,
providing information, career strategies, rules of the road, and so on. Individuals
who are passing through organizational “boundaries,” such as new hires, or those who
are transferring from one part of the organization to another are most affected by these
socialization influences.71 In an ethical culture, the mentor emphasizes the importance
of integrity and resistance to pressure to behave unethically. In an unethical culture, the
mentor may indoctrinate the individual into accepted unethical practices, making it
difficult for the individual not to go along.72 The new accounting graduate who was
told by his superior in a public accounting firm, “You’re too honest to be an auditor,”
received a powerful message about ethics (or, actually, the lack thereof) in that
organization. When looking for evidence of ethical culture alignment and mis-
alignment, ask whether the organization’s role models behave consistently with
the organization’s espoused values and codes.
In an ethical culture, heroes should personify the organization’s values.73 Heroes
are symbolic figures who set standards of performance by modeling certain behaviors,
and they can be the organization’s formal leaders. The CEO can be seen as an
organization’s hero. But, heroes can also be founders who are no longer even present
in the organization. As we noted earlier, Thomas Jefferson is still very much alive at
the University of Virginia. Stories about the values of these heroes continue to
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
179

influence decision making. Thus, a hero who champions integrity and stands up for
what is right may influence the behavior of many in the organization.
An organization’s hero can also be someone who is not a founder, the president or
chief executive officer. For example, at universities or on professional sports team,
coaches or star players often become organizational heroes. The important question is
what values do these heroes represent? Savvy executives understand the role that
heroes play in forming or changing a culture. One CEO of a financial services firm was
very serious about identifying and rewarding people who lived his organization’s
values. He challenged his executives to bring him stories of employees who were
doing the right things in the right way, who were models of the culture. He collected
these stories and sent personal, handwritten thank-you notes to those model employ-
ees. While a phone call might have sufficed, employees were so thrilled with his
written recognition and praise that they displayed his notes in their offices. Those
framed notes sent a rather loud message to other employees about what kind of
behavior was valued at high levels. Of course, they also helped spread word of the
“heroes” and their deeds. In a similar example, Southwest Airlines publishes letters
from customers in its monthly newsletter about employees who provided outstanding
customer service (a key organizational value). They publish the employees’ pictures in
the newsletter and post them on the wall in the headquarters. By doing so, they are
identifying these individuals as heroes and role models for others to emulate.
Norms: “The Way We Do Things around Here”
Norms are standards of daily behavior that are accepted as appropriate by members of
a group. They exert a powerful influence on individual behavior in organizations, and
they can serve to support an ethical or unethical culture. For example, imagine an
individual entering a computer software sales job who is told immediately by peers in
the sales force that customers should always be dealt with honestly because long-term
customer relations are so important to the firm. Here, the norm of honesty with
customers supports ethical conduct and an ethical culture. On the other hand, consider
the individual who begins a new job and is told by his or her colleagues that making the
sale is all that counts, even if you have to lie to the customer about the capabilities of
the software or delivery dates. This norm supports unethical conduct and contributes to
an unethical culture. Either kind of norm (ethical or unethical) can become “the way
we do things around here” in the organization.
Formal rules are often inconsistent with the informal norms that develop. For
example, the salesperson described previously may have attended a mandatory ethics
training session that taught rules of honesty in customer relationships. But if the
message being sent on the job is to make the sale no matter what, the formal rule is
overridden. Similarly, at a fast-food restaurant, new employees may be told about a
rule against eating food without paying for it. However, once on the job, they may see
coworkers eating while the supervisor looks the other way. These coworkers may
rationalize their behavior because of their low pay or poor working conditions, or
because the supervisor doesn’t seem to care or eats food himself or herself.
180
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Encouraged to join in, the new employee is likely to do so, having learned the “real”
rules. Thus, despite formal rules, regulations, codes, and credos, informal norms are
frequently the most influential behavior guides and clues to the culture. When the
formal messages are consistent with the informal norms, this contributes to an ethical
culture in alignment. And when informal norms are inconsistent with formal rules and
codes, the culture is clearly out of alignment.
Rituals
Rituals are an important part of an ethical culture. They tell people symbolically what
the organization wants them to do and how it expects them to do it.74 Rituals are a way
of affirming and communicating culture in a very tangible way.75 Organizations have
meetings, parties, banquets, barbecues, and awards ceremonies that all convey
messages about what’s valued in the organization, Years ago, General Motors of
Canada introduced a new vision and values by asking each manufacturing unit to
create a small float representing one of the key values. These floats were part of a
parade that kicked off a full day of culture-building ritual surrounding the theme
“Customers for Life” and the motto “I Am GM.” During the day, the CEO unveiled a
large painting of the group vision and told a story about the company’s future. To
reinforce the “I Am GM” motto, employees were asked to see themselves as being
responsible, at any moment, for the company, its products, and services. The day ended
with the “GM Acceleration Song” performed by the 100-person Up With People
singing and dancing group. The song had been revised to incorporate the new values
created by the leadership team.76
Some companies have annual family picnics and “bring your child to work days”
that encourage employees to value time with their families. Some have on-site child
care so that having lunch with your preschool child in the company cafeteria becomes
a valued daily ritual and symbol of the extent to which the organization values family.
Others have awards ceremonies that convey the values of the organization, including
awards for exemplary ethical conduct (see the discussion of Lockheed Martin’s
Chairman’s Award in Chapter 6). It’s important to ask what values are celebrated at
these rituals and ceremonies because they can easily support unethical behavior, such
as making the numbers no matter how. For example, sales meetings occur in most
organizations. So is success with integrity being touted and celebrated at these
meetings, or are only those who make their numbers celebrated at these events? Is
the ritual of getting together after work to drink at a sports bar reinforcing an “old boys
network” in an organization that touts its attempt to diversify its work force? Look for
whether the rituals are consistent with the company’s stated values, formal rules, and
reward systems to help determine whether the culture is in alignment.
Myths and Stories
Another extremely important way organizational culture is communicated and kept
alive is through the informal communication network. If you want to learn about an
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
181

organization’s culture, ask insiders to tell you stories that characterize the organiza-
tion. People tell stories to give meaning to their world and life.77 Organizational myths
and stories explain and give meaning to the organizational culture. They may be
anecdotes about a sequence of events drawn from the organization’s history such as
J&J’s story of the Tylenol recall. The story’s characters are employees, perhaps the
founder or other company heroes, and the moral of the story expresses the organ-
ization’s values.78
At IBM, a story that has been told and retold describes how a low-level employee
denied Tom Watson, then IBM president, entry into a restricted area of the company
because Watson was not wearing his IBM identification badge. Watson praised the
employee, suggesting the importance of upholding company rules and applying them
to everyone.
In other ethical organizations, stories that convey the importance of the ethical
culture may refer to rule violators being disciplined harshly or fired for unethical or
illegal behavior. Because discipline is so salient, people tend to remember and recount
these stories, and they reinforce the value the organization places on doing the right
thing.
To the extent that a story becomes a part of the organization’s culture, it serves to
reinforce the culture’s emphasis on the organization’s values and alignment between
the informal and formal cultural systems. But note that stories can easily reinforce an
unethical culture if they’re about rule violators who succeed despite unethical
behavior.
Organizations can also create stories to enhance the ethical culture. Medtronic, a
medical technology firm, has embraced storytelling as a way to do just that. At their
annual holiday party, the company invites patients and their doctors to share their
stories of how the company’s products helped them. For example, one patient with a
long history of Parkinson’s disease told a story about how his life had become
uncontrollable until his doctor suggested trying a new Medtronic device for deep-brain
stimulation that gave him his life and his smile back. The CEO noted how these stories
help reinforce the company’s mission of serving others.79
The best stories are simple ones based on real people and experiences that tap into
the company’s values and employees’ pride. Leaders interested in creating an ethical
culture should be on the lookout for examples of exemplary ethical behavior to
celebrate and find ways to communicate those stories on corporate websites and in
newsletters and award ceremonies. If you want to learn about an organization’s
culture, ask an employee to tell you a story that exemplifies the culture. Then just sit
back and listen. Hopefully the story will be consistent with and help to carry the
message of the organization’s ethical values.
Language
Cultures develop and use language to communicate values to employees. The old joke
that business ethics is an oxymoron suggests the conventional wisdom that the
language of ethics is out of place in the business context. But in a strong ethical
182
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

culture, ethics becomes a natural part of the daily conversation in the organization.
Employees feel comfortable talking ethics with each other and with their managers.
Organizational values are invoked in decision making. And managers routinely talk
ethics with their direct reports. It could be as simple as asking whether the decision is
the right one, in an ethical as well as a business sense. Is this the “proper” thing to do
for customers, suppliers, the community? What is the potential harm to employees,
customers, or the community?
The use of ethical language is likely related to decision-making behavior. In one
study, individuals who discussed their decision-making using ethical language were
more likely to have actually made an ethical decision.80 These people talked about
ethics, morals, honesty, integrity, values, and good character. Those who had made the
unethical decision were more likely to recount the decision in the more traditional
business language of costs and benefits.
But, without cultural support for the use of ethical language, business managers
are reluctant to describe their actions in ethical terms even when they are acting for
ethical reasons. This reluctance, referred to as “moral muteness,” can be attributed to
the value placed on “efficient” decision making such that ethics talk can be thought of
as a distraction as well as to the desire to appear powerful and effective. Ethics talk can
also appear overly idealistic and utopian and inconsistent with the expectation that
effective business managers can solve their own problems.81
Interestingly, getting managers to talk with their employees about ethics has been
likened to parents discussing sex with their children. Although parents agree that sex
education is a good thing, they often find it difficult to broach the subject with their
children. Similarly, managers may find it difficult to begin a conversation about ethics
with other managers or with their subordinates. If these topics are typically not
discussed, the manager who brings it up may feel like a goody-goody or a spoilsport.82
But managers who become comfortable talking about ethics will be role models of
important behaviors for their subordinates.
Kent Druyvesteyn, one of the first corporate ethics officers, told us an anecdote
about the early development of ethics training at General Dynamics.
Early on, at General Dynamics, we declared that our ethics training
workshops were to be small and interactive, and that they were to be led by
managers. And, we heard some complaints from managers who said, “We
don’t know anything about this.” They thought we were going to have
them teach Aristotle and Kant, but that’s not what we were trying to do.
We also had people in training say, “We can’t have people in management
do this. There won’t be any quality control.”
At that point I said, “Let’s consider what it is we’re trying to do here.
What we are trying to do is raise awareness, to increase knowledge of
company standards and stimulate commitment to those standards. That’s
the most important thing.” Here’s an analogy I’d like you to consider. You
have some small children and you decide that you want to teach them
about sex. There are a number of ways that you could do this. You could
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
183

hire an expert—someone who knows all about sex, who knows the right
words to use, who knows all the latest terminology, who is pedagogically
very skilled. You could hire this person to come into your home, sit down
in your living room with your children, and teach them about sex. I mean,
isn’t that good management technique—to delegate it to someone? On the
other hand, you could do it yourself. You may have limitations. You don’t
know everything. You might be embarrassed or tongue-tied. In the end
though, who do you think would be more effective? To have the expert do
it or for you to do it yourself? I have never had a person say that the expert
would be more effective.
Top managers can also make ethics an acceptable topic of conversation by sending
a message that it’s not only okay, but expected, to talk about one’s ethical concerns.
They can do this by leading discussions about ethics, discussing the ethics code and its
application in a video that is shown to employees, and otherwise openly discussing
ethical problems with managers and employees. Senior managers can also build
“ethical talk” into the fabric of the organization by requiring routine discussion of
ethical issues when important decisions are made.83
In unethical cultures, ethical language is mostly absent, or unethical language
may be used (as when employees talk about “screwing” customers). And, as we noted
in our discussion of euphemistic language in Chapter 3, organizational language can
also be used to avoid the ethical implications of actions. This can happen either by
design or inadvertently. For example, in Nazi Germany, the code names for killing and
genocide were final solution, evacuation, and special treatment. This use of euphe-
misms allowed people to avoid confronting the true meaning of their behavior.84
Similarly, companies use euphemisms to avoid the pain of decisions to lay off
employees. Downsizing, rightsizing, restructuring, and targeted outplacement are
just a few terms we’ve encountered. It may be easier to impose a targeted out-
placement than a layoff, but are the ethical considerations as obvious for targeted
outplacement as they are for layoffs? Recall from Chapter 3 that using ethical
language increases individuals’ ethical awareness. So, it’s essential that ethical
language become a part of the organization’s ethical culture.
ORGANIZATIONAL CLIMATES: FAIRNESS,
BENEVOLENCE, SELF-INTEREST, PRINCIPLES
Beyond these specific systems, we have learned that employees’ perceptions of broad
climates within the organization are influential. These climates tend to cross cultural
systems. For example, when employees think about ethical culture, they tend to think
first about the climate for fairness in the organization. This refers to whether they
believe employees are treated fairly every day, in terms of outcomes (pay, promotions,
termination), processes (are processes for making these important decisions about
employees fair, nonarbitrary, and unbiased?) and interactions (are employees treated
every day with dignity and respect?). It makes sense that it would be hard to talk
184
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

seriously with employees about their ethical behavior if they believe that the
organization isn’t behaving fairly toward them and their peers. Research has demon-
strated that these very general perceptions of fair treatment can be as powerful an
influence on employees’ ethical conduct as just about any of the formal or informal
cultural systems just described. Employees appear to reciprocate the organization’s
fair treatment with their own ethical behavior.85
Consistent with these findings about the fairness climate, employees’ behavior is
also influenced by their general perceptions related to whether the organization is
characterized by a benevolence climate—meaning the organization is one that “cares”
about multiple stakeholders, including employees, customers, and the broader com-
munity and public. So employees are much more likely to demonstrate ethical
behavior in an organization they see as one that cares.
By contrast, employees in some organizations see their firm as promoting a very
instrumental self-interest climate, in which people protect their own interests above all
and everyone is essentially out for him or herself. Little attention is given to the social
consequences of one’s actions. You can imagine that an organization that focuses
exclusively on financial outcomes would create such a climate; and, logically,
employee unethical behavior is higher in such organizations.
Finally, in a rule-based climate, employees perceive that the organization is one
where employees follow both laws and the organization’s rules when making
decisions. One can imagine that organizations in highly regulated industries that
take their codes, rules, and policies quite seriously would be rated highly on this
climate dimension, which has the largest impact on reducing unethical behavior.
This may be because this climate taps into perceptions of ethical culture alignment.
An organization in which employees follow the rules is more likely to be one whose
formal (codes, policies) and informal systems (norms of daily behavior) are
aligned.86
DEVELOPING AND CHANGING
THE ETHICAL CULTURE
We can conclude from this cultural perspective that ethics at work is greatly influenced
by the organization’s ethical culture. Both formal and informal systems and processes
channel and reinforce certain kinds of behavior. Each of the systems on its own can
support either ethical or unethical conduct. In addition, these multiple systems can
work together or at cross purposes, thus leading to an organization that is aligned to
support ethical (or unethical) conduct or one that is misaligned and creating mixed
messages. Imagine an organization with an ethics code that forbids employees from
accepting gifts of any kind, but a senior executive is known to have accepted box seats
at the ball game from a client. This “we say one thing, but do another” approach leads
to widespread cynicism. The code loses all credibility as workers pay more attention to
the behavior around them than to what’s said. On the other hand, when the
organization disciplines that executive, this action visibly reinforces the code and
supports the firm’s ethical stance with all workers.
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
185

How an Ethical Culture Can Become an Unethical Culture
The story of Arthur Andersen, the now defunct auditing company, provides a sad
example. It demonstrates how a solidly ethical culture can be transformed into an
unethical culture rather quickly and lead to the demise of an 88-year-old firm.
Founder Arthur Andersen created the company when he was in his twenties. As
chief executive, the messages he conveyed about ethical conduct were strong,
consistent, and clear. Andersen’s mantra, “Think straight—talk straight,” guided
employee behavior in an organization where “integrity mattered more than fees.”
Stories about the founder’s ethics quickly became part of the firm’s mythology and
lore. For example, at the age of 28, Andersen confronted a railway executive who
insisted that the accounting firm approve his company’s books. Andersen said,
“There’s not enough money in the city of Chicago to induce me to change that
report.”87 Andersen lost the railway company’s business, but when that company later
went bankrupt, Arthur Andersen became known as an organization people could trust
to be honest and to stand up for what was right.
In the 1930s, Arthur Andersen emphasized accountants’ special responsibility to
the public. The founder died in 1974, but because his values were internalized by so
many others, he was followed by leaders with similar beliefs, and the strong ethical
culture continued for decades. The management style Andersen initiated was a
centralized, top-down approach that produced employees who were systematically
trained in the “Andersen Way.” Customers around the world knew they could expect
quality work and integrity from Andersen employees, who were all carefully social-
ized to speak the same language and to share “Android” values. Through the 1980s,
people were proud to say they worked for Arthur Andersen, which would provide a
good career with a respected company.
In the mid-1990s, Arthur Andersen still provided formal ethical standards and ethics
training. In 1995 it even established a consulting group, led by Barbara Toffler, to help
other businesses manage their ethics. But Toffler quickly became concerned about the
ethicsofherownemployer,whichshechronicledinherbookFinalAccounting:Ambition,
Greed, and the Fall of Arthur Andersen.88 Toffler attributed much of the change from
ethical culturetounethical culturetothefactthatthefirm’sprofitsincreasinglycamefrom
management consulting rather than auditing. Auditing and consulting are very different
undertakings, and the cultural standards that worked so well in auditing were inconsistent
with the needs of the consulting business. Under the new business realities, rather than
standing for principles of honesty and integrity, consultants were encouraged to keep
clients happy and to concentrate on getting return business because only revenues
mattered. They were even expected to pad prices or create work to increase profits.
Even the training that had always been so important to Andersen’s culture wasn’t
immune from change. Traditionally, new employees (recent college graduates) had
been required to attend a three-day enculturation session, but now new consultants
(often hired with experience outside the firm) were told not to forgo lucrative client
work to attend the training. So Toffler and lots of other consultants never received the
cultural training.
186
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

By the time Toffler arrived at Andersen, no one referred to the ethical standards,
although they still existed in a big maroon binder. Toffler says, “When I brought up the
subject of internal ethics, I was looked at as if I had teleported in from another world.”
So Andersen still had ethics policies, and they still talked about ethics in formal
documents, but the business had changed dramatically and the approach to ethics
management had not kept pace.89
Andersen was convicted of obstruction of justice for shredding documents
associated with its role as Enron’s auditing firm and quickly went out of business.
The Supreme Court reversed the decision in 2005, ruling that the jury had not been
advised that conviction in a white-collar crime case requires evidence of criminal
intent. However, the Supreme Court reversal did not clear Andersen of wrongdoing. In
fact, prosecutors provided evidence of criminal intent.90 In the end, even if someone
had wanted to, there was no firm left to resurrect.
Was Andersen’s transformation from ethical culture to unethical culture a
conscious process? Did anyone ever say, “Now we’re going to create an unethical
culture at Arthur Andersen”? That’s doubtful. But leaders’ lack of attention to the
ethical culture as the organization was undergoing a significant business transforma-
tion practically guaranteed that the messages sent by the informal culture (revenues,
revenues, revenues) would begin to overpower those sent by the formal culture (ethics
standards) and lead to a culture that was seriously out of alignment as well as one that
increasingly sent messages suggesting that only the bottom line mattered.
Becoming a More Ethical Culture
What should an organization do if it wants to transform itself into a more ethical
culture? Given our multisystem perspective on ethical culture, changing organiza-
tional ethics in a positive direction involves simultaneously developing or changing
multiple aspects of the organization’s ethical culture. If the effort is to be successful,
this ethical culture development or change should involve the alignment of all relevant
formal and informal organizational systems to focus on ethics. Obviously, this requires
a major commitment from the most senior levels in the organization. Culture change
attempted at lower levels is likely to be ineffective unless it is fully supported and
modeled by senior management. Unfortunately, some companies (e.g., Arthur Ander-
sen) go out of business before they have this opportunity.
Changing organizational culture is more difficult than developing it. In a new
organization, workers are quite open to learning and accepting the culture of their new
organizational home, especially if it fits with their own values. However, anthropol-
ogists and organizational scientists agree that changing an existing culture is an
extremely difficult process.91 This view is consistent with an idea basic to all
organizational change and development efforts—that changing individual and group
behavior is both difficult and time-consuming. The human tendency to want to
conserve the existing culture is referred to as cultural persistence, or inertia. Culture
has an addictive quality, perhaps because culture members are aware that culture
components cannot be altered without affecting other cherished values and
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
187

institutions.92 Also, an unethical culture tends to feed on itself. Why would successful
(but unethical) managers want to change? They wouldn’t. They would tend to hire
people like themselves and perpetuate the culture that exists.
Most often, pressure for culture change comes from outside—from stockholders,
the government, regulators, and other outside stakeholders. The public’s general
mistrust of business executives93 and the threat of increased government regulation
may encourage leaders to look more closely at their ethical cultures. In addition,
organizations whose members have been “caught” engaging in unethical behavior, or
those faced with costly lawsuits, are prime candidates for such ethical culture change
attempts. Finally, the government’s sentencing guidelines for corporate crime turned
the attention of many organizations to an evaluation of their ethical cultures during
the 1990s.
The influence of bad publicity and costly lawsuits extends beyond the targeted
organization. Organizations scan the environment for information that is relevant to
their concerns. When one organization in an industry is called on the carpet for a legal
or ethical violation, other organizations in the industry take notice and act. Arthur
Andersen’s indictment for document shredding in the Enron case, as well as its
mishandling of multiple audits over a number of years, sullied the reputation of the
entire auditing industry. Thus any organization that senses increased vulnerability to
external pressure is also more likely to consider the need for attention to the
management of its ethical culture.
The pressure to change organizational ethics can also come from within, but it is
not likely to occur unless the CEO decides that change is required. Often a new CEO is
brought in to lead the charge when serious culture change is needed, because only the
CEO has the clout and resources to make such significant changes. John A. Swainson
was brought in after a nearly 30-year career at staid and solid IBM to lead Computer
Associates (CA) in 2004. CA provides IT management software to large users and
generates billions in annual revenue. According to Swainson, the “tipping point” for
the company occurred when its board instituted a new stock option plan for senior
executives in the 1990s. Executives had to hit stock price numbers and keep them up
over a period of time if they were to get payouts of more than $1 billion (you read that
right—it’s a b). These senior managers started breaching accounting rules in order to
adjust revenues, and they started down a slippery slope of accounting malfeasance.
Over time, they became desperate to cover themselves and engaged in ever more
illegal acts. To make matters even worse, when the government started investigating,
the senior managers engaged in a cover-up. The government’s investigation resulted in
a huge fine and the firing of more than 15 executives including the CEO, who went
to prison.
Swainson was brought in under a deferred prosecution agreement (DPA) with the
government. With a DPA, the government sets aside prosecution because prosecuting
the company would likely put it out of business and its employees (most of them
innocent) out of a job. The company accepts a full-time government overseer on the
premises and agrees to all sorts of actions aimed at righting the ship. Perhaps the most
important requirement was to institute a new ethical “tone at the top.” As part of that
188
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

effort, Swainson held hundreds of town hall meetings and began an internal blog
where he communicated with employees about what he was thinking or what they
were thinking. He also answered “ask John” questions in a question-and-answer forum
where employees wrote him directly and he answered. He hired a highly experienced
senior-level legal compliance officer with access to the senior executive team, set up
an ethics training program and a hotline, and improved investigation capabilities.
In regard to the basic business, Swainson visited major customers and learned that
the sales force needed to be reorganized and their performance management system
changed to support building relationships rather than just making transactions. Also,
employees had to be brought into “a single, cohesive, ethics-based culture.” Because CA
had grown so rapidly through acquisition, employees identified morewith their previous
companies than with CA. (Note that the need to combine “ethical cultures” is often
overlooked in mergers and acquisitions and can cause problems for years. A merger
should be thought of as a “marriage” where shared values help to insure success. If those
are missing and are not a focus of attention, the marriage is likely to suffer).
Employees at CA are now surveyed annually. Morale and trust in management are
improving, and just about everyone says they understand the importance of the CA’s
core values and ethical behavior. At the end of his talk to students, Swainson said,
“Today we are back on track. Employees are proud of where they work. Customers
want to do business with us . . . Regaining our reputation and our credibility has been
a long and arduous process. We can’t and won’t go back.”94 Swainson retired in 2009,
leaving it up to a new CEO to sustain the ethical culture Swainson created.
A CULTURAL APPROACH TO CHANGING
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS
Hopefully, we have made it very clear that changing the ethical culture requires
simultaneous and systematic attention to all cultural systems, with the goal of making
changes that align all of these systems to support ethical conduct.
This is a huge job, so many companies employ consultants to help them design
their ethics initiatives. That may be appropriate, especially if the firm doesn’t have the
expertise in-house. But for these initiatives to go beyond superficial cookie-cutter
prescriptions, they need to be based on an in-depth analysis of the company and its
current ethical culture. Many consultants provide this kind of service. Unfortunately,
what firms sometimes receive is an off-the-shelf report with standard prescriptions that
could apply to any firm in what has sometimes been referred to as “spray and pray.”
“Consultants sprayed some ethics over [big companies] and prayed that something
happened.”95 These spray-and-pray programs can breed cynicism because they raise
employees’ awareness of ethics problems while simultaneously suggesting, in many
cases, how little the organization is doing about them. Employees are likely to say,
“We had our ethics-for-a-day training program. Now we’re back to doing things the
way we’ve always done them.”
Companies that are looking for advice from consultants need a unique plan, one
designed to fit their firm’s needs and culture. Obviously, a unique plan takes more
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
189

resources to develop than the off-the-shelf variety. It requires that consultants get to
know the firm, its leaders, and its operations. They must interview and survey
employees, managers, and executives to learn about the current state of affairs.
Such knowledge will allow the consultants to propose a culture shift that addresses
the firm’s unique needs.
Audit of the Ethical Culture
The only way to determine if the culture is aligned to support ethical behavior is to
conduct regular, comprehensive audits of all relevant cultural systems, both formal and
informal. If the ethical culture audit determines that aspects of the current culture are
not aligned to support ethical behavior, and the goal is to produce consistent ethical
conduct, then the culture must change.
Any attempt to develop or change organizational ethics can benefit from an
organizational change approach that includes a system-wide, long-term view. In
addition, the approach should be based on the assumption that human beings are
essentially good and capable of development and change.
A Cultural Systems View
The cultural approach relies on the idea that to be successful, any attempt to develop
or change the organization’s ethics must take the entire cultural system into
account.96 The change effort must target multiple formal and informal organiza-
tional subsystems. All of these subsystems must work together to create clear,
consistent messages about what is and is not appropriate behavior in the organiza-
tion. If subsystems conflict, confusion and mixed messages will result. Thus, the
entire range of formal and informal subsystems must be analyzed and targeted for
development and change.
This complex, multisystem approach to managing organizational ethics argues
against any short-term, quick-fix solutions that target only one system. The idea that an
organization could solve its ethics problem simply by establishing a code of ethics or
by hiring a consultant to deliver a one-hour ethics training program becomes ludicrous
when the complexity of the ethics culture is understood. The management of ethical
conduct must be complex because it is influenced by multiple systems, each of them
complex in itself. Thus the complexity of the solution must match the complexity of
the problem. A solution that isn’t sufficiently complex will miss important informa-
tion, make incomplete diagnoses, and produce overly simple and short-sighted
solutions.
The organization that creates a code of ethics in response to external pressure and
files it away without making changes in other systems such as the reward system and
decision-making processes is more likely making a negative statement about organi-
zational ethics rather than a positive one. The informal message is that management is
hypocritical and that the code of ethics serves no useful purpose beyond creating a
facade. The same can be said of lofty values statements. For example, many of these
190
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

statements talk about valuing diversity. But what happens when people look around
the organization and see few minority managers? Executives need to understand that
when they put a values statement in writing, employees expect a commitment to follow
through. The bottom line about systems thinking is understanding that if an organiza-
tion decides to get into the “ethics business” with a values statement, code, or training
program, employees expect follow-through in other parts of the organization. A failure
to follow through will be interpreted as hypocrisy.
A Long-Term View
The development of organizational culture takes place over a number of years;
effective culture change may take even longer, as much as 6 to 15 years.97 It requires
alterations in both formal and informal organizational systems that take time to
implement and take hold. Resistances must be overcome. New rules and values must
be reinforced via training programs, rites and rituals, and reward systems. Although
not all organizational change efforts take this long, deep interventions in the
organizational culture should be considered long-term projects.
Assumptions about People
Mainstream economics rests on the assumption that human beings are driven by self-
interest and opportunism and are likely to shirk responsibility.98 Acceptance of this
assumption logically leads to change efforts focused almost exclusively on behavioral
control.
We believe, however, that human beings are essentially good and open to growth
and change. Most employees prefer being associated with a fair organization that
supports ethical behavior and disciplines unethical behavior. Given this type of
environment, most individuals can be expected to choose ethical behavior. Individuals
who engage in unethical behavior should not simply be labeled “bad” people. They are
often responding to external pressures or behaving according to organizationally
sanctioned definitions of what’s appropriate. Although unethical behaviors must be
disciplined, the organization should also treat unethical behavior as a signal to
investigate itself and the cultural context in which the behavior occurred. Through
culture, the organization can change definitions of what is appropriate and
inappropriate and can relieve pressures to behave unethically.
Diagnosis: The Ethical Culture Audit
Formal attempts to develop or change organizational ethics should begin with
diagnosis. Diagnosing culture calls for time-consuming techniques, such as auditing
the content of decision making, coding the content of organizational stories and
anecdotes, and holding open-ended interviews with employees at all levels.99 It also
requires systematic analyses of formal organizational systems, such as the structure
and criteria for rewards and promotion.
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
191

The framework presented in this chapter can provide guidance for an audit of the
organization’s ethical culture.100 The audit should include probes into the formal and
informal organizational systems that are maintaining the ethics culture in its current
state. First, formal organizational systems can be analyzed in a number of ways.
Through surveys, interviews, observation at meetings, orientation and training ses-
sions, and analysis of organizational documents, perceptions of how formal organi-
zational systems either encourage or discourage ethical behavior can be identified. The
kinds of questions that can be asked are listed in Table 5.1.
Auditing informal systems is equally important. In small organizations that don’t
have formal policies and decision processes, the informal systems are often more
important than the formal ones. The culture can be analyzed to identify the organ-
ization’s heroes as well as the daily behaviors that are reinforced through stories,
rituals, and language. This can be accomplished through open-ended interviews,
observation of organizational rituals, and analysis of the organization’s stories. Some
questions that might be asked in an audit of the informal system are offered in
Table 5.2. The questions in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 are designed to suggest the general
direction of an ethical culture audit. Specific questions that arise out of the particular
system being analyzed must be developed to tap that system’s unique problems and
needs. Canned approaches to discovering culture that assume they can identify the
Table 5.1 Selected Questions for Auditing the Formal System
1. Do organizational leaders send a clear ethics message? Is ethics part of their
“leadership” agenda? Are managers trained to be ethical leaders?
2. Does the organization incorporate ethics into its selection procedures? Is integrity
emphasized in orienting new employees and training existing ones?
3. Does a formal code of ethics and/or values exist? Is it distributed? How widely? Is it
used? Is it reinforced in other formal systems, such as performance management and
decision-making systems?
4. Does the performance management system support ethical conduct? Are only
people of integrity promoted? Are ethical means as well as ends important in
performance management systems?
5. Is misconduct disciplined swiftly and justly in the organization, no matter what the
organizational level?
6. Are workers at all levels encouraged to take responsibility for the consequences of
their behavior? To question authority when they are asked to do something that they
consider to be wrong? How?
7. Are employees encouraged to report problems, and are formal channels available for
them to make their concerns known conﬁdentially?
8. Are ethical concerns incorporated into formal decision-making processes? How? Or,
are only ﬁnancial concerns taken into account?
9. Are employees and managers oriented to the values of the organization in orientation
programs? Are they trained in ethical decision making?
10. Are ethical considerations a routine part of planning and policy meetings and new
venture reports? Does a formal committee exist high in the organization for
considering ethical issues?
192
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

relevant dimensions in advance are bound to fail.101 In addition, the multisystem
nature of organizational culture suggests that responses must be compared within and
across systems to answer the key question of whether formal and informal systems are
aligned within themselves and with each other.
As you may have determined by now, a full-fledged ethical culture audit is a
complex process that the average manager is probably not prepared to conduct. Many
large organizations will have human resources staff with the required expertise, and
conducting such an audit within the firm can send a powerful message that the firm
cares about ethics (assuming that the audit is followed up with action). But other
organizations that do not have the expertise in-house will need assistance with these
diagnoses and intervention efforts. And in some firms, employees may be more willing
to discuss sensitive ethical issues with a trusted outsider.
Understanding the cultural issues addressed in this chapter can help any manager
becomemoresensitivetothecomplexnatureoforganizationalethicsandtheimportance
of cultural alignment. In fact, with a few changes, the questions in Tables 5.1 and 5.2
could be used to assess the ethics of an organization you’re considering joining. You can
ask your prospective manager or peers relevant questions and see how they respond. If
they welcome such questions, and respond to them easily, that’s a good sign that people
in the organization are comfortable talking about ethical issues.
Ethical Culture Change Intervention
Once the audit is complete, the data should be discussed with employees, who can then
be enlisted in developing a culture change intervention plan. The plan will be guided
by the diagnosis and the cultural, multisystem framework shown earlier in Figure 5.1.
Complementary changes in both the formal and informal organizational systems
should be a part of any recommended change effort.
Though difficult, changing formal systems is a more straightforward process than
changing informal systems. Gaps and problems identified in the diagnosis can be
Table 5.2 Selected Questions for Auditing the Informal System
1. Identifytheorganization’srolemodelsandheroes.Whatvaluesdotheyrepresent?What
advice do mentors give?
2. What informal socialization processes exist, and what norms for ethical/unethical
behavior do they promote? Are these different for different organizational
subgroups?
3. What are some important organizational rituals? How do they encourage or discour-
age ethical behavior? Who gets the awards—people of integrity who are successful, or
individuals who use unethical methods to attain success?
4. What are the messages sent by organizational stories and myths? Do they reveal
individuals who stand up for what’s right despite pressure, or is conformity the valued
characteristic? Do people get ﬁred or promoted in these stories?
5. Does acceptable language exist for discussing ethical concerns? Is “ethics talk” part of
the daily conversation?
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
193

addressed in a number of ways. Structure can be altered to encourage individuals to
take responsibility for their behavior and to discourage unquestioning deference to
authority. Codes of ethics can be designed participatively, distributed, and enforced.
Performance management systems can be designed with an emphasis on what people
do as well as on how they do it. Reporting misconduct can be encouraged by providing
formal communication channels and confidentiality.102 Orientation programs can be
designed to incorporate the organization’s values, and training programs can be set up
to prepare individuals to handle the ethical dilemmas they are most likely to face in
their work. Integrity can be emphasized in selection and promotion decisions.
Decision-making processes can incorporate attention to ethical issues by devoting
time at meetings and space in reports.
It’s more difficult to change the informal systems, particularly those that have
been found to maintain unethical behavior in the organization. However, these changes
must be undertaken if the total change effort is to be effective. These changes require
attention to the “art” rather than the science of management and are consistent with
ideas about the importance of “symbolic management.” With symbolic management,
organizational leaders and managers are encouraged to create rituals, symbols, and
stories that will influence those they manage.103
The organization may have to be “remythologized” by reviving myths and
stories of its founding and resurrecting related tales that can guide organizational
behavior in the desired direction.104 For example, Alexander Graham Bell’s
comment, “Come here, Watson, I need your help,” set up Bell’s concept of service
that was so important to AT&T’s success for many years. However, myths must also
be frequently evaluated for their continuing usefulness. New ones may have to be
found or developed to fit the organization’s current needs and goals. Remytholo-
gizing should be done carefully and infrequently. Employees generally know what’s
“really going on” in the organization. If the revived myth doesn’t fit with
organizational reality, it will only increase their cynicism. Also, myths can’t be
changed frequently. Their strength and value in the culture come from their stability
across time.
ETHICAL CULTURE CHANGE EVALUATION
As with any organizational change
and development effort, results should be evaluated over an extended period of time.
Evaluation, like diagnosis and intervention, should be guided by the multisystem
framework. Surveys and interviews can be repeated regularly to determine whether
norms have changed and to pinpoint potential problem areas. Documents can be
analyzed to determine if ethical issues are being consistently considered. Other
outcomes, such as the number of lawsuits or reports of unethical behavior, can
also be tracked. However, interpretation may need to go beyond simply analyzing the
numbers. Increased reporting to a hotline, for example, may mean only that ethical
sensitivity has been raised and can be viewed as a positive outcome rather than a
negative one. This part of culture building is probably the most neglected. Most
organizations are unwilling to make the investment in evaluation, and therefore they
really can’t calculate the effectiveness of their efforts.
194
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

THE ETHICS OF MANAGING
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS
An effort aimed at changing organizational ethics requires us to face a particularly
knotty ethical dilemma: whose values or ethics are to prevail? We believe that a change
effort that involves employees is not manipulative or coercive and is most consistent
with a concern for the ethics of the change effort itself. Employees should participate
in the problem diagnosis and planning process. They should be aware of what’s
happening and should take part in identifying problems and recommending solutions.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has proposed a cultural framework for thinking about ethical and unethical
behavior in the organizational context. Although individual character traits may pre-
dispose a person to ethical or unethical behavior (as we learned in Chapter 3), the cultural
context in the organization also has a powerful influence on the behavior of most
employees. An organization that wishes to develop or change its ethical culture must
attend to the complex interplay of formal and informal systems that can support either
ethical or unethical behavior. Quick-fix solutions are not likely to succeed. A broad,
multisystem approach to developing and changing organizational ethics was outlined to
guide organizations in diagnosing and, if necessary, changing their ethical culture.
Although most managers are not prepared to conduct a broad culture change effort
themselves, we hope this chapter has helped them understand that organizational ethics
is a complex cultural phenomenon. With this knowledge, the manager can begin to
assess the ethical culture of his or her organization and will know what questions to ask
the consultant who is brought in to help with a culture change effort. Individuals can also
use these questions to help them assess their own organization and their fit within it.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
For the following questions, focus on an organization you are familiar with. If you do
not have significant organizational experience, discuss the questions with someone
who is currently in a managerial role.
1.
Does your organization address ethical issues in a formal, systematic way? How
has the organization customized an ethical culture to match its unique needs?
2.
To the best of your ability, use Figure 5.1 and the questions in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 to
conduct an ethics audit of the formal and informal systems in your organization.
3.
Having conducted the ethics audit, identify the formal and informal systems that
are in need of attention. Where is the culture out of alignment (if it is)? Design a
change program to address weaknesses and to align formal and informal systems
into a strong ethical culture.
4.
How would you change the culture audit questions if you were planning to use
them to conduct an ethics culture audit of a firm you were considering joining?
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
195

CASE
CULTURE CHANGE AT TEXACO
In 1999, Texaco settled a lawsuit that charged the firm with discriminating against
African American employees. Texaco paid $175 million, the largest settlement of this
kind ever. The stock had fallen $3 per share after damning audiotapes became
available to the public. Peter Bijur, then CEO, decided to stop fighting the lawsuit
and settle. Minority employees received $140 million in damages and back pay, and
$35 million was used to establish an independent task force to evaluate the firm’s
diversity efforts for the next five years.
Apparently, there had been very real problems throughout the Texaco organiza-
tion. These included blatant racist language and behavior on the part of Texaco
employees and managers, documented lower pay for minority employees (in some
cases lower than the minimum for the job category), and comments such as the
following overheard from a white manager: “I never thought I’d live to see the day
when a black woman had an office at Texaco.” Unfortunately for Texaco, and
fortunately for minority employees, a Texaco official taped meetings about the lawsuit
in which executives used racial epithets and discussed disposing of incriminating
documents. The tapes were made available to the New York Times and, through it, to
the public. To make matters worse for Texaco, a former senior financial analyst, Bari-
Ellen Roberts, wrote a book detailing the humiliating experiences faced by many
minority employees, including herself. One time, a white official referred to Roberts
publicly as a “little colored girl.” She also detailed how the organization regularly
ignored grievance claims from minorities.
Bijur’s unusual solution to the problem was to launch a complete culture change
effort. During 1998 and early 1999, the company was in difficult financial straits due to
low crude oil and natural gas prices. Revenues and earnings dropped precipitously, and
the number of employees was reduced from 27,000 to 18,500. At a time like that,
another CEO might have put diversity issues aside in favor of a focus on the bottom
line. But Bijur took advantage of the opportunity to “make us a better company.” First,
as leader, he made it clear that he would simply not tolerate disrespect and that those
who didn’t go along with the culture change would be dismissed. He even went outside
the company, speaking to groups such as the Urban League, saying that “a real
commitment must be more than a diversity checklist. It must be integrated into a
company’s business plan. It must guide our strategies for hiring, developing, promot-
ing and retaining a diverse workforce. And it must extend beyond our corporate
boundaries—not only to our customers and suppliers, but also to the communities in
which we work and live.”105 Bijur hired African Americans in key positions such as
director of global business development, general counsel, and head of diversity for the
company. All of these individuals said that they agreed to join the company because
they were convinced of Bijur’s personal commitment to real culture change. New
recruiting systems were set up to increase the pool of minority candidates for every
position. Women and minorities were included on all human resources committees.
196
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Search firms with success in minority hiring were brought in to help in the effort. For a
longer-term solution, the company set up scholarship and internship programs to
interest minorities in areas of study of importance to the firm.
Next, Bijur set specific diversity goals and timetables and linked managers’ career
success and bonus compensation to their implementation of the initiatives. For all
supervisors, he instituted 360-degree feedback that included performance on diversity
issues in evaluation criteria. He also established formal mentoring and leadership
development programs to ensure that the company was preparing minorities for
leadership positions. All employees were required to attend diversity training, and
such training is now being incorporated into more general management training. And
multiple methods were set up for filing grievances. These included hotlines, an
alternative dispute resolution process with independent arbitration and mediation, and
a confidential outside ombudsman. Finally, the company set up a Minority and Women
Business Development Program to increase the number of minority wholesalers it
works with. This entire change effort is overseen by the independent task force set up
as part of the settlement. The task force meets frequently with employee groups and
monitors the firm’s progress.
How is Texaco doing? Angela Vallot, director of corporate diversity initiatives,
says, “You’re not going to change the way people think, but you can change the way
people behave.” Evidence suggests that changes in behavior are real. The new general
counsel has few discrimination lawsuits to work on. In 1999, a total of 44 percent of
new hires and 22 percent of promotions went to minorities. The company spent over $1
billion with minority and women-owned vendors in 1997 and 1998 and exceeded a
goal set in 1996. Texaco even applied for inclusion in Fortune magazine’s 1999 list of
America’s 50 Best Companies for minorities. It didn’t make the list, but the
application suggests that company officials were feeling pretty good about their
progress. Weldon Latham, diversity expert at a Washington, D.C., law firm, says,
“They are absolutely a model for how to approach one of the biggest problems facing
this country.”106 Reports of the monitoring task force were posted on Texaco’s
website. In a report, released in July 2000, the task force acknowledged the commit-
ment of Texaco’s leadership. “Through the values espoused by its leadership and its
efforts to improve its employment practices, the Company continues to communicate
effectively the message that it will not tolerate discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation in its workplace and that equality and fairness for all employees are central
to its mission as a highly competitive business enterprise.” The report also cited the
ombudsman program as employees’ preferred way to resolve grievances that might
otherwise have become serious problems.107
The task force’s subsequent report cited more mixed results. Although the overall
percentage of women and minority employees increased slightly, the percentage of
new hires and promotions in both categories declined, and the representation of
women and minorities in executive positions fell slightly as well. Nevertheless, the
percentage of promotions in these groups exceeded the percentage represented in the
overall Texaco workforce, and this was viewed as a sign of continuing progress.108
These reports noted that there was much more work to be done, particularly after the
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
197

Case Questions
1.
Identify the ethical culture problem at Texaco in the mid-1990s.
2.
Based on the facts in the case and what you have learned in this chapter, evaluate
the culture change effort that is under way. What cultural systems have been
targeted in the culture change effort? What systems are missing, if any? Does the
culture appear to be in alignment? Misalignment? What else might management
do that it hasn’t already done to make the culture change successful?
3.
How long might such a culture change take?
firm became part of Chevron in 2001. On its website, Chevron says that it values
diversity and runs the business “in a way that respects our employees and the world
community.” The company has recently received awards for its treatment of women
and of gay, lesbian, and transgender employees and was named a 2008 Best Diversity
Company by Diversity/Careers in Engineering & Information Technology magazine.
CASE
AN UNETHICAL CULTURE IN NEED OF CHANGE:
TAP PHARMACEUTICALS
In 1995, Douglas Durand was offered the position of vice president for sales at TAP
Pharmaceuticals. TAP had been formed 25 years before by Takeda Chemical Indus-
tries of Japan and Abbott Laboratories. Durand, 50 years old at the time, had married
his high school sweetheart and worked for Merck & Co. for 20 years, during which he
moved up in the sales organization to senior regional director. TAP offered him the
opportunity to earn 40 percent more per year (in addition to a $50,000 signing bonus)
and help the company move from niche player to mass-market purveyor of ulcer and
prostate cancer medicine. He took advantage of the opportunity and looked forward to
the challenge.
But only a few months after arriving at TAP, he was shocked to find a very
different culture from the one he had become accustomed to at Merck. Merck has long
had a reputation for ethics and social responsibility, and these qualities had been borne
out in Durand’s two decades of experience. For example, at Merck, every new
marketing campaign was evaluated by a legal and regulatory team before being
launched, and drugs were pulled back if necessary. But TAP turned out to be very
different. It quickly became clear that this was a culture where only numbers mattered.
On his very first day on the job, Durand learned that TAP had no in-house legal
counsel. The legal counsel was considered a “sales prevention department.” At one
point, Durand found himself listening in on a conference call where sales represen-
tatives were openly discussing bribing urologists with an up-front “administration fee”
to doctors who prescribed Lupron, the company’s new drug for prostate cancer. TAP
198
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Case Questions
1.
Analyze the ethical culture at TAP. Does the culture appear to be in alignment?
Misalignment?
2.
Based on the facts in the case and what you have learned in this chapter, evaluate
the culture change effort that Douglas Durand undertook. What cultural
sales representatives also gave doctors Lupron samples at a discount or for free; then
they encouraged the doctors to charge Medicare full price and keep the difference.
Durand overheard doctors boasting about their Lupron purchases of boats and second
homes. TAP offered a big-screen TV to every urologist in the country (10,000!),
along with offers of office equipment and golf vacations. And reps weren’t accounting
for the free samples they gave away—as required by law. Durand knew that failure to
account for a single dose can lead to a fine of as much as $1 million. Finally, rather than
selling drugs based on good science, TAP held parties for doctors. One such party for a
new ulcer drug featured “Tummy,” a giant fire-belching stomach.
Durand soon became frantic and worried about his own guilt by association.
Initially, he tried to change the culture. After all, he had been hired as a vice president.
But everything he tried was resisted. He was told that he just didn’t understand the
culture at TAP. When he talked about the importance of earning physicians’ trust, the
sales reps just rolled their eyes. He then tried to influence change “the TAP way” by
offering a bonus to reps who kept accurate records of their samples. The program
actually worked, but then senior management discontinued the bonus—and, of course,
the reps stopped keeping track. Over time, Durand began finding himself excluded
from meetings, and he felt trapped. What would happen to him if he left this new job in
less than a year? He wouldn’t collect his bonus, and he wondered if anyone else would
hire him. What would happen to his family? But he also worried about becoming the
corporate scapegoat.
In desperation, Durand turned to an old friend he knew from Merck—Glenna
Crooks, now president of Strategic Health Policy International. Appalled by what she
heard, Crooks encouraged him to document the abuses he had observed and share the
information with Elizabeth Ainslie, a Philadelphia attorney. Given the documented
fraud against the U.S. government, Ainslie encouraged Durand to sue TAP under the
federal whistleblower program. Armed with documents, he filed the suit and federal
prosecutors ran with it. Durand left TAP for Astra Merck in 1996. But under the
whistleblower program, investigations are conducted in secret. Neither TAP nor Astra
Merck was supposed to know about it. The investigation took years, and, when called
to testify, Durand had to make excuses to take time off from his new job. He was
uncomfortable living as a “double agent.” In the end, TAP pleaded guilty to conspiracy
to cheat the federal government and agreed to pay a record $875 million fine. In
October 2001, Durand collected $77 million ($28 million went to taxes), his 14 percent
share of the fine paid under the federal whistleblower statute. He retired to Florida to
be closer to his parents, but he had yet to face the unpleasant task of testifying against
six TAP executives, some of whom had worked for him.
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
199

systems did he target in the culture change effort? What systems were missing,
if any?
3.
Why did his culture change effort fail? What would it take for it to succeed?
Source: C. Haddad and A. Barrett, “A Whistle-Blower Rocks an Industry,”
Businessweek, June 24, 2002, 126–30.
CASE
“BAD TO THE BONE”
In 2012, after a significant amount of research, Fortune magazine published an expose
entitled “Bad to the Bone,”109 about a Pennsylvania company named Synthes. The
company had its roots in Switzerland where Swiss surgeons developed products aimed
at fixing broken bones with implants. One of these surgeons met Hansjorg Wyss, a
Harvard Business school graduate who went on to lead Synthes in the U.S. and then to
become the company’s CEO. Wyss is known for his philanthropy to Harvard and other
causes and for being an outdoorsman who loves to hike. As a corporate leader, Wyss
was described as intimidating and a micromanager who wanted to decide everything
from the toilet paper the company purchased to the shape of the plates in the company
cafeteria (square). The company was described as “highly regimented—the kind of
place where employees do what they’re told” (p. 146), and Wyss was known for being
an “800-pound gorilla” who did not tolerate dissent.
In the late 1990s Wyss became interested in a California startup called Norian that
had developed a special kind of cement that could fill cracks in bone but also transform
itself into bone. The FDA approved its use in the arm and the skull where it was being
used successfully. Synthes was hoping that the cement could also be useful in filling
spinal fractures called vertebral compression fractures (VCFs) that often accompany
osteoporosis. However, the FDA had not yet given its permission to use the product for
that purpose. The product would have to be proven safe and effective in expensive
clinical trials. In the meantime, the FDA prohibited marketing products for
unapproved uses or even mentioning such uses to surgeons.
Nevertheless, Synthes conducted market research and learned that the potential
market for the product was huge—almost 500,000 VCFs a year. When one regulatory
staffer, Michael Sharp, learned by chance of the talk about marketing the product to
spine surgeons, he warned senior executives via email that Synthes employees were
prohibited from discussing Norian with these surgeons. He was assured that this
wouldn’t happen and thought the issue had been resolved. Then, in 2001, a California
surgeon used Norian in two VCF surgeries. Both patients experienced serious drops in
blood pressure and nearly died. Sharp learned of this and again contacted executives
and the head of the North American Division, Michael Higgins, who sent the sales
force an email about the dangers of off-label marketing (marketing a drug or medical
200
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

device for uses that have not been formally approved by the FDA). Yet, mixed signals
continued to come from management and the project continued. In fact, Higgins
himself organized a focus group with interested surgeons. The group recommended
research on animals before using Norian in humans, and the company agreed to
provide funding for a small study. A meeting of top executives rejected the idea of
conducting a human clinical trial when they learned that it would cost about $1 million
over three years. Instead the company applied for a different type of FDA approval for
the modification of existing medical devices. And, in late 2001, the FDA gave its
approval but said that Norian must not be mixed with any other substance before being
injected into the spine (which is what the use of Norian in VCFs required).
In the meantime, bad news came from the animal study. The researchers found
that, in pigs, Norian caused dangerous blood clotting problems that led to death. A
test in the lab also found that mixing Norian with blood causes significant clots in
test tubes. Then, one of the company’s medical consultants happened to learn, by
accident, that the company was shipping Norian to a spine surgeon with directions
on how to mix it, creating a mixture called SRS-R. He warned executives that they
were treading on thin ice and learned, a bit later, that his contract was not renewed.
Others in the company tried to raise concerns with their bosses but were assured that
all was fine.
Despite all of this, executives decided to move ahead with an earlier decision to
recruit a few doctors to do the VCF procedure and report their clinical experiences.
Doctors are allowed to prescribe off-label uses and orthopedic surgeons are prone to do
so. Ayoung business school graduate and product manager was teaching surgeons how
to mix their product with barium sulfate for VCFs (something that was prohibited by
the FDA). Many surgeries went well and the FDA approved the mixture (now called
Norian XR) but continued to warn that it was not to be used for VCFs.
Within a month, a Texas surgeon lost a patient whose blood pressure dropped
precipitously on the operating table. The company did not report the death as
required by the FDA because no autopsy had been done and the cause of death
wasn’t certain. Moving on, the sales team predicted multi-millions in revenue and
50 percent profit margins after taxes. The company sponsored a surgeon forum in
California where surgeons practiced injecting the Norian XR mixture into cadavers.
But soon thereafter, a California surgeon lost a patient in a similar way and blamed
Norian XR for the death. That surgeon’s partner, who had used Norian successfully
20–30 times, then had a similar experience and another patient died on the operating
table. At that point, the company sent a letter stating that “deaths had been reported”
and that Norian should not be used for VCFs. But, there was no recall and Norian
continued to be sold.
In May 2004, an FDA investigator who had received a tip about the off-label
marketing of Norian by Synthes showed up to conduct an investigation and determined
that the company was in violation of FDA rules. It took a while, but in 2009, the
company and four individuals were indicted. In 2010, Synthes pleaded guilty and
agreed to pay $23 million in fines and to divest Norian. Four executives were
sentenced to prison terms of between four and nine months. The prison sentences
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
201

Case Questions
1.
What information did you glean about the culture at Synthes? How do you think
the culture might be related to the behavior of the company’s employees?
2.
Johnson & Johnson, a company with a reputation for ethics and social respon-
sibility, acquired Synthes. From an ethical culture perspective, what would you
recommend if you were going to try to combine these companies, especially if
you wanted to change the ethical culture at Synthes?
3.
Do you think jail time for the executives was appropriate in this case?
Source: M. Kimes, “Bad to the Bone,” Fortune, October 8, 2012, 140–154.
NOTES
1.
R. A. Barrett, Culture and Conduct: An Excursion in Anthropology (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1984).
2.
T. E. Deal and A. A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982); M. R.
Louis, “A Cultural Perspective on Organizations: The Need for and Consequences of Viewing
Organizations as Culture-Bearing Milieux,” Human Systems Management 2” (1981): 246–58;
J. Martin and C. Siehl, “Organizational Culture and Counterculture: An Uneasy Symbiosis,”
Organizational Dynamics (Autumn 1983): 52–64; A. M. Pettigrew, “On Studying Organizational
Cultures,” Administrative Science Quarterly 24 (1979): 570–80; E. H. Schein, Organizational Culture
and Leadership (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985); L. Smircich, “Concepts of Culture and
Organizational Analysis,” Administrative Science Quarterly 28 (1983): 339–58.
3.
L. Smircich, “Concepts of Culture and Organizational Analysis,” Administrative Science Quarterly
28 (1983): 339–58.
4.
T. E. Deal and A. A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982).
5.
B. Morris, “He’s Smart. He’s Not Nice. He’s Saving Big Blue,” Fortune, April 14, 1997, 68–81.
6.
T. E. Deal and A. A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982).
7.
J. Van Maanen and E. H. Schein, “Toward a Theory of Organizational Socialization,” in Research in
Organizational Behavior (vol. 1), eds. L. Cummings and B. Staw (New York: JAI Press, 1979); C. D.
Fisher, “Organizational Socialization: an Integrative Review,” in Research in Personnel and Human
Resources Management (vol. 4), eds. K. Rowland and G. Ferris (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1986),
101–45.
8.
R. A. Barrett, Culture and Conduct: An Excursion in Anthropology (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1984).
9.
P. Murphy, “Creating Ethical Corporate Structures,” Sloan Management Review 30, no. 2 (1989):
221–27.
were unusual and sent a chill through the industry. But the government wanted to send
a message that prison time for executives was a real possibility in these off-label
marketing cases. Civil suits brought by the families of those who died continue to
be litigated.
In 2012, Johnson & Johnson acquired Synthes for about $20 billion and Synthes
appears to be doing fine. It sold the bone cement unit to a small manufacturer nearby
for $22 million (just a million dollars less than the fine) and J&J’s DePuy Synthes unit
distributes the product exclusively.
202
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

10. 
P. Murphy, “Creating Ethical Corporate Structures,” Sloan Management Review 30, no. 2 (1989):
221–27.
11. 
P. Wesslund, “Ethics Are No Substitute for the Real Thing,” Businessweek, April 27, 1992, 10.
12. 
P. Murphy, “Creating Ethic al Corporate Structures,” S l o a n Ma n age m e n t Re v i ew 30, no. 2 (1989):
22 1–27.
13. 
“The Business Effect of Ethics on Employee Engagement,” LRN Ethics Study, 2006, www.lrn.com.
14. 
E. H. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985).
15. 
Pettigrew, “On Studying Organizational Cultures”; E. H. Schein, “How Culture Forms, Develops, and
Changes,” in Gaining Control of the Corporate Culture, eds. R. H. Kilmann, M. J. Saxtion, and
R. Serpa (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985), 17–43; P. Selznick, Leadership in Administration
(New York: Harper & Row, 1957).
16. 
K. Brooker, “Can Anyone Replace Herb?” Fortune, April 17, 2000, 186–92.
17. 
J. Guinto, “Wheels Up,” Southwest Airlines Spirit, June 2006, 109–17.
18. 
A. Sewer, “Southwest Airlines: The Hottest Thing in the Sky,” Fortune, March 8, 2004, 88–89.
19. 
E. Schein, “How Culture Forms, Develops, and Changes”; Selznick, Leadership in Administration.
20. 
M. Gunther, “Money and Morals at GE,” Fortune, November 15, 2004, 177–78.
21. 
Ibid.
22. 
L. K. Trevi ~no, M. Brown, and L. Pincus-Hartman, “A Qualitative Investigation of Perceived Executive
Ethical Leadership: Perceptions from Inside and Outside the Executive Suite,” Human Relations 56,
no. 1 (2003): 5–37; L. K. Trevi ~no, L. P. Hartman, and M. Brown, “Moral Person and Moral Manager:
How Executives Develop a Reputation for Ethical Leadership,” California Management Review 42,
no. 4 (2000): 128–42.
23. 
T. J. Neff and J. M. Citrin, Lessons from the Top: The Search for America’s Best Leaders (New York:
Doubleday, 1999).
24. 
K. Trevi~no, L. P. Hartman, and M. Brown, “Moral Person and Moral Manager: How Executives Develop
a Reputation for Ethical Leadership,” California Management Review 42, no. 4 (2000): 128–42.
25. 
P. O’Neill, “O’Neill on Ethics and Leadership,” Speech at the Berg Center for Ethics and Leadership,
Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh, 2002.
26. 
B. George, “Why It’s Hard to Do What’s Right,” Fortune, September 29, 2003, 98.
27. 
J. A. Byrne, “Chainsaw,” Businessweek, October 18, 1999, 128–49.
28. 
G. Tidwell, “Accounting for the PTL Scandal,” Today’s CPA, July–August 1993, 29–32.
29. 
J. Sonnenfeld, “The Real Scandal at BP,” Businessweek, May 14, 2007, 98.
30. 
L. K. Trevi ~no, G. R. Weaver, D. G. Gibson, and B. L. Toffler, “Managing Ethics and Legal
Compliance: What Works and What Hurts,” California Management Review 41, no. 2 (1999):
131–51.
31. 
C. Loomis, “Whatever It Takes,” Fortune, November 25, 2002, 74–75.
32. 
C. Loomis, “Tough Questions for Citigroup’s CEO,” Fortune, November 29, 2004, 115–22.
33. 
C. Loomis, “Whatever It Takes,” Fortune, November 25, 2002, 74–75.
34. 
C. Loomis, “Tough Questions for Citigroup’s CEO,” Fortune, November 29, 2004, 115–22.
35. 
M. Vickers, “The Unlikely Revolutionary,” Fortune, March 6, 2006, 132–44.
36. 
Peter S. Goodman, “Sluggers and Bankers in the Strikeout Era,” New York Times, January 16, 2010,
www.nyt.com.
3 7 . 
Katrina Brooker, “ Citi’ s Creator, Alone with His Regrets,” New York Ti me s , January 3, 2 010, www. ny t. co m.
38. 
S. Denning, “Rethinking Capitalism: Sandy Weill Says Bring Back Glass-Steagall,” Forbes, July 25,
2012, www.forbes.com.
39.
L. K. Trevi~no, G. R. Weaver, D. G. Gibson, and B. L. Toffler, “Managing Ethics and Legal
Compliance: What Works and What Hurts,” California Management Review 41, no. 2 (1999):
131–51.
40.
D. Mayer, M. Kuenzi, R. Greenbaum, M. Bardes, and R. Salvador, “How Does Ethical Leadership
Flow? Test of a Trickle-Down Model,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
108 (2008): 1–13.
41.
K. Brooker, “Can Anyone Replace Herb?” Fortune, April 17, 2000, 186–92.
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
203

42. 
W. C. Byham, “Can You Interview for Integrity?” Across the Board, March–April 2004, 34–38.
43. 
J. L. Seglin, “The Values Statement vs. Corporate Reality,” New York Times, September 17, 2000,
www.nytimes.com.
44.
G. Colvin and J. Shambora, “J&J: Secrets of Success,” Fortune, May 4, 2009, 117–21.
45.
2007 National Business Ethics Survey (Washington, D. C.: Ethics Resource Center, 2007).
46.
G. R. Weaver, L. K. Trevi~no, and P. L. Cochran, “Corporate Ethics Practices in the Mid-1990s: An
Empirical Study of the Fortune 1000,” Journal of Business Ethics 18, no. 3 (1999): 283–94.
47.
L. K. Trevi~no, G. R. Weaver, D. G. Gibson, and B. L. Toffler, “Managing Ethics and Legal Compliance:
What Works and What Hurts,” California Management Review 41, no. 2 (1999): 131–51.
48.
J. Kish-Gephart, D. Harrison, and L. K. Trevi~no, “Bad Apples, Bad Cases, and Bad Barrels: Meta-
analytic Evidence about Sources of Unethical Decisions at Work: Understanding Calculated and
Impulsive Pathways,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95 (2010):1–31.
49.
W. J. Bowers, Student Dishonesty and Its Control in College (New York: Bureau of Applied
Social Research, Columbia University, 1964); W. G. Campbell, A Comparative Investigation of
Students under an Honor System and a Proctor System in the Same University (Los Angeles:
University of Southern California Press, 1935); R. Canning, “Does an Honor System Reduce
Classroom Cheating? An Experimental Answer,” Journal of Experimental Education 24 (1956):
291–96.
50.
D. L. McCabe and L. K. Trevi~no, “Academic Dishonesty: Honor Codes and Other Situational
Influences,” Journal of Higher Education 64, no. 5 (1993): 522–28.
51.
D. Nel, L. Pitt, and R. Watson, “Business Ethics: Defining the Twilight Zone,” Journal of Business
Ethics 8 (1989): 781–91.
52.
G. R. Weaver, L. K. Trevi~no, and P. L. Cochran, “Corporate Ethics Practices in the Mid-1990s: An
Empirical Study of the Fortune 1000,” Journal of Business Ethics 18, no. 3 (1999): 283–94.
53.
2007 National Business Ethics Survey (Washington, D. C.: Ethics Resource Center, 2007).
54.
G. Weaver, L. K. Trevi~no, and B. Agle, “Somebody I Look Up To: Ethical Role Models in
Organizations,” Organizational Dynamics 34, no. 4 (2005): 313–30.
55.
M. Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic Organizations, trans. A. M. Henderson and T. Parsons
(New York: Free Press, 1947).
56.
G. Sjoberg, T. R. Vaughan, and N. Williams, “Bureaucracy as a Moral Issue,” Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science 20, no. 4 (1984): 441–53.
57.
S. Milgram, Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View (New York: Harper & Row, 1974).
58.
L. K. Trevi~no, G. R. Weaver, D. G. Gibson, and B. L. Toffler, “Managing Ethics and Legal
Compliance: What Works and What Hurts,” California Management Review 41, no. 2 (1999):
131–51.
59.
R. Jackall, Moral Mazes: The World of Corporate Managers (New York: Oxford University Press,
1988).
60.
R. M. Kanter, The Changemasters (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983).
61.
H. C. Kelman and V. L. Hamilton, Crimes of Obedience: Toward a Social Psychology of Authority and
Responsibility (New Haven, CT: Yale University, 1989).
62.
Joani Nelson-Horchler, “The Magic of Herman Miller,” Industry Week, February 18, 1991, 11–12, 14, 17.
63.
M. P. Glazer and P. M. Glazer, “Whistleblowing,” Psychology Today, August 1986, 36.
64.
Ibid.
65.
A. C. Greenberg, “Memos from the Chairman,” Fortune, April 29, 1996, 173–75.
66.
H. Schwartz and S. M. Davis, “Matching Corporate Culture and Business Strategy,” Organizational
Dynamics, Summer 1981, 30–48.
67.
L. Tiger, “Stone Age Provides Model for Instilling Business Ethics,” Wall Street Journal, January 11,
1988, 18.
68.
S. Gellerman, “Why ‘Good’ Managers Make Bad Ethical Choices,” Harvard Business Review 64,
no. 4 (1986): 85–97.
69.
C. Welles, “What Led Beech-Nut Down the Road to Disgrace?” Businessweek, February 22, 1988,
124–37.
204
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

70.
L. K. Trevi~no, G. R. Weaver, D. G. Gibson, and B. L. Toffler, “Managing Ethics and Legal Compliance:
What Works and What Hurts,” California Management Review 41, no. 2 (1999): 131–51.
71.
B. Morris, “He’s Smart. He’s Not Nice. He’s Saving Big Blue,” Fortune, April 14, 1997, 68–81.
72.
J. A. Waters, “Catch 20.5: Corporate Morality as an Organizational Phenomenon,” Organizational
Dynamics, Spring 1978, 319.
73.
T. E. Deal and A. A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982).
74.
Ibid.
75.
J. M. Beyer and H. M. Trice, “How an Organization’s Rites Reveal Its Culture,” Organizational
Dynamics 15, no. 4 (1987): 524.
76.
J. Channon, “Creating Esprit de Corps,” in New Traditions in Business: Spirit and Leadership in the
21st Century (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 1992) 53–66.
77.
I. Mitroff and R. H. Kilmann, “On Organizational Stories: An Approach to the Design and Analysis of
Organization through Myths and Stories,” in The Management of Organization Design: Strategies and
Implications, eds. R. Kilmann, L. Pondy, and D. P. Slevin (New York: North-Holland, 1976).
78.
J. Martin and C. Siehl, “Organizational Culture and Counterculture: An Uneasy Symbiosis,”
Organizational Dynamics, Autumn 1983, 52–64.
79.
S. Fisher, “Telling Tales: The Art of Corporate Storytelling,” Costco Connection, October 2007,
22–23.
80.
K. Butterfield, L. K. Trevi~no, and G. R. Weaver. “Moral awareness in business organizations:
Influences of issue-related and social context factors.” Human Relations 53, no. 7 (2000): 981–1018.
81.
F. B. Bird and J. A. Waters, “The Moral Muteness of Managers,” California Management Review, Fall
1989, 73–88.
82.
K. Berney, “Finding the Ethical Edge,” Nation’s Business, August 1987, 18–24.
83.
F. B. Bird and J. A. Waters, “The Moral Muteness of Managers,” California Management Review, Fall
1989, 73–88.
84.
H. C. Kelman and V. L. Hamilton, Crimes of Obedience: Toward a Social Psychology of Authority and
Responsibility (New Haven, CT: Yale University, 1989).
85.
L. K. Trevi~no, G. R. Weaver, D. G. Gibson, and B. L. Toffler, “Managing Ethics and Legal
Compliance: What Works and What Hurts,” California Management Review 41, no. 2 (1999):
131–51.
86.
K. D. Martin and J. B. Cullen, “Continuities and Extensions of Ethical Climate Theory: A Meta-
analytic Review,” Journal of Business Ethics 69 (2006): 175–94.
87.
B. Toffler, Final Accounting: Ambition, Greed, and the Fall of Arthur Andersen (New York: Broadway
Books, 2003).
88.
Ibid.
89.
B. Toffler, Final Accounting; L. K. Trevi~no and M. E. Brown, “Managing to Be Ethical: Debunking
Five Business Ethics Myths,” Academy of Management Executive 18, no. 2 (2004): 69–81.
90.
K. Eichenwald, “Reversal of Andersen Conviction Not a Declaration of Innocence,” New York Times,
1 June 2005, C6.
91.
R. A. Barrett, Culture and Conduct: An Excursion in Anthropology (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1984);
B. Uttal, “The Corporate Culture Vultures,” Fortune, October 17, 1983, 66–71.
92.
Ibid.
93.
R. Ricklees, “Ethics in America Series,” Wall Street Journal, October 31–November 3, 1983, 33.
94.
J. A. Swainson, “Back from the Brink: Rebuilding a Company after a Near-Fatal Ethics Breakdown,”
Raytheon lectureship in Business Ethics at Bentley University, Waltham, MA, 2008.
95.
J. Byrne, “The Best-Laid Ethics Programs,” Businessweek, March 9, 1992, 67–69.
96.
N. Tichy, Managing Strategic Change (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1983).
97.
R. A. Barrett, Culture and Conduct: An Excursion in Anthropology (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1984);
B. Uttal, “The Corporate Culture Vultures,” Fortune, October 17, 1983, 66–71.
98.
W. R. Nord, “OD’s Unfulfilled Visions: Some Lessons from Economics,” in Research in Organiza-
tional Change and Development, eds. R. W. Woodman and W. A. Pasmore (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press,
1989), 39–60.
CHAPTER 5
ETHICS AS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
205

99.
R. A. Barrett, Culture and Conduct: An Excursion in Anthropology (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1984);
B. Uttal, “The Corporate Culture Vultures,” Fortune, October 17, 1983, 66–71.
100.
A. L. Wilkins, “The Culture Audit: A Tool for Understanding Organizations,” Organizational
Dynamics 12 (1983): 24–38.
101.
F. Luthans, “Conversation with Edgar H. Schein,” Organizational Dynamics 17, no. 4 (1989): 60–76.
102.
J. P. Near and M. P. Miceli, “Whistleblowers in Organizations: Dissidents or Reformers?” in Research
in Organizational Behavior, eds. Cummings and Staw, 321–68.
103.
T. Peters, “Symbols, Patterns, and Settings: An Optimistic Case of Getting Things Done,” Organiza-
tional Dynamics 7 (1978): 3–23.
104.
W. McWhinney and J. Batista, “How Remythologizing Can Revitalize Organizations,” Organiza-
tional Dynamics 17, no. 2 (1988): 46–79.
105.
“Texaco Chairman and CEO Tells National Urban League that Diversity Commitment Must Be
Worked on Daily,” Press Release (August 4, 1998), Chevron Texaco Corporation.
106.
K. Labich, “No More Crude at Texaco,” Fortune, September 16, 1999, 205–12.
107.
“Fourth Annual Report of the Equality and Fairness Task Force for the Year ending June 30, 2001,”
Chevron Texaco Corporation, 2001.
108.
Ibid.
109.
M. Kimes, “Bad to the Bone,” Fortune, October 8, 2012, 140–154.
206
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

C H A P T E R6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL
COMPLIANCE
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 5 presented ethics as organizational culture, but it may have raised as many
questions as it answered, such as “What are real organizations doing to create and
communicate an ethical organizational culture?” This chapter is designed to help
answer that question by focusing more narrowly on ethics and legal compliance
programs in several large American corporations. These programs are designed to
manage and communicate ethics in a variety of ways.
Whatever your organizational level, you should find the information in this
chapter helpful. If you’re at a high level, it should give you ideas about how to
manage ethics and legal compliance in your firm. If you’re at a lower or middle
management level, it should help you understand your own organization’s approach
to ethics management and how it compares to what other organizations are currently
doing. If you’re a student, it will help you think about what to look for during the job
search.
In preparing this chapter, we spoke with executives from four companies in a
variety of industries: Lockheed Martin Corporation (global security); United Tech-
nologies Corporation (UTC—Otis elevators, Carrier air conditioners, Pratt & Whitney
jet engines, Sikorsky helicopters); Merck (medicines, vaccines, and consumer care and
animal health products); and Adelphia (telecommunications/cable). We are grateful to
these executives for their time and contributions to this book. These companies vary in
size. UTC has over 220,000 employees (more than half outside the United States) and
a presence in more than 180 countries. Merck has 80,000 employees in 140 countries.
Adelphia had 14,000 employees across the United States when its assets were
purchased in 2005 by Comcast and Time Warner. Lockheed Martin has 118,000
employees and operates in 572 locations across 46 states in the U.S. and internation-
ally in 75 nations and territories.
Think about the challenge of managing ethics and legal compliance in these firms,
many with employees at locations around the globe. All of the companies are engaged
in a variety of efforts, but their approaches differ somewhat due to differences in
industries and organizational cultures. For example, some industries (e.g., defense and
chemicals) are more highly regulated than others, so compliance with laws and
regulations is an important goal, and it must be managed. For many of these
207

companies, ethics and legal compliance are closely tied to maintenance of the firm’s
reputation and brand value. In such an environment, integrity becomes a key driver of
corporate action.
STRUCTURING ETHICS MANAGEMENT
Many businesses are allocating significant resources to formal ethics and legal
compliance programs. The increasing attention to formal ethics management
programs has come about partially because of media attention to scandals in
American business and management’s awareness of the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines
(see more about the guidelines at the end of this chapter); because for a number of
years, organizations such as the Conference Board have held business ethics
conferences at which formal ethics management systems are encouraged; and
because some corporate leaders are simply committed to the importance of ethics
in their organizations.1
Perhaps nothing, however, has influenced corporate ethics programs in the United
States more than the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines, which took effect in the early 1990s.
Until the mid-1980s, criminal law focused on the individual defendant rather than the
corporation, and fines on corporations were relatively modest. In 1984, Congress
created the U.S. Sentencing Commission in response to criticism of judicial discretion
in sentencing and perceived disparities between sentences for “white-collar” and other
types of crimes. In 1987, the Commission imposed federal sentencing guidelines for
individual offenders, and as a result the trend has been toward increasing fines for both
individuals and organizations convicted of felony crimes. The guidelines limited
judicial sentencing discretion and mandated some incarceration for virtually every
felony offender.
In 1991, the Commission issued new sentencing guidelines for organizations
convicted of federal crimes. The organization can be convicted even if only one
employee is caught breaking the law. The guidelines cover most federal crimes,
including fraud, antitrust, securities, tax, bribery, and money-laundering offenses, and
they impose a schedule of mandatory fines. “Virtually without exception, the Guide-
lines require a convicted organization to make restitution and to pay a substantial fine
(which is not tax deductible).”2 The guidelines even include a provision calling for a
“corporate death penalty.” The provision was used by federal prosecutors in the case of
American Precision Components Inc., a Farmingdale, New York, company that sold
ordinary nuts and bolts to government contractors as highly tested space components.3
The company agreed to divest all of its assets. Arthur Andersen, the former auditing
firm that once “stood for integrity,” put its stamp of approval on a long list of dirty
books (e.g., Sunbeam, Waste Management, Enron, Global Crossing, Qwest, and
WorldCom) and has now become the biggest case ever of corporate capital
punishment.4
The sentencing guidelines were designed to use a “carrot and stick” approach to
managing corporate crime. The carrot provides incentives to organizations to develop
a strong internal control system to detect and manage illegal behavior. The guidelines
208
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

list seven requirements (outlined in detail in Table 6.1) for due diligence and an effective
compliance program. For example, the guidelines propose that organizations establish
and communicate compliance standards and set up communication, monitoring,
reporting, and accountability systems. In this approach, the stick provides for severe
punishment for organizations that are convicted of crimes and were not proactively
managing legal compliance within the organization. Fines and other sanctions vary
widely depending on prior violations, whether management reports itself and coop-
erates with investigative authorities, and whether the company has an effective program
in place to prevent and detect illegal behavior. The 1991 guidelines listed the following
seven specific requirements for an effective legal compliance program.
Therefor e, the same crime can be subj ect to a wide range of penal ties. Th e
minimum fine under the guide lines is $250, and the maximum is $290 milli on or even
more if the cri me meets certain crite ria. (For more specific inform ation about how
fines are dete rmined, see the append ix, “How Fines Are Determined under the U.S.
Sentencing Guidel ines” at the end of this chapt er.) The guidelines also recomm end
that a defendant organizat ion that does not have an effective legal com pliance program
should be put o n corporate proba tion. Some of the recommend ed condi tions of
probation include requi ring that the organi zation publici ze (at its own expense and
as directed by the court) the fact of its conviction and the natu re of the p unishment;
periodically report to the court regarding its finan cial conditi on and operating results;
submit to periodi c, unannou nced reviews of books and reco rds, and interrogat ion of
employees by court-a ppointed experts (pai d by the organization ); and inform the court
of any materia l adverse change in busin ess condition s or prosp ects.
Table 6.1 Seven Requirements for Due Diligence and an Effective Compliance
Program
1. Establishing compliance standards reasonably capable of preventing criminal conduct
2. Assigning speciﬁc high-level individuals with responsibility to oversee those compli-
ance standards
3. Exercising due care to ensure that discretionary authority is not delegated to individ-
uals with a propensity to engage in illegality
4. Taking necessary steps to communicate compliance standards and procedures to all
employees, with a special emphasis on training and the dissemination of manuals
5. Taking reasonable steps to achieve compliance with written standards through mon-
itoring, auditing, and other systems designed to detect criminal conduct, including a
reporting system free of retribution to employees who report criminal conduct
6. Consistently enforcing the organization’s written standards through appropriate dis-
ciplinary mechanisms, including, as appropriate, discipline of individuals responsible
for failure to detect an offense
7. After an offense is detected, taking all reasonable steps to respond and to prevent
future similar conduct
These requirements are from the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines of 1991 (see www.ussc.
gov for more information).
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
209

According to the U.S. Sentenci ng Comm ission’s repor ts (fou nd at www.ussc.
gov), more and more firms are being sentenced under the guide lines. Becaus e the
guidelines were not applied retroactively, they remained under the radar for a number
of years. However, their impact has steadily increased and companies are paying
attention. For example, in 1995, Con Edison was convicted of an environmental
offense and was subject to probation that included onerous compliance requirements.
In 1996, in what has come to be known as the Caremark decision, corporate boards of
directors were put on notice to take the guidelines into account as part of their
corporate governance responsibilities or face personal liability. In 1999, Hoffman-
LaRoche was convicted of antitrust conspiracy charges and was fined $500 million, the
largest criminal fine imposed to that point in the United States, and Rhone Poulenc was
granted amnesty because it reported the offense. In 2001, TAP Pharmaceuticals
received the third largest fine ever imposed to that date under the guidelines—
$290 million.5 (See Chapter 5 for a case study about TAP Pharmaceuticals.) In recent
years, fines have climbed astronomically. AT&T paid almost $1 billion in fines in 2011
for improperly charging taxes to customers who use AT&T lines to access the Internet.
Intel paid $1.25 billion in 2010 for redesigning its chips to retaliate against computer
makers who used a rival’s chips. In 2009, Pfizer was fined $2.3 billion for illegally
marketing a painkiller, and finally, the big banks (Bank of America, Wells Fargo,
JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup, Ally) paid $25 billion in fines in 2012 over faulty
foreclosures and mishandling customer requests for mortgage modifications.6
In 2004, the U.S. Sentencing Commission released revisions to the guidelines,
including the expectation that the board of directors will oversee the compliance and
ethics program, that senior management will ensure its effectiveness, and that the
compliance officer will have adequate authority and access to senior management. In
addition, organizations must train employees and conduct risk assessments to
identify potential areas of concern. The revision also ensures that organizations
cannot just “check off” the list of guidelines (for example, with a code of conduct that
just sits on the shelf). Rather, the program in place must be seen as an integral part of
the organization’s culture (see Chapter 5 for more on ethical culture). With the
Supreme Court’s 2005 United States v. Booker decision, judges are no longer
required to follow the guidelines strictly. The guidelines remain advisory, and federal
prosecutors have been told they are expected to take steps to ensure adherence to
them. Therefore, most observers now expect that the guidelines will continue to be
followed in most cases.7
In recent years, the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines continued to evolve with
refinements being announced on an almost annual basis, and that is a good thing.
Instead of being a dead document, the guidelines are very much alive and the
commission regularly revises them to try to reward good corporate citizenship. As
you’ll see in the material that follows, most of the elements of the Sentencing
Guidelines have become integral parts of organizational ethics programs throughout
the United States. While most companies make a real effort to meet the “letter” of the
guidelines, others go much further to incorporate the “spirit” of the guidelines. We
discuss some of those efforts in this chapter.
210
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Making Ethics Comprehensive and Holistic
The U.S. Sen tencing Guid elines very clearly aim to encourage organi zations to create
ethics program s that drive integrity and ethica l behavior in their business opera tions.
As the guidelines have become more refined and sophist icated over time, resp onsible
organization s have found nume rous ways of making ethics and values central to how
they do business. As we read in the last chapter, values such as ethics and integrity
become part of an organization ’s cultur e by aligni ng various eleme nts througho ut the
organization . Integrating any corpo rate value into the organi zational culture starts with
strong executive com mitment. Onc e execut ives are clearly behi nd the effort, then the
effort must be com munica ted to every emp loyee and complianc e must be measur ed
and rewarded for the value to becom e part of the cultur e.
Managing Ethics: The Corporate Ethics Ofﬁce
Some organizat ions delegate ethics man agement resp onsibiliti es widel y, finding that a
strong statemen t of values and a strong ethica l cultur e can keep the ethics man agement
effort togethe r. This appro ach may be partic ularly effective in smaller firms. However,
most large firms find that ethics initiatives need to be coord inated from a sing le office
to ensur e that all of the progr am’s pieces fit toge ther and that all of the U.S. Sentencing
Guidelin es’ requireme nts are being met.
The corporate ethics office concept can be traced to 1985 and General Dynamics,
then the second-largest U.S. defense contractor. The secretary of the Navy, out of
concern about the appropriateness of certain indirect expenses that had been billed to the
government, directed General Dynamics to establish and enforce a rigorous code of
ethics for all employees that included sanctions for violators. The company turned to a
nonprofit consulting firm in Washington, D.C., the Ethics Resource Center, for help in
developing the code. As part of this process, an ethics office was also set up and an ethics
officer was hired.8 In 1986, General Dynamics joined with other defense industry
companies in the Defense Industry Initiative (see www.dii.org) to “embrace and promote
ethical business conduct.” The companies shared best practices, and these best practices
provided much of the foundation for the U.S. Sentencing Commission requirements.
The 1991 U.S. Federal Sentencin g Gui delines gave im petus to the move toward
establish ing formal ethics program s in firms outs ide the defe nse indus try. The
guidelines also calle d for the assi gnment of specific high-level individuals with
responsibili ty to oversee legal complianc e standar ds. Th is require ment led to the
developme nt of a brand new rol e—that of the corpo rate ethics officer.
Ethics and Compliance Ofﬁcers
Until the mid-19 80s, the title “ethic s and complianc e officer” didn’t exist in American
business. Today, with a growing numb er of ethics and complianc e prac titioners
worldwide, these high-level executives have their own professional organization,
the Ethics and Complia nce Office r Ass ociation (EC OA—see www.the ecoa.org). Th e
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
211

association ’s stated mission is “to prom ote ethical business prac tices, serving as a
forum for the exchange of inform ation and strategies.” Th e organi zation began in 199 1
when over 40 ethics and com pliance officers met at the Cente r for Business Ethics at
Bentley University in Waltham, Massachu setts. The organizat ion was officially
launched later that year and began holding annual meetings in 199 3. As of 2009,
the ECOA has more than 1,300 members representi ng mor e than half of the Fortu ne
100 com panies, nonpro fits, muni cipalities , and intern ational membe rs from over 30
countries. Th e organi zation holds regular confe rences, workshops, and webcasts and
provide s a variety of classr oom and distance learning opport unities for ethics and
complianc e office rs and their sta ff.
The demand for qualified and knowledge able complianc e and ethics professiona ls
is so high that more o rganization s are being created to help them share informat ion and
design more effective ethics and com pliance program s. One of thes e is the Society for
Corporate Compliance and Ethics (SCCE), a nonprofit started in 2002 and head-
quartered in Minneapolis. The SCCE boasts more than 3,000 members and has a
robust web presence (www.corporatec ompli ance.org ).
Many firms designate their legal counsel as the ethics officer. Others create a title
such as vice president or director of ethics, compliance, or business practices, director
of internal audit, ethics program coordinator, or just plain ethics officer. Most firms
locate the ethics officer at the corporate level, and these high-level executives
generally report to a senior executive, the CEO, the board of directors, the audit
committee of the board, or some combination. These individuals are expected to
provide leadership and strategies for ensuring that the firm’s standards of business
conduct are communicated and upheld throughout the organization.
INSIDERS VERSUS OUTSIDERS
An ethics or compliance officer may be an insider
or someone brought in from the outside. We talked to past and present ethics officers
who represent both categories. It can sometimes be more difficult for an outsider to
achieve credibility in the ethics or compliance role, but someone brought in from
outside the company has the advantage of being able to evaluate the situation with a
fresh eye. If change is needed, that person may be better able to guide the organization
through the change process. Most of the ethics officers we interviewed believe that, if
available, a respected and trusted insider who knows the company’s culture and people
is usually the best choice. Results of a 1995 survey support the insider preference; 82
percent of the firms responding to the question hired their ethics officer from inside the
firm.9 The very best situation may be when the ethics officer is also a part of the senior
management team or being groomed for an executive position. However, outsiders are
often brought in if the organization is responding to an ethical crisis of some kind.
At Lockheed Martin, ethics is taken so seriously that an assignment managing an
ethics office is part of the grooming process for executive positions that high-potential
employees receive. Lockheed Martin has a vice president of ethics and sustainability
for the entire corporation and five ethics directors—one for each of Lockheed Martin’s
five huge business areas. These positions report to the executive vice presidents in the
business areas and are largely rotational. High-potential executives are recruited into
212
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

these jobs as a development experience; they serve for two to three years and then go
back to the businesses. Other high-potential employees replace them as ethics
directors, and the process continues. This is a novel approach to enhancing an ethics
program and grooming executives, and it should go a long way toward truly integrating
ethics and integrity into the business rhythm.
Lockheed Martin will soon have a full cadre of executive-level employees who
have served the company as ethics professionals. One employee involved in this
process is Craig Cash, who is currently (2013) the director of ethics and business
conduct for Lockheed Martin Mission Systems and Training (MST) in Washington,
DC. Cash holds an undergraduate degree in engineering and a Masters in Leadership
and Business Ethics from Duquesne University. Cash was working in engineering
when he was tapped for the ethics officer job in Syracuse in 2003. Now he is the
Director for MST and is managing investigations, overseeing ethics and compliance
training, tracking metrics through surveys and other studies, and looking for trends in
this area. He is also talking to leaders, working with them to integrate ethics and
compliance into the business by creating a “culture of trust” throughout the organiza-
tion. With his unique background and advanced education in the field, Cash is the sole
exception among business area ethics directors and is nonrotational. According to
Cash, working in the Ethics Office at Lockheed Martin is a joy since the business takes
the topic so seriously and supports its employees 100 percent in doing the right thing.
ETHICS OFFICER BACKGROUND
The job of ethics officer has been called “the
newest profession in American business.”10 Individuals holding this position come
from many backgrounds. With insiders, the job is often assigned to someone in a staff
function (e.g., someone in the corporate secretary’s office, office of the legal counsel,
audit, or human resources). According to past ethics officer surveys, law was the most
common background. That is true of most of our interviewees as well. Interestingly,
some people believe that lawyers shouldn’t be considered for the job, because
corporate lawyers are hired to defend the corporation and can’t objectively handle
an ethical issue that calls the corporation’s own behavior into question. But the ethics
officers we interviewed agreed that the most important thing is earning other employ-
ees’ respect as being fair, trustworthy, credible, and discreet.
The Ethics Infrastructure
Ethics offices can be centralized, decentralized, or some combination of both. The
decision to centralize or decentralize may depend on the overall structure of the firm.
For example, if the firm’s other staff functions are highly decentralized, it may be
difficult to centralize the ethics function. The structuring decision may also depend on
whether different business units have very different ethics management needs. For
example, if one division of a firm deals in government contracts and others do not, that
division may need a different approach that emphasizes compliance with government
contracting regulations. Thus, local ethics offices might better meet the needs of
different units that are in different businesses. However, decentralized ethics offices
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
213

can be difficult to manage effectively because they must communicate with each other
constantly to ensure consistency and commitment to the organization’s key values.
Even where different units have different requirements, it’s usually helpful to
have a central office that coordinates ethics and compliance activities and ensures
management support for those activities. Most large organizations, such as the ones we
talked with, have a headquarters ethics office that functions as the central point of
communications for ethics and compliance activities. For example, the corporate
ethics office at Lockheed Martin has a staff of around ten people, led by Leo Mackay,
the vice president of ethics and sustainability. In addition, each of the five large
business areas, corporate enterprise operations, and international operations has a full-
time ethics director who has responsibility for overseeing ethics and business conduct
in his or her business areas. These ethics directors, following a matrix reporting
structure, report to Mackay as well as to an executive vice president for their business
area. Mackay reports directly to the president and chief executive officer. In addition,
Mackay reports (in written and oral form) to the Ethics and Sustainability Committee
of the corporation’s board of directors.
Ethics officers seem to agree that, whatever other reporting relationships exist, the
ethics officer should have a direct reporting relationship to the CEO. They were
particularly concerned about the ethics function being “stuck” under law, human
resources, audit, or finance, where it would be just another part of the “silo mentality”
that still exists in many organizations. Ethics would then be perceived as audit’s job or
HR’s job rather than as part of the total culture. For example, it was common at one
time (and still is in some companies) to have the ethics office report to the general
counsel (legal department). In a recent survey conducted among compliance pro-
fessionals, 88 percent said that this was not a good arrangement.11 The person who
leads the ethics office is in a much better position to “press the envelope” if he or she
reports directly to the CEO. (If the CEO is the ethics problem, then a reporting line to
the audit committee of the board is essential).
The Corporate Ethics Committee
In some organizations, ethics is managed by a corporate committee staffed by senior-
level managers from a variety of functional areas. This committee is set up to provide
ethical oversight and policy guidance for CEO and management decisions.12 It also
represents an affirmation that top management really cares about ethics.
At Lockheed Martin, the Corporate Sustainability Council meets at least twice a
year and has done so since 1995 when the company was formed. The Council provides
the organization with strategic direction and oversight on matters of ethics and
business conduct along with other sustainability matters. Each business area and
international region has also established an Ethics and Business Conduct Steering
Committee to oversee its ethics and business conduct operations. In some of the larger
business areas, subordinate-level steering committees have been set up as well.
Members of the corporate committee include the general counsel, executives of large
operating entities, and vice presidents from functional areas such as human resources,
214
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

finance, audit, and communications. The corporate committee is chaired by Mackay,
and the business area committees are chaired by their executive vice presidents. The
two-way communication between the ethics office and these senior executives is
essential. It gives the ethics office information about what concerns senior-level
management, and it gives the firm’s leadership information about the types of issues
that are coming into the ethics office from employees. The group’s role is viewed as
strategic. The steering committees at all levels of the corporation review the ethics
awareness training and business conduct compliance training programs, metrics on
investigations and requests for guidance, trends, employee survey results, and matters
referred by the business areas and business units.
COMMUNICATING ETHICS
Within the ethics infrastructure, good communication—downward, upward, and two-
way—is essential if an organization is to have a strong, aligned ethics culture. The
organization must evaluate the current state of ethics communication and initiatives. It
must communicate its values, standards, and policies in a variety of formal and
informal ways that meet its employees’ needs. These communication efforts should be
synergistic, clear, consistent, and credible. They also need to be executed in a variety
of media, because people learn things in different ways. In general, the old advice to
speechwriters still holds. “Tell ’em what you’re going to tell ’em, then tell ’em, then
tell ’em what you told ’em.” In addition to receiving downward communication from
management, employees must also have opportunities to communicate their ethical
concerns upward. Finally, an open communication environment must be created that
says it’s okay to ask questions, and it’s okay to talk about ethics. In the following
section, we begin with some corporate communications basics—principles that should
guide all ethics communication initiatives.
A number of the ethics officers we interviewed were sensitive to the negativity
sometimes attached to the word ethics. Employees can get defensive when they hear
this word. They think to themselves, “Why are you here talking to me about ethics?
Mine are fine.” Kent Druyvesteyn, former ethics officer at General Dynamics, put it
this way. “Using the word ‘ethics’ unfortunately implies that somebody has a
deficiency. So, I would urge you not to use that word at least until you can make
clear what you mean by it.” This negative reaction to the word ethics may be more of a
problem at some organizations than at others. Again, it depends on the culture of the
firm. Companies have used the term values or business conduct or business practices
successfully. The key is to know your own company and use terminology that sounds
authentic within your organization’s culture.
Basic Communications Principles
ALIGN THE FORMAL AND INFORMAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
When most
people think of a corporate communication system, they think of the obvious—the
company newspaper, website, and annual report. However, like culture, a corporate
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
215

communication system consists of formal and informal components. Formal com-
munications include all formal written and electronic communication—newspapers,
magazines, memos, recruiting literature, policy manuals, annual reports, websites, and
advertising—as well as formalized oral communication such as meetings and
speeches. But perhaps the most powerful component in a corporation’s communica-
tion system is an informal one known as the grapevine.
The grapevine—a continual stream of information among employees about
“what’s really going on”—exists in every organization. It contains news, rumors,
impressions, and perceptions. Surprisingly, research has shown that from 70 to 90
percent of the information that passes through the grapevine is accurate.13 In survey
after survey of employees in numerous and varied businesses, the grapevine is where
they said they received most of their information about their employer. (In those same
surveys, most people said they would rather receive information from their managers.)
The grapevine can be examined to shed light on a corporation’s credibility since most
employees are plugged into it, it provides information fast and continually, and it
contains the “inside” scoop on corporate events.
One way to determine corporate credibility onvarious issues—especially ethics—
is to compare the messages on the formal and informal communications systems. For
example, suppose that Big Company has a policy prohibiting employees from
entertaining customers excessively. The policy is spelled out in a manual, and the
president of Big has reinforced the policy in speeches to employees. Now imagine that
Big’s head of marketing repeatedly wines and dines clients. The costs of the lavish
entertainment are detailed in expense reports that are approved by management and
processed by clerical and financial control employees. In addition, other employees
are invited along when the clients are entertained, and still more employees observe
the head of marketing entertaining guests in expensive restaurants. Regardless of
how strongly Big’s formal communication system states the official policy, the
informal communication system—the grapevine—will communicate what’s really
going on: Big is saying one thing and doing another. The company says it prohibits
lavish entertainment, yet it condones that forbidden behavior in at least one high-
level employee. As a result, Big’s ethics culture is out of alignment and employees
might well conclude that the company has no corporate credibility on the subject of
customer entertainment. Furthermore, its credibility on other ethical issues is
probably suspect.
Now imagine another situation. Little Company has a strongly worded policy
regarding sexual harassment. Moreover, Little’s senior executives have frequently
stated that sexual harassment will not be tolerated. Suppose a manager, Pat, is
accused of sexual harassment. The charge is investigated, found to be accurate, and
Pat is fired. The exact details of the incident may not be on the grapevine, but in most
cases, just the bare bones of that story will send a strong message. The messages on
the grapevine will match what’s said by Little’s formal communication system.
Employees will get the word very quickly that Little means business on the issue of
sexual harassment, and the corporation will have increased its credibility by
“walking the ethics talk.”
216
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

The importance of informal communications can’t be overstated. Since truth
and honesty are at the core of any ethics effort, if a company is saying one thing and
doing another—if the messages on its formal communication system and its
grapevine don’t match—it has little or no credibility and probably shouldn’t attempt
a formal ethics communication effort until it has regained its credibility. How can
you compare the formal and informal messages? Ask employees. Employee surveys
and focus groups can provide feedback that will serve as the beginning of an
effective comparison. One particularly effective way of measuring this is to ask
employees to compare what the company “says” with what the company “does.”
How does an organization establish or regain credibility? Designing consistent
policies and enforcing those policies are the only route an organization can take to
gain credibility on ethics issues. If policies are enforced for only part of the
employee population, or if there are different rules and treatment for different
employees, there’s little an organization can do to gain credibility until consistency
is established.
ANALYZE THE AUDIENCE
The first thing to do when designing a communication
program is to analyze the needs of your audience. Consider what employees already
know, what they need to know, what biases and abilities they have, what the desired
and required behaviors look like, when they should be asking questions, and where
they can go to report their concerns and to ask for help.
When designing ethics communication for a typical employee population,
organizations need to consider three kinds of people. (Because the terms are easy
to visualize and remember, we use military jargon to describe the three types.)
Good Soldiers
Group I includes the “good soldiers.” These people understand
and follow the rules and policies of the organization, and they have good ethical
compasses. They have the judgment or experience required to discern the difference
between right and wrong, and they have the moral grounding to do the right thing. Be
careful to note that these aren’t just soldiers who follow orders, right or wrong. They
know that good soldiers are expected to question an order they believe to be illegal or
morally wrong, and they would do so.
Loose Cannons
In Group II are the “loose cannons”—these people may have
good ethical compasses, but they don’t know their corporation’s policies. They may
not even be familiar with general ethical standards in business. Loose cannons may be
inexperienced, or they may have transferred from another, unrelated industry with very
different norms; they may never have read a policy manual. Whatever the reason, loose
cannons may be well meaning, but they’re naive. Without guidance, loose cannons
may not even consider ethics in the business environment.
Grenades
People in Group III are “grenades,” and they’re neither ignorant nor
benign. These employees may or may not know the rules, but they don’t care either
way. They have their own agenda, and they lack any company or professional loyalty.
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
217

We call them grenades because their activities can blow up suddenly and severely
damage the organization.
Although the communication needs of the three groups overlap, the emphasis for
each specific group is clear. Good soldiers need support because good people often feel
pressured to compromise in order to “fit in.” Good soldiers need to know that their
instincts are right and their behavior is not the exception; in fact, it represents the
organizational model. Loose cannons need to be educated; they need to know and
understand basic norms of ethical conduct and specific company policy and standards.
Grenades need to know unequivocally that ethical lapses will not be tolerated. They
need to see good behavior rewarded and ethical lapses dealt with swiftly, consistently,
and firmly.
There are probably only a few grenades in any organization. But they surely exist
everywhere, and the system must be prepared to deal with them. Good soldiers may
account for a substantial portion of employees, but perhaps not the majority. Since very
few employees ever read a policy manual cover to cover, most people learn policy on a
need-to-know basis. It’s safest to assume that most employees fit into the loose cannon
category. The challenge in designing effective ethics communication programs is
meeting the needs of all types of employees.
This focus on the ethics audience assumes that most employees don’t come to the
organization perfectly principled and completely prepared to make the right decision
in every situation. Recall from earlier chapters that most employees are highly
susceptible to influence from outside themselves, so the organization has to provide
guidance—and, despite advances, the perfect integrity test hasn’t been invented. Since
polygraphs were outlawed for most types of employee screening in the United States,
more organizations have turned to paper-and-pencil honesty or integrity tests to screen
prospective employees. Most of these tests attempt to predict the prospective employ-
ee’s inclination to steal from the organization, although others have a more general
focus on workplace deviance. Integrity tests have been evaluated by the American
Psychological Association. Their report concludes that research on integrity tests is
improving and that evidence supporting the tests’ ability to predict dishonest behavior
has increased.14 Nevertheless, many problems remain, and organizations will continue
to have imperfect employees who need guidance on ethical issues.
Evaluating the Current State of Ethics Communications
Before beginning the actual design of an ethics communication program, it’s essential
to conduct an evaluation that asks the following questions.
WHAT KINDS OF ETHICAL DILEMMAS ARE EMPLOYEES LIKELY TO ENCOUN-
TER?
In addition to common ethical dilemmas faced by employees everywhere,
organizations need to identify the kinds of issues and dilemmas that might be unique to
their particular industry. For example, a chemical company needs to pay special
attention to environmental and safety dilemmas. A financial firm should pay extremely
close attention to fiduciary, confidentiality, and conflict-of-interest issues. A
218
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

manufacturing company may have to look at the ethical issues involved in worker
safety, product quality, product liability, and labor relations. Along with identifying
issues specific to their industry, companies need to examine the various jobs within
their organization to uncover what specific professional dilemmas their communica-
tion program will have to address. For example, an internal auditor faces one set of
dilemmas, whereas a manufacturing supervisor faces an entirely different set. Once
these dilemmas are identified, an organization can develop a program that’s useful for
employees—one that shows them how to deal with their own most common dilemmas.
WHAT DON’T EMPLOYEES KNOW?
Is the company hiring numerous midcareer
hires who may come from other industries with different standards of conduct? Does
the company regularly hire large numbers of recent college or business school
graduates who may have little knowledge of business standards, much less specific
corporate policy or industry standards? The communication program needs to target
the specific needs of these different groups.
HOW ARE POLICIES CURRENTLY COMMUNICATED?
How is policy communi-
cated now? Does the policy manual weigh in at 40 pounds, or is it online and easy to
search? When a manager has a policy question, what does he or she do—look it up in
the manual, ask human resources, ask a colleague, search online resources, or guess? Is
corporate policy ever discussed in orientation or training programs? No one is ever
going to memorize a policy manual. Therefore, an ethics communication program
needs to take a “snapshot” of key policies and concentrate on communicating them.
Organizations also need to send a clear message that employees need to know when to
ask questions and that the organization encourages employees to inquire. Companies
generally do a very good job of telling new hires how to succeed; what they usually
don’t do nearly as well is telling new hires how they’re going to fail or get fired or
worse. It’s vital for new employees to understand their employer’s standards. What
does the company expect from them?
Policy communication also needs to be in plain language—not legalese. It is very
tempting for company lawyers to try to protect an organization by using legal language
to communicate complex policy issues. However, it is not helpful at all to the non-
lawyers (most employees) who need to understand what a particular policy means.
Every effort should be made to simplify language, explain “why” your organization
has a particular policy, and then give examples of how the policy might be applied in
everyday business situations.
WHAT COMMUNICATION CHANNELS EXIST?
How do employees receive mes-
sages from management? How does management receive messages from employees?
Is “management by walking around” a common practice, or is senior management
isolated from most employees? Is there a suggestion program? If so, do suggestions get
responses? Are employees generally comfortable approaching their managers with
problems, concerns, and questions? Is there a grievance process or a whistleblowing
procedure? Do most employees know where to go for help if their managers are
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
219

unavailable or if their manager is part of the p roblem? Ar e human reso urces, legal, and
audit prof essionals accessible to most emp loyees? Analyzing the answer s to thes e
questions will give an organization a g ood idea of where effective com munication
channels exist, where they don’t, and where to build new ones.
Multiple Communication Channels for Formal Ethics
Communication
The company’s ethics message can and shoul d be commun icate d in a vari ety of ways.
The most obvious ethics commun ication channels include a missio n or values
statemen t, a code of conduc t, policy statemen ts, a formal proce ss for reporting
concerns or obser ved miscon duct , and commun ications from leaders. In addition
to these channe ls, the ethics message needs to be reinforced in all formal com muni-
cation materials, including recruiting and orientation mater ials, newslette rs, mag a-
zines, annual reports, and websites . The following are som e type s of com munication
materials that can be used to send an ethics mes sage.
WEBSITES 
The company’s website is an important source of information about the
company and its values and policies. Many companies are hesitant to include ethics
information on their external website and instead use their firm’s intranet to convey the
information. But stakeholders such as investors, potential employees, customers, and
suppliers are likely to use the company’s website to gather information about the
company. So, if ethics is important to these relationships, it should be included on the
external site. For example, Lockheed Martin provides a large amount of information
about ethics on its external website (www.lockheedmartin.com): its ethical principles,
code of conduct, annual ethics awareness training, information about compliance
training, information about how the ethics process works, and information for suppliers
and other business partners who are asked to be guided by high ethical standards and to
respect the restrictions the firm places on its employees with regard to such issues as
giving and receiving gifts. The code, “Setting the Standard,” is translated into 16
languages. United Technologies Corporation (www.utc.com) also provides information
about ethics on its website, including the code and other brochures in portable document
format (PDF). The information is also available in multiple languages.
SOCIAL MEDIA
New technology provides organizations with new ways of communi-
cating the ethics message and encouraging employee involvement. As with any other
subject,theintroductionofsocialmediaintothecommunicationequationcanbeadouble-
edged sword. There are many social media factors that can benefit and harm organiza-
tions—globalreach,instantaneousdistribution,anonymity,andalackofsecurity—allcan
play a positive or a negative role in an organization’s ethics communication strategy.
One company communicator described an ethics communication effort he
designed and implemented for his employer, a large national health insurance
company. This company’s strategy involved an employee blog, managed by the
communication department, where executives and employees could discuss all kinds
220
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

of issues affecti ng employees (inclu ding ethics) online. The comp any executives were
very reluctant to adopt this appro ach and it took months of lobbying by the
commun ication director to convinc e the executives to approve the blog. Finally,
they did approve it and it wen t live. Af ter only a few days, they were horrified when a
disgruntle d employee laun ched a diatribe agai nst the com pany on the blog. Th e
executives were tempt ed to end it right there, but again the commun ication dir ector
persuaded them to stay with it. Within a few hours, several other emp loyees,
completely of their own volition, answer ed the disg runtled emp loyee’s charges and
redirected the conversation. Over the n ext few week s, that patter n happen ed repeat-
edly, and eventually the executives calme d down. As this book goes to press, the blog
has been in place for almost thr ee years and the executives feel that it has had a positive
influence on the ethica l cultur e o f the organizat ion and has helped execut ives
commun icate some difficult mes sages to employees. Plus, internal rese arch shows
that employees tru st it as a source of inf ormation and guida nce.
Another even more successf ul story involves Best Buy and its chie f ethics officer,
Kathleen Edmon d, who won the Ethi cs Resour ce Center’s Carol R. Marshall Award
for Innovation in Corporate Ethics in 2013.15 Edmond employs a variety of tools to
communicate the ethics message among Best Buy’s 170,000 employees, and one tool
that has been very effective is a pers onal blog (www.kat hleenedmo nd.com). The blog
has been popular with employees and has explored a wide range of topics from vendor
contracts to employees posting confidential details of a new video game release date.16
Each entry describes an ethical issue and often a real case, Edmond’s thoughts on the
issue/case, and finally, questions to get readers thinking about the issue and how they
might respond in a similar situation. For example, one entry in February 2013 posed an
interesting situation for any retail employee.
The case involved the spouse of a corporate employee who came into a store,
behaved badly, and said that he was entitled to special treatment because his wife was a
corporate employee. Edmond asked a number of questions about the situation, including
this one: “Whether at Best Buy or any other company, should employees receive special
treatment that ordinary customers do not?” Of course, any of us who have worked in
retail can empathize with this very uncomfortable and infuriating situation. Not only did
Edmond raise a fascinating issue that surely happens repeatedly throughout any
company, but employees got the opportunity to respond, and the website contains
numerous comments from employees who deal with this type of thing every day.17 This
kind of openness, where employees can discuss approaches and ideas to deal effectively
withethicsissues,canonlybenefitacompanyandisapowerfulnewcommunicationtool.
RECRUITING BROCHURES
These can include the mission or values statement, a
discussionofcorporatevalues,andadescriptionofhowpeopleintheorganizationsucceed
and fail. Ethical conduct can be highlighted. Many organizations also have a website for
those interested in finding out about careers within the firm and applying for jobs.
CAMPUS RECRUITING
At Lockheed Martin, the ethics office participates with
university relations for on-campus recruiting. Ethics officers travel to college and
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
221

university campuses across the country to assist in recruiting and to speak about the
Lockheed Martin ethics program.
ORIENTATION MEETINGS AND MATERIALS
Orientation materials can include
the mission or values statement, descriptions of common ethical dilemmas and advice
for handling them, explanations of resources to help employees make ethical deci-
sions, and instructions on how to raise an ethical issue or report an ethical concern.
Organizations should pay particular attention to how their orientation meetings
communicate values and expectations. New employees are eager to learn about their
new employer, and orientations are a wonderful venue for communicating what an
organization stands for and what it expects of employees. How not to introduce values
and ethics during an orientation might best be illustrated by a manufacturing
company’s general counsel we heard about who, when asked to address new hires
on the company’s ethics and compliance program, simply read the code of conduct
aloud to a group of new employees. (Yawn.)
NEWSLETTERS AND MAGAZINES
These materials can be print-based or web-
based. They may include the mission statement, stories about corporate “heroes”—
employees who illustrate the corporate values—and features that describe ethical
dilemmas and include comments from employees and managers about how they would
deal with the problems. Some companies regularly publish lists of the types of ethical or
legal violations they have addressed and how they addressed them. For example, the
communication may say that, in the last six months, the company dealt with a particular
number of reports of Internet pornography, bribery, time reporting, travel charge
reporting, lying to customers, or abusive supervision. They may say how many of these
resulted in a variety of actions ranging from warnings to terminations. Such communi-
cation helps keep the ethical culture alive and lets employees know that the company
means what it says about the importance of ethics. These kinds of regular communica-
tions can also be targeted to specific groups of employees with specific needs.
BOOKLETS
These materials can vary given employees’ need for information in
particular areas of the business. Booklets can be in print or electronic forms and can
also be easily updated or added to, thus making the program adaptable to the dynamic
business environment.
Interactive Approaches to Ethics Communication
One novel approach to ethics communication is based on a “mini-case study”
approach. It gives employees an opportunity to learn about “real” ethics cases in
an ongoing manner, and it sustains the focus on ethics in the organization.
An approach like this was introduced in the early 1990s at Texas Instruments (TI),
and in TI’s system, employees were encouraged to send in questions. This internal
corporate communication tool, called “Instant Experience,” allowed employees to
raise timely issues quickly and without a lot of bureaucracy, and it provided the ethics
222
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

office with a constant line to the ethical pulse of the organization. The idea was the
brainchild of Glen Coleman, a retired Air Force helicopter pilot and an aerospace
engineer who worked for TI’s ethics office at the time. Coleman admitted that while in
Vietnam, he and his fellow helicopter pilots sometimes made potentially life-threat-
ening mistakes. On their return, they freely entered their “stupid mistakes” into a book
they called “Instant Experience,” so that their buddies wouldn’t make the same
mistakes and lives could be saved.
In a variation of the idea that not everyone should have to get burned to find out
that the stove is hot, Coleman reasoned that the ethics office could be a clearinghouse
for ethical experiences that members of the organization were willing to share with
others. As a result, these “instant experiences” were regularly transmitted to all
employees via an e-mail communication system. The experiences were retained on the
system so that new employees could get up to speed and ongoing employees could
check the system whenever they wished.
Here’s an example of an anonymous question posed by a TI employee and then
posted on the communication system.
Suppose I’m in a restaurant and I happen to overhear a conversation from
behind me. It’s two TI competitors discussing sensitive, competitive
information that would be very valuable to TI. What do I do? Continue
to listen? Put my fingers in my ears? Tell them to stop? And what should I
do with the information that I’ve already heard? Forget it and pretend it
never happened? Mark it TI STRICTLY PRIVATE and distribute it?
I didn’t go out looking for the information and I couldn’t change my
table location to get away from the conversation. It seems a little ridiculous
to just throw away an opportunity to use valuable information that I’ve
acquired but didn’t solicit in any way. What’s the right course of action?
And, here’s how Carl Skooglund, TI’s ethics director at the time, responded:
There is nothing illegal or unethical about accidentally being in the right
place at the right time and overhearing a competitor’s conversation. They
must accept the responsibility for irresponsibly discussing sensitive
information in a public place. If you have overheard the conversation,
your best course of action is to document to your best ability what you
heard and notify TI Legal, telling them how you acquired it. The TI
employee who raised this question is correct. It would be ridiculous to
pretend that you never heard the information. Under these circumstances
you can share the information with TI. The competitor must accept
responsibility for his carelessness. Our ethical principles do not exclude
common sense.
Skooglund’s response then took the issue a step further, inviting dialogue by
asking TI employees if the response should be different if the TI employee had
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
223

intentionally sat at a table adjacent to known competitors. Many employees
responded, and over 95 percent of the responses agreed that intentional eavesdropping
was clearly unethical. Here are some of their responses:
“We are not in the spy business. It’s totally unethical.”
“I was disappointed that you would even ask us this.”
“Spying is spying.”
“What happened to the golden rule?”
“My grandmother told me that if something makes you feel guilty, don’t do
it.”
“If our customers knew about this, would their opinion of us suffer?”
“I would be ashamed.”
“It’s unmitigatedly unethical.”
“Would I be proud to have my TI badge on?”
“Let’s leave trickery to magicians.”
“Stay far enough away from legal limits so that TI’s character is never
questioned.”
Skooglund agreed with the large majority of responses and assured the respon-
dents that their ethical compasses were pointing in the right direction. This Instant
Experience system allowed employees to openly share their ethics-related questions
and experiences, and everyone in the organization learned from the open exchange. In
an organization without such a system, this individual may have struggled silently with
the issue or may have asked a few peers or a manager for advice. But with the system,
the entire organization can learn from one employee’s experience.
In addition to the weekly transmissions and interactions, a collection of the
weekly articles was retained on the Instant Experience system as an archive with a
chronological index and a subject index. A survey of TI employees found that 30 to 40
percent were reading it every week, and 70 to 80 percent read it at least monthly.
Supervisors were also encouraged to print the messages and post them on a bulletin
board.
This system was particularly effective because it fit TI’s culture and was based on
sound communication principles. First, electronic communication was an essential
part of the high-tech TI culture, so e-mail ethics discussions were a natural extension
of that culture. Second, e-mail is appropriate for “ethics” discussions because it allows
for interaction with reflection. Ethical issues generally require some introspection,
perhaps even a trip to the file cabinet to check the code of conduct. The Instant
Experience system allowed employees to think about the issue and then participate in
relatively informal discussions with other employees. Finally, research suggests that
people are less inhibited when communicating electronically. They may be more
willing to discuss sensitive ethical issues electronically than they would be face-to-
face, thus contributing to the “it’s okay to talk about ethics” atmosphere.
224
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Mission or Values Statements
In recent years, many corporations have developed mission or values statements. A
mission statement, values statement, or credo is a succinct description of “how we do
business”—the corporate principles and values that guide how business is to be conducted
in an organization. A mission statement is a short description of the organization’s reason
for existence—a sort of “here’s what we do.” Values statements are the next step in the
process of explaining an organization to the world—“and here’s how we do it”—a
codification of essential corporate behavior. It’s a sort of “Ten Commandments” for an
organization. If it’s to be effective, it should be short, memorable, and in plain language so
that everyone can be clear about its message. It’s also essential that the organization’s own
employees have input because a mission statement and values statement must accurately
reflect the organizational culture. Something scribed by outsiders just won’t ring true and
is likely to end up as the subject of a Di lb er t cartoon. But statements that develop out of the
firm’s true values and history can be mainstays of the corporate culture. Merck posts its
values statement prominently on its website (www.merck.com):
Our Values
Our core values are driven by a desire to improve life, achieve scientific
excellence, operate with the highest standards of integrity, expand access
to our products and employ a diverse workforce that values collaboration.
Improving Life
We embrace our quest to tackle health challenges because we are inspired
by the differences we can make in the lives of people around the world.
Ethics and Integrity
We are committed to the highest standards of ethics and integrity.
We are responsible to our customers, to Merck employees, to the
environments we inhabit, and to the societies we serve worldwide.
Innovation
We are dedicated to the highest level of scientific excellence.
We strive to identify the most critical needs of consumers and
customers, and through continuous innovation we challenge ourselves
to meet those needs.
Access to Health
We aspire to improve the health and wellness of people around the world
by expanding access to our medicines and vaccines.
Diversity and Teamwork
Our ability to excel depends on the integrity, knowledge, imagination,
skill, diversity and teamwork of our employees.
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
225

Obviously, it’s possible to have meaningless values statements when the words are
posted on websites and bulletin boards but aren’t really a part of the organizational
culture. To be meaningful, corporate values must guide corporate and individual
decision making on a regular basis. Ethics and integrity are part of the “DNA” at
Merck, where employees know that “how” they achieve results counts as much – or
more – than their results alone. The role of the “customer first” value that guided
Johnson & Johnson’s decision making in the Tylenol crisis (see Chapter 10) is perhaps
the most famous single example of a corporate value being meaningfully applied.
What happens when a company ignores the importance of having in place a
mission and vision and values? That was the situation at Adelphia, the telecommu-
nications/cable company that imploded in 2002. The Rigas family, who founded and
managed the organization, ran the company like a mom-and-pop corner store, even
after the company—mainly through a series of acquisitions—grew to 15,000 employ-
ees. In 2002, the founder and CEO, John Rigas, and his sons were indicted for looting
hundreds of millions of dollars from the company’s coffers and concealing the true
debt load from investors.18 When the new management team took over, they were
surprised to find that Adelphia had no guiding principles, no mission, no vision, no
ethics, no code—nothing! Ray Dravesky was soon hired to head communication at
Adelphia, and his first project was to get the company back on track by helping the
executive team create and communicate a new mission, vision, and code of conduct.
Because the company had filed for bankruptcy, the ethics project had to be created on a
shoestring. Within weeks, however, the company launched its new vision and code of
conduct and installed an employee ethics hotline. Employee satisfaction scores later
indicated that employees—after living in an ethics vacuum for years—were pleased to
receive this kind of direction from the top of the company. Although the company was
purchased shortly thereafter, employees throughout the company were pleased with
the new direction these formal statements had established.
Organizational Policy
Policy—the “rules of the organization”—is critical to any company, and most
organizations create a policy manual or an intranet site to house all relevant company
rules. Generally, policy manuals and websites describe not only laws and regulations
pertaining to the company and its industry but also all company policy, including
human resources policy. Although it’s critical for a corporation to define its policies
and communicate them—it’s a stipulation of the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines—most
employees don’t read every page of a manual or website. Employees consider policy
manuals and websites to be for reference purposes only. As a result, employees consult
policy manuals in the same way they use a dictionary—periodically and on a need-to-
know basis. Many managers never consult a policy manual, however—it’s much easier
to ask someone than to look up the rules in a voluminous book or website—and,
depending on whom they ask, they may or may not get the right answer.
The very nature of policy—it’s usually voluminous and written in legalese—
makes it a poor way to communicate important rules. Also, since all policy is detailed,
226
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

all policy may be viewed as having the same importance. Obviously, some policies are
much more important than others and should receive special emphasis.
When you’re designing policy communication, first analyze the audience. Who
needs to know all the policy? Does some corporate policy apply only to certain
employees? What do employees really need to know, and what’s nice for them to
know? Here are some guidelines to follow.
COMMUNICATE RELEVANT RULES TO THE PEOPLE WHO NEED THEM
Alth-
ough much of a firm’s policy applies to everyone, surely some policy applies only to
specific employee groups. For example, if accountants in the organization need a
specific policy, either separate it from the main manual or site under a specific
heading, or leave it out and distribute accounting policy only to accountants. If some
policy applies to all employees, it can be incorporated into the code of conduct.
PRIORITIZE POLICY
The material describing confidentiality is more important than
a description of how to code a time sheet for sick time. Policy should be presented in a
way that lets employees see, at a glance, what the most important rules are.
MAKE IT UNDERSTANDABLE
First, eliminate the legalese—only lawyers like
legalese; the rest of us like simple English. Second, tell employees what the policy
means. Most policies prohibit conflicts of interest, yet few employees can define what
a conflict of interest is. Give examples of conflicts of interest, and tell employees what
a conflict of interest looks like. If people can’t tell you what a conflict of interest is, it
will be difficult for them to avoid one. If you provide employees with examples of
when a particular ethical issue is likely to happen, they will be more likely to recognize
the issue when it arises and know how to handle it.
MAKE POLICY COME ALIVE
Effective communication occurs not when you send
the message, but when people receive it and understand it. Important policy needs to be
communicated in creative ways that highlight important rules. Policy also needs to be
communicated in a variety of venues: in person, in staff meetings, in orientation
programs, in training sessions—wherever there’s an opportunity.
Codes of Conduct
A code of conduct is not a substitute for an ethics program; a code is only the start of an
ethics effort. Codes come up frequently because most ethics programs, good or bad,
have them. Codes vary substantially in length, content, and readability, but they’re
generally designed to be the main road map, the ground rules for ethical conduct
within the organization.
It’s probably fair to say that the longer the code, the less likely it is that employees
will read it. On the other hand, the shorter the code, the broader and more abstract the
guidelines will be. Reducing the number of pages represents acknowledgment that the
company can’t have rules to cover the hundreds of choices employees make every day.
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
227

Rather, a focus on the values that should guide decision making can help employees
make the best decisions in a wide variety of situations.
Many organizations deal with a longer code by dividing it into parts. The first part
provides the broad guiding principles. These are followed by a more detailed section
that includes more specific application to cases, answers to commonly asked ques-
tions, and reference to more detailed policy manuals. Some organizations create
separate booklets, as supplements to a more general code, for workers in particular
functions such as purchasing or human resources management. These booklets can
provide details and answers to the questions likely to arise in that particular type of job,
and the individuals in that job are more likely to read those details.
Code content may vary depending on the industry and the degree to which the firm
has entered the global marketplace. Specific issues are addressed depending on the
industry. Firms in the defense industry carefully outline the guidelines for charging
one’s time to particular government projects. If the firm is global, the code almost
certainly deals with issues such as bribery. We’ll talk more about this in the next
chapter.
If the code is to be taken seriously, it should be updated regularly and redistributed
throughout the organization, and many companies circulate such a code every year or
two. Also, many organizations ask employees to sign a statement acknowledging that
they have read the company code and abided by it during the previous year. The real
test is whether it is regularly used. For example, in decision-making meetings, if
managers regularly refer to the code’s guidelines, employees will learn that the code is
vital to how important decisions are made.
ETHICS AND THE SUPPLY CHAIN
More and more companies are realizing that the
ethics programs of their vendors have a significant impact on their own operations. If a
significant vendor suffers an operational loss resulting from an ethical misstep, it could
harm the customer company’s ability to produce and/or distribute their product. As a
result, numerous companies are now routinely expressing interest in the robustness of
the ethics program(s) of their vendors. Some industry groups, such as Defense Industry
Initiative on Business Ethics and Conduct (DII), are developing subcontractor codes of
conduct that can be sent down through the supply chain in order to ensure a level of
uniformity in their ethics expectations. In fact, in government contracting, such a
posture has become law. For example, Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) clause
52.203-13 requires that firms entering into a contract with the U.S. Government for
more than $5 million and with a performance period of more than 120 days must have
a robust ethics program that is designed to “promote an organizational culture that
encourages ethical conduct and a commitment to compliance with the law.” Further,
this FAR clause must flow down to subcontractors who meet those criteria and will be
participating in the performance of the prime contract.
On this front, Lockheed Martin has developed an ethics mentoring program to
more directly and personally assist the growth and development of subcontractor
ethics programs. Under this program, experienced Lockheed Martin ethics officers are
paired with key vendors to work with them on their ethics programs. In this
228
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

relationship, both sides learn as the Lockheed Martin ethics officer and the vendor’s
counterpart spend time working through the key elements of a robust ethics program.
The early returns from this program are strongly positive, with the vendors expressing
appreciation for being able to tap into the expertise housed in a mature ethics program
such as Lockheed Martin’s.
Communicating Senior Management Commitment
to Ethics
In Corporate Culture and Performance, Kotter and Heskett19 pointed to one factor that
could turn around a company that was heading in the wrong direction—a strong leader
who can communicate the culture. They explained how the top managers of great
companies lead.
Visions and strategies were communicated with words—spoken simply,
directly, and often—and with deeds . . . they encouraged people to engage
in a dialogue with them, not allowing the communication to flow in one
direction only. In almost all cases, the leaders became living embodiments
of the cultures they desired. The values and practices they wanted infused
into their firms were on display in their daily behavior; in the questions they
asked at meetings, in how they spent their time, in the decisions they made.
These actions gave credibility to their words. The behavior made it clear to
others that their speeches were serious. And successes, which seemed to
result from that behavior, made it clear that the practices were sensible.
Without the buy-in and active support of senior management, ethics initiatives are
doomed. But senior managers don’t have a great track record in communicating a
vision, ethical or otherwise. In a survey of professional and management employees,
respondents revealed a lack of trust in their senior executives.20 Most said that their
company’s leaders failed to communicate a “clear understanding of a corporate vision,
mission, and goals.” They also said that they trust their top management only about 55
percent of the time.21 A more recent survey of employees indicates that trust levels
have fallen precipitously and that only one in ten Americans believe that the leaders of
their company are ethical and honest. The survey also indicates that only one in ten
Americans trust that their company’s leaders will make the right decision in times of
uncertainty. The percentage of employees trusting leaders rises to 16% among younger
employees (18–24 years old) who entered the workforce recently and did not
experience many of the scandals associated with the financial crisis of 2008–2009.22
Nevertheless, most employees want to hear from senior executives. Another study
of 14,250 employees in 17 companies in the United States and Canada found that “62
percent of employees list top executives as their preferred source of information, but
only 15 percent say they actually get their company news from this source.”23
What cansenior managersdo to establish better communication and more trustwith
employees? How can they begin to build an organization in which ethics are valued?
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
229

They can take a look at the advice that Peters and Waterman offered in their classic
book, In Search of Excellence.24 “An effective leader must be the master of two ends
of the spectrum: ideas at the highest level of abstraction and actions at the most
mundane level of detail. The value-shaping leader is concerned, on the one hand,
with soaring, lofty visions that will generate excitement and enthusiasm. . . . On the
other hand, it seems the only way to instill enthusiasm is through scores of daily events.”
With this advice in mind, here are some concrete steps senior managers can take:
& Set high standards and communicate them loudly and repeatedly in public and
in private. Be known for the consistency of your standards. Never let your
standards be a mystery.
& Act swiftly and firmly when someone violates the standards. Be consistent—
don’t have special rules for special people.
& Insist on complete candor from your direct reports. Tell them that you don’t
want to be protected from bad news.
& Never, never shoot the messenger of “bad news,” or it will be the last one who
reports problems to you. And if you don’t know about problems, you can’t fix
them.
& Talk to a wide variety of employees on different levels and in different
locations. Get out there and find out what’s really going on. Don’t be satisfied
with others’ interpretations.
& In a crisis, take responsibility, be accessible, and be honest. Take the high road.
If you do, the company will probably pull through the crisis with a minimum
of damage. This is one reason why Johnson & Johnson received such high
marks for its handling of the Tylenol crisis and why Exxon received bad marks
for its handling of the Valdez oil spill (CEO Lawrence Rawls didn’t visit
Alaska until three weeks after the incident). You’ll read more about these two
crises in Chapter 10.
& Finally, put your money where your mouth is—fund and support ethics
initiatives. Without supporting systems, most corporate value statements
are collections of empty platitudes that only increase organizational cyni-
cism.25 To develop ethics initiatives, get help from your communications and
training professionals. Don’t leave your ethics strategy just to the lawyers.
At many firms, the code of conduct is introduced with a message from the senior
executive. At UTC, Louis Ch^enevert, president and chief executive officer, introduces
the company code with the following message:
Dear UTC Colleague: The UTC Code of Ethics does not merely require
compliance with laws. It embodies a commitment to positive behaviors
that build trust, promote respect, and demonstrate integrity . . . Working
together, we can assure that ethics are at the foundation of our perform-
ance culture.
230
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

The message goes on to introduce the code and the business practices/compliance
infrastructure.
At Lockheed Martin, the corporation has instituted the annual NOVA Award for
Ethics. This award—part of Lockheed Martin’s prestigious NOVA award series—
recognizes a single employee or a group of Lockheed Martin employees for extra-
ordinary actions or behavior that exemplify the corporation’s commitment to ethical
business conduct and integrity. The award is presented at a gala awards ceremony
along with other NOVA Awards. Nominations come from the corporation’s leaders,
who are encouraged to designate someone from their organization each year. The first
winner in 2002 was Ron Covais, a vice president in business development. He was
recognized for demonstrating the highest standards for integrity and ethical business
conduct during the bidding phase of a significant new business opportunity with a
foreign customer. Covais demonstrated the corporation’s values and set the standards
with an international customer and the U.S. government by his willingness to walk
away from an important contract. Covais had received an inappropriate “request for
payment” by a foreign official. Lockheed Martin employees are expected to reject
such bribes, and Covais did. By itself, rejecting the bribe was considered routine and
would not have merited the award. But Covais halted the bidding process (placing at
risk an important contract), reported the problem to senior officials, and worked with
both U.S. government officials and the foreign government to have the foreign official
removed from the decision-making process. The customer subsequently agreed to
conduct a new bidding process on ethical terms. Covais’s action and his award were
publicized, color photos and all, in Lockheed Martin Today, the company newspaper
that went to every employee. The other nominees, one from each business area and
from corporate organizations, were also named in the story. And every top corporate
executive witnessed the chairman giving the award. The tradition of honoring
commitment to the highest level of integrity has continued since that time.
Think about the impact of such an event on the ethical culture. Every senior leader
must expend effort each year to find employees who demonstrate exemplary ethical
conduct. The award ceremony itself is exactly the kind of “ritual” that helps create an
ethical culture. As the stories become part of the organization’s cultural lore, its impact
grows as the stories accumulate over time. This impact is particularly important to a
company like Lockheed Martin, which has scandal in its past. Misconduct by one of
Lockheed Martin’s predecessor companies contributed to the passage of the anti-
bribery Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (discussed in Chapter 11). It has become very
important to the senior leadership of the firm to counteract any perception that the
organization is unethical.
ETHICS TRAINING PROGRAMS
Values statements, policy manuals, and conduct
codes aren’t enough. Organizations that are serious about ethics distribute these
materials widely and then provide training in their meaning and application. Effective
training programs are ongoing efforts to teach everyone from new recruits to high-
level managers. In Chapter 1 we discussed whether ethics can be taught; we hope that
by now, you’re quite convinced that it can. Ethics in organizations is about awareness
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
231

of ethical issues and knowledge of appropriate conduct, and these ideas can and must
be taught to employees at all levels.
Training should be designed to suit the group of individuals being trained. A new
employee needs different training than a manager who has been with the firm for 10
years. An assembly-line worker might require only an hour of training, with regular
refresher sessions, whereas a manager might require several days of training that
address a variety of issues. Furthermore, training needs to be based on program goals.
Is the training supposed to increase awareness of ethical issues, convey knowledge of
laws and policies, change attitudes or behaviors? Finally, ethics training need not—
and probably should not—be solely the province of the ethics office. Ethics training
should be incorporated into leadership development and other programs so that it
becomes integrated more fully into the culture of the organization.
TRAINING NEW RECRUITS
Many firms provide ethics training through new
employee orientation. For example, to set the stage properly, every new Lockheed
Martin employee gets a briefing on ethical and legal issues as part of the first day on
the job. This training is complemented throughout each year of employment, with the
intent of setting the stage properly from the first day.
TRAINING EXISTING EMPLOYEES
Training is also provided to existing employees
and takes a variety of forms. Some companies provide a basic ethics training module to
all employees. For example, at Lockheed Martin, every employee participates in
annual ethics awareness training. This training focuses on the firm’s ethics, diversity,
and leadership values and how employees can and should apply these values to their
work. Each year, the ethics office staff is challenged to make the training different and
memorable—something that employees will discuss with each other after leaving the
training session.
The 2013 training, entitled “Voicing Our Values 2013,” focuses on the corpo-
ration’s values, commitment to diversity, and leadership imperatives. This is the third
year of the “voicing values” theme, which was developed in collaboration with Dr.
Mary Gentile of Babson College, and is described in her book, Giving Voice to Values:
How to Speak Your Mind When You Know What’s Right (we described Dr. Gentile’s
work in Chapter 4.) The session begins with an introductory video in which the
president and chief executive officer emphasize the Lockheed Martin vision and how
ethics and business conduct are integral to the company’s success. The training is
video-based and contains nine case scenarios, each one highlighting different ethical
dilemmas including records falsification, time-card fraud, and intercompany relation-
ships. Not all of the scenarios have clear-cut answers, because the intent is to stimulate
conversation during and after the session.
Each training session contains from 5 to 25 people and is led by the group’s
manager or an ethics officer. The annual training kicks off in early May when the
Board of Directors receives their training, and then president and chief executive
officer Marillyn A. Hewson trains her staff. Each member of the executive staff then
trains her or his employees, and the process continues until October, by which time all
232
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

118,000 employees will have been trained. This annual ethics awareness training has
become integral to the Lockheed Martin culture. People expect it and look forward to
what the ethics staff will create each year. One limitation of this training is that,
depending on the length of the dialogue regarding the cases, teams can get through
only three or four of the case scenarios in a single training session.
To complement its annual ethics awareness training, Lockheed Martin launched
an initiative called “The Integrity Minute,” a series of short (about one-minute) video
messages sent to employees via e-mail. Each series contains three or four episodes on a
central ethics theme. The episodes, which are sent in consecutive weeks, contain a
cliff-hanger to maintain employee interest in the series.
Other engagement initiatives that Lockheed Martin has used include the Ethics
Arts and Film Festival and the “Ethics Be a Star” contest. The Ethics Arts and Film
Festival invites employees to participate in a celebration of the creative arts to promote
ethics, diversity, and good leadership. The entries come from across all business areas,
both domestically and internationally. Participants use a variety of creative media to
produce posters, videos, photographs, poems, and other works of art with a focus on
ethics, diversity, and leadership. Employees use their own resources, on their own time
and away from the office, to prepare their submissions. Most of the submissions are
team entries that provide work groups with a team-building opportunity. An indepen-
dent panel of judges selects the top entries, and the winners are invited to a recognition
event. The ‘Ethics Be A Star’ contest invited employees to submit ‘audition tapes’ to
the Ethics Office. The winners of the contest were filmed and featured in Integrity
Minute episodes. Such activities are designed to engage employees with the ethics
processes and the Ethics Office at Lockheed Martin.
TOP MANAGEMENT INVOLVEMENT IN TRAINING
When organizations conduct
ethics training for the first time, many of them begin the training at the top of the
organization. Cascading is a term frequently used to describe ethics initiatives that
begin at the top of the organization and work their way down, level by level. This
technique is often used because of the importance of leadership to the credibility of
ethics training. Each leader trains his or her direct reports, modeling the expected
training behavior and the necessary commitment to integrity.
LOCAL MANAGEMENT INVOLVEMENT IN TRAINING
Many organizations rec-
ommend having local management conduct the ethics training, using common
everyday ethical dilemmas as the basis for discussion. Training sessions are thought
to be more useful and effective if they address real ethical issues that people face every
day in their own work setting. Examples of calls that have come in to the ethics office
can be used as the basis for training. Employees make ethical decisions every day.
Anybody who reports the time that they work—or decides how to divide their time
across different government contracts, or decides whether they are going to engage in
some kind of an outside business activity that might be in conflict with their job, or has
to decide what to tell a customer about a delayed order—is making an ethical decision.
Using common everyday issues in training gives employees a feeling of comfort that
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
233

the issue they’ve faced has been a problem for others and that they’re not some
screwball who is worrying about something that doesn’t matter.
A TRAINING MODEL: THE ETHICS GAME
A powerful method of communicating a
corporate ethics message is through an ethics game. Katherine Nelson, coauthor of this
book, created the firstcorporate ethics game, “The Work Ethic:AnExerciseinIntegrity,”
when she was head of human resources communication at Citicorp in the late 1980s.
The game worked like this: A group of employees were divided into teams, and a
facilitator then positioned the exercise with the following messages:
“We’re playing a game about ethics because we want to make sure we get
your attention. Integrity is critical here.”
“This is an opportunity for you to practice making ethical decisions in
a risk-free environment.”
“We’re doing this to give you an overview of corporate policy and
how things are done here. We’re also going to outline all of the resources
available to you if you think you’d like some help or advice if you’re faced
with an ethical dilemma.”
A facilitator presented the teams with a series of ethical dilemmas related to such
topics as sexual harassment, reporting ethical concerns, responsibilities of customers,
the need for confidentiality, and conflicts of interest. The ethical dilemmas were
written so that there was no clearly right answer.
For each issue, the teams took a few minutes to discuss what they considered to be
appropriate action. Then, based on a consensus among team members, they chose one
of four possible courses of action. Once the teams decided, the facilitator played
devil’s advocate and questioned the entire group about why they voted the way they
did. The discussions could get very heated, as participants and teams loudly defended
their positions. The facilitator then revealed the scores for each course of action (scores
are predetermined, preferably by the management of the organization where the game
is being played). If the participants disagreed with the scores, they could take them to
an appeals board of senior managers. Again, the discussions could get quite impas-
sioned and lively, and the competition for the best scores kept interest high.
The senior management appeals board was one of the most important aspects of
the ethics game. The very presence of senior managers for 90 minutes or so sent a
strong message that integrity and ethics must be important in this company, or all these
executives wouldn’t be spending so much time talking about it. In addition, when
discussing an appeal, the appeals board often communicated the ethics message about
company standards and expectations more powerfully than any other element of the
ethics program. Along the way, employees could see how senior managers worked
through an ethical dilemma and what factors they considered important in making
decisions.
Groups could disagree with the scoring of a question and appeal to the senior
managers,whohadthepowertochangescoresiftheyheardagoodargumentfordoingso.
234
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

This process somehow “stamped” participating managers as approachable. Man-
agers who participated in appeals boards frequently reported a marked increase in
the number of employees seeking them out and asking for advice. One manager
described how he had been stopped in hallways, restrooms, cafeterias, and even on
the street to be asked advice by employees who had seen him as a judge on an ethics
game appeals board. Most companies would do just about anything to have their
employees seek advice from managers on ethical issues.
Senior managers also learned a lot by participating in the game, which gave
employees an opportunity to raise issues directly to management. In one session, several
male managerswere made aware of how offensiveyoung female trainees foundany kind
of sexual stereotyping. The young women were so determined to let management know
how strongly they felt on this issue that the women continued the discussion face-to-face
with the executives at a reception after the game had officially ended.
Since the game usually raised more questions than it answered, it was crucial to
debrief the group. At the end of the game, the facilitator gave advice on how to solve
ethical dilemmas and outlined the resources available to help employees if they found
themselves in need of advice.
The ethics game met many communication and training goals, but it was especially
effective in raising awareness, creating a dialogue, and describing expected dilemmas
and how employees might handle them. However, for an ethics program to be effective
over the long term, training and communications should continue over time. A game is
an excellent beginning and can be used repeatedly with different dilemmas. However, it
can’t exist in a vacuum or be all things to all people. It needs to be part of an integrated
ethics program with other media and complementary messages.
Although some may view an ethics game as heresy, those who have seen this type
of training program in action are quickly convinced of its effectiveness. Other
companies have developed their own versions of the game and have used them
successfully. For example, years ago, Lockheed Martin developed an ethics game
modeled after the Citicorp game, but with a twist. At the time, the company received
permission from Scott Adams, author of the Dilbert cartoons (popular with employ-
ees), to use the Dilbert character in their game. Then Chairman of the Board Norm
Augustine appeared with Dilbert in an introductory video, and the game included a
humorous “Dogbert answer” to each ethical question. With the introduction several
years ago of online ethics training, the Citicorp format featuring a series of scenarios
with scored answers has become increasingly popular with a wide range of companies.
Formal and Informal Systems to Resolve Questions and
Report Ethical Concerns
An organization with a strong ethical culture is one where employees feel free to speak
openly about ethical issues, question authority figures, and report concerns, and where
managers are approachable and listen to their people. This may be the most important
thing an organization can do to open up the communication lines and set up an
environment of candor: make sure people feel they can discuss their opinions, their
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
235

ideas, and their thoughts openly. Most important, set up an environment where people
feel they can sincerely bring up and resolve problems without being embarrassed or
fearing retribution. The first time you shoot the messenger who brings you bad news,
you’ve taken the first step toward squelching ethics in the organization. News of the
“dead messenger” will spread like wildfire on your organization’s grapevine.
Although most organizations encourage employees to bring their concerns to their
immediate supervisor first, employees sometimes want to ask a question anonymously,
or they may have a concern about their supervisor’s behavior. Also, the U.S.
Sentencing Guidelines require that organizations “take reasonable steps to achieve
compliance with written standards through monitoring, auditing, and other systems
designed to detect criminal conduct, including a reporting system free of retribution to
employees who report criminal conduct.” As a result, many firms have established a
more formal system for raising concerns. This generally takes the form of a telephone
line employees can call to ask for help in resolving an ethical dilemma or to report an
ethical problem or behavior they’ve observed in the organization. A number of names
have emerged for these reporting systems—“Communication Lines,” “Guideline,”
“Open Line,” “Helpline,” “Hotline,” and “Ethics Action Line.” These phone lines
generally ring in the ethics office, if there is one.
For example, at Lockheed Martin, the Corporate Ethics helpline is available
during regular working hours, and employees can leave a voice message 24 hours a
day. In addition to the helpline, Lockheed Martin provides an e-mail option, a web-
based “Ask-Us” channel, a fax number, and a postal address that employees may use to
submit ethical concerns. Each business unit advertises the local ethics program on
posters that include a prominent photo of the site ethics officer and the phone number
for the ethics helpline. Some large organizations provide separate reporting lines for
each business unit. In a few firms, the line actually rings on the chairman’s desk. Other
firms have hired an outside consulting firm or law firm to take the calls at a toll-free
number and then transfer the information to the company.26 That system is especially
prevalent in many global firms, where a call can come at any time of the day or night
because of time zone differences.
We believe that, where possible, it’s best for ethics office staff to talk with callers
directly. As ethics office staff, they need to be in touch with what’s going on in the
organization. If they delegate the task, they lose the tone and perspective of the callers.
For example, the nonverbal clues that come through on the phone can easily get lost in
a paper report. One way to handle this is to answer calls during business hours and then
contract with an outside firm for after-hours capability. Around-the-clock answering
capability is essential for a global business. The ethics office can explain the decision
to hire an outside contractor to employees as its solution to handling calls from around
the globe.
Organizations that have experience with telephone reporting lines find that most
of the calls represent requests for clarification. The individual says, “Here’s what I
want to do. Is it okay? Does it follow procedure?” Most of the calls in many
organizations represent HR-related issues, such as fairness concerns. Some are
relatively routine. But occasionally calls come in that represent serious breaches
236
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

of the code of conduct or even illegal conduct. Managing these lines is no small feat.
It’s not unusual for a company hotline to receive thousands of calls per year. One ethics
officer reported that 90 percent of the calls to his company’s hotline were to report HR-
related issues. “But many of the other 10 percent were issues of great interest to us, and
it’s well worth dealing with all of the HR issues to get to the others,” he said. This
situation points to how necessary it is for ethics officers and ethics departments to have
a good working relationship with HR. If employees trust their HR department, ethics
messaging can help manage employees’ HR concerns and direct them to HR. Of
course, that only works if employees view HR as being trustworthy.
One concern often raised about these reporting lines is that individuals will make
invalid reports—“tattling” on people they don’t like. But that’s not the experience of
the ethics officers we interviewed. Most people call about valid issues. Although their
motives may not always be noble, the content is usually correct. Most of the people
who use the communication line are using it because they sincerely have a question or
concern about something they think is wrong. It’s one reason that confidentiality is so
important within the entire reporting and investigative system. The identity of both the
reporter and the alleged violator must be protected throughout the process. The alleged
violator must be protected because allegations can result from simple misunderstand-
ings. The reporter must be protected from any retaliation from the accused.
Another relevant question concerns how to interpret the meaning of the number of
calls and letters. Obviously, if an organization institutes and promotes an easy way to
ask questions, express concerns, and report violations, the number of calls should
increase dramatically. Does this mean that there are more ethical problems? Probably
not. The executives who run these programs generally interpret such increases as
evidence that their programs are working. However, in an ideal world, the ethics office
should aim to put itself out of business. In other words, ethical conduct should become
so institutionalized that there would be no reason for people to call. They would handle
issues locally, with their managers. Like the old ad about a Maytag repairman, the
ethics officer would have a very boring job. On the other hand, a quiet telephone may
also signal a number of other positive or negative conditions:
& Lack of concern or recognition of ethical problems (negative)
& An intimidating environment where people fear retribution (negative)
& Good problem solving at the local level (positive)
& No one knowing the ethics office exists (negative)
Ultimately, it’s up to the ethics office to devise ways to determine what the
numbers and changes in the numbers mean.
Most ethics officers prefer to see a relatively low and stable level of allegations
of misconduct and a higher level of advisory questions. That means that people are
calling for advice—which is a good thing. The question remaining is whether
employees are aware of and willing to use the resources that are made available
to them.
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
237

Confidentiality and the protection of reporters remain important issues. Some
firms use outside individuals, often called ombudspersons, who may answer the
reporting line, provide information, investigate complaints, serve in an alternative
dispute resolution role, and report problems to a corporate compliance or audit
committee while maintaining the confidentiality of the reporter.27
Whether a telephone line, an ombudsperson, or some other formal procedure is
most appropriate for a particular corporate culture, the important thing is to have some
way for employees to raise issues without fear of retribution. If there’s no way for
employees to raise issues without such fear, the first time an executive hears about a
problem may be from a district attorney, a regulator, or a newspaper reporter.
Finally, each of the firms we talked with has a system for investigating reports of
misconduct. These are multistage processes that can be quite complex, depending on the
seriousness of the allegation. Obviously, facts must be gathered to determine whether the
allegation can be verified. Confidentiality must be maintained throughout these investi-
gations, and they must be coordinated with other parts of the organization such as the
legal, audit, security, or human resources department, depending on the problem. Then,
based ona thoroughanalysisofthe findings,recommendations mustbemadeand actions
taken to discipline employees and/or correct systemic problems in the organization.
USING THE REWARD SYSTEM TO REINFORCE THE
ETHICS MESSAGE
Recall from Chapter 5 that the reward system is vital to alignment in an ethical culture.
At Lockheed Martin, the performance management process, called LMCommit, rates
employees not just on results of the job such as increased sales or profits. Employees
are also rated on how you got there through attributes that include ethics, excellence,
integrity, and people and teamwork. Leaders, in particular, are evaluated against the
company’s model of leadership called Full Spectrum Leadership. The Full Spectrum
Leadership model consists of five tenets: Shape the Future, Build Effective Relation-
ships, Energize the Team, Deliver Results, and Model Personal Excellence, Integrity
& Accountability. Along with operating and financial results, every leader is evaluated
against this model to ensure that he or she is demonstrating the values that the company
embraces. For example, under the category Model Personal Excellence, Integrity &
Accountability, LMCommit looks for a leader to “demonstrate a commitment to
personal excellence, ethical behavior, and integrity,” to “exhibit managerial courage to
overcome obstacles,” and, of course, to “lead with integrity.” Specific examples of
these behaviors are required, and all compensation decisions are directly tied to every
employee’s and leader’s LMCommit results.
In some organizations, as much as half of every employee’s performance
appraisal is devoted to how an employee did his or her job. Measuring the how
and not just the what (results achieved) is an excellent and proven way to drive desired
behavior and discourage unethical behavior.
At Otis Elevator Company (a subsidiary of United Technologies Corporation),
Stephen Page, then president and now retired as UTC’s vice chairman, wrote a letter
238
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

to employees making it clear that Otis seriously disciplines breaches of integrity. In
his words:
Our company is making substantial changes in the way we do business. I
am writing today to highlight what has not changed, and never will
change: our commitment to the highest ethical standards and business
practices.
We know that Otis employees are honest, mature, independent, and
scrupulous in their conduct at work. We know that Otis employees care
about ethics and our company’s reputation. And we know that employees
support sanctions for any colleague whose behavior shows he or she does
not hold these fundamental Otis values.
Our ethics program grows out of this knowledge. We provide training
and communications programs to all employees in our Code of Ethics,
which offers guidance in how to behave in specific business situations.
Through our worldwide network of business practices officers (BPOs), we
also provide expert advice to employees who have questions or who face
ethical dilemmas.
But for those few who do not care about ethics; who think they can cut
corners; who violate the law, our policies or our standards, there is no
place in Otis. To our regret, we have had to terminate the employment of
nearly a dozen colleagues this year alone for violations of our Code of
Ethics—a record that is simply unacceptable. Unlawful or unethical
conduct can only harm our company and we will take whatever actions
are necessary to prevent that from happening.
Our actions reflect our fundamental belief: Otis would rather lose
business than compromise our standards of conduct.
Please take this opportunity to refresh your knowledge of our Code of
Ethics, and to recommit yourself to its guidelines and principles. We have
so much to be proud of at Otis, and our reputation as an ethical company
stands in the first rank of our accomplishments. We are determined to
protect this priceless asset. Thank you for your continued support.
This letter confirms the company’s willingness to take firm action to uphold
standards through discipline when necessary, and it was likely welcomed by the
company’s many ethical employees (see Chapters 7 and 8 for information about the
appropriate use of discipline).
EVALUATING THE ETHICS PROGRAM
Many organizations have committed significant resources to their ethics efforts— hiring
high-level executives, developing values statements and codes, designing and imple-
menting training programs, and more. But few organizations have systematically
evaluated these efforts, because doing so presents many challenges. For example, as
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
239

suggested earlier, more calls to the telephone line can mean different things and can be
interpreted in a variety of ways. And asking employees at an ethics training program
whether they “liked” it or not doesn’t tell you much about the quality of the ethics
program. Many employeeswillrespond affirmatively justbecause they likedthe idea ofa
few hours or a day away from the office. Whether or not they likeditshould besecondary.
The most important question should be whether the program is accomplishing its goals.
Otis has gone the extra mile in the area of evaluation. It has over a million
elevators in operation in more than 200 countries around the world! You may not have
thought much about it, but all of us depend on the integrity of a company that provides
many of the elevators we ride daily. As part of a toolkit provided to each of its
companies, Otis requires a self-assessment process that involves regular evaluations of
program effectiveness including training, communication, work practices reviews,
instances of misconduct, corrective actions, reports, and records. Companies are also
asked to identify the strengths and weaknesses of their programs and to implement
changes to overcome weaknesses. Finally, they are asked to share their successes,
program strengths, and lessons learned with the rest of Otis.
Organizations that are members of the Defense Industry Initiative (DII) are often
at the forefront on evaluation because the DII asks each of its member organizations
each year to certify that the firm is complying with the six DII principles. These
self-certifications are available to all members, and a report is published and sent to the
U.S. Congress annually.
Surveys
Surveys are probably the most common approach to evaluation. Many organizations
already conduct regular employee attitude surveys; some have added ethics to the list of
survey topics, and some conduct separate ethics surveys. Surveys can target knowledge,
attitudes, skills, and behaviors. For example, if ethics training has been recently required
of all employees, surveys can evaluate the extent to which employees understand the
company’s expectations and standards. Baseline data can be collected before ethics
training is begun, and then again several months after it’s completed, to analyze whether
positive change has occurred. Surveys can help evaluate employees’ skill at recognizing
and resolving ethical issues, and they can measure the extent to which employees
observe unethical conduct in the organization. Finally, attitudes toward ethics manage-
ment programs and processes can be evaluated. It’s important to survey regularly so that
changes and progress can be evaluated. A final suggestion about surveys—don’t ask
questions if you’re not willing to accept the answer. Employees will expect action based
on survey results. If you’ve asked them to take the time to complete a survey, you should
communicate the results and planned action.
The most famous ethics-related survey is likely Johnson & Johnson’s Credo
survey. Then Chairman James Burke had been on the board of IBM Corporation in the
1980s and became impressed with IBM’s employee survey program. He decided that
one way to keep the Johnson & Johnson Credo alive would be to survey employees
about how the company was doing relative to the Credo. The survey went through a
240
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

number of iterations after being tested on employees at a variety of locations. The first
survey was conducted in the United States in 1986–87. The first international survey
was conducted the following year. The first part of the survey contains 118 items and
takes about 25 minutes to complete. It asks employees to rate things such as the
company’s “customer orientation” on five-point scales. The second section is open-
ended for written comments. One of the findings has been the impact of top leadership
and corporate culture on the survey’s results. For example, former Chairman Burke
had emphasized the customer above all. President David Clare emphasized safety first.
In an analysis of the survey results, ratings on these two survey dimensions were
highest. Most of all, the survey is viewed as a way to keep the Credo alive, a way of
“closing the loop on this thing called the Credo.”28
Lockheed Martin conducts a complete employee survey every two years, so that the
firm can gauge whether ethical principles are being applied and whether employees have
observed wrongdoing—and, if so, whether they have reported it. The major surveys are
augmented with interim “pulse” surveys and have been combined with the company’s
employeeperspectivesanddiversitysurvey.Thesurveyallowsthefirmtoassessitsculture,
determine the impact of ethics programs, and point out areas in need of attention. All
118,000 employees are asked to participate in the voluntary survey, for which the
participation rate has increased over the years. Results of the survey are shared with
employees,andareusedtogaugethehealthofdepartmentsdowntothefirst-linemanagers.
In 2007, Lockheed Martin’s ethics and employee perspectives surveys were
combined for the first time, and results were benchmarked with data from the DII and
the Mayflower Group, a consortium of blue-chip companies. More than 80 percent of
the Mayflower Group’s member companies are included in the Fortune magazine list
of the most admired companies in America. The ethics survey measurements include
pressure to compromise standards, observed/reported misconduct, and commitment to
ethics. Most survey results were positive and consistent with favorable results from the
2005 survey. For example, a high percentage of employees reported that they know
what constitutes ethical business conduct, how to obtain guidance on ethical issues,
and how to report misconduct.
The 2012 results demonstrated that Lockheed Martin continued to progress on
key metrics. For example, over the years Lockheed Martin has seen a steady decline in
the percentage of people who believe they observed misconduct and in the perceived
pressure to commit misconduct. In general, employees indicated that management will
act on reports, and managers are held accountable for their conduct. Where areas of
concern were noted, action plans were developed by the business unit leadership;
where particular business units showed strong positive results, they were studied for
best practices that contributed to the results.
VALUES OR COMPLIANCE APPROACHES
Formal corporate ethics initiatives can be categorized as emphasizing either a values or
a compliance approach to managing ethics. The values approach is proactive and
aspirational. It emphasizes expected behavior and an effort to achieve high standards
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
241

represented by the spirit of the law and organizational values. It relies on such
techniques as leader communication and role modeling to affirm the organization’s
commitment to its stated ethical values and goals. Employees learn that these are not
empty words, but words that organizational leaders believe and live by. Ethics
becomes a point of pride in the organization: “We’re so good we don’t have to
cheat!” The response to a values-oriented program is generally good until violations
occur. Then, employees expect that commitment to be backed up with sanctions
against the violators.
With a compliance emphasis, the focus is more on required behavior—obeying
the letter of the law rather than aspiring to lofty ethical principles. Disciplinary
procedures for violators are also important to compliance efforts. Many organizations
that are motivated by the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines and Sarbanes-Oxley legislation
mandate a compliance approach. Employees are told that compliance with the law is
essential and that employees who break the law will be punished. The danger with a
compliance-only focus is the possibility that employees will believe anything goes as
long as there isn’t a rule against it, or that the company is interested only in protecting
itself, not in helping them.
An effective program should have both values and compliance components. By
themselves, abstract values statements can appear hypocritical to employees.
“Management makes these lofty statements, but they don’t tell us what we should
do.” Values must be translated into rules for behavior; and to give the rules
meaning, violators must be disciplined. Employees welcome information that
reduces ambiguity about what they can and can’t do. And if enforcement is
applied consistently across all organizational levels, they are likely to perceive the
system as fair and just.
On the other hand, employees often view a strictly compliance-oriented program
with cynicism. Without a strong values base, compliance programs seem to focus on
catching employees doing something wrong rather than on aspiring to do things right.
Employees translate this emphasis into mistrust and a “protect yourself” approach.
Either “the organization doesn’t trust its employees,” or “the organization is just out to
protect its own behind.” The best programs aim to focus on aspiring to a set of values
first and foremost, supported by just and fair enforcement of the rules.
At Merck, development of a formal ethics program was driven by its long-
standing values-based culture. Interestingly, Merck did not have a formal ethics code
until 1999. In rolling out the code initiative, the firm was careful to position it as
simply a continuation of the good things the company was already doing. It also
worked hard to get participation and buy-in through focus groups and surveys. This is
typical of values-based programs, where employee buy-in and support are essential.
GLOBALIZING AN ETHICS PROGRAM
In Chapter 11, we’ll talk about business ethics in a global environment. What sets
UTC apart is the truly global extent of its ethics and compliance efforts. Recall that
UTC has over 220,000 employees, more than half outside the United States, and a
242
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

presence in more than 180 countries. Imagine how difficult it must be to design
systems and programs to effectively reach such a wide audience across multiple
cultures. UTC’s program rests on three coordinated efforts: management engage-
ment, the Ombudsman/DIALOG program, and a worldwide Business Practices
Organization.
Management engagement is the keystone, because no “program” succeeds
without direct management support. At UTC, managers are evaluated on an “ethics
competency” that is based on behaviors identified by the research of the Ethics
Resource Center as well as on a complementary set of ethics and compliance
objectives. The ethics and compliance objectives are developed annually and cascaded
through management from the CEO and require ongoing communications to employ-
ees, customers, and UTC’s business partners; training of employees and key business
partners; continuous implementation, evaluation, and improvements in compliance
risk management systems; and efforts to improve the ethics scores on the biennial
employee survey. UTC policy states specifically that the business leaders are
responsible for fostering a culture of ethical conduct, encouraging open communica-
tions, and instilling a commitment to the Code of Ethics. Both the competency and the
objectives are evaluated through the company’s “Performance Feedback Tool,” which
was developed by the human resources department.
The Ombudsman/DIALOG program at UTC is an alternative communications
channel for raising issues to management. Created in 1986, it fields questions or
concerns on essentially any subject. Ombudsman/DIALOG is a confidential
channel that does not reveal the user’s identity; it serves as a neutral intermediary
between employees and management by advocating only for clear communication,
it works independently of management, and it performs under the standards of the
International Ombudsman Association. Inquiries come via phone contacts through
toll-free calling, or via written contacts, through either postage-paid mailers or an
encrypted, web-based system. UTC has three ombudsmen who handle more
complex issues, including those with legal implications. Less complex issues
are managed by DIALOG coordinators who work directly under the supervision
of the ombudsmen.
Users of Ombudsman/DIALOG can choose to remain completely anonymous to
the organization, and the company goes to great lengths to keep this commitment. For
example, an assistant to a senior business-unit executive called with concerns about
expense report behavior. If investigated openly, the source of the information would
have been identifiable. Instead, the company audited all expense reports of people at
the same level, as a routine review. In that way, they protected the reporter’s identity.
They found the problem, fired the executive, and no one was the wiser. However, the
ombudsmen do not conduct investigations. If the issue requires investigation or
intervention, it is turned over to people in other areas (e.g., human resources, business
practices, legal) for further action. Ultimately, the ombudsman or DIALOG coordi-
nator reviews the answer from the company. If it doesn’t completely and fairly address
all of the issues raised by the employee, it goes back to management with the
suggestion that it be fixed. Ombudsman/DIALOG receives more than 2,800 inquiries
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
243

per year, from around the world, and makes translators readily available. Over the past
five years, with respect to those Ombudsman/DIALOG inquiries requesting change,
about half resulted in change. Moreover, in recent years, more than half of all
Ombudsman/DIALOG inquiries came from outside the United States.
UTC’s Business Practices Organization is led by Kevin J. O’Connor, UTC’s
Vice President, Global Compliance, a former United States Attorney and Associate
Attorney General of the United States. O’Connor is one of the company’s top
executives. He reports to the senior vice president and general counsel as well as to
the audit committee of the board of directors, with whom he meets at least four times
per year. His staff consists of experienced ethics and compliance professionals
(including a former federal prosecutor, FBI agent and head of the Connecticut State
Police) at UTC’s headquarters. His team also includes five international lawyers/
Directors of Business Practices who work alongside UTC’s businesses overseas,
including Russia, the Middle East, China, India, and Europe. Additionally, he
supervises a network of almost 600 business practices officers (BPOs) who are
embedded in UTC businesses around the globe. Overall, about 48 BPOs are full-
time, five of those serving as the business practices leaders at UTC’s major
businesses.
O’Connor participates in selecting and appointing the BPOs as well as in
evaluating their performance, and he can veto appointments. Most have at least
several years of experience in the company and are familiar with internal controls and
the company culture. They are considered high-potential people who generally come
from staff functions such as finance or safety. Good communication skills are
considered a must for business practices staff, along with the ability to take the
ball and run with it when a problem arises. UTC has a BPO Handbook, an
investigations handbook, standard work for case management, an online case man-
agement system, toolkits for communications and risk management, and an online
knowledge management system. In addition, UTC has a standard curriculum for
training BPOs, which includes written materials, online modules, WebEx meetings,
and regional conferences. BPOs generally serve for about two or three years, a
turnover rate that is considered to be both a boon and a bane. It’s a boon because these
individuals bring fresh ideas and energy to the function, and they take their business
practices experience with them to their future roles, becoming continuing champions
for the business practices organization. It’s a bane because training new people is a
constant challenge.
The business practices unit manages UTC’s code of ethics (in place since 1990), a
companion policy statement on doing business with the U.S. government, and the
corporate policy manual. The code applies to UTC employees worldwide and includes
sections that specifically address ethical issues relating to doing business abroad. But
the code is not ethnocentric, so it allows for some adaptation to the cultural mores of
different cultures. It is made clear, however, that this flexibility does not permit
violations of U.S. or local laws, and the code states that UTC will not facilitate illegal
conduct or fraud by others, regardless of local norms. In 2012, a total of 379 employees
were discharged for violations of the code of ethics.
244
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

CONCLUSION
This chapter has offered specifics about how ethics is managed in large business
organizations. Large businesses that are committed to ethics are likely to have
formal ethics management systems such as an ethics office, ethics officer, explicit
ethics training, a telephone counseling/reporting line, and a system for investigat-
ing and following up on reports of misconduct. However, the specifics of these
systems vary with the context and culture of the firm. Some companies in highly
regulated industries may focus more on legal compliance. Others that have a long-
standing values-based culture will want to make sure that the ethics management
system is designed with a heavy emphasis on values and aspirations. Research has
found that the best of these formal ethics management programs have an over-
arching values-based approach that incorporates legal compliance within the
framework of a broader set of company values. Smaller firms with a strong
commitment to ethics are less likely to have separate formal ethics management
structures and systems. Whether an organization is large or small, the keys to
effective ethics management are commitment to ethics from the very top, the
involvement of leaders and employees at every level, and the recognition that ethics
management is an ongoing effort requiring continuous reinforcement and integra-
tion into the larger corporate culture.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.
Think about the impact of the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines. Would organizations
have tried to drive ethical behavior among employees without government
encouragement?
2.
After reading about how a number of large companies try to encourage ethical
behavior, what stands out? What approach is most unique? Which one do you
think is most effective? Which one would make the biggest impression on you if
you were an employee?
3.
Imagine that it’s your responsibility to select an ethics officer for your orga-
nization. What qualities, background, and experience would you look for?
Would you ever be interested in such a position? Why or why not?
4.
What are the advantages of having an ethics office or officer report to a
company’s chief executive officer, the legal department, human resources, or
audit? What are the disadvantages?
5.
Think about an organization where you’ve worked. What kinds of ethical
dilemmas are unique to that organization? To that industry? What might be the
best way to prepare employees to deal with those dilemmas?
6.
Think about all of the communication opportunities provided by social media.
How could an organization use social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and the
like to promote ethical behavior and communicate the organization’s values?
What are the advantages and dangers of those media? Think about Best Buy and
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
245

its ethics blog for employees. Would you read an ethics blog? If you saw an
interesting case, would you comment? Why or why not?
7.
Which of the following exist in an organization where you’ve worked: mission or
values statement, policy manual, code of conduct, ethics training (who conducts
it), a hotline? Were they consistent and credible?
8.
Is senior management committed to ethics? How do you know? What could they
do differently or better?
9.
Are leaders at all levels held accountable for their ethical conduct? If so, how? If
not, why not? What would you recommend?
10.
Whatrecommendations wouldyoumake forhandlingfrivolous calls tothehotline?
11.
Does the organization evaluate its ethics initiatives? How? If not, why not?
12.
Would you characterize the ethics efforts in this organization as taking a values,
compliance, or combination approach? Is it effective? How could it be improved?
13.
How would you raise an ethical concern in this organization? List all of the resources
available to you. Which ones would you be likely to use? Why or why not?
14.
Imagine that you’re the CEO of a small manufacturing company. An employee
has dumped toxic waste in a nearby stream. Who would you call into your office,
and what would you want to know? Develop a short-term and long-term action
plan for dealing with the crisis. Who would you communicate with and why?
15.
Evaluate the ethics program at your organization from the perspective of “fit.”
Has the ethics program been designed to fit the organization’s overall culture? If
so, how? If not, what could be done to make the program a better fit?
16.
Think about your own positive, memorable, “peak experiences” when it comes
to ethics. Be prepared to discuss them with others in your class and to think about
the conditions that would make it possible for such experiences to happen more
regularly at work. Or, if you don’t have much work experience yourself,
interview someone who has, and ask these questions. Be prepared to report on
what you learned from the interview.
SHORT CASE
WHAT’S WRONG WITH THIS PICTURE?
You’re a management consultant who has been asked by Green Company to help design
an ethics communication and training program for all Green Company employees. Your
meetings to date have been with the head of human resources, and your contract with the
company has been negotiated with him. Once the papers have been signed, you begin
your research and are quickly stymied by Green’s corporate counsel. He says you will
not be allowed to ask employees about ethical dilemmas that have occurred at Green. He
specifically asks you to get your information from other sources such as press accounts
of problems in the industry, or from other organizations you’veworked with. In addition,
246
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

CASE QUESTIONS
1. 
Based on what you know about developing ethica l cultures and program s,
identify the problem s present ed by this case .
2. 
Why do you think the corpo rate counse l has responded in this way? What will be
your resp onse to him, if any?
3. 
As a consul tant, wha t are your ethica l obligat ions, if any?
4. 
How will you proce ed?
APPENDIX
How Fines Are Determined under the U.S. Sentencing
Guidelines
For more details, see www.ussc.gov.
Part 8C1.1 of the guidelines states that “If, upon consideration of the nature and
circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the organization, the
court determines that the organization operated primarily for a criminal purpose or
primarily by criminal means, the fine shall be set at an amount (subject to the statutory
maximum) sufficient to divest the organization of all its net assets.”
If that is not the case, penalties are based on a base fine and the “culpability score”
assigned by the court.The base fine isthegreatest of the following: the pretaxgain from the
crime, the amount of intentional loss inflicted on the victims, and an amount based on the
Sentencing Commission’s ranking of the seriousness of the crime (ranging from $5,000 to
$72.5 million). This amount is then multiplied by a number that depends on the culpability
score. The culpability score ranges from 0 to 10, and the multipliers range from 0.05 to 4.
Every defendant starts at a culpability score of 5 and can move up or down
depending on aggravating or mitigating factors (see Table 6.A.1). The presence of
aggravating factors can cause the culpability score to increase. These aggravating
factors include (1) organizational size, combined with the degree of participation,
tolerance, or disregard for the criminal conduct by high-level personnel or substantial
authority personnel in the firm; (2) prior history of similar criminal conduct; and (3)
role in obstructing or impeding an investigation.
The presence of mitigating factors, however, can cause the culpability score to drop.
To decrease the culpability score, the organization must have in place an “effective
program to prevent and detect violations of the law.” If the court determines that the
organizationhassuchaprogram,3pointscanberemovedfromthebaseculpabilityscore
the head of human resources has told you that you’ll be unable to meet the three most
senior executives because they’re busy negotiating a large acquisition. You will have
access to other high-level managers who can tell you what they think the seniors want.
You’re instructed to write a code of conduct for the company and a mission statement,
and to prepare presentations for the senior managers to give to employees sometime next
month on corporate expectations and values.
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
247

Factors That Can Increase or Decrease Culpability Scores
Aggravating Factors: Result in an increase to the base level of 5

The size of the organization coupled with the degree of participation, tolerance,
or disregard for the criminal conduct by “high level personnel” or “substantial
authority personnel.” In a ﬁrm with greater than 5,000 employees, this factor can
result in an increase of as much as 5 points.

Prior history:Organizations thathavebeeneither civilly orcriminally adjudicatedtohave
committed similar conduct within the past ﬁve years can have up to 2 points added.

Obstructing, impeding, (or attempting to obstruct or impede) during the investigation,
prosecution, or something can result in 3 points added.
Mitigating Factors: Result in decreases from the base level of 5

Having an effective program to prevent and detect violations of the law can result in a
downward departure of 3 points.

Self-reporting, cooperating, and accepting responsibility for the criminal conduct can
result in a downward departure of 5 points.
of 5. Besides having an effective compliance program in place, the culpability score
can be substantially reduced if the organization reports the criminal conduct promptly
after becoming aware of the offense and before government investigation. According
to the guidelines, an organization that reports its own misconduct, cooperates with
authorities, and accepts responsibility can have as many as 5 points subtracted from the
base culpability level of 5.
The mitigating factors that reduce the culpability score have important implica-
tions for the way companies manage ethical conduct. For example, many believe that
Table 6.A.1 Method for Determining Minimum and Maximum Fines
Culpability Score
Minimum Multiplier
Maximum Multiplier
10 or more
2.00
4.00
9
1.80
3.60
8
1.60
3.20
7
1.40
2.80
6
1.20
2.40
5
1.00
2.00
4
0.80
1.60
3
0.60
1.20
2
0.40
0.80
1
0.20
0.40
0 or less
0.05
0.20
248
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

overseei ng an “effective” program for preventing and detecting legal violation s is a
full-time job for at least on e pers on. It would likely involve the development of a
conduct code, training progr ams, scrutiny of performanc e managem ent systems, the
developme nt of com munica tion system s, detection system s, and so on. Many of thes e
elements have been descr ibed in this chapt er.
NOTES
1. 
G. Weaver, L. K. Trevi~no, and P. Cochran, “Corporate Ethics Programs as Control Systems: Managerial
and Institutional Influences,” Unpublished working paper, 1998.
2. 
S. A. Reiss, Speech given at the Conference Board meeting on business ethics, 1992.
3. 
United States of America v. David D’Lorenzo, 96-CV-1203, U.S. Dist. Ct., 1996.
4. 
J. A. Byrne, “Fall from Grace,” Businessweek, August 12, 2002, 50–56.
5. 
J. M. Kaplan, “The Sentencing Guidelines: The First Ten Years,” Ethikos and Corporate Conduct
Quarterly 15, no. 3 (2001): 1–4.
6. 
U.S. Public Interest Research Group, “Rogues Gallery of Major Corporate Legal Settlements,”
April 17, 2012, uspirg.org
7. 
Governance, Ethics, and the Sentencing Guidelines: A Call for Self-Governing Cultures (Los Angeles:
LRN, 2004).
8. 
Personal communication, Kent Druyvesteyn, 1994.
9. 
G. Weaver, L. K. Trevi~no, and P. Cochran, “Corporate Ethics Practices in the Mid-1990s: An Empirical
Study of the Fortune 1000,” Journal of Business Ethics 18, no. 3 (1999): 283–94.
10. 
Society for Corporate Compliance and Ethics, “Should Compliance Report to General Counsel?”
March 2013, www.corporatecompliance.org
11. 
Ibid.
12. 
N. K. Austin, “The New Corporate Watchdogs,” Working Woman, January 1994, 19–20.
13. 
D. G. Simmons, “The Nature of the Organizational Grapevine,” Supervisory Management , November
1985, 39–42.
14. 
T. DeAngelis, “Honesty Tests Weigh in with Improved Ratings,” APA Monitor 7 (1991); D. S. Ones, C.
Ziswesvaran, and F. Schmidt, “Comprehensive Meta-analysis of Integrity Test Validities: Findings and
Implications for Personal Selection and Theories of Job Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology
78 (1993): 679–703; P. R. Sackett, L. R. Burris, and C. Callahan, “Integrity Testing for Personal
Selection: An Update,” Personal Psychology 42 (1989): 491–529.
15.
Ethics Resource Center, Kathleen Edmond of Best Buy Receives ERC’s Carol R. Marshall Award for
Innovation in Corporate Ethics, March 27, 2013, www.ethics.org
16. 
J. Davis, Best Practice at Best Buy: A Pioneering Ethics Blog for Employees, January 29, 2013, http://
www.convercent.com/company-ethicist/best-practice-at-best-buy-a-pioneering-ethics-blog-for-
employees/
17.
K. Edmond, Are Corporate Employees More Important Than Other Employees?” February 14, 2013,
www.kathleenedmund.com
18.
R. Farzad, “Jail Terms for 2 at Top of Adelphia,” New York Times, June 21, 2005, C1.
19.
J. P. Kotter and J. L. Heskett, Corporate Culture and Performance (New York: Free Press, 1992).
20.
A. L. Smith, Innovative Employee Communication: A New Approach to Improving Trust, Teamwork
and Performance (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1991).
21.
Ibid.
22. 
Maritz Research, 2011 Employee Engagement Poll Executive Summary, June 2011, http://www.mar-
itzresearch.com//media/Files/MaritzDotCom/White%20Papers/ExcecutiveSummary_Research.pdf
23.
A. L. Smith, Innovative Employee Communication: A New Approach to Improving Trust, Teamwork
and Performance (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1991).
CHAPTER 6
MANAGING ETHICS AND LEGAL COMPLIANCE
249

24.
T. J. Peters and R. H. Waterman Jr., In Search of Excellence: Lessons from America’s Best-Run
Companies (New York: Harper & Row, 1982).
25.
M. Hammer and J. Champy, Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for Corporate Revolution
(New York: HarperCollins, 1993).
26.
J. M. Powell, “Pinkerton Responds to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines,” Corporate Conduct
Quarterly 3, no. 1 (1994): 10.
27.
S. S. Miller, “The Ombudsperson,” in Corporate Ethics: Developing New Standards of Accountability,
Conference Board Report No. 980 (New York: The Conference Board, 1991), 29–30.
28.
“Johnson & Johnson’s Credo Survey: Genesis and Evolution,” Ethikos 7, no. 2 (1993): 2.
250
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

C H A P T E R7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL
CONDUCT
INTRODUCTION
We talked (in Chapter 3) about how most employees look outside themselves (to
leaders and others) for guidance about how to behave. We have also discussed ethical
culture and how organizations, especially large ones, manage ethics and legal
compliance. Within this broad organizational context, managers oversee employee
behavior every day, and they can have enormous influence. Therefore managers need
simple and practical tools for managing the ethical conduct of their direct reports in the
context of the broader organizational culture—to be ethical leaders at their own
organizational level. This chapter introduces some basic management concepts that
provide a foundation for understanding how to lead in a way that increases the
probability that employees will behave ethically. Consistent with the focus of the
book, each section concludes with practical implications for managers. Underlying
our recommendations to managers are three key assumptions:
1.
Managers want to be ethical.
2.
Managers want their subordinates to be ethical.
3.
Based on their experience, managers will have insight into the unique ethical
requirements of the job.
IN BUSINESS, ETHICS IS ABOUT BEHAVIOR
In business, when people talk about ethics, they’re talking about behavior. In this
context, ethics isn’t mysterious or unusual, nor does it depend on the individual’s
innate goodness, religious conviction, or philosophical understanding (or lack of these
qualities). In work situations every day, people face ethical dilemmas—questions of
right and wrong where values are in conflict. Should I hire, fire, promote, or demote
this individual? Should I offer or accept a gift in this or that situation? How should I
respond when my supervisor asks me to act against my own beliefs?1
The study of ethical behavior in business involves understanding the factors that
influence how people behave in these situations. Although we’ve seen (in Chapter 3)
that internal factors such as individual moral development are important, we know that
for most people ethical conduct depends largely on external factors such as the rules of
251

the work context, rewards and punishments, what peers are doing, what authority
figures expect, the roles people are asked to play, and the broad ethical culture
discussed in Chapter 5. In this chapter, we’re focusing on the factors managers can
influence the most. Once leaders understand how management principles apply to
ethical conduct, they can manage the ethical behavior of their direct reports more
proactively and effectively. On the other hand, if managers fool themselves into
thinking that ethical conduct is determined exclusively by some mysterious character
trait, they’ll throw up their hands and walk away from situations they could proactively
manage. Or they’ll think that simply getting rid of a “bad apple” will make unethical
conduct stop. However, unethical behavior is rarely as simple as a bad apple. It’s often
something about the work environment that allows the bad apple to behave badly. Plus,
the work environment is the manager’s responsibility. Top executives are responsible
for the broad organizational culture (as we saw in Chapter 5). In most cases, though,
lower-level leaders can do a lot to influence the subordinates in their own depart-
ments—and ethical leadership at the department level is what this chapter is about.
Practical Advice for Managers: Ethical Behavior
What are the practical implications for managers? First, think of ethics in concrete
behavioral terms. Specifically, what kind of behavior are you looking for in your
subordinates, and how can you lead in a way that creates a departmental work context
that will support that behavior? Specifying concrete expectations for ethical behavior
means going beyond abstract statements, such as “integrity is important here” to more
concrete statements, such as “I expect sales representatives to be absolutely honest
with our customers about such things as the characteristics of our products and our
ability to deliver by a certain date.” Providing a reason for these expectations is also
important. “We’re interested in building long-term relationships with our customers.
We want them to think of us as their most trusted supplier.” Finally, it’s the manager’s
responsibility to create a work environment that supports ethical behavior and
discourages unethical behavior just as much as it’s his or her responsibility to manage
for productivity or quality. Don’t just set ethical behavior goals. Follow up to make
sure that they’re achievable and that they’re being met, and model ethical conduct
yourself. Your people will pay more attention to what you do than to what you say.
Take advantage of opportunities to demonstrate the ethical conduct you expect.
OUR MULTIPLE ETHICAL SELVES
To understand ethics at work, we must understand that people are socialized to accept
different behavior depending on the context. Cultural anthropologists have known for
years that we have multiple selves and that we behave differently depending on the
situation we confront.2 Children in our society are taught very early that it’s all right to
be loud and boisterous on the playground, but they must be reverent at the church,
synagogue, temple, or mosque. Table manners are important when visiting, but eating
some things with one’s fingers may be acceptable at home. As adults, we play highly
252
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

differentiated roles, and we assume that each social context presents different
behavioral expectations. Football players are expected to tackle each other deliber-
ately and aggressively on the playing field, but they would be arrested for such
behavior on the street. Businesspeople are expected to be aggressive against competi-
tors but gentle with their spouses and children. Game jargon is often applied to
business dealings—like the term playing field, which makes the business dealings
seem like a game and therefore less subject to moral scrutiny. One may bluff and
conceal information in business negotiations the same way one bluffs in a poker game.
“Bluffing” sounds a lot better than lying (the word lying would raise ethical awareness,
as discussed in Chapter 3), and the game analogy helps distinguish business behavior
from morality in other situations. Although we might prefer to think that we take a
single ethical self from situation to situation, reality suggests that most people behave
differently in different contexts. This means that we can and often do have multiple
ethical selves.
The Kenneth Lay Example
Kenneth Lay, former chairman of Enron Corporation (until he was forced out by the
firm’s creditors in 2002), exemplifies the concept of multiple ethical selves. A
Newsweek article written after Enron’s bankruptcy described the paradox that was
Ken Lay.3 First, we see the affable leader who was loved and admired by Enron
employees. Even Sherron Watkins, the Enron whistleblower who brought Lay her
concerns about the accounting problems (and was rebuffed) described Lay as a man of
integrity. He grew up a poor preacher’s son who pulled himself up by his bootstraps
and eventually won the Horatio Alger Award (designed to foster entrepreneurship and
honor the American dream of success through hard work). At the University of
Missouri, he was president of a dry fraternity and went on to earn a Ph.D. in
economics. He created Enron, and by 2000 it was the seventh largest company in
the United States in terms of revenue.
Despite becoming quite rich, Lay never flaunted his wealth. He drove an old
Cadillac and used rental cars rather than limos when traveling. He was highly
philanthropic in the Houston community. He talked about making Houston a
world-class city and worked to make that happen, spreading his largesse to the ballet,
symphony, museums, the United Way, the NAACP—you name it. He was even
discussed as a possible mayoral candidate.
But Lay had another side. He has been described as an arrogant gambler who
valued risk taking and boosting the firm’s stock price above all. He transformed Enron
from the 1980s merger of two old-fashioned pipeline companies into a huge energy
trader. Enron “became a giant casino, taking positions, hedging, betting on winners
and losers.”4 Interestingly, the merger deal was financed by Michael Milliken, 1980s
junk-bond trader and one of Lay’s heroes (even though Milliken had done jail time for
financial fraud). Lay fired Enron’s conservative accounting firm, Deloitte Haskins
Sells, early on because they were “not as creative and imaginative” as he wished, and
he replaced them with Arthur Andersen. He created a corporate culture that was
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
253

described by insiders as “cutthroat” and “vicious,” and hired Ivy League “hot shot risk
takers” like Jeff Skilling (CEO) and Andrew Fastow (CFO) to run it. People who didn’t
make their numbers were quickly fired, and a large internal security force came to be
feared by employees.
Lay was also a political pro. He gave generously to political candidates and
received favors in return, including exemptions from a variety of local and state
regulations; his reach extended all the way to the White House. As the largest single
contributor to George W. Bush’s presidential campaign, Lay and other Enron officials
met at least six times with Vice President Richard Cheney and his aides while the vice
president headed the National Energy Policy Development Group and formulated the
Bush administration’s energy policy.5
After CEO Jeff Skilling resigned in August 2001, Lay told employees that the
company’s upcoming financials looked fine and encouraged them to “talk up the stock
and talk positively about Enron to your family and friends.” In an online discussion, he
told employees that he had been buying stock himself. In fact, he had bought about
$4 million worth, but what he failed to mention was that he had sold $24 million worth
in the previous few months. Those who heeded his suggestion to buy or hold saw their
retirement plans wiped out and were furious when they learned that Lay had been
unloading his own stock for years. According to Newsweek, although he claimed that
he was deceived by unscrupulous subordinates,6 Lay had to know about Enron’s
“elaborate schemes to hide losses and debts”—the off-the-books partnerships that no
one, including stock analysts, really understood.
The difference between “lie” and “lay”
Has fallen into deep decay.
But now we know from Enron’s shame
That Lay and “lie” are just the same7
So was Kenneth Lay ethical or unethical? Had he lived (in 2006 he died of a heart
attack at age 64—after being found guilty, but before being sentenced), perhaps he
would have written a book that would have helped us understand his motivations and
behaviors. But we’ll never know. We suspect the answer is that, like many people, he
had multiple ethical selves. In some areas of his life he did good, ethical things,
including his many philanthropic efforts. But philanthropy shouldn’t be equated with
ethical conduct in daily business dealings. In fact, if he felt responsibility for what
happened, wouldn’t he have turned over at least some of his estimated $20 million net
worth to help those who lost so much?
A prominent victim of the Enron bankruptcy was Cliff Baxter, Enron’s 43-year-
old former vice chairman, who committed suicide following Enron’s collapse. We can
only speculate about the reason, but a clash of his multiple ethical selves may have
played a role. Those who knew him described Baxter as a family man who balanced
his home and work lives. He was certainly instrumental in creating the massive Enron
fortune in the 1990s. Over time, however, he clashed with Andrew Fastow and openly
criticized the firm’s involvement in financial deals he considered to be questionable
254
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

and inappropriate. Upon realizing he couldn’t influence what was happening, Baxter
left the company in May 2001 (citing a desire to spend more time with his family). We
will likely never know for sure why he committed suicide. Friends said he was
“devastated by the company’s demise.” He may have felt responsible for the many
employees who lost their life savings in the collapse that could have been prevented.
It’s possible that the ethical self who cared about those employees could no longer live
with the self who contributed to their pain.8
The Dennis Levine Example
Now for another example. Dennis Levine was a mergers and acquisitions specialist at a
prominent investment banking firm in the 1980’s. His personal account of his insider
trading activities, which resulted in his arrest and imprisonment also suggests multiple
ethical selves. He described himself as a good son, husband, and father, and a man who
had been encouraged by his parents to “play straight.” “I come from a strong, old-
fashioned family . . . [my father] taught me to work hard, believe in myself, and
persevere . . . as a kid I always worked.”9 Levine’s wife, Laurie, had no idea that he
had been secretly and illegally trading in stocks for years. In fact, the family lived in a
cramped one-bedroom apartment for nearly three years after their son was born despite
Levine’s huge insider trading profits. That someone is “from a good family” or is “a
family man or woman” is no guarantee of ethical behavior in the office. At the office,
the manager is dealing with the “office self,” who may be very different from the
“family self” or the “religious self.”
Levine was a good son, husband, and father, but he separated his family self from
his insider trading self. Why was his insider trading self allowed to exist? We can only
speculate that this office self fit into an environment where peers were crossing the
ethical line and not getting caught. Most important, his continuing huge profits led
Levine into a downward spiral of unethical behavior that he found difficult to stop
despite his recognition that it was illegal.
Practical Advice for Managers: Multiple Ethical Selves
So what should managers do? First, recognize that many people find it quite possible to
divide themselves into multiple ethical selves and to behave differently in different life
contexts. That means you too. So, begin by analyzing yourself. Is your office self
consistent with your personal ethical self? If not, what will be required to bring the two
together? You’re an important role model for your subordinates. If you’re clearly a
“whole” person of integrity, they’re more likely to aspire to “wholeness” themselves.
Next, think about those who report to you. Make no assumptions about ethics at
work based on a person’s background, religious affiliation, family life, or good deeds
in the community. Instead, find out what norms and expectations guide their work
selves, and make sure that these influences support ethical behavior. You can learn a
great deal simply by keeping your eyes and ears wide open. Of course, the best way to
find out how your people think about these issues is to ask them, either in person or in
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
255

survey form. You may be surprised what they’ll tell you. And you’re sending an
important symbolic message about what concerns you just by asking. Do employees
feel, as many surveys have suggested, that they must compromise their personal ethics
to get ahead in your organization? If so, what do they think can be done about it?
Find out what influences their thoughts and behavior in ethical dilemma situa-
tions. Find out what inhibits them from being the best they can be, from doing the right
thing. You can base your questions on real or hypothetical situations. Most supervisors
have never bothered to ask such questions. Is it any wonder then that most subordinates
end up believing that their leaders don’t really care about ethics? Once you’ve had this
type of discussion, it’s essential for you to follow up in ways that support ethical
conduct. A number of practical ideas for how to do that follow.
Finally, it’s important to evaluate the broader organizational environment to be
sure that it supports the best in you and your people. As a lower- or middle-level
manager, you can do little to influence the broad ethical culture. If senior executives
are creating a cutthroat, Darwinian culture where only bottom-line results count, it’s
probably time to look elsewhere for a job because you won’t be able to protect yourself
or your people from the effects of such a culture. Chapter 5 provides information about
how to conduct an “ethical culture audit” that can help you make that tough decision.
But let’s assume that senior management is supportive. It is then up to you to
contribute to the larger organizational culture by creating a local work environment
that supports ethical conduct and integrity for the people you manage. Integrity is
defined as “that quality or state of being complete, whole, or undivided.” Individuals
of high integrity are thought to be consistent and ethical across contexts. So, the
ultimate goal is to help those who work for you to be as ethical at the office as they are
at home.
REWARDS AND DISCIPLINE
People Do What Is Rewarded and Avoid Doing What
Is Punished
In Chapter 5 and our discussion of ethical culture, we described the importance of
performance management systems and the signals they send about what the organi-
zation cares about (because it signals what the organization measures, rewards, and
disciplines). Managers implement those systems through their application of rewards
and discipline every day. Rewards and discipline are probably the most important
influences on people’s behavior at work. Most managers can probably recite a few
basics recalled from a college psychology or management class. For example, most of
us remember something about reinforcement theory—people are more likely to
behave in ways that are rewarded, and they’re less likely to do what is punished.
In fact, people in work organizations are constantly on the lookout for information
about rewards and punishments—especially if this information isn’t explicit. In fact,
the more ambiguous the situation, the more people search for clues. They know that to
be successful at work, they’ll have to determine what’s rewarded and do those things
256
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

while avoiding behaviors that are punished. Remember this simple adage: what gets
rewarded gets done! Financial industry employees were rewarded handsomely for
creating and selling risky mortgages and mortgage-backed securities. They did this
without much attention to the risks to customers or the financial system as a whole.
People Will Go the Extra Mile to Achieve Goals
Set by Managers
In combination with rewards, goal setting is one of the most powerful motivational
tools. That’s why managers use goals so much. Rewards are often tied to explicit goals
(e.g., Sandy will win a trip to the Caribbean by hitting a particular sales target within a
particular period of time). Goals focus attention on the desired outcome (the sales
target and vacation), and they lead individuals to strategize about how to achieve the
goals that have been set. That is generally considered to be a good thing. Meeting the
goal makes Sandy feel good (providing psychological benefits), and it results in a
significant valued reward.
Researchers are beginning to understand more about how people think about
goals, what they will do to achieve goals, and what happens when they fall short of
achieving a goal.
For example, intense focus on attaining a task goal can distract people from other
goals, such as ethical goals. Consider the goals that Lee Iacocca set for design and
production of the Ford Pinto—recall from the Pinto fires case (Chapter 2) that goals
were set—the car had to weigh less than 2,000 pounds and cost less than $2,000. An
intense organizational focus on striving for those goals may have contributed to
shortcuts and safety problems. Apparently, Iacocca had not set explicit safety goals to
accompany these challenging production goals. Thus the employees involved likely
focused on achieving the stated weight and price goals without giving equivalent
attention to safety. Researchers have found that employees may be less likely to report
problems to management if they are intently focused on achieving a task.10 In addition,
attempting to achieve a task goal increases risky behavior, whereas falling short of the
goal can lead to increased lying about performance.11
Imagine that a claims handler at an insurance company is assigned an explicit goal
to close a certain number of claims within a particular period of time and is offered a
financial reward for doing so. He’s likely to find ways to reach that goal even if it
means denying some legitimate claims, and he’ll be less likely to report concerns
about legitimate claims being denied. On the other hand, setting goals for ethical
performance can make a difference. For example, one study found that participants
who were given a goal to revise a paragraph from their boss were more likely to correct
misinformation if they were given an explicit goal to ensure the accuracy and truth of
the information.12
Incentives and goals are popular with managers because they work well to
motivate behavior. But managers often fail to recognize the potential of goals and
incentives to motivate unethical behavior if not used thoughtfully. Let’s look at a more
specific example.
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
257

How Goals Combined With Rewards Can
Encourage Unethical Behavior
THE ELECTRONICS APPLIANCE SALES EXAMPLE
Suppose an electronic appli-
ance store has a sales force that is paid on the basis of a modest salary plus
commission. In other words, the salespeople are paid a percentage of the items
they sell. The company frequently advertises specials on certain television models in
the local newspaper—and, of course, people come into the store asking about those
models. But because of the lower profit margin on these sale items, the company also
lowers its salespeople’s commission on these models. The higher rewards (i.e., higher
commissions) come with sales of models that aren’t on special. The company prefers
to sell the higher-priced models but advertises the lower-priced ones to get customers
into the store. The company has set sales goals for each salesperson, and the goals are
higher for the higher-priced models. The company offers little sales training. New
salespeople spend a day or so working with the store manager and then are pretty much
on their own. The manager doesn’t seem to care how sales are made—just that they are
made. The manager’s own commissions are based on store sales.
If the salespeople value money (and their jobs), and let’s assume that they do,
they’ll be motivated to sell more of the higher-priced models. They can do this in a
variety of ways. For example, they might point out that some of these models have
features that the sale models don’t have. Some customers will probably listen to the
advice and buy the more expensive models. As buyers listen and go through with the
purchase, the connection between selling higher-priced items and positive outcomes
(commissions, praise from the manager) becomes stronger for salespeople, and their
motivation to sell more of these items grows.
Still, lots of folks will probably insist on buying the sale models. To sell more of
the higher-priced models, a salesperson might try stressing the advantages of the high-
priced model’s features even when the customer doesn’t need them. The salesperson
may find that a good number of people go along with this sales tactic. The salesperson
then receives more rewards—higher commissions, more praise from the manager—
and no obvious negative outcomes. This behavior can even be justified, or at least
rationalized. These customers are getting features they wouldn’t otherwise get, right?
And the salesperson doesn’t know much about their finances or personal life, so there
would be no way to know (without asking) if spending more money really had negative
consequences for the customer.
Things are going so well that the salesperson might now be tempted to go a bit
further—perhaps playing with the controls to make it look as if the picture on the sale
TV is a bit fuzzier than the picture on the more expensive models. That makes it even
easier to sell the more expensive models.
Explained this way, the connection between goals, rewards, and unethical
behavior seems pretty clear. Although no one was explicitly telling salespeople to
be unethical, the motivating factors were there: management set higher sales goals for
higher-priced models and rewarded the sale of these models with higher commissions.
The store manager didn’t seem to care how the sales got made and may not have
objected to the salesperson playing with the controls to deceive customers.
258
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Management wanted to sell higher-priced models and set higher sales goals for
those models. But the exclusive focus on goals frequently obscures the method of
reaching a goal. If managers are concerned about ethical conduct, it’s essential that
they focus at least as much on how the goal is being achieved. They must let their
workers know that they’re interested in ethical means as well as ends and that they plan
to evaluate both. If individuals are rewarded for meeting goals no matter what methods
are used, they’re much more likely to try methods that cross the line between ethical
and unethical behavior.
Many people have told us of their experience with managers who say something
like this: “I don’t care how you do it, just do it.” Or “I don’t want to know how you
meet the goal, just meet it.” These statements are clearly giving permission to use any
means necessary (ethical or unethical) to meet the goal. Managers who have uttered
these words shouldn’t be surprised to find that unethical behavior is often the result.
Goal setting and incentives combine to create the most effective motivational method
available to managers. Set challenging and achievable goals, reward people for
meeting them, and people will go to great lengths to achieve the goals that have
been set. That’s why responsible managers need to be clear about the importance of
using only ethical means to achieve the goals they have set for their employees. The
statement, “I don’t care how you do it, just get it done,” should send up a huge red flag
that triggers ethical awareness. Managers shouldn’t say it, and workers should beware
of ethical land mines if they hear it.
Practical Advice for Managers: Goals,
Rewards, and Discipline
First, remember that people do what’s rewarded. And these rewards don’t have to be
explicit. The electronics store in our example would probably never have dreamed of
saying that it was rewarding salespersons for being unethical. In fact, they weren’t
doing this explicitly. But if the designers of the motivational plan had thought carefully
about the plan’s potential effects (and it’s their responsibility to do so), they might very
well have identified its fatal flaw—it focuses on ends only and leaves it to the
salespeople to figure out the means (how to accomplish the goals). Managers are more
likely to identify these flaws in advance if they put themselves in their employees’
shoes. Think about what the average individual would be likely to do given the
rewards. What kinds of attitudes and behaviors are being rewarded explicitly or
implicitly? How can you find out? Ask your staff. If you have good, open communi-
cation with them, they’ll tell you.
Second, think carefully about the goals you’ve set for your employees. Combining
specific, challenging, and achievable goals with rewards for achieving them is a
powerful motivational tool. People set their sights on those goals and work hard to
reach them. It’s up to the manager to think about the likely behavioral outcomes and
potential unintended consequences. Again, put yourself in employees’ shoes and ask
yourself what those consequences might be. Also ask yourself whether you have
set goals for ethical conduct (e.g., safety, honesty with customers) as well as for
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
259

bottom-line performance (e.g., number of TVs sold) that focus on the means (building
trusting customer relationships) as well as the ends. Are you measuring and rewarding
both? We believe in an ethical “Pygmalion effect.” In tests of the more general
Pygmalion effect, researchers have found that people in school and work settings
generally live up to the expectations that are set for them, whether they’re high or
low.13 Students and workers perform better in response to a teacher’s or supervisor’s
high expectations, but they fall behind if they’re expected to fail. With the ethical
Pygmalion effect, expectations for ethical behavior (as well as performance) are set
high, and people are expected to fulfill them. This ethical Pygmalion effect appeals to
people’s desire to do what’s right. It is also likely to get people to think about how they
achieve their goals, not just whether they’ve achieved them.
Recognize the Power of Indirect Rewards and Punishments
It’s important to recognize that workers don’t have to be personally rewarded (or
punished) for the message to have an impact. A powerful extension of reinforcement
theory is social learning theory.14 According to social learning theory, people learn
from observing the rewards and punishments of others. Imagine if we had to touch a
hot stove to learn that we’ll get burned if we do so! Luckily, we can observe others to
learn most of what we need to know about what works and what doesn’t in life and at
work. So, workers’ behavior is influenced even when they don’t experience a reward
or punishment themselves. If they see that others get away with lying, cheating, or
stealing—or worse yet, if they see those individuals getting promotions or big
bonuses—they’re much more likely to try such behaviors themselves. On the other
hand, if they see that someone is quickly dismissed for lying to a customer, they learn
that such behavior is unacceptable.
THE TAILHOOK EXAMPLE
As an example of how people learn about rewards and
punishments by observing others, consider the 1991 Tailhook scandal. The Tailhook
Association is a nonprofit organization of naval aviators that, in 1991, had formal ties
with the U.S. Navy. According to many insiders, the type of sexual harassment (of
some 90 women) that occurred at the annual Tailhook Association meeting held in the
Las Vegas Hilton in 1991 had been implicitly rewarded (or at least not punished) in the
Navy for some time. These sexual harassment rituals were regular events that the male
participants experienced as fun (rewarding). The Navy brass was known to turn a blind
eye to reports, responding with a “boys will be boys” attitude. Investigations were
torturously slow and resulted in little, if any, punishment. The reward system became
well known, and therefore the men continued to engage in these “rewarding” behaviors
that weren’t punished.
Many people (especially women) looked to the Navy’s reaction to the Tailhook
scandal as an opportunity to change the messages being sent about the acceptability or
unacceptability of such conduct. Some early signs were encouraging, but the longer-term
results disappointed many women. The secretary of the Navy resigned his post at the
outset of the scandal, and the Navy severed ties with the Tailhook Association in late
260
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

1991. Investigations of potential criminal misconduct were also launched. However, the
Navy’s discussions with 1,500 men resulted in only two suspects. When the Pentagon
took over, 140 aviators were accused of indecent exposure, assault, or lying under oath.
However, only 80 of these individuals were ever fined or even moderately disciplined.
None of those involved in the assault of the 90 women was court-martialed or seriously
disciplined. Perhaps most significant, in early 1994 the young woman who filed the first
complaint, Lieutenant Paula Coughlin, resigned from the Navy, explaining that Tailhook
“and the covert attacks on me that followed have stripped me of my ability to serve.” 15
Lieutenant Coughlin left amid “rumor mongering by officers trying to impugn her
credibility” and with a “stack of hate mail.” However, also in 1994, a federal jury awarded
Lieutenant Coughlin $1.7 million in compensatory damages and $5 million in punitive
damages and held the Hilton Hotel responsible.16 The Tailhook Association continues to
hold an annual convention, but it is now a much tamer affair. In 1999, after an
investigation of the Tailhook Association and its 1999 convention in Reno, the Navy
restored its ties with the organization. Secretary of the Navy Richard Danzig said, “The
shameful events of the Tailhook Convention in 1991 led to a withdrawal of our support for
the Association. Over the past eight years, however, the Association took a number of
constructive steps that warranted a review of its status . . . [and] we’ve concluded that
thetimeisrighttorestoreties.”Theassociationhascommitteditselftopreventthetypeof
misconduct that occurred in 1991. (See www.tailhook.org for more information on the
association.)
The message to Navy men (and women) has clearly been mixed. Yes, the event
caused a lot of turmoil, probably enough to suggest to Navy men that assaulting their
female colleagues was not going to be as “rewarding” as it used to be. In fact,
membership in the Tailhook Association dropped dramatically after the incident,
especiallyamongyoungermembers.17Moreover,severaladmiralshavebeendischarged
for inappropriate sexual behavior committed since Tailhook. Sexual harassment sensi-
tivity training is now required in the Navy. But in 1996 Newsweek reported that in the
four years after Tailhook, the Navy received more than 1,000 harassment complaints and
more than 3,500 charges of indecent assault. Women still complained that they faced
reprisals forfilingcomplaints.18To sumup,organizationssend a powerful message to all
personnel every time a decision is made to respond to a sexual harassment complaint.
Everyone watches and learns from what happens to the perpetrators and to the victims.
The problem with sexual harassment and sexual assault continues today and goes
well beyond the Navy. For example, the most recent Defense Department annual
survey (2012) showed that sexual harassment and sexual assault remain serious
problems in the military, with reports increasing dramatically. Anonymous surveys
put the estimate of sexual assault in the military at over 26,000 in 2012. In Spring 2013,
the U.S. Secretary of Defense called sexual assault in the military a “scourge that must
be stamped out” and a “profound betrayal of sacred oaths and sacred trusts.” Clearly,
much more work will be required to create a culture across the military where such
behavior is not tolerated.19
Managers, take note of the messages you’re implicitly sending to all of your
workers by what you reward and punish (or fail to punish). Employees are constantly
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
261

on the lookout for these cues. They want to know what’s okay and not okay in your
work environment. If they observe that people advance by stepping on others, lying to
customers, and falsifying reports, they’ll be more inclined to do so because they will
have learned that such behavior is rewarded. If they see sexual harassment go
undisciplined, they may feel free to engage in it themselves. If they see those who
report misconduct suffering reprisal, they won’t risk reporting problem behavior. So if
you become aware of unethical behavior in your group, chances are that it’s being
rewarded somehow. Ask yourself how the system might be intentionally or uninten-
tionally rewarding the undesired behavior, and take responsibility for changing it. On
the other hand, if unethical individuals are dismissed, and persons of integrity advance,
the ethical lesson is also clear: integrity is valued and unethical behavior won’t be
tolerated.
Can Managers Really Reward Ethical Behavior?
For years, management writers have preached that whenever possible, managers should
use rewards instead of punishment—that punishment is inherently a bad management
practice. This idea, good as it sounds, is impracticalwhen thegoal is to encourage ethical
behavior and discourage unethical behavior. Relying on rewards means rewarding
ethical behavior. So let’s think about how a manager might regularly reward routine
ethical behavior. Perhaps he or she could give awards or bonuses to thosewhose expense
reports were honest and accurate or to those managers who didn’t harass their
secretaries. Does this seem ridiculous to you? Of course it does. Workers don’t expect
to be rewarded for behaviors that are expected of everyone—for simply doing the right
thing everyday.Sointheshortterm,it’squitedifficult torewardroutineethicalbehavior.
However, as we noted in Chapter 6, some organizations do reward extraordinary ethical
behavior that goes above and beyond the routine. Doing so sends a powerful message to
everyone that such extraordinary behavior is highly valued in the organization.
If we switch to longer-term thinking, there should be rewards for doing the right
thing. For example, most people know how to get ahead in their own organization. As
we noted in our discussion of ethical culture, large organizations have performance
management systems that provide regular feedback to employees about their per-
formance. This information is used to make important decisions about pay and
promotion. Is information about integrity incorporated into those systems? Is it
weighted heavily enough to make the point that integrity matters at least as much
as bottom-line performance if an employee wants to advance in the organization? Or
do people get highly compensated and promoted despite ethical lapses? If so, the
message is clear. If you want to get ahead around here, you have to do whatever it
takes. People who advance are likely the ones who have decided to go along to get
along or, worse yet, the ones who stepped on others along the way. On the other hand,
are those who have advanced to the highest levels known for their integrity? If so, the
organization is sending a message about the importance of integrity. Rewards may be a
limited tool for influencing specific ethical behaviors today or tomorrow, but they
should be used to set the tone for what’s expected and rewarded in the long term.
262
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

What About the Role of Discipline?
As for discipline, we all know that managers sometimes have to discipline errant
subordinates, just as responsible parents are expected to discipline unruly children. It’s
an essential part of the manager’s job to step in when an employee is headed down the
wrong path. In fact, it can be a real gift to give an employee a heads-up and the
opportunity to correct bad behavior and avoid severe negative consequences later. We
also know that discipline works. If people expect their misconduct to be detected and
punished, they’re less likely to engage in it. So if it works, why not use it? Well, it turns
out that managers are often told to avoid punishment and to rely on rewards as much as
possible because of a belief that employees will automatically react badly to punish-
ment. They’ll dislike the supervisor or engage in sabotage to retaliate. But we now
know that discipline can produce good results when it’s carried out in a particular
way—when workers perceive it as fair.
If we examine the idea that punishment should be avoided, we find that it’s based on
old psychological research that was conducted on rats and small children. It has little to
dowithadultsinworksettingswhocandistinguishdisciplinethat’sfair (i.e., punishment
that is deserved and fairly administered) from discipline that’s unfair. Have you ever
heard an adult say, “I had it coming; I deserved it”? As Dennis Levine said of his arrest
and imprisonment for insider trading, “I’ve gained an abiding respect for the fairness of
our system of justice . . . When I broke the law, I was punished. The system works.” He
also said, “My former life was destroyed because I figured the odds were a thousand to
one againstmygettingcaught.”20Ifhehadthoughthewould becaughtandpunished,the
odds would have been reversed, and he may never have cut an insider trading deal. Once
caught and punished, he acknowledged that the punishment was just.
Discipline should be administered fairly. Research evidence suggests that pun-
ishment results in more positive outcomes (e.g., the behavior improves and the
employee becomes a better corporate citizen) if the recipient perceives it to be
fair.21 These positive outcomes are linked primarily to the appropriate severity of the
punishment and employee input. The punishment should “fit the crime,” and it should
be consistent with what others have received for similar infractions. It’s also important
that you give the employee an opportunity for input—to explain his or her side of the
story. In addition, the disciplined worker is more likely to respond positively to the
punishment if you approach it in a constructive fashion and carefully explain the
reasons for the punishment. Finally, if you discipline someone, do it in private.
Punishment can be a humiliating experience, and public punishment adds insult to
injury.
Recognize the indirect effects of punishment. The punished employee should not
be the manager’s only concern. Social learning theory suggests that other workers will
be affected as well. Remember, we learn a great deal from observing the rewards and
punishments of others. But if the punishment occurs in private, how will others know
about it? Anyone who has worked in a real organization knows about the grapevine,
the communication network that flashes organizational news throughout a department
or company. Good managers are aware of the power of the grapevine and rely on it to
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
263

transmit important information. Research has discovered that when people are aware
that unethical behavior has taken place, they want the violators to be punished.22
People want to believe that their workplace is “just”—that the organization
rewards good guys and punishes bad guys. They also want to feel that they aren’t
suckers who, in a sense, are being punished for following the rules when others get
away with breaking them. This is an important reason that managers must discipline
unethical behavior when it occurs. There must be no exceptions. High-level rule
violators must be held to the same standards (or higher ones). By clearly disciplining
all rule violators, managers send an unequivocal message to the violator and all
observers that this behavior won’t be tolerated. They also support the notion that the
company is a just place to work, where the rules are enforced fairly and consistently.
Imagine how the honest employees at Enron must have felt—long before the public
implosion of the company in 2001—when two Enron energy traders in New York made
massive fraudulent energy trades and siphoned off company money into their own
personal accounts in the mid-1980s. In short, the traders had kept two sets of books and
had routinely destroyed records to obliterate any paper trail. When Enron’s board heard
of these shenanigans, CEO Ken Lay said openly at a board meeting that the two traders
“made too much money to let them go.” So the trading crooks were allowed to stay on,
until an internal investigator discovered the magnitude of the fraud and the company
tookan $85million charge toafter-taxearningstocover losses.Laycomplainedatanall-
employee meeting that he never knew about these activities. Later, a lawyer involved in a
lawsuit against the company said, “Any honest, competent management, confronted
with the conduct of Borget and Mastroeni, as revealed to Enron’s senior management in
January 1987, would have fired these gentlemen without delay.”23 It makes us wonder if
Enron’s later difficulties could have been avoided if only the executive team had
regularly disciplined the company’s rogue employees.
In his book Father, Son & Co.; My Life at IBM and Beyond (1990), Thomas
Watson Jr., the son of IBM’s founder, described his experiences in running the
company for almost 20 years at a time when IBM dominated the computer industry. He
discussed the importance of imposing swift, severe punishment for breaches of
integrity, as well as the indirect effects of punishing or not punishing. He said, “If
a manager does something unethical, he should be fired just as surely as a factory
worker. This is the wholesome use of the boss’s power.” But, as he explains in the
following excerpt, his managers didn’t always follow his advice.
On one occasion some managers in one of our plants started a chain letter
involving U.S. savings bonds. The idea was that one manager would write
to five other managers, and each of those would write to five more, who
would each send some bonds back to the first guy and write to five more,
and so on. Pretty soon they ran out of managers and got down to
employees. It ended up that the employees felt pressure to join the chain
letter and pay off the managers. I got a complaint about this and brought it
to the attention of the head of the division. I expected him to say, at a
minimum, “We’ve got to fire a couple of guys, I’ll handle it.” Instead, he
264
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

simply said, “Well, it was a mistake.” I couldn’t convince him to fire
anybody. Now, you could admire him for defending the team, but I think
there is a time when integrity should take the rudder from team loyalty. All
the same, I didn’t pursue the matter any further, and my failure to act came
back to haunt me.
Acoupleofyearslater inthat samedivision,amanagerfiredalow-level
employeewho had been stealing engineering diagrams and selling them to a
competitor. Firing him would have been fine, except that the manager
handled it in a brutal way. The employee in question had one thing in his life
that he was proud of—his commission in the U.S. Army Reserve, where he
held the rank of major. Instead of simply going to the man’s house and
telling him, “You swiped the drawings and we’re going to fire you,” the
manager picked a week when the fellow was in military camp to lower the
boom. Somehow the military authorities got involved as well, and the man
was stripped of his commission. The humiliation caused him to become
insanely angry, and for the next few years he devoted himself to making me
uncomfortable. He sent pictures of Tom Watson Jr. behind bars to his
senators and his congressman and to every justice of the Supreme Court.
And he kept harking back to that chain letter, because he knew we had
tolerated the men responsible for it. Eventually he simmered down, but the
incident really taught me a lesson. After that I simply fired managers when
they broke rules of integrity. I did it in perhaps a dozen cases, including a
couple involving senior executives. I had to overrule a lot of people each
time, who would argue that we should merely demote the man, or transfer
him, or that the business would fall apart without him. But the company was
invariably better off for the decision and the example.24
Sometimes employees are punished for trying to do the right thing. For example,
Owen Cheevers was an experienced researcher at the Bank of Montreal who wrote an
honest report expressing his concerns about the radio industry. Investment bankers at
the firm asked him to make his report more positive. When he refused to write a more
glowing report, Cheevers was fired. Obviously, such punishment sends a powerful
message to all other employees who are aware of it—go along or be fired.25
Practical Advice for Managers: Discipline
Tom Watson learned the hard way what can happen when breaches of integrity aren’t
disciplined swiftly and severely. Workers have long memories about incidents such as
the chain letter and how management handles them. They tuck that sort of information
away for later use. When the IBM employee who stole the engineering drawings was
fired in a particularly humiliating way, he was outraged. His severe and public
punishment seemed particularly unfair when compared with the way others had
been treated. And he reacted in ways that managers are told to expect from punished
employees. He was angry at the punisher and the organization.
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
265

The important point about discipline is that adults differentiate between fair and
unfair punishment. If you use punishment consistently to enforce the rules, employees
will expect to be punished when they break them. However, they expect punishment
that fits the crime and that is consistent with how others have been treated. In most
cases, if you impose discipline fairly, the problem behavior improves and the
subordinate goes on to be a productive organizational citizen.
Remember that you should be concerned about observers who pay a great deal of
attention to how rule violations are handled. When the chain letter offenders weren’t
severely disciplined, an implicit message was sent to all who were aware of the
scheme, and expectations were set up for how management would respond to future
breaches of integrity. A just organization is one that disciplines rule violations fairly
and consistently and doesn’t punish people who try to do the right thing. Workers
expect managers to discipline fairly, and they’re morally outraged when management
doesn’t do its job.
PEOPLE FOLLOW GROUP NORMS
“Everyone’s Doing It”
“Everyone’s doing it” is the refrain so frequently used to rationalize—or justify or
even encourage—unethical behavior. We’ve all heard it. From fraternity brothers who
are expected to advise their peers about the content of exams to college football
players who accept booster money, to waiters and waitresses who don’t claim all of
their tip income for tax purposes, to auditors who sign off on financial statements that
haven’t been thoroughly checked and to insider traders who share secrets about
upcoming financial deals, individuals are much more likely to engage in unethical
behavior if they’re convinced that others are doing it too. It lets them off the hook by
providing an acceptable justification and rationale for the behavior. Also, recall what
you learned about ethical awareness in Chapter 3. People are more likely to recognize
issues as being ethical ones if there is social consensus in the group that the issue raises
ethical concerns. But if, instead, everyone agrees that a particular behavior is not a
problem because “everyone is doing it,” it’s more likely that ethical concerns just
won’t come up.
Rationalizing Unethical Behavior
For some behaviors, the refrain “everyone is doing it” is used primarily to rationalize
behavior that’s guided by unethical group norms. The employee who inflates his or her
expense reports believes that it’s justified first because everyone else is doing it (and
getting away with it, too). Within the group, inflating expenses may also be explained
as a way of compensating for the extra hours spent away from home, to pay for the
drink at the bar or a movie, or to cover other expenses that aren’t deductible under the
organization’s formal travel cost reimbursement policy. These rationalizations are
often explicitly or implicitly supported by the boss, who suggests the behavior or
266
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

engages in it himself or herself. Either way, the manager sends a powerful message that
it’s okay to bend the rules, and that message can easily be generalized to other rules in
the organization.
A better way to manage the process is to state the rules clearly and then enforce
them. In other words, if it seems reasonable to reimburse a traveling employee for a
drink at the bar, a movie, or a telephone call home, then change the rules so that these
expenses can be legally reimbursed under the organization’s formal travel policy. Then
abuses of the system can be disciplined.
Pressure to Go Along
For other behaviors, the “everyone is doing it” refrain represents not just a rational-
ization but actual pressure to go along with the group norms. The argument is used to
encourage those who are reluctant. “Aw, c’mon, everybody does it!” Not going along
puts the individual in the uncomfortable spot of being perceived as some sort of goody-
goody who is highly ethical but also unlikable, and certainly not someone who can be
trusted. The result can be ostracism from the group, and most of us would rather go
along than be ostracized.26 Many individuals will go along with unethical behavior
because of their strong need to be accepted. If left to their own devices, they might very
well follow the rules. But in the group situation, they feel that they have no choice but
to comply, or at least to remain silent about what others are doing.
Practical Advice for Managers: Group Norms
So what does the notion of group norms mean for the manager? Above all, you must be
acutely aware of the power of group norms (informal standards of behavior), which
aren’t always consistent with the formal, written rules.
Group norms represent what’s really happening in the group, and you must be in
touch with this reality. Any new employee will be quickly schooled in “the way we do
things in this group” and will be expected to go along. Loyalty to the group may be the
most powerful norm and one that’s extremely difficult to counteract. If the group norms
support ethical behavior, you have no problem; but if they don’t, you face a particularly
tough situation. If the group is strong and cohesive, one approach you can use is to
identify the informal group leader and attempt to influence that individual, hoping she or
he will influence the others. It’s also important to consider the reward system. Norms
often arise to support behaviors that are implicitly rewarded. If people are doing
something, it’s usually because they find it rewarding and the system somehow
encourages it. Changes in the reward system can lead to changes in group norms.
A PROBLEMATIC GROUP NORM EXAMPLE
A classic organizational behavior
case explains how a highly productive manufacturing work group with a strong
informal leader created a problematic group norm for punching in and out at the time
clock. After the foreman leaves, all but one of the group members goes home. The one
person remaining behind punches out all of the other group members. The result is that
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
267

group members are paid for more hours than they actually work. On occasion, when a
group member is delayed in the morning, the group punches him in. But this practice is
carefully controlled, and the group has developed norms so that it is not abused.
Although the punch-out system seems to be clearly wrong, the case is complicated
because management admits that even though the group’s pay is low, their productivity
is high. What’s more, the group is highly cohesive and very willing to work hard when
necessary to fulfill last-minute orders or solve unusual production problems. The
workers also value the ability to have some control over the workday. Finally,
management has known about the practice for some time and has ignored it.
The solution to the case isn’t clear-cut. The casewriters suggested that management
might be better off leaving well enough alone. “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.” However,
this is impossible if the ethical dimensions of the case are brought into focus. Leaving it
alone implies tacit acceptance and approval of rule breaking and sends that message not
only to this work groupbut to all of the others as well. Othergroupsthat, for some reason,
can’t manage to do the same (perhaps because of less cohesion or because their
supervisor stays later) will no doubt resent the injustice. Management must also accept
some responsibility for tacitly approving this practice over a long period of time.
Remembering that people do what’s rewarded, we believe that the norm is most
likely to change via adjustments in the reward system. For example, moving to a five-
day salary (somewhat higher than their current average take-home pay) rather than
hourly pay would reward people for getting the job done rather than staying a certain
number of hours on weekdays. Group members could still be paid extra for weekend
overtime work when it’s available. If the late-arrival norm isn’t being abused, it could
be institutionalized: if someone must be late, a new rule could state that he or she must
inform someone in the work group by a certain time. As with absences, a certain
number of late arrivals would be allowed within a specified period. The informal group
leader should be involved in devising the solution through an appeal to his or her
concern for fairness to other workers in the organization.
PEOPLE FULFILL ASSIGNED ROLES
Roles are strong forces for guiding behavior, and workers are assigned roles that can
powerfully influence their behavior in ethical dilemma situations. Roles can reduce a
person’s sense of his or her individuality by focusing attention on the role and the
expectations that accompany it. It doesn’t really matter who fills the role. It’s the role
requirements that are important. This focus on the role reduces the individual’s
awareness of the self as an independent individual who is personally responsible for an
outcome. This psychological process is called deindividuation.27
So the individual acts “in role” and does what’s expected. This is fine when
behaving in role means doing the right thing. But what happens when in-role behavior
involves behaving illegally or unethically? For example, aggression is a necessary part
of the police officer role, although police officers are expected to use aggression only
under very specific circumstances. Sometimes, though, police officers step over the
ethical line; they become overly aggressive at inappropriate times and assault suspects
268
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

without cause. Several such incidents have been videotaped by bystanders in recent
years. Another important part of a police officer’s role is loyalty to other police officers
and protection of his or her peers. Police officers often travel in pairs and must rely on
each other in difficult, life-threatening situations. Loyalty, protection, and trust within
the ranks thus serve an important, positive purpose. But loyalty can also end up
supporting unethical behavior when, for example, a fellow police officer is overly
aggressive and a peer who observes the conduct doesn’t report it.
Consider this example from an old television series. Two female police detectives
were part of a stakeout intended to catch one of their fellow police officers stealing
heroin. The detectives realized they were facing a complex moral dilemma when the
officer told them he was stealing the heroin for his mother, who was dying of cancer
and in severe pain. He had clearly broken the law, and the rules clearly said that they
must turn him in. But loyalty and protection were important parts of their police role.
Their colleague had good intentions—to help his dying mother. After much discussion
and individual soul searching, they decided to protect their colleague and keep silent
about what they knew. Although we may disagree about whether they made the right
decision, the point here is that the peer protection and loyalty aspects of the police
officer role were an important part of that decision.
The Zimbardo Prison Experiment
A powerful and widely cited social psychology study illustrates the power of roles to
influence behavior.28 The researchers created a prison environment in the basement of
the psychology building at Stanford University. Twenty-four psychologically healthy
subjects (people like us) were recruited and randomly assigned to play the roles of
prisoners or guards. General rules were provided regarding how to fulfill the role, but
subjects were left free to interact within those general guidelines. With the cooperation
of the local police, the guards were actually sent out to arrest the prisoners, book them,
and transport them to their simulated cells. The prisoners were given uniforms and
were referred to by identification numbers. The guards were given comfortable
quarters and a recreation area. The guards wore uniforms and mirrored sunglasses,
and they worked standard eight-hour shifts during which they were given a great deal
of control over the prisoners (physical abuse was not allowed). With rare exceptions,
the guards enjoyed the social power and status of the guard role. Some “guards” were
exhilarated by the experience and reinforced their guard role with aggression, threats,
and insults. The “prisoners” quickly began to show dramatic signs of emotional
change, including acute anxiety, helplessness, and passivity verging on complete
servility. Some became severely distressed and physically ill.
Although the experiment was originally scheduled to last two weeks, it was halted
after only six days due to concern about the prisoners’ well-being. “At the end of only
six days . . . it was no longer apparent to most of the subjects (or to us) where reality
ended and their roles began. The majority had indeed become prisoners or guards, no
longer able to clearly differentiate between role playing and the real self. There were
dramatic changes in virtually every aspect of their behavior, thinking, and feeling.”29
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
269

After the experiment ended, the guards expressed a combination of excitement
and dismay at the darker side of themselves that had emerged. The simulated situation
had become real very quickly, and both sides had readily assumed the roles expected of
them as members of their respective groups (prisoner or guard). This occurred despite
the other roles these individuals may have played in their “normal” lives just days
before. Finally, when individuals attempted to deviate from the role behavior, the
deviation was quickly suppressed by pressure to conform as expressed by other group
members. The experimental results were used to support the “situational” explanation
for prison behavior. In other words, perfectly normal people behaved cruelly and
aggressively when placed in a role where these behaviors were either expected or
allowed.
The Zimbardo experiment can help us better understand the 2004 Abu Ghraib
prison scandal in Iraq. At Abu Ghraib, beginning in 2003, poorly trained American
military police officers (MPs) and civilian contractors tortured Iraqi captives in what
had ironically been one of Saddam Hussein’s most infamous prisons. The brutal
torture ranged from physical violence to verbal, psychological, and sexual abuse. The
American public became incensed when photographs of the abuse showed up on the
Internet thanks to one young military policeman, Joseph Darby. The most famous
photos include one of a supervisor giving a thumbs-up sign while standing next to a
pyramid of hooded, naked Iraqis. Another shows female Private Lyndie England
leading a naked Iraqi around on a leash. According to the Red Cross, most of the
prisoners at Abu Ghraib had committed no crime. They had just managed to be in the
wrong place at the wrong time.
So what drove these Americans, men and women, to engage in such horrific
behavior and to laugh at the humiliation of other human beings? What happened at
Abu Ghraib was complex and likely caused by many factors. But at least some of them
seem hauntingly reminiscent of the Zimbardo experiment. The Abu Ghraib guards
quickly donned the role of prison police, and they relished the power over prisoners
that accompanied the role. This in-role behavior was likely enhanced further by
intelligence officers’ encouragement to use more aggressive techniques to soften up
the prisoners for interrogation and by praise when such techniques “worked.”30
Roles at Work
But prisons aren’t your average work setting. How do the results of this experiment
apply to work organizations? People enter work organizations in a state of “role
readiness.”31 In this state, they’re likely to engage in behaviors that are consistent with
their organizationally prescribed role, even if those behaviors violate other values they
hold (another example of multiple ethical selves). A particularly interesting example is
provided by corporate professionals such as lawyers, physicians, and accountants.
Professionals are thought to adhere most closely to their professional roles. In fact, this
is part of the definition of a professional.
Although there’s little research evidence, much anecdotal evidence suggests that
many corporate physicians, lawyers, and accountants identify more closely with their
270
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

organizational role than with their professional role. For example, when asbestos was
still being used in building insulation, Johns Manville medical personnel conformed to
corporate policy and remained silent about asbestos exposure that was adversely
affecting employees’ health, despite the known medical dangers.32 In their dual roles
of physician and organizational member, the latter took precedence. The same can be
said of auditors who are supposed to adhere to the ethical guidelines of their
professional organization, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
(AICPA). They are supposed to protect the public interest and report any financial
irregularities they find. As we have learned from auditing scandals, however, the
corporate organizational role seems to take over for many.
Conﬂicting Roles Can Lead to Unethical Behavior
In their jobs, people are sometimes expected to play different roles that may make
competing demands on them, causing internal conflict and stress that may be resolved
via unethical behavior such as lying. For example, professional nurses are taught that
patient education and patient advocacy are important aspects of the nursing role. Yet
these nursing role expectations may conflict with physicians’ orders, or they may be
difficult to implement because of time pressures and paperwork that take nurses away
from patients. In a research study, nurses responded to various scenarios, some of
which placed them in role-conflict situations.33 The nurses who were in role-conflict
situations said they would be more likely to lie by misreporting their behavior on the
patient’s chart.
Managers must be aware that conflicting role demands can pressure workers to be
dishonest. The best way to avoid this type of dishonesty is to minimize conflicting role
demands. Ask your staff to analyze their jobs and to identify sources of conflict that
could cause them to feel they have to lie to you or someone else in order to successfully
accomplish some aspect of their job. Then, see if the job can be redesigned to minimize
these conflicts.
Roles Can Also Support Ethical Behavior
Roles can also work to support ethical behavior. For example, whistleblowing
(reporting the misconduct of others) is sometimes prescribed for individuals in certain
jobs. This makes a difficult behavior easier to carry out. A survey of internal auditors
found that whistleblowing was more likely when the auditors saw reporting as a
prescribed job requirement.34 Managers should consider the extent to which organi-
zational roles encourage either ethical or unethical behavior. Obviously, those that
support and encourage unethical behavior should be changed. Those that encourage
ethical behavior (e.g., whistleblowing) should be bolstered. For example, research has
found that although reporting a peer’s misconduct is a distasteful and difficult act,
people are more likely to report a peer if doing so is explicitly made a part of their role
via an honor code or code of conduct.35 In other words, if their role requires them to
report misconduct when they see it, they’re more likely to do so. Many colleges and
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
271

universities have honor codes that require students to report any cheating they observe.
The requirement makes it easier for the reporter because the behavior becomes a duty,
a role responsibility rather than a voluntary ethical act.
Practical Advice for Managers: Roles
The key concept for managers to understand is that roles influence behavior. Think
about the roles people play in your department or organization. What are the
implications of their role expectations for ethical and unethical behavior? Do
some individuals experience conflicts between their roles? For example, are pro-
fessionals torn between their organizational and professional roles? Or do employees
experience conflicts within a role—for example, nurses, who are often required to
fulfill the conflicting roles of patient advocate and subordinate to the physician?
Again, the individuals who hold the jobs are probably the best source of information
about their role expectations and potential conflicts. Once you’ve analyzed roles and
role conflicts, determine whether jobs need to be altered to reduce conflict. If change
isn’t possible, at least you can anticipate the problems that are likely to arise for people
in these jobs.
OBEDIENCE TO AUTHORITY: PEOPLE DO
WHAT THEY’RE TOLD
In a 60 Minutes segment, Americans working for a Japanese company in the United
States reported that their supervisor told them to unpack machine tools manufactured
in and shipped from Japan, remove the “Manufactured in Japan” label, change a few
things, replace the label with a “Manufactured in the U.S.” label, and repack the
machine tools for shipping. These products were then shipped as if they had been
manufactured in the United States to, of all places, the American military (where the
U.S. manufacture of machine tools was a requirement). An American accountant at the
firm finally blew the whistle, but when the workers who had been doing the unpacking
and repacking were asked why they did it, they replied that they were doing what their
supervisor had told them to do. One of the men who had attempted to protest was told
that he could find another job if he didn’t like it, so he continued doing what he was
told to do.
This is just one of many examples we could cite of workers at all levels doing what
they’re told by managers. Participants in the famous 1972 Watergate break-in referred
to their unquestioning obedience to superior orders in testimony before the Senate
investigating committee, as did Nazi SS officers in war crimes trials and participants in
the Iran-Contra affair.36 Organizations (corporate, political, or military) are authority
structures whose members accept the idea that, to be members in good standing, they
must give up a certain amount of independence and autonomy. They expect that
managers will tell them what to do. That’s the managerial role. They also assume that
they should do what’s expected of them. That’s the subordinate role. These assump-
tions and expectations allow organizations to avoid chaos and function in an orderly
272
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

way. In addition, individuals often feel that they owe the organization and their
manager their loyalty, thus further reinforcing the pressure to comply.
The Milgram Experiments
Probably the most famous social psychological studies of all time were conducted by
Stanley Milgram in the 1960s. They provide uncomfortable insights into how normal
adults behave in authority situations.37 Most adults will carry out the authority figure’s
orders even if these orders are contrary to their personal beliefs about what’s right and
will lead to harming other human beings.
In a number of laboratory experiments, Milgram paid subjects recruited from the
New Haven, Connecticut area to participate in a one-hour study on the effects of
punishment on learning. The subject was asked to play “teacher” in a learning experi-
ment; the “learner,” unbeknownst to the teacher/subject, was a member of the research
team (known in research parlance as a “confederate”). The learner was strapped into a
chair with an electrode attached to his or her wrist. The teacher/subject was seated at a
shock generator and was told to pose questions to the learner. Each time the learner
provided an incorrect response to a question, the teacher/subject was told to turn a dial to
administer an increasingly severe shock—though in fact no shocks were actually given.
As the apparent “shocks” intensified, the learner verbally expressed scripted responses
representing increasing discomfort, finally screaming and then going silent. During the
experiments, many teacher/subjects would question the experimenter and express the
desire tostop.Theexperimenter,dressedinawhitelab coat,would providethe following
scripted response, “Although the shocks may be painful, there is no permanent tissue
damage, so please go on.” If the teacher/subject continued to resist, the experimenter
would respond with three successive prods: “The experiment requires that you con-
tinue”; “It is absolutely essential that you continue”; “You have no choice, you must go
on.” If the teacher continued to resist, the experiment was finally terminated.
To the surprise of Milgram and other observers, about 60 percent of the teacher/
subjects in these experiments continued to the end, obeying the authority figure’s
instructions despite the conflict they felt and expressed. It’s not that they felt okay
about what they were doing. In fact, their emotional appeals to the experimenter
suggested that they very much wanted to stop. But most of them didn’t. They may have
felt that refusing to continue would challenge the experimenter’s authority, affect the
legitimacy of the experiment, and cause embarrassment for themselves.38 They acted
as if they were constrained to do as they were told by the authority figure, rather than as
independent adults who could end the experiment at any time. We should also note that
teacher/subjects who were at the principled level of cognitive moral development (see
Chapter 3) were more likely to challenge the experimenter’s authority as well as more
likely to stop giving the electric shocks. So, although some participants did resist the
authority figure’s commands to continue, most of them did not.
Do you think that people today are different somehow—that they would be less
susceptible to authority figure dictates? Jerry Burger, a psychology professor at Santa
Clara University carried out a partial replication of the original Milgram experiment
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
273

and published the results in 2009.39 Much like Milgram had done, he recruited people
from the community. The recruitment process screened out individuals who might
have been familiar with the original Milgram experiments or whose screening
suggested that they might have a negative reaction to participating. In its design,
the study closely followed the original. The main difference was that, in keeping with
modern-day ethics rules about protecting human subjects in research, the experiment
was stopped when the teacher/subject thought she or he had administered a 150-volt
shock (rather than continuing all the way to 450 volts, as in the original version). In the
original experiment, 150 volts appeared to be a turning point. Most subjects who
passed that point continued all the way up the shock generator. In the replication,
subjects were also told multiple times that they could leave at any time and keep the
$50 they were being paid. Once the experiment was completed, the learner immedi-
ately entered the room and told the teacher/subject that he or she was fine. In addition,
the experimenter was a trained clinical psychologist who stopped the experiment
immediately at any sign of serious stress. Even with all of these changes, the results
were quite similar to those Milgram found more than 40 years ago. About two-thirds of
the teacher/subjects continued to deliver shocks up to 150 volts.
No matter what the results, this is still an experiment that took place in a behavioral
laboratory. Do the findings apply in the real world? Apparently, yes. A few years ago,
ABC TV showcased a horrifying “real-world” version of the Milgram experiment. A
person posing as a police officer telephoned a McDonald’s in 2004 and told the assistant
manager (named Donna Summers) that a young woman employee (whom he described)
had stolen a purse and should be brought into the office. He also claimed that he had
Summers’s boss on another phone line. Once the employee was in the office, the caller
instructed the manager to take the employee’s cell phone and car keys and have her
remove her clothes and do jumping jacks in the nude. Having done so, the manager said
that she needed to get back to the busy restaurant so the caller suggested that she tap her
middle-aged fiance, Walter Nix, to watch the employee. Nix followed further phone
instructions from the alleged police officer and eventually sexually abused the young
womanemployee.The entireevent wasrecordedonthe restaurant’s surveillancecamera,
and much of it was broadcast in the ABC special report. Nix was sentenced to several
years in prison for sexual assault. The caller was caught when police discovered that
he had used a telephone card bought at a Wal-Mart. They identified the man using
Wal-Mart’s surveillance cameras (he was a corrections officer and the married father
of five!) and he was arrested—but surprisingly, not convicted. Summers was fired and
received probation. The victim also brought a civil suit against McDonald’s, which she
woninlate2008(thecasewasappealedandsettled).Wesharethisstorywithyou because
it provides a too real (some might say surreal) example of obedience to authority at two
levels. First, the young woman employee obeyed her boss’s instruction to hand over her
keys, cell phone, and clothes. It didn’t occur to her to resist these extraordinary requests,
becausetheywerecomingfromanadult authorityfigure,herboss.Evenmoreoutrageous
is the willingness of Summers and Nix to harm another person simply because someone
posingas a police officer told them todoso. In the broadcast interview, Summers claimed
that she believed he was a police officer and that she was doing the right thing.
274
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Obedience to Authority at Work
The obedient behavior seen in the Milgram experiments and their modern counterparts
is similar to behavior observed again and again in work organizations. The notion of
legitimate authority is an accepted tenet of organizational life. In 1968, American
military men massacred hundreds of innocent civilians at My Lai, Vietnam. They
didn’t ask questions. They did what they were told to do despite the military’s efforts
in training soldiers to believe that it is their duty to disobey unjust authority.
More recently, Lyndie England, who was found guilty of prisoner abuse at Abu
Ghraib prison in Iraq, claimed that she and others were following orders of authorities
above her. In addition, such behavior is not limited to organizations we think of as
authoritarian such as the military. Individuals who testified to the U.S. Congress about
price-fixing practices in the electrical industry were asked why they didn’t report these
practices to higher authorities. They responded that they felt they couldn’t because
they reported to a prescribed superior only.40 Roger Boisjoly, who questioned
the safety of the O-rings and attempted to convince managers to cancel the launch
of the space shuttle Challenger, never went outside the chain of command at his
company to protest.41 So, as current or future work organization members, we
encourage you to stop and think hard when an authority figure asks you to do
something that could harm another person or seems wrong in some other way. Think
for yourself—and as difficult as it might seem at the time, say no.
Practical Advice for Managers: Obedience to Authority
Managers must also realize the power they hold as authority figures in work
organizations. Old concepts die hard. And even today in team-oriented organizations,
most people will do as they’re told. Authority figures therefore must exhibit ethical
behavior, and they must send powerful signals that high ethical standards are expected
of everyone and that employees are expected to question authority figures if they
believe they are being asked to do something that is wrong. This message should begin
at the top of the organization and work its way down through every level. Moreover,
when unethical behavior is uncovered, the investigation must consider the explicit or
implicit messages being sent by authority figures. Don’t assume that the individual
acted alone and without influence. Our tendency is to try to isolate the problem, find
the one “culprit” (bad apple), and get on with our lives. But the culprit may have been
explicitly or implicitly encouraged by a superior, and this possibility should be
investigated and taken into account.
RESPONSIBILITY IS DIFFUSED IN ORGANIZATIONS
For a relationship to exist between what people think is right and what they do, they
must feel responsible for the consequences of their actions.42 Therefore the sense of
personal responsibility is a prerequisite for moral action. If you yourself decided to
market a certain product that might hurt small children or the environment, you would
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
275

be much more likely to seriously consider the moral implications of the decision. But
in organizations, the individual often becomes disconnected from the consequences of
his or her actions and doesn’t feel personally responsible for them. Responsibility
becomes diffused. No individual feels the need to take responsibility, so in the end, no
one does; unethical behavior is then more likely.
For at least four reasons, individuals may not feel personally responsible for their
organizational actions. Responsibility is diffused because it is taken away, shared with
others in decision-making groups, obscured by the organizational hierarchy, or diluted
by psychological distance to potential victims.
“Don’t Worry—We’re Taking Care of Everything”
At work, individuals are often encouraged to turn responsibility over to those at higher
levels. This behavior is related to our earlier discussion of obedience to authority. But
in this case, the individual is simply told not to worry—that the problem or decision is
someone else’s responsibility. For example, an individual who expresses concern
about a safety or environmental problem may be told, “We appreciate your concern,
but you don’t need to worry about it. We’re taking care of everything.” This type of
response absolves the subordinate of feelings of responsibility for the consequences of
the organization’s action. Someone, particularly someone at a higher level, has taken
the responsibility.
Even if the superiors are highly responsible and highly ethical, however, the act of
absolving subordinates of responsibility may have significant implications for their
subsequent ethical behavior. Because of the feeling that they must do as they’re told by
authority figures, most people feel they have no choice but to follow superiors’ orders.
In this case, the orders are to hand over responsibility for decision making, and the
individual feels that she or he has no choice but to give it up. If this sort of response
becomes routine, individuals will come to believe that it isn’t their responsibility to be
on the lookout for ethical violations, and they may stop bringing potential problems to
the attention of superiors.
Diffusing Responsibility in Groups
Because important organizational decisions are often made in groups, responsibility
for the decision becomes diffused among all group members. No single individual
feels responsible. Diffusion of responsibility in groups is used to explain the results of
classic research on the likelihood that bystanders will help a seizure victim.43 This
research suggests that when others are present, responsibility is diffused among all of
the bystanders and individuals are less likely to help.
Diffusion of responsibility also operates in group decision making through a
process known as groupthink,44 which has been used to explain a number of historical
group decision-making disasters such as the Bay of Pigs fiasco in John F. Kennedy’s
presidential administration. Groupthink can occur in cohesive groups whose members
are committed to the group and have a strong desire to remain group members. A
276
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

major characteristic of groupthink is individual group members’ tendency to conform
to the decision they think most of the group’s members prefer. Individual group
members may find it difficult to express disagreement and tend to censor themselves
even if they disagree with the group decision.
One important symptom of groupthink is the group’s “illusion of morality,” the
sense that the group simply wouldn’t do anything wrong. In a classic instructional film
on groupthink, a group of managers makes a decision to market a new drug despite
disturbing evidence that it may cause dangerous side effects. The illusion of morality
is expressed by a group member who states that the company has a well-earned good
reputation and would never do anything to hurt its customers.
Clearly, decisions with ethical overtones that are made in a group setting require
special attention. The manager must make sure that the ethical implications are
identified and carefully analyzed. The group leader should be careful not to state his or
her preference up front, because group members will tend to censor their own beliefs
to conform to those of the leader. Other techniques can be used to make sure that
alternative viewpoints are aired. For example, group members can be asked to provide
anonymous criticism of the decision being considered. Computer-based group deci-
sion support systems often provide such a feature. An individual can be appointed to
the role of devil’s advocate, or multiple individuals can be appointed to voice multiple
alternative perspectives. It’s easier for these individuals to take an alternative stance
when it’s their role to do so. Another alternative is to open the group to outside
stakeholders who would come in to present their concerns and perspectives.
Diffusing Responsibility by Dividing Responsibility
Responsibility in organizations is often so divided that individuals see themselves as
only a small cog in a large machine. Or they simply don’t have vital information that
would be required to make a good decision. Division of responsibility is essential for
the kind of specialization required in modern jobs. But this means that organizational
members often do their jobs with blinders on; they see only what’s directly ahead of
them, and no one sees (or takes responsibility for) the whole picture.
Scott Peck is a psychiatrist and author of the best-selling book, The Road Less
Traveled (1978).45 He was part of a group dispatched to study the 1968 My Lai
massacre in South Vietnam. At My Lai, American troops slaughtered a village of
unarmed women, children, and elderly men. The killing took all morning, and only
one person, an observant helicopter pilot, tried to stop it. Peck’s interviews with
military people revealed a bureaucratic organizational structure that allowed individ-
uals to see only their own narrow part of the problem, thereby allowing them to avoid
feelings of responsibility. When Peck wandered the halls of the Pentagon, questioning
those involved in directing the manufacture of napalm and its transportation to
Vietnam as bombs, the replies he received were something like the following:
“We appreciate your problem and your concerns, but we are not the department
you want. We are in ordnance. We supply the weapons, but we don’t determine how
they’re used.” Down the hall, another group suggested that the broad issues were also
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
277

beyond their purview. “We simply determine how the war will be conducted—not
whether it will be conducted.”46 Peck termed this process “the fragmentation of
conscience.” “Any group will remain inevitably potentially conscienceless and evil
until such time as each and every individual holds himself or herself directly
responsible for the behavior of the whole group—the organism of which he or she
is a part. We have not yet begun to arrive at that point.”47
Research has documented the process of diffusing responsibility. In a variation on
the Milgram obedience-to-authority experiments discussed earlier, diffusion of
responsibility was simulated by dividing the original teacher’s role between two
people, a “transmitter” and an “executant.” The transmitter would inform the
executant when a shock had to be administered and at what level. The experiment
found that transmitters were significantly more likely to obey than executants.48 One
can imagine that it was easier for the transmitter to rationalize his or her actions. “I
didn’t actually do the harm—someone else did.” This rationalization should become
easier and easier, the greater the distance between the individual decision maker and
the actual outcome.
Diffusion of responsibility also occurs at a broader system level. Think about
September 11, 2001, and the discussions about whether the government should have
been able to “connect the dots” and anticipate the terrorist attacks. Different people in
different government agencies had extremely relevant information (about specific
terrorists, their activities in the United States such as flight training, and plans to fly
planes into other key structures such as the Eiffel Tower). But these agencies were not
set up to communicate with each other on a regular basis. In fact, some of them (the
CIA and FBI) were explicitly designed to operate independently because of concerns
about the power of an integrated agency. So the design of an organization (and
decisions about who communicates with whom) influences the nature of information
individuals receive in organizations and whether they can be held responsible.
Similarly, many individuals at multiple financial industry organizations contributed
to the recent financial crisis. Realtors sold houses to people who couldn’t afford them.
Mortgage lenders created risky loans for these buyers. Investment bankers securitized
those loans. Ratings agencies scored the securities highly based upon past performance.
No one stepped back to consider that the system of continuously increasing real estate
prices was unsustainable and would eventually self-correct, if not crash. The responsi-
bility was widely diffused. The actions of single individuals did not create the crisis, but
the combined actions of many did. Therefore it is important to consider how we can get
individuals to think more broadly about the potential consequences of their individual
actions when combined with the actions of others.
Diffusing Responsibility by Creating
Psychological Distance
Responsibility can also be diffused because of the psychological distance between the
decision maker and potential victims.49 When potential victims are psychologically
distant or out of sight, it’s more difficult to see oneself as responsible for any negative
278
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

outcomes. This principle was exemplified in further variations on the studies of
obedience to authority; in those studies, Milgram varied the closeness of the learner
“victim” to the teacher.50 For example, when the learner was placed in the same room
with the teacher, the level of obedience dropped more than 20 percent (to 40 percent).
In another variation, when the teacher was asked to physically force the learner’s hand
onto the shock plate, the obedience level dropped another 10 percent. In these
situations, as psychological distance decreased, the teacher felt personal responsibility
more strongly and was less likely to comply with the authority figure’s demands to
harm the learner.
In yet another variation on the obedience experiments, Milgram posed as an ordinary
man—not as a scientist in a white lab coat. When Milgram, dressed like an ordinary man,
conducted the experiments, obedience by the subjects dropped from 60 percent to
20 percent. The influence of a uniform (like a lab coat) on obedience is startling.
This research suggests that personal responsibility for the outcomes of our
organizational decisions will be less clear in situations where the potential harm is
far removed. For example, when the plant is not in our community, but in Mexico or
somewhere in Asia, potential negative consequences are more distant; we may feel
less personal responsibility, and we may be more willing to make decisions that would
harm other people. Similarly, when we see a decision as someone else’s responsibility
(not my job), we are more likely to go along with decisions that harm others.
Practical Advice for Managers: Personal Responsibility
People are much more likely to act ethically if they perceive themselves as personally
responsible for the outcomes of their decisions and actions. That means they also need to
have the relevant information. As a manager, you should make individual responsibility
a highly salient issue for yourself and others. Spell out the responsibilities associated
withspecificpositions,andholdindividualstothoseexpectations.When aworkerbrings
upan ethical concern,don’t take it completely off his or herhands. Anddon’t saythat it’s
someone else’s responsibility. If it becomes necessary to do so, be sure to keep the
concerned individual informed of the progress and outcome of the decision.
When it comes to groups, make it clear that every group member will be held
personally responsible for the outcome of group decisions. Ask groups to present
minority reports or recommendations so that a communication mechanism exists for
those who don’t agree with the group. Appoint a devil’s advocate or multiple
advocates to question the assumptions of the group and the group’s decision.
Don’t forget to think about the design of your organization. How is the work
divided? Does the division of labor contribute to a diffusion of responsibility by
keeping people in the dark about relevant facts? Does the organizational structure
make people feel like they’re just cogs in a bigger wheel? Encourage information and
responsibility sharing across bureaucratic divides.
The current movement to decrease levels in the organizational hierarchy may have
a positive side benefit. People find that they have to communicate more laterally—
across the organization. Also, with fewer levels, it should become more difficult for
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
279

organizational members to rationalize that higher-ups were responsible. Finally,
personal visits to geographically distant work sites and personal contact with
customers should decrease psychological distance and increase the manager’s feeling
of responsibility for the outcomes of any decisions or actions that impact people in
these locations.
CONCLUSION
You now have some important management concepts in your toolbox that can be
applied to the management of ethical and unethical conduct at whatever organizational
level you find yourself. The remaining challenge is to ask yourself questions that will
help you determine whether you are an ethical leader who creates a work environment
that supports doing the right thing and discourages unethical conduct.
Am I Walking My Ethical Talk?
A common phrase used by today’s managers is “walking the talk.” If your intention is
to be an ethical leader, here are some questions to ask yourself to see if you’re walking
your ethical talk.
1. Do I talk about the ethical implications of decisions with the people who report
to me as well as with the job candidates I’m interested in hiring? With my
peers? With my manager?
2. Have I made it clear to the people who report to me that I don’t want to be
protected from bad news? Do they understand that they can tell me anything
without fear of retribution? Do my reports come to me with ethical concerns?
3. Do I provide guidance on ethical decision making, and have I participated in the
ethics training of those who report to me?
4. When evaluating the performance of my staff, do I value ethical goals at least as
highly as performance and quality goals? Do I focus on the means as well as the
ends in decision making and performance appraisals?
5. Do I reward ethical conduct and discipline unethical conduct?
6. Do I require my people to take responsibility for their decisions?
7. Do I support employees who challenge unjust authority?
8. What are the informal norms in my department? If my employees were asked to
list the “rules” of working for me, what would they say? Are any of these
problematic if ethical conduct is the goal?
9. Do my direct reports know I care about them and will be there for them in good
times and bad?
10. If I were to die tomorrow, would the people who report to me say that I had
integrity? How would my peers describe me? And what would my manager
say?
280
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

The answers to these questions should form a sound beginning for understanding
and managing ethical behavior in your work group and within the broader ethical
culture.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
For the following questions, if you don’t have work experience, interview someone
who does and ask them these questions. Otherwise, ask them of yourself.
1.
Have you ever been in a situation—especially a work situation—where the norms
supported a particular behavior, ethical or unethical, that you felt pressured to go
along with? Explain.
2.
Have you ever been in a situation where the rewards explicitly or implicitly
supported unethical conduct? Explain.
3.
Can you think of situations in which unethical behavior was dealt with appro-
priately (punished justly) or inappropriately? What were the reactions of others in
the organization?
4.
What do you think would be appropriate punishment for those found guilty of
assault or indecent exposure in the Tailhook situation? Why?
5.
Have you ever felt obligated to do something you felt was wrong because a person
in a position of authority told you to do it?
6.
Think about how you might design work to maximize workers’ taking respon-
sibility for the consequences of their actions.
7.
Evaluate yourself or a manager you know using the “do you walk your talk?”
questions above.
CASE
SEARS, ROEBUCK, AND CO.: THE AUTO CENTER SCANDAL
Sears, Roebuck, and Co. began in the late 1800s as a mail-order company that sold
farm supplies and other consumer items. Its first retail store opened in the mid-1920s.
Responding to changes in American society, such as the move from farms to factories
and the presence of the automobile in many homes, hundreds of retail stores opened
over the years. The company expanded rapidly, and eventually it diversified to include
other businesses: insurance (Allstate Insurance), real estate (Coldwell Banker),
securities (Dean Witter Reynolds), and credit cards (Discover). Each of these other
businesses became its own division, in addition to the merchandising group that
included retail stores, appliances, and auto service centers. By the early 1990s, the
company was reporting revenues and earnings in the billions of dollars.51
Despite its long history of high earnings and its penetration into the U.S. market,
the Sears retail business began to experience serious financial difficulties in the 1980s.
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
281

Discount retailers such as Wal-Mart were pulling ahead in market share, leaving Sears
lagging. Sears responded by adding non-Sears name brands and an “everyday low
price” policy. But despite these efforts, in 1990 Sears reported a 40 percent decline in
earnings, and its merchandising group dropped a whopping 60 percent! Cost-cutting
measures were planned, including the elimination of jobs and a focus on profits at
every level.52
In 1991, Sears unveiled a productivity incentive plan to increase profits in its auto
centers nationwide. Auto mechanics had traditionally been paid an hourly wage and
were expected to meet production quotas. In 1991, the compensation plan was
changed to include a commission component. Mechanics were paid a base salary
plus a fixed dollar amount for meeting hourly production quotas. Auto service advisors
(the counter people who take orders, consult with mechanics, and advise customers)
had traditionally been paid a salary. To increase sales, however, commissions and
product-specific sales quotas were introduced for them as well. For example, a service
advisor might be given the goal of selling a certain number of front-end alignments or
brake repairs during each shift.53
In June 1992, the California Department of Consumer Affairs accused Sears,
Roebuck, and Co. of violating the state’s Auto Repair Act and sought to revoke the
licenses of all Sears auto centers in California. The allegation resulted from an
increasing number of consumer complaints and an undercover investigation of brake
repairs. Other states quickly followed suit. Essentially, the charges alleged that Sears
Auto Centers had been systematically misleading customers and charging them for
unnecessary repairs. The California investigation attributed the problems to Sears
Auto Centers’ compensation system.54
In response to the charges, Sears CEO and Chairman Edward A. Brennan called a
news conference to deny that any fraud had occurred, and he defended Sears’ focus on
preventive maintenance for older cars. He admitted to isolated errors, accepted
personal responsibility for creating an environment where “mistakes” had occurred,
and outlined the actions the company planned to take to resolve the issue. These
included
& Eliminating the incentive compensation program for service advisors
& Substituting commissions based on customer satisfaction
& Eliminating sales quotas for specific parts and repairs
& Substituting sales volume quotas
According to Brennan, “We have to have some way to measure perform-
ance.”55 Sears also introduced “shopping audits” of its auto centers, during which
employees would pose as customers, and Brennan published a letter of explanation
to the company’s customers in the Wall Street Journal and USA Today on June 25,
1992.
Note that the compensation system for mechanics, based on the number of tasks
performed and parts replaced, was maintained. In the summer of 1992, Chuck Fabbri,
282
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

a Sears mechanic from California, sent a letter about Sears’s wage policy for mechanics
to U.S. Senator Richard Bryan. Fabbri said:
It is my understanding that Sears is attempting to convince your committee
that all inspections in their auto centers are now performed by employees
who are paid hourly and not on commission. This is not the case. The truth
is that the majority of employees performing inspections are still on
commission . . .
The Service Advisors . . . sell the repair work to the customer . . .
The repairs that they sell are not only based on their inspections, but to a
larger degree based on the recommendations of mechanics who are on
commission . . .
On January 1, 1991, the mechanics, installers and tire changers had
their hourly wages cut to what Sears termed a fixed dollar amount, or FDA
per hour which varied depending on the classification. At present the
mechanic’s FDA amount is $3.25 which, based on current Sears minimum
production quotas, is 17% of my earnings. What this means is that for
every hour of work, as defined by Sears, that I complete, I receive $3.25
plus my hourly base pay. If I do two hours worth of work in one hour I
receive an additional $3.25 therefore increasing my earnings.
Sears calls this type of compensation incentive pay or piecework;
however, a rose by any other name is still a rose. This is commission plain
and simple. The faster I get the work done the more money I make, and as
intended, Sears’ profits increase. It is therefore obvious to increase his
earnings, a mechanic might cut corners on, or eliminate altogether,
procedures required to complete the repair correction. In addition to
this, since the mechanic often inspects or performs the diagnosis, he has
the ideal opportunity to oversell or recommend more repair work than is
needed. This would be especially tempting if it has been a slow day or
week. In part greed may create this less than ethical situation, but high
pressure to meet quotas by Sears’ management also presents a significant
contribution. I have recently been threatened with termination if my
production didn’t at least equal Sears’ minimum quotas. I might add
that prior to this new wage policy, management had only positive
responses to my production, and my record proves this. . . .
There is no doubt in my mind that before their auto center employees
were put on commission Sears enjoyed the trust of its customers. Today
presents a different story. The solution is obvious not only for Sears, but
for the industry.56
Sears agreed to a multimillion-dollar settlement with the state of California and
the 41 other states that had filed similar charges. The company was placed on three-
year probation in California. It also settled a number of consumer class-action suits. In
July 1992, the U.S. Congress held hearings on fraud in the auto repair industry.
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
283

Case Questions
1.
Identify the ethical issues involved in the case from a consequentialist and
deontological perspective (refer to Chapter 2).
2.
Identify the management issues involved in the case. For example, think about
the case in terms of multiple ethical selves, norms, reward systems, diffusion of
responsibility, obedience to authority. What factors contributed the most to the
alleged unethical conduct on the part of service advisors and mechanics?
3.
How would you evaluate Sears’s response to the allegations and the changes the
company made? Has Sears resolved its problem? Why or why not?
4.
What do you think is the impact of the scandal on Sears’s reputation for quality
and service?
5.
Respond to Brennan’s comment, “We have to have some way to measure
performance.” What can management do to prevent employees from oversell-
ing? Propose a management plan (including a compensation system) that allows
management to measure performance and encourages auto center employees to
behave ethically. Be specific.
6.
Should anyone be disciplined? If so, who, and when? What should the discipline
be?
7.
Think more generally about Sears management’s response to the firm’s financial
problems. How else could they have increased auto center sales without
providing incentives to employees to sell specific products?
SHORT CASE
You’ve recently been promoted into the position of marketing manager in the
communications division of your company. Your new job involves managing a staff
and creating the publications and marketing materials for insurance sales professionals
in three regions.
You have met the directors of the three regional sales forces before, and now
you ask each one for a meeting to discuss in depth how your team can best meet their
needs. Two of the sales directors were very cordial, and each explained what the
technical demands of their areas are and how your department can best meet their
needs.
The long-term impact of the scandal is unclear. Sears has now sold off its
securities firm, the Discover card, most of its real estate and mortgage business, and
20 percent of Allstate Insurance. At the end of 1992, auto center sales lagged behind
prior levels.57 Also in 1992, Business Week reported that employees in other areas of
Sears’s business, such as insurance and appliance sales, were feeling the same kinds of
pressures from sales quotas.58
284
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

However, duri ng your meeti ng with Bill—t he sales direct or of the third region and
one of your firm’ s bigge st moneymakers— he lays down the law. He says that his area
is the largest of the thr ee regions, and it produc es sign ifica ntly more revenue for your
company than the o ther two regions combine d. “You and your peopl e need to know
that when I say, ‘Jump,’ ” he says, “they need to ask, ‘How high? ’”
In return, he says, he’ll recomm end you and your people for every award the
company has to o ffer. In addi tion, he says he’ll pers onally give you a moneta ry bonus,
based on your tea m’s performanc e, at the end of the year. Altho ugh you have never
heard of a manager giving someone a bonus out of his own pocket, you suspect that
your company would frown on such a prac tice.
Case Questions
1. 
What are the ethica l issues in this case?
2. 
What are som e reas ons the deci sion maker in this case might be inclined to go
along? Not go alon g?
3. 
If you were the decisi on maker, how would you handle the situatio n?
4. 
Would you report the conversation to your manager ? Why or why not?
NOTES
1. 
B. Toffler, Tough Choices (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1986).
2. 
R. A. Barrett, Culture and Conduct: An Excursion in Anthropology (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1986).
3.
E. Thomas and A. Murr, “The Gambler Who Blew It All,” Newsweek, February 4, 2002, 18–24.
4.
Ibid.
5. 
J. Nichols, “Enron: What Dick Cheney Knew,” The Nation, April 15, 2002, 14–16, at http://www
.thenation.com/article/enron-what-dick-cheney-knew.
6.
A. Sloan, “Lay’s a Victim? Not a Chance,” Newsweek, July 19, 2004, 50.
7.
R. Lederer, “Take the Money Enron,” Across the Board, November–December 2003, 9.
8.
A. B. Gesalman, “Cliff Was Climbing the Walls,” Newsweek, February 4, 2002, 24.
9.
D. B. Levine, “The Inside Story of an Inside Trader,” Fortune, May 21, 1990, 80–89.
10.
E. E. Umphress, A. Barsky, and K. See, “Be Careful What You Wish For: Goal Setting, Procedural
Justice, and Ethical Behavior at Work,” Paper presented at the Academy of Management meeting,
Honolulu, Hawaii, 2005.
11.
D. Knight, C. C. Durham, and E. A. Locke, “The Relationship of Team Goals, Incentives, and Efficacy
to Strategic Risk, Tactical Implementation, and Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 44
(2001): 326–38; M. W. Schweitzer, L. Ordo~nez, and B. Douma, “Goal Setting as a Motivator of
Unethical Behavior,” Academy of Management Journal 47 (2004): 422–32.
12.
E. Umphress, K. See, A. Barsky, C. Gogus, L. Ren, and A. Coleman, “Be Careful What You Wish For:
Goals Influencing Ethical Behavior in Organizations,” Symposium presented at the 65th annual
conference of the Academy of Management, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2005.
13.
D. Eden, “Self-fulfilling Prophecy as a Management Tool: Harnessing Pygmalion,” Academy of
Management Review 9 (1984): 64–73.
14.
A. Bandura, Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social-Cognitive Theory (Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1986).
15.
E. Goodman, “Nobody Deemed Accountable for Tailhook,” (State College, PA) Centre Daily Times,
February 15, 1994, 6A.
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
285

16.
D. C. Waller, “Tailhook’s Lightning Rod,” Newsweek, February 28, 1994, 31.
17.
A. Marshall, “Knowing What’s Ahead Can Prevent Looking Back with Regret,” Hotel and Motel
Management, March 6, 2000, 10.
18.
G. L. Vistica, “Anchors Aweigh,” Newsweek, February 5, 1996, 69–71.
19.
P. Stewart. “Sexual assault is a ‘scourge’ on U.S. military: Hagel.” Reuters online, May 25, 2013 and
R. Lardner. “Sexual assaults in military rose to over 26,000 in 2012: Pentagon Survey.” Huffingtonpost.
com, May 5, 2013.
20.
D. B. Levine, “The Inside Story of an Inside Trader,” Fortune, May 21, 1990, 80–89.
21.
G. Ball, L. K. Trevi~no, and H. P. Sims Jr., “Just and Unjust Punishment Incidents,” Academy of
Management Journal 37 (1994): 299–322.
22.
L. K. Trevi~no and G. A. Ball, “The Social Implications of Punishing Unethical Behavior: Observers’
Cognitive and Affective Reactions,” Journal of Management 18 (1992): 751–68.
23.
B. McLean and P. Elkind, The Smartest Guys in the Room (New York: Portfolio, 2003), 21–24.
24.
Thomas J. Watson Jr., Father, Son & Co.: My Life at IBM and Beyond (New York: Bantam, 1990).
25.
G. Morgenson, “The Enforcers of Wall St.? Then Again, Maybe Not,” New York Times, June 20, 2002,
C1–C2.
26.
L. K. Trevi~no and B. Victor, “Peer Reporting of Unethical Behavior: A Social Context Perspective,”
Academy of Management Journal 353 (1992): 38–64.
27.
P. G. Zimbardo, “The Human Choice: Individuation, Reason, and Order versus Deindividuation,
Impulse, and Chaos,” In Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, eds. W. J. Arnold and D. Levine
(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1969), 237–307.
28.
C. Haney, C. Banks, and P. Zimbardo, “Interpersonal Dynamics in a Simulated Prison,” International
Journal of Criminology and Penology 1 (1973): 69–97.
29.
P. Zimbardo, “Pathology of Imprisonment,” in Readings in Social Psychology: Contemporary
Perspectives (2nd ed.), ed. D. Krebs (New York: Harper & Row, 1982).
30.
J. Barry, M. Hosenball, and B. Dehghanpisheh, “Abu Ghraib and Beyond,” Newsweek, May 17, 2004,
32–38; D. Jehl and E. Schmitt, “Dogs and Other Harsh Tactics Linked to Military Intelligence,” New
York Times, May 22, 2004, A1; S. Sontag, “Regarding the Torture of Others,” New York Times
Magazine, May 23, 2004, 24–41; P. V. Zelbauer and J. Dao, “Guard Left Troubled Life for Duty in
Iraq,” New York Times, May 14, 2004, A11.
31.
D. Katz and R. Kahn, The Social Psychology of Organizations, 2nd ed. (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1978).
32.
F. N. Brady and J. M. Logsdon, “Zimbardo’s ‘Stanford prison experiment’ and the Relevance of Social
Psychology for Teaching Business Ethics,” Journal of Business Ethics 7 (1988): 703–10; P. Brodeur,
Outrageous Misconduct: The Asbestos Industry on Trial (New York: Pantheon, 1985).
33.
S. Grover, “Why Professionals Lie: The Impact of Professional Role Conflict on Reporting Accuracy,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 55 (1993): 251–72.
34.
M. P. Miceli and J. P. Near, “The Relationships among Beliefs, Organizational Position, and Whistle-
Blowing Status: A Discriminant Analysis,” Academy of Management Journal 27 (1984): 687–705.
35.
L. K. Trevi~no and B. Victor, “Peer Reporting of Unethical Behavior: A Social Context Perspective,”
Academy of Management Journal 353 (1992): 38–64.
36.
H. C. Kelman and V. L. Hamilton, Crimes of Obedience (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989).
37.
S. Milgram, Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View (New York: Harper & Row, 1974).
38.
H. C. Kelman and V. L. Hamilton, Crimes of Obedience (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989).
39.
J. M. Burger, “Replicating Milgram: Would People Still Obey Today?” American Psychologist 64, no.
1 (2009): 1–11.
40.
J. A. Waters, “Catch 20.5: Corporate Morality as an Organizational Phenomenon,” Organizational
Dynamics (Spring 1978): 319.
41.
H. C. Kelman and V. L. Hamilton, Crimes of Obedience (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989).
42.
S. H. Schwartz, “Words, Deeds, and the Perception of Consequences and Responsibility in Action
Situations,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 10 (1968): 232–42; S. H. Schwartz,
“Awareness of Consequences and the Influence of Moral Norms on Interpersonal Behavior,”
Sociometry 31 (1968): 355–69.
286
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

43.
J. M. Darley and B. Latane, “Bystanders’ Intervention in Emergencies: Diffusion of Responsibility,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 8 (1968): 373–83.
44.
I. Janis, Groupthink, 2nd ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1982).
45.
M. S. Peck, M. D., People of the Lie: The Hope for Healing Human Evil (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1983).
46.
Ibid.
47.
Ibid.
48.
W. Kilham and L. Mann, “Level of Destructive Obedience as a Function of Transmitter and Executant
Roles in the Milgram Obedience Paradigm,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 29 (1974):
696–702.
49.
H. C. Kelman and V. L. Hamilton, Crimes of Obedience (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989).
50.
S. Milgram, Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View (New York: Harper & Row, 1974).
51.
M. A. Santoro, Sears Auto Centers (Boston: Harvard Business School, 1993).
52.
K. Kelly, “How Did Sears Blow This Gasket?” Businessweek, June 29, 1992, 38.
53.
M. A. Santoro, Sears Auto Centers (Boston: Harvard Business School, 1993).
54.
K. Kelly, “How Did Sears Blow This Gasket?” Businessweek, June 29, 1992, 38.
55.
D. Gellene, “New State Probe of Sears Could Lead to Suit,” Los Angeles Times, June 12, 1992, part D: 1.
56.
Hearing before Subcommittee on Consumer of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation, 102nd Congress, 2nd Sess., July 21, 1992 (Sen. Hearing 102972), 83.
57.
M. A. Santoro, Sears Auto Centers (Boston: Harvard Business School, 1993).
58.
J. Flynn, “Did Sears Take Other Customers for a Ride?” Businessweek, August 3, 1992, 24–25.
CHAPTER 7
MANAGING FOR ETHICAL CONDUCT
287

C H A P T E R8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS
OF MANAGERS
INTRODUCTION
Good managers do four things really well: hire good people, define clear expectations
(including ethical expectations), recognize excellence and praise it, and finally, show
their people that they care.1 We’re going to focus on those managerial “basics” in this
chapter, since managers are responsible for the entire range of human resources
activities such as hiring, firing, disciplining, and evaluating performance. Conse-
quently, some of the ethical responsibilities of managers and employees are different
and require special thought and preparation. Also, since managers are responsible for
employee supervision, the courts can hold them accountable for the activities and
behavior of the people who report to them. Finally, because managers are role models
for the workers in their department, it’s critical that managers be able to discuss the
ethical implications of decision making and provide advice to employees who find
themselves in an ethical quandary. These facts of corporate life have frustrated many
managers. “How can I possibly manage the ethics or morality of the people I manage?
Is it even possible to manage ethics? Where are the special pitfalls for me as a
manager?” In this chapter, we examine what responsibilities managers have and how
you as a manager can encourage employee engagement and influence your direct
reports to make ethical decisions. We also explore how organizational culture
influences manager decisions and how managers can help reinforce the ethical culture
of their organization.
Managers and Employee Engagement
An extremely important element in any corporate endeavor—whether it’s an ethics
program, productivity effort, employee engagement initiative, or anything else—is the
quality of an organization’s managers. To employees, managers are the company, and
if managers are not able to manage the basics well, it will be extremely difficult to
inspire people to meet business goals or live organizational values.
As more companies study how people work and what makes employees most
productive, a clearer picture is emerging of exactly what motivates employees and
encourages ethical behavior at the same time. We believe that those seemingly
unconnected activities—encouraging employee engagement and ethical behavior—
288

are actually intertwined. Research indicates that perhaps the best way to encourage
ethical behavior is to create an organizational culture that is built to enhance employee
engagement and that uses as its linchpin the quality of managers.
What do we mean by “employee engagement”? In short, it is discretionary effort,
or how committed employees are to their work. Are they willing to provide excellent
customer service? Are they willing to work overtime if needed to meet a deadline? Are
they willing to go the extra mile in providing solutions? We can divide employees into
three groups along an engagement continuum. For our purposes, let’s just call them
actively engaged, not engaged, and actively disengaged. Here’s how we might
describe the characteristics of each of the three groups:
Actively Engaged
Employees
J ——
Not Engaged Employees J —— Actively Disengaged
Employees

Passionate and
enthusiastic

Feel profoundly
connected to the
company

Drive innovation

Move the com-
pany forward

Eagerly go the
“extra mile”

“Checked out”

Sleepwalking

Put time—but not pas-
sion or energy—into
their work

May or may not go the
extra mile

“It’s not my job.”

Negative drag on the
culture

Little or no company
loyalty

Undermine what
engaged coworkers
accomplish

May well sabotage
company initiatives and
employee goodwill
It’s hard to overstate the importance of increasing an organization’s levels of
employee engagement. Gallup, one of the first companies to put employee engagement
research on the map, claims that actively disengaged employees cost world economies
billions of dollars each year.2 On the positive side, however, actively engaged employees
help an organization through such benefits as lower turnover and absenteeism, higher
customer loyalty, higher profits per employee, and fewer accidents.3
Although the connection between employee engagement and productivity is easy
to see, the connection between engagement and ethical behavior may be less obvious.
Take just a moment and think about the characteristics that describe each group along
the engagement continuum. Which group do you suppose is most likely to engage in
unethical behavior? Which group is more likely to misuse corporate resources? Which
group is more likely to serve as role models for ethical behavior? Which group is more
likely to include mavericks who have their own (not a corporate) agenda? Which group
is more likely to raise an issue about suspected wrongdoing? Which group might tend
to go to a regulator or newspaper reporter or some other external source if they
perceive wrongdoing?
We think it’s evident that improving levels of employee engagement can also
improve an organization’s ethical culture (see Chapter 5). But how does a company
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
289

begin to do that? First, it needs to focus on the four drivers of engagement; second, it
needs to identify and develop great managers. According to James Shaffer, an expert in
communication and employee engagement, the four drivers of engagement are as
follows:4
1.
Line of sight.
Employees understand the company’s strategic direction,
how the company makes money, and how their individual efforts play a role in
that revenue-generating enterprise. Note: Business goals and ethical values
are important elements in an organization’s strategic direction.
2.
Involvement.
Employees are involved in the enterprise; they actively
participate, and their ideas are heard. Note: This kind of employee involve-
ment encourages the two-way communication that is critical for ethical issues
to be identified and resolved.
3.
Information sharing.
People get the information they need to be effective,
when they need it, and information goes in all directions—up, down, and
across the organization as needed. Note: Cultures that encourage information
sharing are more likely to be open organizations that identify and resolve
ethical issues rather than sweeping them under the rug.
4.
Rewards and recognition.
Business goals and values are clearly spelled
out, and employees know what they need to do and how they need to behave
to get rewarded. Note: It is critical for companies to pay close attention to the
incentives that goals and values will provide for ethical (or unethical)
behavior.
While there are a number of employee engagement models, we think this one
makes a lot of sense and that the four drivers of employee engagement are critical
building blocks of an ethical culture.
In addition to focusing on the four drivers of engagement, organizations need
to recognize on a fundamental level the critical role that managers play in
increasing engagement and building an ethical culture. According to Towers
Watson, the international human resources consulting firm, the following key
senior manager behaviors influence employee engagement (and we believe these
behaviors, when modeled and endorsed by senior managers, trickle down to lower-
level managers and supervisors and can greatly influence employees’ ethical
behavior).5
& Senior management is sincerely interested in employee well-being.
& Senior management communicates openly and honestly.
& Senior management is visible and accessible.
& Senior management effectively communicates the reasons for key business
decisions.
& Senior management’s actions are consistent with stated values.
290
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Think about these manager behaviors. Which do you think play a direct or an
indirect role in building an ethical culture? Which might build engagement but not
influence ethical culture? Which do both?
MANAGING THE “BASICS”
A manager’s most important responsibility is to bring good people into the organiza-
tion and then manage in a way that makes those good people want to stay. The new
people may be permanent employees, or they may be part-time employees, temporary
workers, or consultants. Effective managers need to be proficient at hiring the best
people who fit the organizational culture, evaluating their performance, recognizing
and praising excellence, and disciplining or even terminating poor performers.
Hiring and Work Assignments
HIRING CASE
You’re planning to hire a new sales manager, and the most promising
candidate is really homely. You are concerned about how your customers—
and even his colleagues—would react to him. The specific job he’s applying
for requires extensive customer contact, and his appearance is frankly
disconcerting. On the other hand, his credentials are excellent, and he’s
certainly qualified for the job.
Federal law prohibits discrimination based on race, religion, sex, color, ethnic
background, and age, and it protects those who are pregnant or disabled.
In this case of a homely candidate, the solution is ambiguous. He is certainly
qualified for the job, and unattractive looks are not included in protectionist handi-
capped legislation, so the law isn’t helpful. But the larger issues are what qualities
should determine whether or not an individual should be hired, and is it ethical to
consider a prospective employee’s attractiveness?
All protectionist legislation points to the answer, as does the concept of fairness.
Hiring, promotions, and terminations should be based on qualifications, period.
However, it’s one thing to ignore someone because of your own prejudice and quite
another to hesitate to put someone in a situation where he or she might suffer
discrimination from an external audience, such as your customers, that’s out of your
control. It’s difficult to say whether you’re doing someone a favor by setting him or her
up for possible failure in an environment that’s hostile.
Prejudice is difficult to overcome. As we’ve noted in earlier chapters, everyone
has biases. Some people don’t like very tall people, or very short people, or fat ones, or
skinny ones, or old ones, or young ones. Others have biases against brown eyes, or blue
eyes, or eyes with wrinkles, or big noses, or aquiline noses, or balding heads, or hair
that looks too long. Some people favor individuals from certain schools or from
particular parts of the country. What if someone interviews for a job and, as in this
case, he is just plain unattractive; or she’s deaf; or he had cancer three years ago; or she
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
291

speaks English with an accent? Do those qualities have anything to do with an ability
to do the job or with talent? What kind of response would the Golden Rule prescribe?
Kant’s categorical imperative? How about Rawls’s veil of ignorance?
Some employers have a “corporate profile” in mind when they hire, especially
when they’re trying to fill positions with “extensive public contact.” Some large
Fortune 100 companies are well known for their penchant for hiring certain types of
employees. They look for healthy young people with regular features, moderate
height, a medium build, and no discernible accent. Do employers with a conscious or
subconscious “corporate profile” think that the public or their customers are somehow
homogeneous? If history had used a corporate profile as a yardstick, Abraham
Lincoln, Benjamin Franklin, Marian Anderson, Albert Einstein, Sammy Davis Jr.,
and Franklin Roosevelt may have been relegated to positions with “no public contact.”
Talent and ability come in a variety of packages. When managers use anything
other than those two factors to evaluate qualifications for hiring, promotions, or work
assignments, they shortchange not only the individual but also their employer and their
customers (who surely come in a variety of packages). They also help perpetuate
stereotypes, instead of trying to build a workforce that reflects real life. One way to
hire is to deeply understand your own organizational culture and to hire based on how
well a candidate will “fit” into the existing culture. Both the organization and the
employee are likely to be more satisfied when a good fit is achieved. For example,
think about a family-oriented organization, like Starbucks, that tries to demonstrate
great care for its employees. What would happen if a manager hired an edgy, highly
competitive person who doesn’t care about relationships? How would that type of
person fare in a “warm and fuzzy” company? It would be far smarter for a manager to
look for candidates who demonstrate the same qualities that the company values,
because those are the people who will succeed in the company culture. On the other
hand, companies that stick too closely to a corporate profile can risk being accused of
discrimination (as happened to Abercrombie & Fitch when the “look” the company
was attempting to achieve seemed to exclude qualified individuals from certain
minority groups). Or, they risk becoming too homogeneous and therefore resistant
to needed change. So, managers must strike a delicate balance. They need to hire
people who fit the current culture, but also they need to be open to people who fit, but
may be different. To be successful, organizations need to nurture strong cultures that
have enough differences to encourage innovation and balance and that counter the
tendency to hire to a “profile.”
Performance Evaluation
You were recently promoted to manager of a department with five profes-
sionals and two clerical staff. One of the professionals, Joe, is a nice guy, but
he simply hasn’t been able to match the performance of the others in the
department. When he tells you he has been interviewing for another job in a
different part of your company, you pull his personnel file and see that your
predecessor had rated Joe’s performance as “good to excellent.” You frankly
292
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

disagree. Joe has asked you for a recommendation. Based on the written
appraisals, you could give him a good one—but your personal observation is at
odds with the written evaluations. Joe’s prospective manager—your peer in
another department—asks for your opinion. What do you say?
When we talk about performance evaluation, we’re really talking about two things.
First, there’s a written assessment of an employee’s performance. Most large companies
have a formal performance management system, with forms to standardize the process,
and a mandate to complete a written evaluation on every employee (usually once each
year). These written appraisals usually have some influence on any salary adjustments,
and they usually become part of the employee’s permanent personnel file. Second,
there’s the informal process of performance evaluation that ideally is an ongoing process
throughout the year. When a manager gives continuous feedback—when objectives are
stated andthen performanceagainst thoseobjectives ismeasured—employees generally
aren’t surprised by the annual written performance appraisal.
Why is continuous evaluation important? First, rewards and recognition are one of
the four drivers of employee engagement. Excellent managers recognize and reward
excellence as well as manage and improve the performance of workers who are at a
lower rung on the performance ladder. A training manager in New York City tells a
story about the importance of accurately and continuously appraising performance.
“Imagine you’re bowling,” he says. “A bed sheet is stretched across the lane and you
can’t see what you’re doing. Your manager is the only person who can tell you how
you’re doing. What would happen if your manager told you how you were doing only
occasionally or once a year? How would your performance be affected if he or she told
you about your performance only when you got gutter balls? What would happen if he
or she commented just when you did well?” It’s only when your manager gives you
consistent feedback—reflecting the complete range of your behavior—that you can
improve your performance.
As we noted in Chapter 5, performance management systems do more than almost
anything else to signal what the organization cares about (including whether ethics-
related behaviors really matter) and to bake desired behaviors into the organizational
culture. If managers don’t do a good job at coaching employees and influencing their
performance, this valuable tool to drive culture and performance is undermined. And if
managers don’t communicate clearly that ethics-related performance matters, employ-
ees will focus on what does.
The practical problem with performance evaluation is that most managers hate to
do it. They especially hate to deliver negative feedback. It’s certainly easier to
recognize an employee’s achievements than his or her shortcomings. In any case,
many managers are so busy that they fail to recognize either. Pointing out an
employee’s deficient performance is extremely difficult for most managers. It’s
such a thorny issue that in a survey of 4,000 Fortune 500 executives, five out of
seven executives said that they would rather lie to employees about performance than
confront them about performance problems.6 We even know of managers who have
attempted to conduct performance appraisals via e-mail in order to avoid their
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
293

discomfort. But performance evaluation is one of the most important activities
managers do, and it should be conducted regularly and in person. Most employees
can and will accept honest feedback if it is delivered in a clear, honest, and sensitive
manner and if expectations were clear in the first place. It is especially important to
provide the employee with the specifics of any problem behavior, explicit goals for
improvement including a timeline, and follow-up.
Regular evaluations are important even if an employee is working on a temporary
basis. A college student worked as a summer intern at a well-known company and
received no feedback for more than two months, until her last day on the job. Her
manager took her aside and said, “You would never work out here. We basically
couldn’t stand the way you worked.” The student was devastated and the experience
took a terrible toll on her self-confidence. But was this failure her fault? We think not.
Most students don’t magically know how to work in a corporate environment or what a
company expects from them in terms of behavior. Managers are responsible for
instructing new employees, especially interns, on work and behavioral norms. The
student would likely have had a very different result if her manager had coached her
from Day One. The important lesson here is this: you should never interpret no
feedback as being positive. If you have received no feedback from your manager, ask
for it. “How am I doing? Should I change anything? How can I improve?”
In the example featuring Joe, you as the manager suspect that he has been
inaccurately (and perhaps even dishonestly) evaluated in the past. Since most employ-
ers require a rating of “good” or “satisfactory” before an employee can transfer to
another job, you will probably feel pressure to supply such a recommendation so Joe
can qualify for the transfer. This is a common problem. Many organizations have
employees like Joe, who are less than stellar performers but who are never confronted
with their poor performance and given guidance to improve. In Joe’s company, no
manager has been brave enough to bite the bullet and either try to get Joe to improve
his performance or initiate the termination process. It’s easier to pass Joe along to
someone else—to turn him into a Ping-Pong ball, bouncing from department to
department, never really improving his performance because no one will confront him
with the truth. (In some organizations, passing poor performers around the organiza-
tion is called “turkey farming.”)
Because his previous written appraisals have been less than honest, prospective
managers get buffaloed into thinking Joe’s performance is adequate. It’s a vicious
cycle and a real disservice to the employee, his or her coworkers, and the organization.
Coworkers who are doing a good job will perceive the system to be unfair if someone
like Joe is getting a rating similar to theirs for his inferior work. They may even find
themselves picking up the slack for Joe. Perhaps the party most disadvantaged by this
kind of problem is the organization and its culture. Joe’s manager has sent the message
that “not very good” or “just OK” is good enough. It’s a dishonest message that erodes
organizational efforts regarding quality, integrity, and ethics.
One good way to ensure continuous performance evaluations is to establish a
formal system with the employees who report to you—whether or not your company
requires it—and certainly use it more than once each year. Meet regularly with every
294
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

employee and jointly agree to job objectives and how to measure success for each
objective. Make sure that your department goals are directly linked to corporate goals
and that the individual goals of the people who report to you are directly linked to your
department goals. Also ensure that ethics-related performance expectations are
included in goals and evaluation discussions. For example, have you talked about
your expectations for respectful interactions with coworkers, trusting relationships
with customers, fair treatment of subordinates, honesty and integrity in all business
dealings?
Remember the importance of driving employee engagement: establish a clear line
of sight between the goals of individuals and the organization and between the results
of the organization and the individual. Then meet weekly or monthly with each
employee and discuss how the employee is meeting his or her objectives. When
objectives and measurement standards are established in advance and progress is
tracked, it’s much easier for employees to perform. They know what the target looks
like, how to get there, and how they’ll know when they’ve met it. They will understand
and internalize what it means to create value. An ongoing process eliminates the need
to blast a nonperformer once a year and can greatly reduce misunderstanding,
resentment, and charges of discrimination or bias.
Probably the best way to handle the situation with Joe is to meet with him and be
completely honest. “I can’t write you the kind of letter you want for the following
reasons. [Spell out the performance problems.] We can either wait until you get your
performance on track, or I can write you a letter that reflects my honest evaluation of
your work at this time. It’s your decision.” This approach will obviously be much
easier if you’ve been providing Joe with honest appraisal of his performance all along.
Discipline
Steven is a salesman who reports to you, the regional director of sales for an
office supply company. He has a great track record and has consistently
surpassed his sales targets, but he has one terrible flaw: He’s not on time for
anything. He’s late both for meetings with you and for lunches with clients,
and the problem extends to his paperwork. His expense reports, sales reports—
everything is handed in a week late. As his manager, you’ve counseled him
about his tardiness, and he has improved. Now instead of being 15 minutes late
for a meeting, he’s only 5 minutes late. And instead of submitting his expenses
a week late, they’re only two days late. His lateness seems minor in view of his
achievements, but it’s driving you and his coworkers crazy.
Most managers view disciplining employees as something to be postponed for as
long as possible. Many people in a work environment simply ignore a worker’s
shortcomings and hope the situation will improve. Discipline, however, is important
not only to ensure worker productivity but also to set the standard that certain
behaviors are expected from all employees, and to meet the requirements of the
U.S. Sentencing Guidelines. As we discussed in Chapter 6, the Sentencing Guidelines
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
295

specify that all employees in an organization must receive consistent discipline for
similar infractions. For example, in the case of employee theft, a secretary and a senior
vice president must be treated in the same way. The guidelines are violated if people in
different job classifications are treated differently—if one receives a slap on the wrist
and the other is suspended or fired.
In the case of Steven, the salesman who is always late, you as a manager could be
tempted to view disciplining his lateness as nitpicking. He’s a star after all, right?
However, it’s unrealistic and unfair to expect promptness from all of your other
employees and not from Steven.
As we noted in Chapter 7, research has given us clues about the most effective
ways to discipline employees. First, the discipline must be constructive and done in a
professional manner. For example, although you might be tempted to scream at Steven
and call him an inconsiderate jerk, that’s not going to change his behavior. It’s much
more effective to meet with him, explain the consequences of his lateness, and focus
the discussion on his behavior, not on him personally.
Second, the discipline should be done privately. Employees should never be
criticized in front of other employees. It’s just as embarrassing as being criticized in
public by your parent or your spouse, and it encourages nothing but hard feelings.
Those discussions should always be held behind closed doors.
Third, employees should have input into the process and be encouraged to explain
their side of the story. The entire idea of “team” management revolves around
individuals being encouraged to share their view of a situation. The real problem
may not be with the particular employee you want to discipline. Steven, for example,
may be late with reports because people are late in submitting data to him. To solve
problems at the simplest point, it’s wise to ask for an employee’s explanation.
Finally, discipline should be appropriately harsh and consistent with what other
employees have received for similar offenses. This aspect of discipline is perhaps the
most important in ensuring good performance in the future.7
For example, a highly respected financial professional (let’s call her Beth) was fired
from her position at a large financial services company for providing an inaccurate
calculation in a report to senior management. The director of human resources had given
Beth an almost impossible assignment: use a new formula to calculate the company’s
pensionobligations to all current employees. Theassignment was given at 6:00 p.m. on a
Tuesday, and the report needed to be written, typed, and copied for a senior management
meetingthenext morning at 9:00 a.m. Beth andher secretary stayed at the office all night
long, doing calculations, writing the report, and finally preparing it for the meeting the
next morning. When one of the senior managers discovered an error in one of the
complex calculations, Beth was summarily fired by the human resources director. It sent
a huge message not only to Beth, but to the entire human resources department. Other
mistakeshadbeen made—evenbythe director—and ifthoseerrorshadbeen punished, it
had been with a reprimand, certainly not a firing. And, of course, theimpossible deadline
constituted an extenuating circumstance in everyone’s opinion except the director.
The effects of unreasonable discipline (and unreasonable assignments) are far
reaching, and that’s why discipline needs to be appropriate to the offense and
296
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

consistent with what others have received. In the case of Steven, the chronically late
salesman, unless you’re willing to be consistent and accept tardiness in all other
employees, his behavior needs to be addressed. Just don’t follow the example of the
human resources director who fired Beth. She had been placed in the role as part of her
company’s grooming process of high-potential executives and if she had succeeded,
she surely would have moved on to bigger and better things. However, the executive
team viewed her behavior with Beth and others as erratic and ill advised. She left
human resources after a few years and ended up in a senior marketing role somewhere
in one of the company’s subsidiaries—not in the enterprise-wide role she had been on
track for before the debacle.
How companies manage “star” employees is one of the most telling characteristics
oftheirethicalcultures. Ifan organizationtreats starsinawaythat isconsistentwith their
organizational values, the culture of the organization will be strengthened. On the other
hand, if an organization states one thing in its values statement and permits star behavior
to deviate from the organization’s stated values, the entire culture can be undermined.
For example, if a star employee is allowed to be abusive to coworkers in an organization
that has stated that people management and respect are core values, those values will be
suspect. Employees will instead look to the very visible star and perceive that his or her
attributes are the ones that are really valued by the organization (regardless of what
appears on its values statement). Perhaps the biggest cultural question is who gets to be
considered a star in the first place. Does only quantitative performance matter, or does
performance based upon ethical values also figure in (as we recommend)? In a strong
ethical culture, a star would be someone who not only performs well in terms of the
bottom line but also achieves that bottom-line performance in a way that is consistent
with other values such as respect for people and integrity.
Terminations
You’re a manager in a large commercial bank. You discover that Patricia, a
loan officer who reports to you, has forged an approval signature on a customer
loan that requires signatures from two loan officers. When you confront Pat
with the forgery, she apologizes profusely and says that her husband has been
very ill. The day she forged the signature, he was going into surgery and she
just didn’t have time to find another loan officer to sign the authorization for
the loan. Pat has been with your bank for 15 years and has a spotless record.
Terminations come in many varieties, none of them pleasant. There are termina-
tions for cause—meaning that an individual has committed an offense that can result in
instant dismissal. “Cause” can represent different things to different companies, but
generally theft, assault, cheating on expense reports, forgery, fraud, and gross
insubordination (including lying about a business matter) are considered as cause
in most organizations. Many companies define cause in their employee handbooks.
In the case above, Patricia will most likely be fired for cause. In banking, few
things are as sacred as a signature, and a professional with 15 years of banking
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
297

experience would certainly be expected to know this. Forgery of any kind cannot be
tolerated in a financial institution. It’s a sad case, and any manager would feel
compassion for Patricia. However, some offenses are unpardonable in a financial
institution, and this is probably one of them.
There are also terminations for poor performance. This type of firing is most often
based on written documentation such as performance appraisals and attendance
records. Many employers have a formal system of warnings that will occur before
someone is actually terminated for poor performance. A verbal warning is usually the
first step in the process, followed by a written warning and then termination. The
process can differ from company to company.
Then there are downsizings or layoffs. Layoffs can result from many kinds of
reorganizations, such as mergers, acquisitions, and relocations, or they can be the
result of economic reasons or changes in business strategy. A layoff can result from a
decision to trim staff in one department or from a decision to reduce head count across
the company. Whatever the reason, layoffs are painful not only for the person losing
his or her job but also for the coworkers who’ll be left behind. Coworkers tend to
display several reactions: they exhibit low morale; they become less productive; they
distrust management; and they become extremely cautious.8
In addition, layoff survivors are generally very concerned about the fairness of the
layoff. They need to feel that the downsizing was necessary for legitimate business
reasons; that it was conducted in a way that was consistent with the corporate culture;
that layoff victims received ample notice; and that the victims were treated with
dignity and respect. If management provided “a clear and adequate explanation of the
reasons for the layoffs,” survivors are more likely to view the layoffs as being fair.9
Once again, if a company espouses respect and concern for employees in its values
statements or executive speeches and then lays off employees in a particularly brutal
way, it undermines employee confidence in the organization. Layoffs and other
terminations speak volumes about what a culture truly values. Smart companies
make sure that their actions are aligned with their values. These are just a few reasons
that layoffs have to be handled well.
Whatever the reason for a termination, you can take certain steps as a manager to
make it easier for the employee being terminated and for yourself.10 Again, the main
goals are to be fair, to deliver the news in a way that is aligned with your organization’s
values, and to allow the employee to maintain personal dignity.
1.
Do your homework before you meet with the employee. Prepare a brief
explanation of why this termination is necessary, and have ready an explan-
ation of the severance package being offered to this employee, including
financial and benefits arrangements. It’s also helpful to check the calendar
and consult with your company’s public relations department to ensure
you’re not firing someone on his birthday or on the day she receives
recognition from an industry group or professional association.
2.
If at all possible, you should arrange to have an outplacement counselor or
human resources professional on hand to meet with the employee after you
298
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

have spoken to him or her. Most outplacement counselors advise managers to
give the bad news to terminated employees early in the day and early in the
week, if possible. This gives the employee time to meet with a counselor if
necessary. (Obviously, this advice doesn’t apply to employees who are fired
for cause.)
3.
It’s generally a good idea to terminate someone on neutral ground—in a
conference room, for example, rather than in your office. In that way, you can
leave if the situation becomes confrontational. If possible, try to assess what
the employee’s reaction might be. If you’re about to fire a violent person for
cause (like assaulting a coworker), you might want to have security nearby or
a human resources professional present when you deliver the news.
4.
Speak privately with each individual and deliver the news face-to-face, not by
e-mail, telephone, or in a meeting or other kind of public forum. When you
deliver the news, be objective, don’t be abusive in any way, be compassionate,
do it quickly (if possible), and never, never get personal. This is a business
decision and should be delivered in the most professional manner possible.
5.
Finally, keep all information about the termination private. Never discuss the
reasons for a firingwith anyonewho doesn’thave a needto know. The exception
to this advice is when numerous layoffs occur. Survivors—coworkers who are
left behind—will require some explanation of why layoffs were needed. In this
case, you will want to speak about the business reasons that made the layoff
necessary. Never explain why particular individuals were involved and others
weren’t. (For more information on downsizing, see Chapter 10.)
Terminationsforcausedon’tgounnoticed,andtheemployeegrapevinewillassuredly
carry the news of a termination around your organization. That’s a good thing because it’s
important for employees to understand that bad acts get punished. However, it’s generally
impropertopubliclyexplainwhyanindividualhasbeenpunished;the primaryobjectiveis
to protect the dignity and privacy of the person who has been punished.
Why Are These Ethical Problems?
Hiring, performance evaluation, discipline, and terminations can be ethical issues
because they all involve honesty, fairness, and the dignity of the individual. Rice and
Dreilinger11saythatthedesireforjusticeisa“fundamentalhumancharacteristic.People
want to believe that the world operates on the principles of fairness; they react strongly
when that belief is violated.” In fact, most calls to corporate ethics hotlines (discussed
more fully in Chapter 6) relate to precisely these types of human resources issues.
Costs
Much federal legislation exists to protect the rights of individuals in situations that
involve hiring, performance evaluation, discipline, and terminations. There are myriad
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
299

legal remedies for employees who feel they have suffered discrimination (see
discrimination costs in Chapter 4 for more details). In response to increased litigation,
employment practice liability insurance is a hot product among corporations. This
insurance covers organizations that are sued by employees over charges such as
harassment, discrimination, or wrongful discharge. The insurance, which was virtually
unheard of 15 years ago, has been purchased by many Fortune 500 companies. This is
surely the result of the huge increase in litigation and in settlements. The Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission received almost 10,000 workplace discrimi-
nation complaints in 2011, and monetary relief for victims totaled more than $364
million.12
Besides perhaps paying legal costs and fines, organizations that are charged with
discrimination can expect to pay a price in terms of employee morale and organiza-
tional reputation. Research evidence indicates that employees who perceive that they
have been unfairly treated are less satisfied, less likely to go the extra mile, and more
likely to steal from the organization.13
Smart organizations look beyond monetary costs when it comes to training
managers to manage the “basics” of the employer-employee relationship. Savvy
companies understand that managing the basics is the aspect of organizational culture
that’s probably most visible to employees. Those day-to-day activities—hiring, firing,
discipline, rewards, praise, and so on—are concrete signals to employees about how an
organization really values its workers. If an organization pays no attention to those
basics and does not identify and train managers to perform those basics well, it will be
an uphill struggle to inspire workers to produce excellent results and to convince them
that the culture values employees and their efforts.
MANAGING A DIVERSE WORKFORCE
Experts predict that the workforce is becoming more diverse and that the key to many
managers’ success will be how well they can persuade diverse groups to sing together
as a well-tuned chorus. Companies that best address the needs of a diverse population
will probably be in a better position to succeed than companies that ignore this new
reality. Managers must be able to deal with individuals of both genders and all ages,
races, religions, ethnic groups, and sexual orientations. Managers need to have this
ability themselves, and they need to encourage this ability in team members. Managers
must become “conductors” who orchestrate team performance—sometimes teaching,
sometimes coaching, and always communicating with employees and empowering
them to learn and make good decisions.
The second skill set required of the new manager involves positively influencing
the relationships among other team members and creating an ethical work environ-
ment that enhances individual productivity. Everyone we work with has a range of
issues that could affect their ability to perform well. Many people are responsible for
children, parents, or other relatives. Many workers have chronic illnesses or medical
conditions or allergies, and those workers who are lucky not to have a chronic
condition can suddenly become ill or injured. Other employees have chemical
300
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

dependencies, such as an addiction to drugs or alcohol. Managers must be able to
accomplish tasks and the mission of a department or team despite the often painful
events and conditions that can distract team members.
Since a bias-free person hasn’t been born yet, managers also must be able to
counsel team members in their relationships with one another. Because every team
will include a wide range of personalities, a manager frequently needs to be a referee
who mediates and resolves disputes, assigns tasks to the workers who can best
accomplish them, and ensures that fairness is built into the working relationships
of team members.
The examples that follow are similar to those in Chapter 4 but are presented from
the perspective of the manager rather than the individual. And, as we said earlier in this
chapter, managers have a different level of responsibility.
Diversity
One of your best customers is a very conservative organization—a real “white-
shirt” company. Reporting to you is David, a very talented African American
who could benefit greatly from working with this customer account—and the
customer account would benefit greatly from David’s expertise and creativity.
The issue is that David dresses in vibrant colors and wears a kufi, an African
skullcap. Your company long ago recognized David’s brilliance, and his dress
within the company isn’t an issue. But you know your customer would react to
David’s attire with raised eyebrows.
A diverse workforce consists of individuals of both genders and myriad races,
ethnic groups, religions, and sexual orientations. The role of a manager is to create an
environment that maximizes the contribution of each individual. Since the population
of the United States is remarkably diverse, it makes perfect sense to believe that
products and services offered to this population should be developed, produced, and
marketed by a diverse workforce.
The danger of ignoring this diversity was illustrated during an interview with a
chemical company executive. One of the company’s products is wallpaper. Even
though the wallpaper was of a very high quality and priced competitively, sales were
down. This was even more of a mystery since home repairs and renovations, especially
by do-it-yourself decorators, were at record numbers.
Baffled by the problem, several senior marketing managers conducted customer
surveys and found that the company’s wallpaper patterns were the problem. Consum-
ers viewed the patterns and styles as being outdated and old-fashioned. The managers
then investigated the process the company used to select patterns and styles. What kind
of market research was performed before selecting patterns for the next season?
They discovered that even though female consumers made more than 90 percent of
all wallpaper purchases, no women were on the team of chemical company employees
who selected patterns for production. Male employees were making all style decisions.
The marketing managers and other executives insisted that women and other diverse
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
301

voices be included on the selection committee. The results were immediate. As soon as
the new styles of wallpaper appeared in stores, sales increased substantially.
In the example at the beginning of this section, David’s attire could be viewed as
problematic by some managers. In this case, and others like it, honesty is the best
policy. You may want to tell David frankly that you want him to work on this account
because his ability would benefit the customer. You may perhaps say that the customer
is conservative and that his attire may distract the customer from his ability. Let David
decide how he wants to dress when meeting with the customer.
You may also be frank with your customer: Tell him or her that David is
extraordinarily talented and is the best person to add value to your relationship. To
lessen the surprise of the initial meeting, mention in advance that David often wears
ethnic garb. This approach lets David know how the client might interpret his clothing,
but it doesn’t force him into some narrow corporate box. It also prepares the client to
deal with diversity. The point is to balance your interpretation of what a customer
might appreciate with David’s individuality and diverse voice.
Dress codes tend to raise some people’s hackles. The intention of most dress
codes is not to restrict individuality, but to ensure a professional appearance in the
workplace. Ethnic garb shouldn’t really be an issue, as long as it’s modest. The aim of
most dress codes is to eliminate clothing that could be viewed as immodest or too
casual to a customer. Dress codes are also a very visible manifestation of your
organization’s culture, and how employees are advised to dress should be aligned with
other elements of culture. For example, if a company is casual and egalitarian,
informal dress is part of that. Managers may encourage formal dress in
certain situations (such as when employees meet with conservative clients), but
the reason should be explained. This issue is all about having words match actions.
Harassment
Your profession has been traditionally a male-dominated one, and Marcia is
the only woman in your department. Whenever Sam, your senior engineer,
holds staff meetings, he and the other males in the department compliment
Marcia profusely. They say things like, “It’s hard for us to concentrate with a
gorgeous woman like you in the room,” or “You’ve got to stop batting your
eyelashes at us or the temperature in this room will trigger the air con-
ditioning.” They compliment her apparel, her figure, her legs, and her manner
of speaking. Although flattering, their remarks make her feel uncomfortable.
She has mentioned her discomfort to you on several occasions, and you’ve told
Sam and the others to cut it out. They just laughed and told you that Marcia
was too sensitive. You think that while Marcia was being sensitive, she did
have justification for being upset about her coworkers’ remarks. (For a review
of the legal definitions of sexual harassment, see Chapter 4.)
Do compliments constitute harassment? They do when they embarrass someone
and serve to undermine an individual’s professional standing in front of coworkers. If
302
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

Marcia is disturbed by the remarks of her coworkers, it’s your responsibility as her
manager to do something about it. In cases like these, it’s sometimes helpful to reverse
the situation. Imagine that your department was predominantly female and that the
women continually said to the lone male, “You’re just a hunk.” “We all get aroused
when you bat your eyelashes at us.” “That’s a great suit you’re wearing; those slacks
really show off your gorgeous thighs.” How ridiculous does that banter sound?
In this case, Marcia’s discomfort is the issue, and it’s irrelevant whether you or
others think she’s being a “little too sensitive.” She has already taken the appropriate
steps, first by telling her coworkers to stop and then by approaching you when they
didn’t. You should meet immediately with the members of your department, either
individually or as a group. To show the men how ridiculous their comments would
sound if women were saying such things to men, you could reverse the situation.
Explain to them that inappropriate compliments are not acceptable and that anyone
who behaves inappropriately in the future will be disciplined. Make it clear that every
member of the team has the right to feel comfortable on the team and to be treated with
respect. If you don’t act swiftly and firmly, and then back up future offenses with
disciplinary action, you may be inviting a lawsuit.
Here’s another kind of harassment:
One of your direct reports, Robert, belongs to an activist church. Although you
have no problems with anyone’s religious beliefs, Robert is so vocal about his
religion that it’s becoming a problem with other employees in your depart-
ment. He not only preaches to his fellow employees, but criticizes the attire of
some of his female coworkers and continually quotes religious verse in staff
meetings. You’ve received complaints about his behavior from several
employees. A few weeks ago, you suggested to Robert that he tone down
his preaching, and he reacted as if you were a heathen about to persecute him
for his beliefs. His behavior has since escalated.
It’s the manager’s job to maintain a balance between the rights of the individual
and the rights of the group—in this case, the attempt by one individual to impose his or
her opinions or behavior on other team members. The objectives are fairness and
respect for each individual.
It appears that Robert has crossed the line from expressing diverse views to
harassment. Although it’s important to recognize the value of diverse backgrounds,
it’s just as important to have an environment where one individual can’t constantly
attempt to impose his beliefs on other team members. Robert has ignored your requests
and those of his coworkers, and he continues to preach. This kind of behavior will no
doubt disrupt the team’s performance and the relationships among team members. In
this case, it’s probably reasonable to begin documenting Robert’s performance since
you’ve already verbally warned him. His hostility and his refusal to respect the
opinions of his coworkers and his manager can be viewed as insubordination. In
organizations that have a due process approach to discipline, the next step might be a
written warning to curb his attempts to influence the religion of his coworkers, or
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
303

termination will result. Then, if Robert’s harassment of his coworkers doesn’t stop, he
could be fired.
Family and Personal Issues
One of your direct reports is Ellen, who just returned from maternity leave. She
now has two children; her infant is four months old, and her older child is three
years old. Ellen is notonly a talented worker but also awonderful person. Before
the birth of her second child, she had no problem handling the workload and the
demands on her time; she had a live-in nanny who could care for her child
regardless of when she returned home. Recently, however, her nanny left, and
Ellen is now sending her children to a day-care facility with strict opening and
closing times. Although Ellen is very productive when she’s in the office, her
schedule is no longer flexible—she must leave the office no later than 5:00 p.m.
This has caused a hardship for all of her peers, who must complete team
assignments whether or not she’s present. Although you don’t want to cause
problems for her, the situation doesn’t seem fair to her coworkers.
Family and personal issues are those situations and conditions that, though not
directly related to work, can affect someone’s ability to perform. People simply can’t
leave their personal and family problems at home. The difficulty in situations like
these is achieving a balance between maintaining a worker’s right to privacy and
ensuring fairness to coworkers. The yardstick is that if someone is performing well,
and his or her attendance is satisfactory, there’s probably no cause for action by the
manager, beyond offering assistance if the worker wants it.
In Ellen’s case, she has a temporary inability to match her coworkers’ schedules.
Sooner orlater, everyworkermustdealwithsituationsthatplacelimitationsontheability
to maintain certain working hours. Similar situations could result from a variety of other
causes, including illness, family responsibilities, home construction, and commuting
schedules. The issue here is fairness in attendance, not in performance or productivity.
Since many people have children and therefore have responsibilities that require them to
either leave work at a specific time or stay home with a sick child, often the burden of
“always being there” falls on single, childless employees, and that is not fair to them. We
all want to be generous with our coworkers, but as managers, we have to ensure that we
aren’t helping people with children at the expense of people who are childless.
The ideal solution may be to build more flexibility into the working hours, not just
for Ellen but for the entire team. The ideal solution would involve confronting the
problem head-on by asking the people in your area to collaborate and find a solution.
For example, you could make an attempt to hold all team meetings in the middle of the
day, when everyone can attend. Individual activities could be relegated to the after-
noon, so that it would not be essential for Ellen—or anyone else—to stay late and work
as a group. If your organization has flexible work hours, you could talk to your
manager about the possibility of your area incorporating flexible work schedules that
allow people to arrive and leave at varying times, but ensure that the office and
304
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

department are always covered. The objective is to make life easier for individual
employees and fair for the entire group, and as a result enhance the team’s overall
productivity.
Personal illnesses and chemical dependencies of employees present a different set
of issues. These situations can affect work schedules as well as an individual’s ability to
perform. Most corporations have explicit policies for managing employee illness.
Generally, employees are guaranteed a specific number of sick days and then must
go on some sort of disability program. If, however, an employee hasn’t received a formal
diagnosis and is simply taking sick days, acting erratically, or showing a change in his or
her performance, you might suspect a physical or mental illness. Encourage the
employee to see a doctor, and consult with the company medical department (if you
have one) if you continue to be concerned about an employee’s health. It’s important to
remember that illnesses of any kind—depression, cancer, AIDS—are private and should
be kept confidential. These conditions cause no danger to coworkers, and many people
who suffer from them can resume normal or modified work schedules. Managers can
help these employees by protecting their privacy and by being fair and compassionate.
Drug or alcohol abuse is a different matter. Most corporations have policies that
prohibit any kind of drug or alcohol use on company premises, and many companies
have severe penalties for employees who are caught working under the influence of
alcohol or drugs. Both alcoholism and drug addiction are costly in terms of the
abuser’s health, and they can both cause extreme danger in the workplace. A corporate
bond trader who’s high on cocaine can wreak havoc on himself, his employer, and his
customers. A pilot who’s drunk poses obvious risks to an airline and its passengers.
Would you like to ride with a railroad engineer who just smoked a few joints, or have
the sale of your home negotiated by a real estate broker who’s inebriated, or have your
child’s broken leg set by a doctor who’s high on amphetamines?
If you suspect that one of your employees is abusing drugs on or off the job, keep
track of any changes in behavior and performance, in writing. (Even if an employee
uses drugs or alcohol only off company premises, the residual effects of the substance
may affect job performance. Also, the expense of some recreational drugs may present
a risk to your organization.) This is an important step because some medications smell
like alcohol on the breath, so it’s important to be sure that you’re dealing with abuse
and not a medical condition. Once you’re fairly certain that abuse is the problem,
contact your human resources department. Substance abuse is considered an illness
(and generally not an offense that will get the employee fired—at least in many large
corporations), and the employee usually will be counseled by human resources. If
abuse is present, most large employers offer substance abuse programs for employees
and will probably insist that your employee participate in such a program. In most
large companies, employees are given one or two chances to get clean. If the problem
recurs, substance abusers can be terminated. For example, in one money management
firm, an employee was sent to company-paid rehabilitation when it was discovered he
was regularly using cocaine and was high on the trading floor. After 90 days at a rehab
facility, the trader came back to work, was off drugs and highly productive. His career
was not ended by his addiction, although he regularly has company-administered drug
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
305

tests to ensure he does not relapse. The important issue here is to get fast help for the
employee—for the sake of the employee, the company, and your customers.
Why Are These Ethical Problems?
These are all ethical issues because they concern fairness and respect for the individual. A
large percentage of the ethical issues that arise in business are related to human resources,
and they can usually be addressed by local managers who act quickly, fairly, and
compassionately.
Costs
The personal, professional, and corporate costs of discrimination and sexual harassment
are described earlier in this chapter and in Chapter 4. The costs for mishandling most
issues connected to diversity are not clear-cut, and they’re often difficult to quantify.
To glimpse how costly the publicity associated with such cases can be, we have to
look no further than the now infamous Texaco case, which is described in detail at the
end of Chapter 5. Texaco executives were heard on tape complaining about Hanukkah
and Kwanzaa interfering with the celebration of Christmas, and recounting the
destruction of documents connected to a pending discrimination case.14 In the wake
of a firestorm of bad publicity, Texaco was forced to settle the case for $176 million.
Obviously, the costs to Texaco—both financially and in damaged reputation—were
significant. Yet those costs are just the tip of a giant iceberg.
If we could combine all of the fairness issues—performance evaluation systems,
harassment, subtle and not-so-subtle discrimination, and how managers handle family,
substance, and illness issues—and figure out how much it costs businesses when
employees are treated unfairly, the result would probably be astronomical, and not
just in terms of financial costs and damaged reputations. How many people leave a job
becauseofunresolvedproblemswithacoworker?How manypeoplechoosenottogothe
extra mile because the organization doesn’t treat its employees fairly? How many of the
best performers choose to work for a company that allows them flexible hours to care for
a child or an aging parent? How many people are depressed and frustrated because
they’re picking up the slack for a coworker who’s a chronic alcoholic? The toll in human
suffering, morale, loyalty, productivity, and lost opportunity is inestimable.
THE MANAGER AS A LENS
Managers perform a crucial role in organizations because they interpret company policy,
execute corporate directives, fulfill all of the people-management needs in their
particular area of responsibility, cascade senior management messages down the chain
of command, and communicate employee feedback up the chain. More than almost
anything else, managers communicate the culture of the organization up close and on the
ground to everyone who reports to them. Managers are probably the most important
ingredient in an organization’s success, and they are frequently the most overlooked.
306
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

But make no mistake—managers are the lens through which employees view the
company as well as the filter through which senior executives view employees. As we
noted earlier in this chapter, managers are the critical ingredient in growing employee
engagement: to many employees, managers are the company. Managers can be the
inspiration for someone to stay with an organization or the impetus for someone to leave.
As a result, managers have more influence and need more senior management attention,
more training, and more communication skills than any other employee group.
The Buck Stops with Managers
If we could take a peek at the innermost thoughts of managers, we might very well
encounter this sentiment: “I hope we do good work and get recognized for it. But most
of all, I hope there’s nothing going on that I don’t know about that could hit the fan.”
As a manager, you’ll soon discover that your employees can bring you glory as well
as get youinto big trouble. But the good news is that youcan make investments over time
to help ensure that nothing hits the fan; or if it does, that you find out about it before it
mushrooms outofcontrol.Asa manager, youcan designyour own littleinsurancepolicy
to help protect you and your organization from employees who might cause problems.
You can begin to protect yourself by understanding and internalizing the idea that
the people who report to you are looking to you for guidance and approval. That means
that you need to actively manage ethics. Your employees want to know what your rules
are, so you need to think carefully about your standards and consciously try to
communicate and enforce them. Most important, you need to understand that you are a
role model and your employees will follow your example. (Read more about the
importance of ethical leadership in Chapter 5.)
Boris Yavitz, former dean of Columbia University’s Graduate School of Business
and a member of several large corporate boards, had sage advice for managers. First,
communicate your expectations and standards publicly and privately. Employees are
more likely to respond to a direct verbal challenge from you—“Are we doing it
right?”—than they are to an expectation that’s expressed only in a policy manual.
Second, managers should prove their commitment through personal example. They
need to “walk the talk,” or no one will take their expectations seriously. Finally, since
employees are naturally inclined to protect managers from bad news, managers need to
explicitly tell employees that they don’t want that kind of protection. “Tell me
everything.” The best policy is to communicate loudly and clearly that you don’t
want protection. Of course, that also means that you can’t shoot the messenger who
brings you bad news, or it will be the last time you ever hear from a messenger.
BEGIN WITH CLEAR STANDARDS
All organizations have standards, and many
organizations even have written standards. Written standards—usually in the form of a
mission statement or guiding principles—can be a double-edged sword. It’s great if an
organization has written standards that actually guide how it does business. It’s a huge
problem if those written standards are just window dressing, and the real standards
have nothing to do with the ones that are printed up and hanging on the wall. The
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
307

disconnect between written standards and reality (referred to as cultural misalignment
in Chapter 5) destroys credibility, and a company can’t be effective over the long term
without credibility.
The same is true for managers. Any employee can tell you what the rules are for
working for a particular manager. “You must tell the truth here or you’ll be fired,”
might be a rule, or “Don’t rock the boat,” or “Don’t tell me how you do it, just do it.”
The very best way for managers to gain credibility and respect among employees is to
set clear standards, live by those standards, very deliberately communicate them, and
insist that everyone adhere to them. And, don’t be afraid to set ethical standards that
say “how” you want your people to behave. Remember, ethical standards are needed in
order to balance the financial goals that can narrow employees’ attention to just
focusing on bottom line outcomes rather than how those outcomes are achieved.
The truth is that employees are always trying to figure out if managers mean what
they say and if they support the values that the company has communicated so well.
Think about this case: The manager of a food processing plant consistently talks about
the importance of quality. “The consumer should always come first,” he says. Then
one day, a shipment of food is delivered for processing. The factory equipment is ready
to go, the employees have been waiting for this huge delivery—and the food is just on
the wrong side of spoiled. “It’s good enough,” the manager says. “The processing will
kill any contaminants and the consumer will never know the difference because this
will be flash-frozen after the processing. We’ll lose a lot of money if we don’t process
something now.” What message has he just sent to his employees? Suppose that a
month later, an employee finds a few rodent droppings in a food processing unit. It’ll
cost a lot of money to stop the machinery and clean it, plus the food already in the
hopper would have to be destroyed. What do you think the employee would do? Would
he or she believe that the consumer comes first? Or would the employee decide that it’s
okay to cut a corner to save money?
It’s important to understand that, as a manager, you are setting standards and
communicating organizational culture all the time. In fact, failing to deliberately set
ethicalstandardsis astandard initself, sinceyour employees may verywellinterpret itas
meaning you have no standards. In this era of teams and empowered employees,
managers need to be very deliberate in spelling out what they stand for and “how things
are going to be done around here.” Those ethical standards have to be demonstrated by
the manager and enforced, or people won’t believe them. It’s what “walking the talk”
really means. Plus, employees figure out what really matters to an organization by
observing manager behavior. This is how culture gets baked into an organization (and
once employee perceptions are baked in, they are very difficult to change).
DESIGN A PLAN TO CONTINUALLY COMMUNICATE YOUR STANDARDS
Good
communication skills are at the very heart of effective ethics management. Without
them, it’s virtually impossible to encourage ethical behavior. Regardless of where you
are in the management hierarchy, if you haven’t made effective communication your
top priority, you had better get ready for some big surprises. Here’s a Big Truth: If you
don’t communicate with your employees, they won’t communicate with you. You
308
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

won’t know what’s going on; you’ll be out of the loop; you’ll be ignorant; you’ll be
inviting ethical transgressions. And in business, ignorance is definitely not bliss.
Communicating with one group of employees is not enough, because you’ll know
what’s going on only with them. You’ll see information aboutother employee groups only
through the filter of that one group. That’s why “management by walking around” always
gets such high marks from management experts. Managers can be knowledgeable only
when they regularly interact with and listen to many different people on many different
levels. (You may think this is simplistic, but think about how many top executives think
they are communicating when they do it just with the executives who report to them.)
Consider this example. A young, newly named CEO decided to create an
executive floor and bring all of his most senior people together to improve communi-
cation within the group and make it easy to work together. It happens all the time in
companies around the world. Is it a good idea? Maybe not, since he effectively isolated
not only himself but also the rest of the executive team. He also created an atmosphere
of elitism within the organization.
You can improve the communication within your department by holding regular
staff meetings where you discuss the company mission, business results, and the way
you want things done. Talk about what you stand for and what you want your
department to stand for. Use ethical language—for example, when employees are
designing a new program or product, ask them in a staff meeting if they have
considered everyone who could be affected by their plans. Ask them if they think
they’re doing the right thing. Framing business decisions in ethical terms goes a long
way toward increasing moral awareness, communicating your standards, and empha-
sizing the importance of ethical behavior. It also helps reinforce ethical culture.
Once you have deliberately articulated and communicated your standards both
privately to individuals and publicly in front of your team, you need to think about how
approachable you are. You need to think long and hard about how you react when
people raise issues or ask questions or deliver criticism. If you kill the messenger or
react with hostility if someone asks a question, or if you seem too busy to clarify
directions, you are asking for trouble. Your people may well consider you
unapproachable, and managers who aren’t approachable lay the groundwork for
being blindsided. The first time they hear about a problem may not be from an
employee, but from a lawyer, a newspaper reporter, or a regulator. So, if you are a
manager, work hard at being approachable. Drop in on people who work in your area
and shoot the breeze. Ask them what they’re doing in and out of the office. Take your
people out to lunch, and stay interested in what they are thinking and feeling. Get to
know one another. Build a relationship. Learn to trust one another. Those relationships
will be invaluable when problems occur, as they surely will.
Managers Are Role Models
A number of years ago, the famous professional basketball player Charles Barkley
made sports headlines when he proclaimed, “I’m not paid to be a role model.”15 A
colleague on the courts, Karl Malone, responded in an issue of Sports Illustrated,
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
309

“Charles, you can deny being a role model all you want, but I don’t think it’s your
decision to make. We don’t choose to be role models; we’re chosen. Our only choice is
whether to be a good role model or a bad one.” Like Barkley, some managers may not
want to be role models. But Barkley and managers are indeed role models—not
because they want to be, but because of the positions they hold. Being a manager and a
good role model means more than just doing the right thing; it means helping your
employees do the right thing. A manager who is a good role model inspires employees,
helps them define gray areas, and respects their concerns.
Managers can provide guidance to employees who encounter ethical dilemmas by
encouraging them to gather all of the facts and then evaluate the situation using some
of the advice detailed in Chapter 2. And after that, managers need to go further. What
happens if one of your employees raises an issue with you, and you don’t see where
there’s a problem? The employee goes away, satisfied for the moment with your
response that nothing’s wrong. But soon she is back because she still doesn’t feel right
about the situation. What do you do now? Probably the most responsible thing you can
do at that point is to offer to pursue it with her to make sure there is no problem. This
sends a huge message to the employee and to her colleagues. First, you’re saying that
you’re glad she brought this to your attention. Second, you’re taking her seriously even
if you don’t particularly agree with her. Third, you’re saying that you trust her instincts
and that she should, too. Fourth, you’re declaring that ethics are important to you and
to your organization—so important that you’re willing to pursue this issue, even
though you don’t agree, in an effort to make her feel more comfortable. These are all
critical messages to send to employees. (You also may find that she is right in her
suspicions.)
The most important thing for managers to remember about their job as role model
is that what they do is infinitely more important than what they say. They can preach
ethics all they want; but unless they live that message, their people won’t. As a
manager, all eyes are upon you and what you’re doing. Your actions will speak much
louder than your words, and if there is a disconnect between the two, you will have no
credibility—and employees may even question the credibility of your organization.
MANAGING UP AND ACROSS
Gone are the days when a person could advance in an organization by impressing only
the next level of management. The new team structures mandate that workers treat
everyone well. An example of how some corporations are institutionalizing this
approach is an increasingly popular method of performance appraisal that some
companies call 360-degree feedback. This means that when reviewing an employee’s
performance, a manager asks for input from the employee’s coworkers and sub-
ordinates. Feedback of this sort, which comes from all directions, is probably a much
more effective barometer of performance than old methods that measure only how
well people manage up. Of course, it means that workers need to carefully consider all
of their work relationships: up, down, and across. It’s also an indicator of what astute
workers have always known: since you never know who you might end up reporting to,
310
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

or who is going to be crucial to your success in the future, it’s critical to effectively
manage all of your work relationships.
In team situations, managers can still profoundly affect your future. They sign off
on or approve performance appraisals, pay raises, transfers, and generally are a
primary influence on your career mobility and trajectory. It can be difficult to
overcome a poor relationship with a manager unless you have solid relationships
with individuals on or above your manager’s level. That’s why it’s important for you to
cultivate your manager’s respect.
Although it may appear that your peers don’t have as direct an impact on your
career as your manager does, they nevertheless can significantly affect your future
success. Since you generally “get as good as you give, ” if you don’t cooperate with
your peers, they’ll probably refuse to cooperate with you—perhaps even sabotage you
behind the scenes—and that lack of cooperation could cripple you. In addition, peers
can be promoted to management positions; this outcome can be truly unfortunate if
you haven’t developed good relationships with them.
Honesty Is Rule One
Michael is a lawyer who reports to Paula, the corporate counsel for a chemical
company. During one particularly busy period, Paula asks Michael to prepare a
summary of all pending lawsuits and other legal activity for the company’s
senior management. Michael has several court appearances and depositions
cluttering his schedule, so he assigns the report to one of his paralegals, who
completes the report in several days. Since he’s so busy, Michael simply
submits the report to Paula without reviewing it. When Paula asks him what he
thinks of the report, he assures her that it’s fine. The next day, Paula asks
Michael into her office and says that she has found a major omission in the
report. Michael has no choice but to admit that he didn’t have time to review it.
Probably nothing trips up more people than the temptation to lie or stretch the
truth. And probably nothing will trip up your career faster than a lie or an exaggeration.
In business, your reputation is everything, and lying or exaggerating can quickly
undermine it.
Michael has basically lied to his manager. Even if he can weasel his way out of the
hot seat by saying he didn’t have time to thoroughly review the report, he has created
an indelible impression with Paula. She may question not only his future reports but
also his activities in general. Michael could have told Paula up front that he didn’t
have time to prepare a report. He could have suggested that one of the paralegals
prepare it. He could have asked for more time so that he could carefully review it.
Paula may not have been thrilled with his analysis of the situation, but she probably
would have understood and helped him look for another solution. However, by
implying that he had completed and reviewed the report when in fact he hadn’t looked
at it, Michael has severely damaged his reputation with his manager. A worker’s
responsibility includes identifying a problem and then proposing a solution. If you
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
311

provide a solution when you report a concern, you stand a good chance of having your
idea implemented. If you just report an issue with no solution, you’ll probably have a
solution imposed on you.
Managers and peers rely on the information they receive from the people who
report to them and who work with them. Obviously, that information must be truthful
and accurate, or someone else’s work will be skewed. Once someone has reason to
doubt your veracity, it may be impossible for you to recover. As one executive said,
“Lying will end someone’s relationship with me, period.” The message: Be com-
pletely honest about all aspects of your work, including your ability, the information
you provide, and your ability to meet deadlines. Keep your promises.
Standards Go Both Ways
It began when Bruce asked Andy to lie to his wife about his whereabouts. “If
Marcia calls, tell her I’m in Phoenix on a business trip,” he told Andy. Of
course, he had also confided to Andy that in case of an office emergency, he
could be reached at a local golf tournament or at a nearby hotel where he was
staying with another woman. Since Bruce was senior to Andy and was a
powerful contributor in the department, Andy went along with his request.
When Marcia called, Andy told the lie about Bruce being in Phoenix. Bruce
asked several more “favors” of Andy, and Andy complied. Then Bruce asked
for a big favor: he instructed Andy to inflate monthly sales figures for a report
going to senior management. When Andy objected, Bruce said, “Oh, come on,
Andy, we all know how high your standards are.”
Just as it’s important for managers to set standards within their departments, it’s
equally important for workers to set ethical standards with their managers and peers
and stick to them. The best way to ensure that you’re not going to be asked to
compromise your values is to clearly communicate what people can expect from you.
In Andy’s case, he made his first mistake by going along with Bruce’s lie to his
wife. Although it’s tempting to help out a colleague—especially one who’s powerful
and senior to you—you’re sliding down a slippery slope when it involves a lie. The
chances are excellent that Bruce would not have asked Andy to lie about the monthly
sales figures if he hadn’t already known that he could manipulate Andy. If Andy had
refused to lie for Bruce on that first occasion, Bruce would probably have vastly
different expectations of him. When Bruce asked Andy to lie to his wife, Andy could
have replied, “Hey, Bruce, don’t drag me into that one! I’ll tell her you’re not in the
office, but I’m not going to outright lie to her.” Andy could have said it in an
unthreatening way and Bruce probably would have understood. Bruce might even have
been embarrassed. But once Andy got caught up in Bruce’s conspiracy, Bruce felt he
would probably go along with other untruths. The message: Say it politely, but say it
firmly and unequivocally. If a coworker or manager asks you to betray your
standards—even in the tiniest of ways—refuse to compromise your standards, or
you’ll end up being confronted with increasingly thorny dilemmas.
312
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

CONCLUSION
Employees are strongly influenced by the conduct of management, and managers
build and reinforce organizational culture with everything they say and do. That’s why
it’s so critical that individual managers understand how they are viewed by employees.
It’s also critical that managers understand that if they set high standards, foster good
communications, and act as ethical role models, they will have the power to create an
environment that encourages employees to behave ethically. Good managers also
understand their pivotal role in influencing subordinates, building ethical culture,
growing employee engagement, and inspiring people to do their best work. It’s equally
important that workers appreciate the importance of managing their relationships with
the manager and their peers and know how to alert the company’s senior executives to
wrongdoing in the safest way possible.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.
Why is employee engagement important, and what is its relationship to ethics?
2.
How does employee engagement relate to organizational culture? How do
managers contribute to the ethical culture?
3.
In addition to identifying and training good managers, what else could an
organization do to increase levels of employee engagement?
4.
What specific action could a manager take to help move employees up the
employee engagement continuum—for example, from not engaged to actively
engaged?
5.
Why should performance be measured as an ongoing process, and not just as a
once-a-year event?
6.
Should high performers be allowed to work by rules that are different from those
that apply to other workers? Why or why not?
7.
Imagine that you’re the manager of a facility where 200 layoffs are scheduled.
Design an action plan for how the layoffs would occur. How would you handle
both those being laid off and the survivors?
8.
Are there ways in which managers can avoid harassment issues among
employees who report to them? What would your strategy be?
9.
Imagine that someone who reports to you is on a prescription medication that
makes his breath smell like alcohol. How would you handle this situation?
10.
Imagine that one of your employees complained about being harassed by a
coworker. Also imagine that you suspect the motives of the person who is
complaining to you. How would you handle this situation? Is there a way you
could discern motivation, or does it matter? When would you involve your
company’s human resources department?
11.
As a manager, how would you respond when a worker’s performance has
declined and you suspect a problem at home is the cause? How might you
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
313

respond if you think an alcohol or drug problem is the cause? What language
could you use to confront the employee? Are there others you might want to
bring into the discussion?
12.
List some ways you can communicate your ethical standards to your employees
and to your peers. As an employee, how can you communicate your ethical
standards to your manager?
SHORT CASES
EMPLOYMENT BASICS
You’ve recently been promoted to a supervisory position and are now responsible for
coordinating the work of four other employees. Two of these workers are more than
20 years older than you are, and both have been with the company much longer than
you have. Although you’ve tried to be supportive of them and have gone out of your
way to praise their work, whenever there is some kind of disagreement, they go to your
boss with the problem. You’ve asked them repeatedly to come to you with whatever
issues they have; they just ignore you and complain to other workers about reporting to
someone your age. Design a strategy for dealing with these workers and your manager.
MANAGING A DIVERSE WORKFORCE
After two years of sales calls and persuasion, a large, multinational petroleum
company—Big Oil Ltd.—decides to sign with your employer, Secure Bank. Since
Big Oil is headquartered in Saudi Arabia and most of the meetings with the client have
been in the Middle East, Secure Bank’s senior executive in charge of oil and oil
products companies, Julie, has not attended. Although the Secure Bank employees
who have met with the company have told the Big Oil executives that the lead on their
account will be a woman, the news must not have registered, perhaps because of
language difficulties. Today, the Big Oil reps are in Chicago to sign on the dotted line
and meet with Secure Bank’s senior managers, and of course, they’ve met with Julie.
A member of your sales team calls you to say that Big Oil’s senior team member has
told him he does not want Julie to work on their account, period. Because of cultural
issues, Big Oil execs are uncomfortable dealing with women from any country. As
Julie’s manager, what do you do? Can you think of ways to respect Julie’s expectations
and those of the Big Oil executives?
MANAGING UPAND ACROSS
As an operations professional, you need to be able to interact effectively with many
internal customers—from corporate managers to field representatives. One of your
peers is Jessica, who is a talented operations professional but who is downright rude to
her internal customers. Her attitude is so bad that people around your company ask
314
SECTION III
MANAGING ETHICS IN THE ORGANIZATION

NOTES
1. 
M. Buckingham, The One Thing You Need to Know (New York: Free Press, 2005), 73–85.
2. 
A. Gopal, “Disengaged Employees Cost Singapore $4.9 Billion,” Gallup Management Journal,
October 9, 2003, www.gallup.com.
3. 
J. Shaffer, “Communicating for Business Results: How to Choose and Execute Communication
Projects That Dramatically Help the Company,” Journal of Employee Communication Management,
March–April, 2003, www.ragan.com
4. 
Ibid.
5. 
Towers Perrin, “Global Workforce Report” (2008), http://www.towerswatson.com/.
6. 
J. Halper, Quiet Desperation: The Truth about Successful Men (New York: Warner Books, 1988).
7. 
G. Ball, L. Treo, and H. P. Sims Jr., “Just and Unjust Punishment Incidents: Influence on Subordinate
Performance and Citizenship,” Academy of Management Journal 37 (1994): 299–332.
8. 
D. Rice and C. Dreilinger, “After Downsizing,” Training and Development Journal (May 1991): 41–44.
9. 
J. Brockner, “Managing the Effects of Layoffs on Survivors,” California Management Review, Winter
1992: 928.
10. 
Kenneth Labich, “How to Fire People and Still Sleep at Night,” Fortune, June 10, 1996, 65–71.
11. 
D. Rice and C. Dreilinger, “After Downsizing,” Training and Development Journal (May 1991): 41–44.
12. 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission website (2010), http://www.eeoc.gov.
13.
J. Greenberg, “Employee Theft as a Reaction to Underpayment Inequity: The Hidden Cost of Pay
Cuts,” Journal of Applied Psychology 75 (1990): 56–64.
14.
J. Leo, “Jellybean: The Sequel,” U.S. News & World Report, February 10, 1997, 20.
15.
D. Gelman, “I’m Not a Role Model,” Newsweek, June 28, 1993, 56.
specifically to deal with you instead of Jessica. You’ve heard many tales about her
sarcasm and her unwillingness to deliver anything other than the absolute minimum to
other employees. You’ve thought about talking to Bruce, the manager to whom both
you and Jessica report, but you and everyone else knows that they’re dating. In the
meantime, your workload is increasing because of Jessica’s reputation. How do you
handle Jessica and Bruce?
CHAPTER 8
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF MANAGERS
315


S E C T I O N IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
317

C H A P T E R9
CORPORATE SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY
INTRODUCTION
Thus far, we have emphasized ethical behavior “inside” the organization. We have
discussed why ethical behavior is important at work and how individuals who aim to
be ethical can make good ethical decisions. We have also discussed the psychology of
ethical decision making, including why individuals with the best of intentions can find
it difficult to do what’s right. We have outlined what organizations can and should do
to create strong ethical cultures that support employee ethics and what managers can
and should do, within those cultures, to lead their employees in an ethical direction.
In this chapter’s discussion of corporate social responsibility (CSR), we extend
beyond the organization to focus on the relationship between the organization and its
external stakeholders. In today’s highly interconnected, global and transparent world,
corporations are finding that social responsibility is essential to fundamental business
strategy. They are also discovering that it is difficult to separate “internal” organiza-
tional ethics from “external” social responsibility. Although most large companies
have separate people and structures to deal with “internal” ethics and “external” social
responsibility issues, these efforts are overlapping more and more because both
depend on a solid set of ethical values and an organizational culture that supports
doing the right thing. For example, making business decisions today to invest in
environmentally sustainable business practices is a strategy that is consistent with the
organization’s value of respect for the community and the natural environment while
also signaling to employees that the organization cares about people, the community,
and its longer-term legacy. Because many corporate social responsibility issues stem
from the global nature of business today, we will focus more extensively on global
CSR issues in Chapter 11.
WHY CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY?
A rich literature on corporate social performance suggests three reasons that corpora-
tions should care about social responsibility:1 a pragmatic reason, an ethical reason,
and a strategic reason. These reasons are not mutually exclusive and can and do
overlap.
318

The pragmatic reason is based upon the recognition that business must use its
power responsibly in society or risk losing it. Corporations exist as legal entities with
certain advantages (such as limited liability) because society allows them to do so, and
these corporate rights and advantages can be removed from firms that are perceived to
be irresponsible. That’s exactly what happened to Arthur Andersen, formerly one of
the “Big Five” auditing firms, when it lost its license to operate after being involved in
the Enron scandal.
The perception of the corporation as a responsible societal actor is dependent on a
stakeholder view of the firm. Recall that we defined a stakeholder in Chapter 1 as “any
party (e.g., customers, employees, suppliers, the government, stockholders, the
community) who is affected by the business and its actions and who has a stake in
what the organization does and how it performs.”2 In Chapter 2, we used the concept of
stakeholders a bit differently to refer to the people or groups affected by a particular
ethical decision. There, we said that a good ethical decision considers harms and
benefits to multiple stakeholders, and the best ethical decision is one that creates the
greatest societal good.
Here, at the level of the corporation, the stakeholder view provides a particular
lens on the firm that is broader than the view offered in many other courses you may
have taken (e.g., marketing highlights customers, finance highlights shareholders,
management highlights employees, etc.). With the stakeholder perspective, the
assumption is that a responsible executive will take multiple stakeholders into account
in decision making and will find ways to balance their needs and concerns. The
stakeholder perspective places the corporation at the center of a web of constituents (or
stakeholders; Figure 9.1) who are affected by the actions of the business, but who can
also affect the business in dramatic ways that can interfere with a firm’s autonomy,
economic success, and license to operate. Maltreated employees can strike, dissat-
isfied customers can boycott products, interest groups can create harmful publicity,
owners can bring shareholder resolutions, and the government can pass laws and
regulations that limit a firm’s activities or even put the firm out of business. Therefore
a pragmatic reason for being responsible is that corporations must anticipate multiple
Organization
Owners
Employees
Customers
Suppliers
Competitors
Government
Community/
Interest groups/
Media
Financial
institutions/
Analysts
FIGURE 9.1 Stakeholder Perspective on the Firm
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
319

stakeholder conce rns simultaneous ly and act defe nsively to protect their reput ation
and viabil ity.
It can be costly not to anticipate sta keholder concerns. With the power of
instantane ous ele ctronic com municatio n, soci al networking, cel l phone camera s,
Twitter, and YouTube vide os, even relat ively small sta keholder groups can get the
word out quickly about their concerns and have a h uge, usually negative, impact o n
very large compani es. For example, whe n the organi zation People for the Ethical
Treatm ent of Anim als releas ed a hidden camera vide otape from a West Virginia
chicken slaught erhouse showing workers stompi ng on chickens, squee zing them to
death, and flinging them against the wall, the com pany acted quickly, sent in
inspectors , and told the cont ractor that owne d the plant to fix the probl ems or lose
its cont ract. The contrac tor fired 11 emp loyees and made every remai ning emp loyee at
its 25 plants pled ge to treat animals humanel y. 3
Altho ugh a frequent corpo rate resp onse to such a charge is denial or resistanc e,
KFC and its pare nt Yu m Brands resp onded quic kly to the chal lenge from an important
stakeholder group. 4 Taco Bell, a fast-food restaur ant selling Mexican food, is also a
Yum Brands company. Af ter Mexican tomato pickers led a boycott, hunger strike, and
protest against the chain , the com pany agreed to pay a penny more per pound of
Florida tom atoes, to monit or supplie rs, and to adopt a code of conduc t that would
allow the company to drop suppliers who abuse farmworkers.5
Another case in point is the environment al o rganization Rainf orest Action
Network (RAN; www.RAN.org), which has influe nced well-known compani es
such as Citigroup, Home Dep ot, Lowe’s, Stapl es, Office Depot, and Chevron. In
the short ter m, it may be hard to make the business case for the “green” prac tices that
RAN prom otes. But when com panies believe that their reputat ions as go od corpo rate
citizens are at risk, the calculat ion quickly changes. And once they serious ly consider
the organizat ion’s envir onmenta l conce rns, executives often adopt them as their own.
For example, RAN targete d Home Dep ot for sourc ing wood from endang ered forest s.
In fact , the company realized that it didn’t even know where its wood came from at the
time. 6 Now, the com pany knows the sourc e o f all of it s wood; on its website (www.
corporatehom edepot.co m), it claims to b e integrating environm ental plan ning into its
business, including sustainable forestry practices and recycling. Smart CEOs have
benefited from opening a dialogue with reasonable reform groups. They cite as success
stories, Home Depot’s eco-friendly lumber supply program, developed with RAN, and
Starbucks’ work with Conservation International to purchase coffee from farmers who
preserve forests.7
So, with the pragmatic approach to corporate social responsibility, a firm’s
managers scan the environment and are on alert to act in ways that avoid economic
harm, maintain legitimacy, and ensure a good corporate reputation.8 But this approach
can be risky if it is mostly reactive, acting on stakeholder concerns only after they are
voiced. Sometimes stakeholders are not deemed worthy of attention until after
negative publicity has already substantially damaged the firm and its reputation.
Then, the firm has to play catch-up to repair the damage. This may be what happened
with Apple and its Foxconn supplier in China, where iPhones and iPads are assembled.
320
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

When an explosion and fire at a Foxconn facility in May 2011 killed two and injured
others, Apple was harshly criticized for the working and living conditions at the
facility, including excessive overtime, crowded living conditions, underage workers,
and use of harmful chemicals.9 As a result, stakeholders began to watch the company
and its suppliers more intently. Apple does have a code of conduct for suppliers and
publishes an annual report of their compliance.10 If violations are not corrected, the
supplier is terminated. But, as other firms have learned, it takes more than codes of
conduct and audits to avoid the kind of bad publicity that faced Apple in this situation.
Constructive engagement with stakeholders, including a company’s critics, offers
a new and increasingly popular approach. Executives are learning that the plea to “just
trust us” rarely works in a world plagued by regular corporate scandals. Rather, a better
approach is proactively analyzing the stakeholder landscape and working with
selected stakeholders who are willing to engage in constructive dialogue. Goldman
Sachs actually brought Rainforest Action Network into the company to help draft its
plan to become more environmentally responsible, and Dell included environmen-
talists on a task force to craft a recycling strategy.
These efforts are in line with a more proactive, ethical reason for corporate social
responsibility, which argues that businesses, as part of society, have a responsibility to
behave ethically. In this view, responsible executives have an ethical duty to care about
multiple stakeholders because it is simply the right thing to do. It might also be
pragmatic to do so, but the focus here is on the ethical intention to “do the right thing.”
Social responsibility becomes as integral to the business as is economic performance.
With this perspective, deciding which issues and stakeholders a firm should prioritize
is an ongoing process of executive ethical decision making. Consistent with our earlier
discussions about how ethical decisions should be made, executives weigh the harms
and benefits to multiple stakeholders (including shareholders) of the firm’s activities,
and they aim to make decisions that benefit the societal greater good. They prioritize
their organization’s ethical values and apply moral rules. And they consider their
intentions, how the broader society would react to a contemplated behavior, and what a
“virtuous firm” would do.
This ethical perspective is more likely to support proactive corporate policies and
practices that extend beyond current legal or regulatory requirements, such as the
development of quality products that contribute to societal welfare (whether or not these
are the most profitable), human resources practices that treat all employees fairly and
respecthumanrightseverywhere,businessprocessesthat protect theenvironmentbeyond
current governmentregulations, andphilanthropiccontributionsthat help thecommunity.
It also supports constructive engagement with stakeholders. As we’ll discuss later, these
proactive policies and practices may “pay” in the long term. For example, the very best
employees may be attracted and committed to firms that treat people well. In addition,
organizations that act in values-based ways often avoid legal costs and other negative
outcomes. But those who argue for the duty-based perspective contend that the positive
ethical duty exists whether or not an economic payoff is likely to result.11
In an interview in 2009, John Allison, former Chairman of Branch Banking and
Trust Corporation (BB&T) talked of how ethical values affect his business.12 Along
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
321

with othe rs, BB&T’s value s include honesty, int egrity, and justice. Allison sai d that the
company decided not to be in the business of negative amo rtization mor tgages. These
mortgages (w here the paym ent is less than the intere st and the mor tgage bala nce
actually increases) became popul ar for a while (bef ore the financial crisis), and they
were highly profit able. But BB&T avoide d the bu siness because they didn’t think it
would be right for custom ers. According to Allison, “we got beat up in the market. We
also lost a numb er of mortgage produc ers who coul d make more money working for
Countryw ide. . . . We believe that doing our best to h elp our clients make the right
financial decisions is good for BB&T. I believe that whi le there may be short-ter m
trade-offs by sticking to your value s, you are never making a sacrifice in the long
run.” 13 By sticking to its value s, the com pany not only prot ected its clients, it avoided
contributing to the broad er finan cial crisis as well .
Honda provides another excellent example of a company with strong ethical values
that drive its business. The company is guided by its founder’s visionary principles,
called “the Power of Dreams.” On the company website (http://corporate.honda.com),
“TheHondaPhilosophy” says:“We seethingsfrom a global perspective, alwaysstriving
to create and produce products of the highest quality at a reasonable price for worldwide
customer satisfaction. . . . We see it as our responsibility to serve humanity through our
global commitments to helping protect the environment and enhancing safety. . . . In
every endeavor we pursue, we strive to be a company that people all over the world want
to exist.” In an interview in 2005, Honda’s chief engineer said, “everybody at Honda is
fired by the dream of creating great products that are the most fuel efficient in their
class.”14 So, even when SUV sales were booming, the company was committed to fuel
economy. That meant that Honda was late getting into the truck market; and when they
eventually did, they aimed to do it with better fuel economy. Certainly, the company lost
out on potential profit. But, according to the chief engineer, “The point is not that
customers demand it [fuel economy] or don’t demand it, because that’s absolutely not
the viewpoint of Honda. When you are a philosophy-driven company, you don’t ask the
customer if they agreewith your philosophy. . . . [At Honda] you are never going to get
anything approved by the board . . . without proving you have the best fuel economy in
class. That’s it.” So, at Honda, protecting the natural environment is a core principle
guiding business decisions—one that has proven to be costly in the short run but is likely
to pay off in the longer term.
A third reason to be socially responsible is a strategic one. Because Michael
Porter is a world-renowned business strategy scholar, writer, and consultant, many
observers were surprised to find him writing a major Harvard Business Review article
about corporate social responsibility in 2006.15 But, with coauthor Mark Kramer, he
outlined a strategic approach to CSR that begins by emphasizing the interdependence
of business and society. The authors rely on the premise that business needs a healthy
society because only a healthy society can produce a productive workforce and the
rules of the road that make business transactions possible. A healthy society also needs
business to innovate, create jobs, goods, and services, and pay the taxes that support
societal activities. Therefore the best CSR initiatives will be simultaneously good for
the business and for society.
322
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Importantly, the strategic approach to CSR offers managers a strong basis for
making decisions about which stakeholders and social responsibility issues should
garner their attention and resources given the multitude of options available. Porter
and Kramer proposed that each firm should carefully analyze its own business in
search of two things: those places where the firm is doing harm and those initiatives
where the firm can do good by providing unique opportunities to create shared value—
value for the business and for society simultaneously. Companies should begin the
harm reduction part of this analysis by scrutinizing the social impacts of the
company’s value chain. The value chain, a concept Porter introduced earlier to
strategic management, describes all the normal business activities of a firm that
add value as a product or service passes from one part of the business to another.
For example, in a manufacturing operation, one would consider inbound logistics
(e.g., raw material acquisition and transportation), manufacturing operations, out-
bound logistics, marketing and sales activities, and post-sales support. Support
functions such as human resources management and firm infrastructure undergird
the entire value chain and should also be considered. Managers involved in the firm’s
daily operations are asked to look carefully at the value chain and consider where in
the chain the firm creates harm or has the potential to do so, with an eye toward
reducing such harm. Therefore a natural resources company would need to focus more
on environmental issues while a company that sells toys might need to focus more on
child safety issues or labor conditions in its overseas plants.
Value chain activities should be considered prime candidates for a firm’s
corporate social responsibility initiatives because they benefit society by reducing
harm (or doing social good) and can also help the company by reducing costs or by
improving its reputation. According to Porter and Kramer, the firm should study best
practices for addressing these issues, create clear goals and evaluation criteria, and
implement the initiatives. The authors call this approach “responsive CSR.”16
The second part of the strategic CSR analysis attempts to identify where the
company has the potential to do social good because of its unique knowledge and
expertise. For example, one could say that FedEx is in the dependability business.
Packages need to arrive at their destination no matter what the weather or other
contingency, so the company prepares itself to handle these contingencies. Such
preparation made the company invaluable after Hurricane Katrina. It had prepared by
positioning ice, water, generators, and facility repair kits in key locations. The
company was also ready with 60 tons of Red Cross provisions, something it does
routinely in advance of such disasters. The company was able to repair a FedEx radio
antenna in New Orleans, thus providing rescuers with reliable radio communications
that had been lacking for days.17
To further this approach toward creating social good, Porter and Kramer argue
that firms should also consider how they can leverage potential CSR initiatives in a
way that also helps the company succeed in its competitive environment. Such
initiatives contribute to societal good while strengthening the company’s competitive
position. The most strategic CSR initiatives are those that go beyond reducing harm.
They add a social dimension to the firm’s overall competitive strategy. For example,
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
323

Porter and Kramer note that Toyota did this quite successfully by devoting significant
resources to developing its Prius hybrid car. Given societal need for more fuel-efficient
cars and reduced carbon emissions, it made a lot of sense for a car company to focus
resources on developing a more environmentally sustainable automobile and to do so
in a way that enhanced its reputation with customers as an innovator. Not only did
Toyota have the expertise to do this work, but being among the first to offer affordable
hybrid cars helped the company’s competitive position and its bottom line. Toyota’s
CSR situation was complicated by a number of safety problems with its vehicles that
received much attention from multiple stakeholders including the government, media,
and of course customers (case to be discussed more in Chapter 10). However, the
company seems to have remedied the problems and the Prius remains a good example
of strategic CSR.
The strategic approach is more proactive and affirmative than the pragmatic
approach because it asks companies to identify and acknowledge company activities
that can do harm (or that can be particularly helpful) and encourages firms to scrutinize
their practices and address potential harms by focusing on their own value-chain
activities. In this way, companies need not wait for stakeholders to identify issues for
them and then react. They are proactively out in front of the issues, dealing with them
before they become reputational problems. This approach also provides guidance for
how an organization can make the tough choices about where to focus resources, thus
targeting social responsibility issues that they can and should do something about
given their expertise rather than just following the crowd. Companies that follow this
strategic approach will also not limit their CSR efforts to only those that will enhance
their bottom line, because focusing on the value chain requires firms to address the
harms they cause. This approach challenges businesses to be innovative, to think about
how they can be socially responsible in ways that leverage their unique competencies
and help the business and society simultaneously, and it encourages business to
actually measure the social impacts of their efforts.
But we would like to offer a caveat: This approach can give the false impression
that social responsibility always has the potential to be profitable. In a book about
managing “ethics,” it’s important to acknowledge that socially responsible business
practices are sometimes costly; but for ethical reasons, companies should do them
anyway. Students are often surprised to learn that many companies make decisions that
they know, at least in the short term, will reduce their financial bottom line—and they
do it simply because it is consistent with their values and because they have decided
that it’s the right thing to do. BB&T’s decision to forgo the negative amortization
mortgage business is one example. Many more such examples come from the overseas
business environment. For example, a company may decide not to venture into a
potentially profitable overseas market (say Russia or Nigeria) because it would have to
engage in corruption in order to do so, and such behavior goes against its corporate
values of honesty and transparency. Or, a company that has committed itself to
sustainable business practices will adhere to its more expensive U.S. guidelines when
disposing of toxic wastes in developing countries despite little in the way of local
regulation or oversight. They do this because respect for human health is a
324
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

fundamental value that has no national boundaries. Therefore we believe that, in
addition to assessing the company’s value chain and the competitive environment,
companies need to identify the core values that will help them make tough ethical
decisions about what they will and will not do, and where to focus social responsibility
resources.
We’ll offer one final caveat about the strategic approach. Social responsibility
efforts can backfire if the public perceives that the company engages in CSR programs
only ifand when it can profit from doing so. We routinely find that students are cynical in
reaction to efforts that are perceived in this way. An interesting question to ask yourself
(and to discuss in class) is how you perceive such corporate efforts and what influences
your perceptionsandthoseofyour classmates.How doyoufeel aboutcompanies such as
Ben & Jerry’s or Patagonia that integrate corporate social responsibility and sustain-
ability into their DNA and then market themselves accordingly? Do you feel differently
about these firms compared to those that seem to treat corporate social responsibility as
something “nice to do” that may garner goodwill with customers? Understanding your
own and others’ perceptions can yield important insights that can help you later when
you’re in a position to make these kinds of management decisions.
TYPES OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Another way to think about corporate social responsibility is to think of it in terms of
multiple types of responsibility. CSR has been conceptualized as a pyramid constitut-
ing four types of responsibility that must be considered simultaneously: economic,
legal, ethical, and philanthropic (Figure 9.2).18
Economic Responsibilities
The economic responsibilities of a business involve its primary function of producing
goods or services that consumers need and want, while making an acceptable profit.
This responsibility is considered to be primary and the bedrock of corporate social
Philanthropic Responsibilities
Ethical Responsibilities
Legal Responsibilities
Economic Responsibilities
FIGURE 9.2 Corporate Social Responsibility Pyramid
Source: Reprinted from Archie B. Carroll, The Pyramid of Corporate Social Responsibility:
Toward the Moral Management of Organizational Stakeholders, Business Horizons, July-August
1991, pp. 39–48, with permission from Elsevier.
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
325

responsibility because without financial viability, the other responsibilities become
moot issues. Fulfilling this responsibility effectively is considered to represent an
important ethical purpose of business because it provides good jobs, important
products and services, and contributes to a vibrant economy.
The late economist Milton Friedman is the best-known proponent of the 40-
year-old argument that management’s sole responsibility is to maximize profits for
shareholders. Yet people often forget what Friedman actually said—that manage-
ment should “make as much money as possible while conforming to the basic rules
of society, both those embodied in the law and those embodied in ethical custom.”19
So, maximizing profits is not the sole responsibility after all, even for a staunch free-
market economist like Friedman. Interestingly, the statement above tacitly embraces
two of the three other components of the CSR pyramid: legal responsibility and
ethical responsibility. This statement also means that some businesses simply should
not exist, because society has deemed them to be harmful no matter what their
potential for profit. An example might be child pornography, which is illegal in the
United States and many other countries. Most of us agree that no matter how many
people it might employ, or how much potential profit exists, child pornography is
not a socially responsible activity and organizations that engage in it should not be
allowed to exist.
Legal Responsibilities
Beyond its economic responsibilities, the pyramid shows that business is expected to
carry out its work in accordance with the current law and government regulations. The
law guiding business practice can be viewed as a fundamental precept of the free
enterprise system and as coexisting with economic responsibilities. As we said in
Chapter 1, the law can also be viewed as representing the minimum norms and
standards of business conduct agreed upon within a society. But not every societal
expectation has been codified into law, and laws vary from state to state in the United
States and even more from country to country.
Ethical Responsibilities
Ethical responsibilities go beyond legal responsibilities to encompass the more general
responsibility to avoid harm and do what’s right, again relying on ethical decision-
making processes to make these decisions. It’s illegal to advertise or sell cigarettes to
minors in the United States. But a firm can continue to do so in countries that have no
such legal restrictions. In fact, that is what tobacco companies do in many parts of
Asia. Still, a tobacco company taking its ethical responsibility seriously would cease
advertising to minors everywhere because of the long-term harm to health caused by
tobacco addiction.
There are many good examples of companies going beyond legal requirements to
fulfill what they perceive to be their ethical responsibilities. Johns Manville, a
manufacturer of specialty building products, goes beyond its legal responsibilities
326
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

regarding produc t safety— perhaps no t surprising ly, given its problem atic history
(more than 15 0,000 lawsu its alleging health probl ems from exposure to asbes tos). In
addition to complying with U.S. law by placing warning labels on all of its fiberglas s
products , the company also places warning labels on fiberglass products bein g ship ped
to Japan. Such warni ngs are not require d by loca l law, and the company was even
advised agai nst it by the Japanese government becau se the warnings might result in
cancer fear s. Tom Steph ens, former chairman, preside nt, and chief executive officer,
said, “But a human bein g in Japan is no differ ent from a huma n being in the U.S. We
told them we had a policy. We had to have a labe l.” Altho ugh the company lost 40
percent of its sales to Japan in on e year, it was later able to rebuild its Japan ese
business. 20 Th us the ethica l responsibil ity category frequently inters ects wi th the legal
category, pushing the expansion of legal resp onsibiliti es and p lacing expectations on
businesspersons to function at a level above the law.
Levi Strauss invokes its values whe n it says on its website (www.levistra uss.com)
that “Our values are fundamental to our success. They are the foundation of our
company, define who we are and set us apart from the competition. They underlie our
vision of the future, our business strategies and our decisions, actions and behaviors.
We live by them. They endure.” Its four core values are empathy, originality, integrity,
and courage. In keeping with the values of empathy and integrity, Levi Strauss was the
“first multinational company to develop a comprehensive code of conduct” designed
to ensure that the company’s workers “anywhere in the world are safe, and treated with
dignity and respect.” Further, the company’s commitment to diversity began in the
1940s, well before the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964. As an example of courage (a
value not commonly found on corporate lists), the company notes that it became the
first Fortune 500 company to extend full medical benefits to employees’ domestic
partners, in 1992. That benefit was controversial at the time, but the company believed
it was the right thing to do.
Philanthropic Responsibilities
Philanthropic responsibilities center on the corporation’s participation in activities
that promote human welfare or goodwill generally through donations of time and
money or products and services. Because many people consider philanthropy to be a
completely voluntary or discretionary aspect of corporate social responsibility,
failure to be philanthropic is generally not considered as unethical; some may
question whether it is a corporate “responsibility” at all. But, at least in the United
States, those with wealth (including wealthy businesses) are expected to share their
good fortune and are offered tax incentives for doing so. Andrew Carnegie, the
nineteenth-century steel baron who gave millions to charity (it would be over $7
billion today), said, “He who dies rich dies thus disgraced.” He believed that the rich
were morally obligated to give their riches to the community and should do so
during their lifetime.21
In a more recent version of the same belief, Bill Gates (the cofounder of
Microsoft) and his wife, Melinda, created the world’s largest (multibillion-dollar)
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
327

endowment. Gates stepped awa y f rom playing a day-t o- day management r ol e a t
Micros oft in 2008 to focus full-time on phil anthr opy. The G ate s es have de ci de d to
g ive awa y 9 5 p e r c e n t o f t h e i r w e a l t h . T h ey a re particularly i nt erested in health
( A I D S , m a l a r i a , t u b e r c u l o s i s ) , a g r i c u l t u r a l d evel o p m e n t , a n d e d u c a t i o n . T h e f oun-
da tion has been credited with much of the progress in research on malaria, one of the
world’s worst killers. The Gates e ndowm ent i s now supplemented by many more
billions pledged to the foundation by Warren Buffett, who decided to speed up his
own philanthropy when he learned that Gates was going to focus on the foundation
full-tim e22 (see www.gatesfoundation.org). These modern-day philanthropi st s are
actively involved in tackling huge global ills, and they demand accountability and
results.23
These previous examples are of philanthropic individuals from business. Many
companies also engage in philanthropy routinely, often through foundations that they
create. It is difficult to know how much companies actually give, because public
disclosure is not required. But, many firms now voluntarily disclose this information in
their CSR reports, and Business Week and Fortune both publish annual lists of
corporate giving. Some companies, such as Target and Whole Foods, regularly donate
a set portion of their profits to charity. Whole Foods stated in its mission statement that
it would donate 5 percent of its net profits, something it has done annually since 1985.
Target has been doing the same since 1962 and, interestingly, it surveys customers to
find out where it should give. Many companies will also match employee giving or
give employees time off to contribute in their communities. These companies may
think of philanthropy from a stakeholder perspective. They see philanthropy as
allowing them to improve relations with employees, communities, customers, or
other stakeholders by giving to particular causes.
However, philanthropy can also be aimed at causes that are strategically tied to
a company’s competencies and business. As an example of a philanthropic effort
tied to its business, Boston’s Bain & Company provides heavily discounted
management consulting to charities through a nonprofit it created, something it
is particularly competent to do. Similarly, many pharmaceutical companies either
give drugs away to those who can’t afford them or slash prices to make them more
affordable.24
When the tsunami of 2004 hit Southeast Asia, FedEx jumped in to help. The firm
quickly chartered a plane at company expense to send 344,000 pounds of Pedialyte to
rehydrate children in need. Over 100 companies (mostly in the United States) sent an
estimated $178 million in cash and medicine. Companies also used their distinctive
competencies to help. For example, Coca-Cola offered the use of bottling facilities and
pledged to deliver 500,000 bottles of water in Thailand. Colin Powell said that the aid
gave the Muslim world the “opportunity to see American generosity, American values
in action.” Many of these companies helped quietly, not announcing or commenting on
their contributions.25
In September 2005, corporations responded similarly to Hurricane Katrina
victims in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. In fact, Wal-Mart responded so
quickly, efficiently, and generously to hurricane victims that many observers felt the
328
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

company should play an official role in U.S. federal emergency management response
efforts because of its logistics expertise. Wal-Mart donated over $20 million in cash to
Hurricane Katrina relief and donated 1,500 truckloads of free merchandise, food for
100,000 meals, and the promise of a job for all of its displaced workers. The
company’s response was so unparalleled that one observer said, “Wal-Mart has raised
the ante for every company in the country. This is going to change the face of corporate
giving.”26
An interesting question to discuss in class is whether corporations that engage in
philanthropy should publicize their philanthropic efforts. For example, Berkeley
business school students advised Birkenstock to stop giving quietly to a pediatric
AIDS foundation as the company had done for years, and instead to sponsor walks for
causes that could be publicized to advance the shoe company’s image. But the CEO at
the time rejected this advice, suggesting that the meaning of the word responsibility is
lost if social responsibility is just about making money.27 Similarly, we heard the CEO
of Lens Crafters speak about the company’s efforts to collect customers’ old eye-
glasses and fit them on needy individuals in the United States and overseas. He showed
a heartwarming video about the work and its meaning to employees, the company, and
most of all to the recipients (many of whom could see well for the first time). When
asked if the company would be willing to share the video for use in business ethics
classes, he was obviously uncomfortable, saying that he would prefer not to do so
because the company doesn’t engage in this work for publicity purposes. On the other
hand, the philanthropy is an important part of the organization’s culture and, in his
view, creates an important sense of unity and employee commitment.
In our teaching, we often encounter student cynicism in response to corporate
philanthropy efforts, especially when students perceive that companies are engaging in
philanthropy in an attempt to compensate for other clearly harmful activities. For
example, people know that Enron was very philanthropic in the Houston community
and that Philip Morris touts its philanthropic activities while avoiding the fact that its
product, cigarettes, causes lung cancer and kills millions. If observers perceive that a
company is simply attempting to polish its image, cynicism is likely to result.
Therefore the decision to engage in corporate philanthropy should be separate
from management decisions about whether and how to publicize such giving.
What do you think? Should companies publicize their philanthropic efforts externally?
Or, should they treat philanthropy as a more internal matter?
If one believes that philanthropy is a responsibility for corporations, many other
questions remain about what types of initiatives make most sense (how closely they
should be tied to the company’s business, for example), how much to invest in them,
how to monitor and evaluate them, and whether to pay for philanthropic initiatives
through a firm’s operating budget or a foundation. Unfortunately, little research exists
to help us answer these questions.28Fortune magazine reports corporate gifts as a
percentage of revenue. Others suggest that a better measure would be donations as a
percentage of pretax or after-tax income or net earnings. Whatever the best measure, it
is clear that most U.S. businesses are serious about their responsibility to give back to
the community through philanthropy.
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
329

TRIPLE BOTTOM LINE AND ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY
An increasingly popular way to think about corporate social responsibility is in terms
of what has been referred to as the triple bottom line—a firm’s economic, social, and
environmental impacts. We have already discussed the economic bottom line, which
refers to the economic impacts of a firm. The social dimension refers to a firm’s
impacts on multiple stakeholders such as employees, customers, suppliers, and the
broader community. The third dimension of the triple bottom line is the environmental
dimension. It recognizes the impact of business on the natural environment. The term
sustainability has sometimes been used to represent harmony among these three
dimensions. At other times, sustainability has come to be associated with environ-
mental impact—“long-term growth that doesn’t deplete natural resources and lowers
emissions of greenhouse gases.”29Sustainable development has been defined as
“meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their needs.”30
Some companies are using sustainability as an umbrella term to encompass all
CSR efforts that make business more sustainable in the long term, including environ-
mental efforts. Others use corporate social responsibility as the umbrella term (as we
do) and sustainability to represent their social responsibility efforts aimed at preserv-
ing the natural environment. Whatever the terminology, it’s clear that more and more
attention is being paid to this type of corporate effort. In 2008, Fast Company
published a list of 50 ways companies are greening their businesses—everything
from Ford’s process for applying three coats of paint at one time to Enterprise Rent-A-
Car’s increasing the miles per gallon of its fleet to Staples’ modifying thousands of its
private label products to be more eco-friendly.31
In 2011, Forbes magazine created a list of the top 10 “greenest” companies in the
US, companies that have conserved energy and increased their commitment to green
power. They noted that Intel almost doubled its commitment to green power even
during the economic downturn, a remarkable accomplishment. And Intel ties every
employee’s annual bonus to the company’s sustainability performance. As we noted in
our discussion of culture in Chapter 5, this is a sure-fire way to get employees to focus
on particular ethics-related goals.32 Whole Foods was in the Forbes top 10, as was
Starbucks, Cisco Systems, and Kohl’s Department Stores, all companies that say they
want to be part of the effort to “drive a new U.S. green economy.”
In 2012, Newsweek partnered with The Daily Beast and two research organiza-
tions to publish a list entitled “Greenest Global,” that ranked the 500 largest publicly
traded companies worldwide based on environmental footprint, management, and
transparency.33 The top companies represent a wide variety of industries, including
information technology, telecommunications, retail, pharmaceuticals, and financial
services. Well-known names such as IBM, Microsoft, Accenture, Toshiba, Staples,
and Novartis are all in the top 50.
Despite being criticized in many CSR arenas (e.g., employee relations, overseas
bribery), Wal-Mart has had a huge impact on the sustainability initiatives of its
330
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

suppliers by announcing in 2009 that it was working to create a “Sustainability Index”
that would help its customers evaluate products based on their sustainability. In 2011,
as a pilot program, the company developed an index for six different product
categories and accompanying category scorecards. Wal-Mart buyers then used these
scorecards to evaluate products and worked with suppliers on improving their products
in accordance with the scorecards. The stated goal was to develop scorecards to cover
100 product categories by the end of 2012.34
Early environmental efforts date back to concerns about air and water pollution
reduction that began in the 1960s and then to concerns in the 1970s about chemicals
called chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)that, whenreleasedintothe environment, were eating
away the earth’s ozone layer. Although ongoing concerns remain, efforts to reduce
pollution have been quite successful, particularly in Western countries. More recent
attention has focused on global climate change. A growing consensus exists among the
most respected scientists around the world (including those at the first author’s institu-
tion, Penn State University) that global climate change is real and is influenced by
human-generated emissions of greenhouse gases. In early 2007 the UN Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, including the world’s leading scientists on
the subject, issued a reportdocumenting that climate change exists,that human activity is
a key driver, and that the many resulting likely threats to humans includewater shortages,
dropping crop yields, rising sea levels, and harsher storms. The report resulted from a
review of hundreds of peer-reviewed scientific studies. Insurers are certainly taking
notice, especially after the increasing number and intensity of recent storms. According
to a report by German reinsurance company Munich Re, North America has seen a rising
number of extreme weather events that have caused losses of over one trillion dollars
from 1980through 2011.35 Although climate scientists acknowledge that nosingle storm
can be attributed to climate change, Jonathan Foley, director of the University of
Minnesota’s Institute on the Environment put it this way in a tweet following Superstorm
Sandy that hit the U.S. northeast in 2012: “Would this kind of storm happen without
climate change? Yes . . . Is [the] storm stronger because of climate change? Yes.”36
Many American companies, including General Electric, Wal-Mart, and DuPont
Chemical, are making sustainability an essential part of their business strategy. This is
largely because executives of these companies agree with the scientific consensus. But
it is also a response to stakeholder expectations that companies will use resources
responsibly, recycle and reuse when possible, eliminate harmful toxins, and reduce
greenhouse gas emission.37 In addition, executives are rightly concerned because
energy costs are likely to continue increasing in this environment. Further, many
companies also operate in multiple markets, many of which (e.g., the European Union)
are increasing government regulation of carbon emissions. Therefore it makes sense
for a global business to operate according to the most stringent requirements. Savvy
business executives also see the call for change as a grand opportunity for business to
innovate and create the businesses and jobs of the future that provide solutions to
climate change problems. Following Porter and Kramer’s advice,38 some firms are
making environmental sustainability a cornerstone of their broader strategy and an
opportunity to achieve competitive advantage.
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
331

This attention to the natural environm ent repr esents quite a change from earlier
days whe n Gen eral Electric dumped toxic chemical s into New York’s Huds on River
and fought efforts to clean it up, DuPon t was consider ed the count ry’s worst polluter,
and Wal-Mart was known for bulldozi ng its way acro ss the count ry. In 2007, Fortu ne
magazine highl ighted a number of com panies that are seen as leaders in environm ental
sustainabi lity efforts. 32 One som ewhat surprising entry on the list was DuPon t, which
has gone from being known as a corpo rate pollut er to a sust ainability lead er. DuPon t
learned a great deal from its earli er experience with CFCs. Ini tially, it resist ed efforts to
reduce them and suffer ed a battering of its reputat ion as a result. Onc e it was forced to
replace CFCs, the firm developed a highly profitabl e and envir onmentally friendly
substitute. Beginning in the 1990s, the com pany’s efforts reall y intensified whe n a new
CEO focus ed attenti on o n these issues. Since then , DuPon t has subst antiall y cut
greenhouse gases , carc inogens, and hazardous wastes of all kinds . It tries to do this by
fundame ntally changing (rathe r than tweaking) it s proce sses. Now, whe n managers are
considering new produc ts, they are required to addre ss the produc t’s environm ental
footprint as part of the busin ess evalua tion. In addition , emp loyees are challenged to
develop new produc ts that can help solve the worl d’s probl ems while contributing to
the bottom line. Another of the leading com panies identified by Fortune is Hewlett-
Packard, which outlin es its sust ainability efforts in a detailed Global Citize nship
Report. Altho ugh h igh-tech compani es tend to be particula rly sensitive to these issues,
Hewlet t- Packard is seen as one of the best. Fo r example, the com pany’s own machin es
are now comple tely recyclable, and HP makes huge efforts to mitigate the deleteri ous
impacts of “e-waste.” 39
Yet anoth er way compani es are “going gree n” is thr ough their building s. Adob e,
the software maker, became the first com pany to receive the U.S. Green Buil ding
Council’ s p latinum award for its headqu arters in San Jose, Califor nia, in 2006. This
achievement is espec ially impressive becau se the comp any did it n ot by buildin g a new
structure , but by overhauling an existing one. An investment of over $1 million is
yielding nearly $ 1 milli on in annual savings, includi ng subst antial reductions in
electricity and gas usage. 40
William McDonoug h and Mic hael Braunga rt’s book, Cradle to Cradle: Rema k-
ing the Way We Make Things (2002) , is causing many organization s to adopt a new way
of thinking about how to make their business more sustainable. The authors offer a
manifesto for transforming industry through what they call intelligent design and a
concept called “waste equals food,” in which no material is actually wasted but is
either used by another organism or returned to the earth through biodegradation. The
entire process is patterned after natural ecosystems. You can learn more about it at the
authors’ website (www.mcdon ough.co m).
A particularly stellar example of sustainability in action is Interface Carpets,
founded by Ray Andersen in 1973 to produce carpet tiles. Although you may not have
heard of this company, you have likely walked on its ubiquitous carpet tiles. Interface
Carpets is a billion-dollar global firm with sales in over 100 countries. Andersen had a
personal epiphany after reading Paul Hawken’s book, The Ecology of Commerce
(1994). He set the company on a new course to become a restorative enterprise with a
332
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

long-term com mitment to sustai nability and the goal of dem onstratin g to others that
the com pany coul d opera te in such as way as to “ta ke nothing from the earth that is not
naturally and rapidly renewable, and to do no harm to the b iosphere.” 41 This goal is
summed up in the company’s Mission Zero promise and its pledge to climb “Moun t
Sustainabili ty.” Th e com pany aims to be restor ative not just thr ough its own efforts but
by helping others do the same. The com pany’s web site (www.inter faceglobal.com)
lists the seven fron ts of Mount Susta inability: elim inating waste , ensur ing benign
emissions , using renewable energy, closing the loop, achieving resource -efficient
transporta tion, sensitizing stakeholders (in cluding suppliers and investors), and rede -
signing comme rce. It lists mile stone markers and what it consi ders to be its grea test
achievements. Here are just a few. Th e waste sent to land fills is down 77 perc ent. Over
a thi rd of the raw materia ls the company now uses are bio-based or recycled mater ials.
Since 1996, wate r u se in man ufactur ing is down 80 percent and energy intensit y is
down 43 percent. Eight of nine company facilities op erate comple tely on renewable
electricity. The com pany refers to its efforts as a long-te rm jour ney that continue s.
We encour age you to visit the company’s website to learn mor e about its admirabl e
accomplis hments.
We’ll say mor e later about how corpo rate executives often have a knee-je rk
reaction to any additi onal government regula tion. Interestingl y, though , many exec-
utives are actual ly supporting increased government regulation in the environm ental
arena as a way to reduc e uncer tainty about the future and level the play ing field. For
exampl e, influe ntial CEOs from America ’s carmakers and utilities have stated
publicly that the clim ate change threat require s nationa l legislative action to reduc e
greenhouse gas emiss ions . In Janua ry 2009, execut ives from more than a dozen
companies (inclu ding Gen eral Electr ic, Xerox, Con ocoPhillip s, Caterpi llar, and Duke
Energy) joined togethe r to encourage the U.S. Cong ress to pass climat e legislat ion and
offered their own policy reco mmendati ons. In another surpr ising turn of events, in
2009, a numb er of compani es (including Appl e Computer and pub lic utilities PG&E,
Exelon, and PNM Resour ces) resigne d from the U.S. Chamb er of Comm erce becau se
of disagre ements over the Cha mber’s fierce resistanc e to climate change legislation.
As with other social responsibility efforts, firms’ environmental initiatives often
trigger cynical reactions. Terms like greenwashing have been used to describe
corporate efforts that are seen as disingenuous attempts at public relations rather
than sincere efforts to reduce environmental harm or to do good. Greenpeace even
launched a web site (stopgr eenwash.org) devoted to helping peopl e disti nguish the
pretenders from firms that deliver legitimate environmental benefits. So, once again,
firms need to think hard about how to represent their efforts publicly. Interested
stakeholders are quick to target insincere attempts to use the public’s interest in the
environment to simply advance corporate interests.
On a more positive note, we’ve also found a great deal of interest in sustainability
initiatives among our students. In fact, many are beginning to see the sustainability
movement as a career opportunity that aligns with their own values. Students with such
an interest are finding more colleges and universities developing sustainability training
programs, including MBA programs that prepare students to operate sustainable
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
333

businesses or to help traditional business become more environmentally responsible.
At Boston College’s Carroll School of Management, teams of students are competing
to give companies ideas that do good while creating unique business opportunities.
The winners of a 2009 competition created a program called “Green with Envy” that
offered green products and services including a recyclable telephone and a program
customers can use to reduce their carbon footprint and stay aware of environmental
issues.42 We expect to see more of such programs in coming years.
IS SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE BUSINESS GOOD
BUSINESS?
This is an age-old question to which we don’t have a perfect answer, although we know
a lot more about it than we used to. Anecdotes abound. We can probably all name
companies that appear to have “gotten ahead” in irresponsible ways, at least in the
short term. The financial companies that helped precipitate the 2008 financial crisis
come to mind. On the other hand, we can also identify companies that have paid dearly
for their irresponsible behavior; and finally, we can point to many successful
companies that are based on a foundation of social responsibility. Let’s see if we
can get beyond the anecdotes and look to the evidence.
The Beneﬁt of a Good Reputation
One argument that social responsibility does “pay” focuses on the value of a
company’s reputation with key stakeholders. Norman Augustine, retired chairman
of Lockheed Martin, one of the largest defense contractors, recounted a situation when
the company’s ethics and social responsibility were on the line. When competing on a
government contract, the company received a brown paper bag containing their
competitor’s bid. They immediately turned it over to the U.S. government and told
the competitor about it. Lockheed lost the contract, employees lost jobs, and share-
holders lost money—huge short-term losses. But Augustine is convinced that the loss
was only short term. “We helped establish a reputation that, in the long run, will draw
us business . . . it always pays off in the long term.”
But does reputation really matter? According to Business Week, “business has a
huge stake in the way the rest of society perceives its ethical standards.” On the
negative side, scandals give business “a black eye”43 and cost money. For example,
Exxon faced years of negative media scrutiny after the Exxon Valdez oil spill. On a
more positive note, a favorable corporate reputation “may enable firms to charge
premium prices, attract better applicants, enhance their access to capital markets, and
attract investors.”44 In general, research has supported the idea that having a good
reputation pays off in lower costs, higher sales, and the ability to charge higher prices
than firms with poor reputations can.45 Studies have also found that workers are more
attracted to firms with a reputation for social responsibility.46 In a Stanford University
study of 800 MBA graduates from 11 leading European and North American business
schools, 94 percent of the students said they would be willing to forgo financial
334
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

benefits to work for an organization with a better reput ation for ethics and corpo rate
social responsi bility.47 Onc e emp loyed, people are also more com mitted to organiza-
tions that have a “benevolen t clim ate”—one that focus es on the welfare of employees
and the commun ity, whi le organi zationa l commitmen t is lower in “egoistic” climat es
(based on self-int erest and people being out for themselves). 48
Socially Responsible Investors Reward Social
Responsibility
Another way to think about this question is to focus on shareholders as a particularly
important stakeholder group and ask whether shareholders reward social responsibility.
We focus here on a particular group of shareholders who do; they’re socially responsible
investors. It’s important to note that shareholders are not a unified group. Socially
responsible investors are those shareholders who clearly care about the financial and the
social bottom line of a business. Socially responsible investors insist that their invest-
ments meet ethical as well as financial criteria. They “put their cash where their
conscience is.” Although the social criteria vary, many of these investors shun certain
types of industries, such as tobacco, while supporting companies that use energy wisely,
protect the environment, practice good governance, and market safe products and
services. They may also consider the firm’s human resource practices, such as female
and minority advancement, day care, profit sharing, and executive pay policies. Several
socially responsible stock indexes have emerged (e.g., KLD, FTSE4Good, Dow Jones
Sustainability Group Index, Domini Social Index 400), and being listed on one of those
has value in terms of corporate reputation. A number of brokers, financial planners, and
mutual funds also serve these investors’ needs in the United States and internationally
where socially responsible investing is also growing. A nonprofit trade association, the
Social Investment Forum (www.socialinvest.org), reported that socially responsible
investing grew from $40 billion in 1984 to nearly $4 trillion in 2012. The association
provides a long list of 140 socially responsible mutual funds, and these funds have
generally managed to keep investors better than other funds have.49 Growth in socially
responsible investing is attributed to demand for such products from both institutional
and individual investors and growing concern about the natural environment, among
other forces. Institutional investors’ concern about social responsibility has also grown.
For example, CalPERS (the huge California Public Employees’ Retirement System)
pressures the companies it invests in to engage in good corporate governance and
socially responsible practices in areas such as human rights and environmental respon-
sibility (see www.calpers.ca.gov). What does this mean for ethics and social responsi-
bility? At least for this group of investors, shareholders’ interests are not distinct from
employee, customer, and community interests; they’re all interconnected.50
The Cost of Illegal Conduct
We said earlier that fulfilling legal responsibilities is one type of corporate social
responsibility. Failing to fulfill those responsibilities results in criminal conduct that is
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
335

extremely costly to the individuals and firms convicted.51 Since the passage of
Sarbanes-Oxley, hundreds of corporate fraud cases have been brought to trial. Senior
executives have been sentenced to lengthy prison terms, such as Bernie Ebbers’ 25-
year prison sentence for his involvement in cooking the books at MCI and Walter
Forbes’ 2007 sentence to 12 years and 7 months in prison and $3.275 billion in
restitution for accounting fraud at Cendant. Despite the myth that white-collar
criminals go to a summer-camp-like “Club Fed,” that is far from true. Some who
commit financial crimes serve their time in higher-level prisons along with rapists,
pedophiles, and drug dealers.
For example, Dennis Kozlowski, the former CEO of Tyco, and Mark Swartz, the
former Tyco CFO, were sentenced in September 2005 in a New York State court (not a
federal court) to 8 to 25 years and will have to serve their terms in a maximum-security
state prison such as Attica—not a Club Fed by any means.52 Even the minimum-
security federal prisons are not pleasant places. Although there is no razor wire,
inmates have no privacy, are subject to body cavity strip searches, and eat prison
food.53 Just ask Charles Gile, a former energy derivatives trader for Citigroup who left
behind his degrees from Vanderbilt and Wharton, medals from Desert Storm, a home
on the Connecticut coast, and a lovely wife and three children to become inmate No.
59449-054 at a federal prison camp in Jesup, Georgia. He was charged with overstating
the value of energy-based derivatives and understating their risk as a way to boost
bonuses. He said, “This notion of Club Fed is terribly inaccurate...That place doesn’t
exist. No nice meals—unless you consider the bologna soup we had a couple of weeks
ago a nice meal. I live in an open-air cinderblock building. Sleep in a triple-decker
bunk bed. There are six toilets. Seven showers for 75 men.” He was allowed two
possessions, eyeglasses and his wedding ring.54 Most inmates say that even worse than
serving time in prison is the shame that a criminal investigation and conviction bring to
one’s family. Criminals often lose their families as a result. Finally, many of these
executives, even if not convicted of a criminal offense, will likely lose their personal
fortunes as a result of other lawsuits. As one former CEO inmate put it, “Life as you
know it is over.”55
From the firm’s perspective, stock prices also drop in the short term in response to
announcements of allegations of corporate crime and in response to announced
penalties.56 Financial performance also suffers significantly over the five years
following a conviction.57 Companies often settle with prosecutors to avoid lengthy
litigation. For example, in late 2002, the top 10 U.S. brokerage firms agreed to pay
$1.44 billion in fines, completely separate their stock research from their investment
banking operations, and pay for independent stock research. Merrill Lynch agreed to
pay a $100 million fine earlier in 2002. The conventional wisdom says that firms don’t
suffer enough for illegal behavior. But one academic study examined the penalties
imposed on nearly 600 firms for financial misrepresentation over more than two
decades. Beyond the monetary penalties, which averaged $23.5 million, the research-
ers found a much larger reputational penalty imposed by the market that was felt only
after the legal penalty was revealed. Firms lost 41 percent of market value on news of
the misconduct, and most of that decrease can be attributed to lost reputation.58
336
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Interestingly, punishment comes from business partners as well. When illegal or
unethical conduct is revealed via the media, firms lose legitimacy with business
partners such that, after the illegal conduct is revealed, their executives are more likely
to serve on the boards of firms with lower reputations and profitability than before, and
the company’s own board members are more likely to come from firms with lower
reputations and profitability. More serious illegal or unethical conduct is associated
with even stronger effects. So, firms that engage in illegal or unethical conduct find
that high-quality network connections are severed as those associated with more
profitable and reputable firms distance themselves.59
The Cost of Government Regulation
Another huge cost of irresponsible business behavior is increased government
regulation. Government is responsible for preventing serious risks to our system
(for example, by regulating industries such as financial services and electricity) and for
holding companies accountable for the “externalities” they create. Externalities are
costs to society, such as environmental damage, that are produced by companies but
not reflected in the company’s cost structure.60 As consumers, we rely on the
government to hold companies accountable for their actions. We want to be sure
that our air, food, and water are safe; that airlines don’t skimp on maintenance,
security, or pilot training; that physicians who work for managed care companies put
patient care ahead of profits; and that large financial institutions don’t take huge risks
that can bring down the entire economy.
After so many business scandals, business has experienced a regulatory backlash.
You may have noticed that deregulated businesses (e.g., energy, telecommunications,
and financial services) have been at the forefront of recent business scandals. The lack
of regulation of the mortgage-backed securities business contributed to the recent
financial crisis and led to new financial industry regulations. In earlier scandals, Enron
clearly took advantage of the lack of regulation of its energy trading business to
influence government officials and play games with the numbers.61 And companies
like WorldCom took advantage of deregulation in the telecommunications industry. As
a result of these scandals, people lose trust in the ability or will of business to self-
regulate and demand more government regulation.
The 1990s financial reporting scandals led the New York Stock Exchange to call
for reform. The reforms, passed in August 2002, enforce corporate board and audit
independence and require members to have codes of conduct. Congress passed the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (commonly referred to as SOX) legislating corporate governance
and accounting reform in July 2002. Among other things, the law sets up a new
oversight board for the accounting industry, requires that companies change their lead
auditor or coordinating partner every five years, reduces the range of services auditors
can offer, and bars senior executives from selling stock during certain periods.62 In
addition, CEOs and CFOs of public companies are required to certify the accuracy of
their financial statements, which they did for the first time in August 2002. A false
certification can get the executive a $5 million fine and up to 20 years in prison.
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
337

Securitie s fraud is punishabl e with up to 25 year s in jail , and shreddin g o r destroying
documents in federal investigations can get the perpe trator up to 20 years. 63
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is considered the most burdensome for
companies. It requires firms to be able to show that their internal financial control systems
are sound and can prevent fraud. This requirement is difficult at best and, according to the
Wall Street Journal, has enriched the firms that conduct audits while taking attention away
from innovation and day-to-day business.64 So, although some executives have acknowl-
edged that the law has resulted in worthwhile improvements in their internal control
systems (e.g., GE, United Technologies), other business leaders have complained that the
regulation is too costly—especially for smaller businesses—and has driven companies
away from U.S. stock exchanges. But Bu sin ess We ek writes that the reforms have been
successful because they have increased the credibility of the markets and have caught a lot
of real problems before they became serious.65 Further, costs have decreased over time as
companies have streamlined their processes and become more efficient, and other
countries (e.g., France, Japan, China, Canada) have adopted similar rules. Finally,
ac co rd in g t o Business Week, non-U.S. companies continue to flock to U.S. stock
exchanges. Some analysts say that the more stringent regulatory environment actually
helps companies by increasing shareholder confidence in financial reporting.66
The Securitie s and Exchang e Commis sion is still in the proce ss of making and
implementi ng the rules calle d for by the Dodd -Frank Wall Street Refor m and
Consumer Protection Act, which was passed in resp onse to the 2008 finan cial crisi s.
The overar ching idea is to increase transparency in a wide variety of markets such as
securities-based swaps and hedge funds. In addition, investors now have more of a say
in executive compensation and the SEC has implemented a new whistleblower
program that incentivizes individuals to come forward with information about
securities law violat ions (see www.sec.gov for more informat ion).
Boards of directors of public companies are taking their oversight responsibilities
more seriously because of the new regulations as well, largely out of concern for their
own personal liability. Boards have fired a number of CEOs as a result (Harry
Stonecipher at Boeing, Hank Greenberg at the insurance company AIG, and many
more). At MCI (formerly WorldCom, of scandal fame), the board has taken a broad
stakeholder perspective on its duties. Its governance guidelines say that the board
should “maximize the long-term value of the company for its shareholders” by
“responsibly addressing the concerns of other interested parties including employees,
customers, suppliers, government and regulatory officials, communities and the public
at large.” Those guidelines came into play when MCI’s board rejected a higher
takeover bid from Qwest in 2005 in favor of one from Verizon—leaving over $1 billion
on the table and angering short-term investors. The board looked ahead and concluded
that, in the long term, the Verizon bid would be worth more.67 As this story points out,
those who argue that a public company owes responsibility first to its shareholders
must answer a very important question—which shareholders? Day traders have very
different interests than do those who plan to hold a stock long term.
In some cases, probably in attempts to stave off further government regulation,
companies in specific industries come together to self-regulate. In July 2002 the
338
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Pharmac eutical Research and Manufacturers of Amer ica (PhRMA ) embrac ed new
voluntar y guide lines for h ow pharmac eutica l sales represe ntatives can mar ket to
physicians. For decad es this has been fertile territory for conflicts of interest , and
PhRMA ’s guide lines are the beginning of a cle anup. The code, an updated version of
which took effect in 2009, is post ed on the org anization’s website and specifically
prohibits pharmaceut ical sales reps from payi ng for a range of perks they had
employed in the past to get access to physi cians who make the deci sions about whi ch
drugs to prescribe. Th e perks ranged from dinne rs to ski vacati ons, sporti ng events, and
cruises, and even to paying for a physici an to fill up his car at a serv ice statio n—all in
an attem pt to get air time with the d octors. Although Ph RMA h as no enfor cement
provisions , many of the p harmaceut ical compani es are expected to take the new
guidelines serious ly. Executives from Merck, GlaxoSmi thKlein, Wyeth Ayers t, and
others have spoken publi cly in suppor t of the guidelin es,68 and a long list of compani es
have now stated publicl y that they intend to abide by the code.
However, the government was not content to leave the compani es to regulate
themselves o n this issue. In Septemb er 2002, the Departm ent of Hea lth and Hum an
Services issued similar guidelines prohibiti ng pharmac eutica l com panies from offer-
ing ince ntive paym ents or any othe r “tangible benefits” to reward the p rescribin g or
purchasing of their drugs . Compa nies that flout the new standar ds can be investigated
and prosecuted under federal fraud and kickback statutes.69 In 2005, PhRMA also
released a voluntary conduct code for print and television advertising of prescription
drugs. Among other principles, the companies pledge to educate doctors before
beginning consum er advertising campaigns (see www.phrma.org).
Responsible Care, a voluntary initiative of the chemical industry, was launched in
the United States in 1988 in response to major accidents such as the 1984 disaster at a
Union Carbide plant in Bhopal, India. The aim of this program is to secure the public’s
trust in the chemical industry by demonstrating responsible corporate citizenship.
Members subscribe to a voluntary code of conduct that is monitored and enforced by
the Chemical Manufacturers Association. The codes cover the following areas:
community awareness and emergency response, pollution prevention, safe distribution
of chemicals in transit, employee health and safety, and safe handling of chemicals
from manufacture through disposal. The codes and policies extend beyond legal
compliance and focus on continuous improvement, communication with external
stakeholders, and training of suppliers on the standards.70
What the Research Says about Social Responsibility
and Firm Performance
In academic circles, arguments are made on both sides about whether corporate social
responsibility is related to financial performance. Some argue that CSR should
contribute positively to the bottom line by making multiple important stakeholders
more positively disposed toward the firm. Others argue that social responsibility is a cost
that robs resources from profits. Although difficult to research, studies on this question
have become more sophisticated over the years and they’re providing answers.
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
339

In an early and simple attempt to demonstrate a positive link between good ethics
and firm financial performance, James Burke, former CEO of Johnson & Johnson,
compiled a list of major companies with a reputation for ethics and social responsi-
bility. The group, including such recognized names as Johnson & Johnson, Coca-Cola,
Gerber, IBM, Deere, 3M, Xerox, J.C. Penney, and Pitney Bowes, grew at a rate of 11.3
percent annually from 1950 to 1990, while the growth rate for Dow Jones industrials as
a whole was only 6.2 percent for the same period.71
In a similar study, researchers compared the 2001 “100 Best Corporate Cit-
izens”—as measured by a synthesis of the rankings by Kinder, Lydenberg, Domini
(KLD), an independent service that assesses corporate social performance of compa-
nies in the S&P 500, based on firms’ responses to key stakeholder interests—with
Business Week’s financial rankings. The average financial performance of the 100 best
corporate citizen firms was significantly better (more than 10 percentage points
higher) than the average financial performance of the rest of the S&P 500.72 These
firms also had higher rankings in Fortune magazine’s 2001 reputation survey.
Corporate citizenship was measured by rating companies’ service to seven different
stakeholder groups: stockholders, community, minorities and women, employees,
environment, non-U.S. stakeholders, and customers.73
Over the last 30 years or so, a growing number of academic studies have attempted
to document the relationship between social responsibility and financial performance
more rigorously.74 A recent statistical review (a meta-analysis) of 52 such studies
found a positive relationship between CSR and financial performance, especially
when reputation-based measures of corporate social performance and accounting-
based measures of financial performance were used. In addition, researchers have
found that a reputation for higher corporate social performance is associated with
decreased firm financial risk.75 Finally, research has demonstrated that companies
with good corporate governance structures and policies (such as strong shareholder
rights provisions) have higher profitability, sales growth, and market values as well as
higher stock prices than do companies without such structures and policies. Gavin
Anderson at GovernanceMetrics International (a firm that evaluates corporate gov-
ernance practices) suggests that, before investing in a company, wary investors should
search for a pattern of previous litigation and regulatory problems (available through
the Securities and Exchange Commission and other public data sources). Such a
pattern suggests that the firm has a culture that tolerates unethical and illegal behavior
and should be avoided.76
Research also suggests a reciprocal relationship, meaning that social responsi-
bility leads to increased financial performance and financial performance provides
firms with more slack resources that they can then devote to future social responsibility
efforts.77 The study used an index of eight attributes of CSR as rated by KLD. Firms
with strong financial performance were rated higher on corporate social performance,
suggesting that companies that do well financially also allocate more resources to
social concerns—they “do good by doing well.” Those that are not in good financial
health may not have the funds to engage in philanthropy or other discretionary social
performance activities. The study also found that financial performance depends on
340
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

good social performance, suggesting that firms also “do well by doing good.” The
authors termed this the “good management theory,” arguing that good social per-
formance is related to other good managerial practices.
It’s likely that these relationships are linked in what the authors termed a “virtuous
circle” in which good corporate social performance feeds financial performance and
good financial performance makes it possible to continue good corporate social
performance. Clearly, being socially responsible doesn’t harm the firm’s bottom line
as some economists have suggested in the past. In fact, the study’s findings suggest
that a firm’s relationships with key stakeholders (e.g., employees, community, natural
environment) are important to its financial performance.78
One difficulty of understanding the relationship between CSR and financial
performance is that most studies combine all types of social responsibility into one
composite. But different types of initiatives may have different effects. For example,
firms that made Working Mother magazine’s list of “Most Family Friendly
Companies” for the first time experienced significant, positive, abnormal stock market
returns following the announcement that they were on the list.79
Further, many corporate executives believe that philanthropy contributes to the
bottom line, helping to attract and retain thebest employees and helping to create a brand
that consumers will associate with caring and generosity. But previous research had
found mixed results. In one study the authors argued that these mixed results may occur
because the relationship is not a simple linear one.80 Interestingly, this study found an
inverted U-shaped relationship between corporate philanthropy and financial perform-
ance. The authors found that firms can benefit from philanthropy up to a point, arguably
because key stakeholders will be more cooperative and supportive of the firm as theory
suggests. The authors used the term excessive philanthropy to explain that, beyond some
optimal point, philanthropy becomes more of a cost and may raise concerns among wary
stakeholders who worry that too many resources are being expended. The study also
found that firms operating in more dynamic business environments, where corporate
reputation and image are likely most important, benefit the most from corporate
philanthropy.81 Therefore, although it’s clear that philanthropy can be beneficial,
research suggests that executives must work hard to find the optimal point beyond
which additional philanthropy is likely to be counterproductive.
In yet another attempt to look at specific types of initiatives, a 2008 study
investigated the relationship between “green” initiatives (in particular, strategic
investments to reduce emissions and pollution) and financial performance.82 Previous
research had generally found a positive relationship between environmental perform-
ance and financial performance and had credited that relationship to more efficient
utilization of resources. In this study of 267 firms, the authors argued that such
investments reduce the risk of litigation, allowing the firm to direct resources more
strategically and ultimately improving investors’ perceptions of the company’s risk
profile. As a result, the authors argued, the firm’s cost of debt and equity capital should
be reduced, and they found support for these relationships. Therefore, in addition to
improving internal efficiencies, external stakeholders respond positively to environ-
mental initiatives by reducing the firm’s cost of capital.83
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
341

Res earch ha s also fo und th at failu re to be socially respo nsible is cos tly. O ne study
synthesized the results of 27 studies that covered over 2,0 00 incidents of socially
irrespo nsible or illegal b ehav ior. Across these studies, sto ck p rices decreased signifi cantly
in respo nse to so cia lly irresp onsible or illegal acts, thereb y decreasing shareho lde r
wealth.84 T hese results suggest that the re are defin itely costs t o being socially irrespo nsible .
It is important to remember, however, that stellar social responsibility cannot
compensate for a poor business strategy. Levi Strauss has long been known for its values
and CSR initiatives (see www.levistrauss.com). The company is proud of its commitment
to diversity, philanthropy, and its early establishment of an ethical code for overseas
manufacturers.Butinthelate1990s,thecompanyexperiencedaslideinrevenuethattook
quite some time to turn around. A new CEO was hired in 1999. He initiated a turnaround
strategy aimed at product innovation, the system of styles and sizes, and information
technology initiatives. Over the long term, it is clear that, to be successful, companies
must have both excellent business strategies and socially responsible business practices.
Being Socially Responsible Because It’s the Right
Thing to Do
Finally, we propose that businesspeople may have another reason (besides the
financial bottom line) to practice “good ethics” and social responsibility—because
they’re people first, who value their good reputations and the opinion of their friends,
family, and community. They’re guided by a moral compass that points them in an
ethical direction as well as a financial compass that points them toward considering the
costs and benefits of a decision.
Consider Malden Mills, the Massachusetts manufacturer of Polarfleece and Polar-
tec fabrics. On December 11, 1995, while the CEO was celebrating his seventieth
birthday, the company experienced a catastrophic industrial fire that wiped out three of
four factories in Lawrence, Massachusetts. The fourth building was saved through the
heroic efforts of 27 union employees who fought the fire all night. No one was killed in
the fire, thanks to the efforts of employees who checked attendance sheets, made a
human chain, and dragged their fellow employees to safety. After the fire, CEO Aaron
Feuerstein carried the welfare of his employees, customers, and the Lawrence commu-
nity on his shoulders. “There is no way I would throw 3,000 workers into the street—no
way I would take Lawrence, Massachusetts, and condemn them to economic obliv-
ion.”85 He quickly announced that he would keep his 3,000 jobless employees on the
payroll for a month, which he extended to two months, and then three months, while the
factory was being rebuilt. Feuerstein paid out a total of more than $15 million in wages
and benefits to jobless employees after the fire. Employees jumped to the challenge. Just
a fewweeks after thefire,productivitywashigher than ithadbeenbefore thefire because
of employees’ creativity and willingness towork “25 hours a day.”86 By summer, almost
all of the employees had returned to work, and the 400 unemployed got extended health
benefits, help finding work, and a promise of a job when the new plant opened.
Feuerstein received accolades from the workforce and the media, and President Bill
Clinton invited him to attend the State of the Union Address in 1996.
342
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Many in the business community thought Feuerstein should have pocketed the
insurance money and moved the company somewhere with lower labor costs, perhaps
overseas. But Fortune magazine later praised Feuerstein as an astute businessman in
his handling of the disaster. He treated his employees as an asset rather than an
expense, cultivated their loyalty, and bet on the company’s future. The decision to
rebuild the factory was also a rational one because insurance covers the replacement
cost of a factory only if it is rebuilt. If he hadn’t replaced the factory, Feuerstein might
have had to settle for the depreciated value of the burned building and its contents. And
moving the factory overseas would have risked losing the quality advantage. Finally,
Feuerstein took advantage of a mountain of free media attention from People and
Parade magazines, TV newsmagazines such as Dateline, and more.87
According to Fortune, “Any idiot with a strong enough stomach can make quick
money, sometimes a lot of it, by slashing costs and milking customers, employees,
or a company’s reputation. But clearly that’s not the way to make a lot of money for
a long time. The way to do that is to create so much value that your customers
wouldn’t dream of looking for another supplier. Indeed, the idea is to build a value
creation system of superior products, service, teamwork, productivity, and cooper-
ation with the buyer.”88 This view jibes with Feuerstein’s philosophy. In a 1997 talk
to management professors at their annual Academy of Management meeting,
Feuerstein said his business objective is to win by creating a better-performing,
higher-quality product that is different from what competitors are making. To do
that, you have to have the right people, trust, and understanding. You have to extend
to your people the loyalty you want them to extend to you. Clearly, Feuerstein is an
accomplished businessman. But he is also driven by deeply held moral beliefs. In
that talk to business professors, he quoted the Bible (in Hebrew!) on the responsi-
bility of a rich man not to praise himself for his riches, and to do kindness, justice,
and charity in the community. Given his moral beliefs, he believed that he had no
choice but to rebuild his factories.
In an unfortunate turn of events, Malden Mills was forced to file for bankruptcy
when it ran short of cash in late 2001 due to the cost of rebuilding after the devastating
1995 fire. However, Feuerstein remained optimistic because key customers remained
loyal (L.L. Bean, Patagonia, The North Face, the U.S. Military), union employees
volunteered major concessions, and members of the general public (including local
townspeople) sent notes of encouragement and sometimes checks! 60 Minutes aired a
laudatory segment about Feuerstein and the company on March 24, 2002, and the
company worked hard to develop new specialty products for growing markets
including the American military.
The company emerged from bankruptcy protection in 2003. Michael Spillane, a
Tommy Hilfiger executive, was named CEO in August 2004 about the same time the
company announced that the U.S. Congress had approved $21 million to purchase
Polartec garments for the military and to support continued research and development
of electronic textiles that can remotely monitor the physiology of soldiers in combat.
But, in 2007, the company filed for bankruptcy again. The new company that emerged
is named Polartec LLC and is owned by Versa Capital Management. It offers a wide
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
343

variety of Polartec products, which it sells to the military and other familiar names
such as Patagonia, The North Face, Lands End, and L.L. Bean.
Feuerstein lost control of his former company in June 2004.89 But he has said that he
didn’texpectanythingin return forhis magnanimousbehaviorin 1995.Hediditbecause
it was right, not because therewould be a financial payoff.90 “There are times in business
when you don’t think of the financial consequences but of the human consequences.”91
So to Feuerstein, the question, “Is socially responsible business good business?” is the
wrong question. Good business doesn’t refer to just the financial bottom line. Good
business is business that does well financially by producing products that meet
customers’ needs and by being responsible to employees and the broader community.92
CONCLUSION
This chapter was designed to introduce the concept of corporate social responsibility
(CSR). Hopefully, we have convinced you that it’s good for business and that it’s worth
bothering about. The next chapter provides both classic and more recent examples of
corporate social responsibility and irresponsibility, and the final chapter provides
examples from the global business environment.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.
Do you think corporate social responsibility is important? Why or why not?
2.
Choose a company and analyze its CSR report. In doing so, think about what seem
to be its reasons for being socially responsible. Is it pragmatic, ethical, strategic,
or some combination? Can you identify its key stakeholders?
3.
Using the same company as an example, think about the four types of corporate
social responsibility. What is your assessment of how the company is doing?
4.
With reference to the CSR pyramid, what are the implications of stopping at a
particular pyramid level? For example, would it be all right if a company took its
sole responsibility to be financial responsibility to its shareholders? Financial
responsibility and legal responsibility? Do you agree that CSR is best represented
by a pyramid? Why or why not? Can you think of a better way to graphically
represent a company’s social responsibility?
5.
Think about the television programs and films you’ve seen recently in which
business’ social responsibility (or lack thereof) was portrayed in some way. How
were business and businesspeople portrayed? Is there anything the business could
or should do to improve its media image? Some businesses try to stay out of the
limelight. Why might that be? What do you think of that strategy?
6.
Do you believe that employees are more attracted and committed to socially
responsible companies? Why or why not? Are you? Why or why not?
7.
If you were running your own company, how would you communicate your CSR
strategy with employees, with external stakeholders, and why?
344
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

CASE
MERCK AND RIVER BLINDNESS
Headquartered in New Jersey, Merck & Co. is one of the largest pharmaceutical
companies in the world. In 1978, Merck was about to lose patent protection on its two
best-selling prescription drugs. These medications had provided a significant part of
Merck’s $2 billion in annual sales. Because of imminent loss, Merck decided to pour
millions into research to develop new medications. During just three years in the
1970s, the company invested over $1 billion in research and was rewarded with the
discovery of four powerful medications. Profits, however, were never all that Merck
cared about. In 1950, George W. Merck, then chairman of the company his father
founded, said, “We try never to forget that medicine is for people. It is not for the
profits. The profits follow, and if we have remembered that, they have never failed to
appear. The better we have remembered that, the larger they have been.” This
philosophy was at the core of Merck & Co.’s value system.
RIVER BLINDNESS
The disease onchocerciasis, known as river blindness, is caused by parasitic worms that
live in the small black flies that breed in and about fast-moving rivers in developing
countries in the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America. When a person is bitten by a fly
(and some people are bitten thousands of times a day), the larvae of the worm can enter
the person’s body. The worms can grow to almost two feet long and can cause grotesque
growths on an infected person. The real trouble comes, however, when the worms begin
to reproduce and release millions of microscopic baby worms into a person’s system.
The itching is so intense that some infected persons have committed suicide. As time
passes, the larvae continue to cause severe problems, including blindness.
In 1978, the World Health Organization estimated that more than 300,000 people
were blind because of the disease, and another 18 million were infected. In 1978, the
disease had no safe cure. Only two drugs could kill the parasite, but both had serious,
even fatal, side effects. The only measure being taken to combat river blindness was the
spraying of infected rivers with insecticides in the hope of killing the flies. However,
even this wasn’t effective since the flies had built up immunity to the chemicals.
MERCK’S ETHICAL QUANDARY
Since it takes $200 million in research and 12 years to bring the average drug to
market, the decision to pursue research is a complex one. Resources are finite, so
dollars and time have to go to projects that hold the most promise in terms of making
money to ensure the company continues to exist as well as of alleviating human
suffering. This is an especially delicate issue when it comes to rare diseases, when a
drug company’s investment could probably never be recouped because the number of
people who would buy the drug is so small. The problem with developing a drug to
combat river blindness was the flip side of the “orphan” drug dilemma. There were
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
345

Case Questions
1.
Think about the definition of stakeholders—any parties with a stake in the
organization’s actions or performance. Who are the stakeholders in this situation?
How many can you list? On what basis would you rank them in importance?
2.
What are the potential costs and benefits of such an investment?
3.
If a safe and effective drug could be developed, the prospect of Merck’s
recouping its investment was almost zero. Could Merck justify such an invest-
ment to shareholders and the financial community? What criteria would be
needed to help them make such a decision?
4.
If Merck decided not to conduct further research, how would it justify such a
decision to its scientists? How might the decision to develop the drug, or not to
develop the drug, affect employee loyalty?
5.
How would the media treat a decision to develop the drug? Not to develop the
drug? How might either decision affect Merck’s reputation?
6.
Think about the decision in terms of the CSR pyramid. Did Merck have an
ethical obligation to proceed with development of the drug? Would it matter if
the drug had only a small chance to cure river blindness? Does it depend on how
close the company was to achieving a cure, or how sure they were that they could
achieve it? Or does this decision become a question of philanthropy only?
7.
How does Merck’s value system fit into this decision?
8.
If you were the senior executive of Merck, what would you do?
SHORT CASE
You have a long-standing consulting relationship with a large consumer products
company. This company represents 50 percent of your consulting revenues and is
clearly your most important client. The CEO has called to ask you to commit a
significant amount of time over the next couple of months to assist with a large
certainly enough people suffering from the disease to justify the research, but since it
was a disease afflicting people in some of the poorest parts of the world, those
suffering from the disease could not pay for the medication.
In 1978, Merck was testing ivermectin, a drug foranimals, to see ifit could effectively
kill parasites and worms.Duringthis clinicaltesting, Merckdiscoveredthat the drugkilled
aparasiteinhorsesthatwasverysimilartothewormthatcausedriverblindnessinhumans.
This, therefore, was Merck’s dilemma: company scientists were encouraging the firm to
invest in further research to determine whether the drug could be adapted for safe use with
humans, but Merck knew it would likely never be a profitable product.
Source: D. Bollier, Merck & Company (Stanford, CA: The Business Enterprise Trust, 1991).
346
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

merger project . The company is merging with a large conglom erate whos e prima ry
business is the sal e and distribution of tobacco produc ts. The CEO is relyin g on you to
assist in faci litating a smooth integration of the two com panies. You prom ised yourself
that becau se your father died of lung cance r, you would never work for a toba cco
company. Is there a way that you can acce pt the consult ing assignm ent and still keep
your promis e to yours elf? How will you handl e thi s dilem ma if you decide that you
cannot work for the toba cco com pany?
NOTES
1. 
D. Swanson, “Addressing a Theoretical Problem by Reorienting the Corporate Social Performance
Model,” Academy of Management Review 20 (1995): 43–64.
2. 
E. Freeman, Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach (Boston: Pitman/Ballinger, 1984).
3. 
D. G. McNeil, “At Last, a Company Takes PETA Seriously,” New York Times, July 25, 2004, 4.
4. 
Ibid.
5. 
“First, They Took on Taco Bell. Now, the Fast Food World,” New York Times, May 22, 2005, 30.
6. 
M. Gunther, “The Mosquito in the Tent,” Fortune, May 31, 2004, 158–63.
7. 
“Confronting Anti-globalism,” Businessweek, August 6, 2001, 92.
8. 
K. Davis, “The Case For and Against Business Assumption of Social Responsibilities,” Academy of
Management Journal 16 (1973): 312–22; D. J. Wood, “Corporate Social Performance Revisited,”
Academy of Management Review 16 (1991): 691–718.
9. 
C. Duhigg and D. Barboza, “In China, Human Costs Are Built Into an iPad,” The New York Times,
January 
25, 
2012, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/26/business/ieconomy-apples-ipad-and-the-
human-costs-for-workers-in-china.html
10. 
“Compliance by the Numbers,” The New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/01/26/
business/apple-suppliers-compliance-by-the-numbers.html?ref ¼ business
11.
D. Swanson, “Addressing a Theoretical Problem by Reorienting the Corporate Social Performance
Model,” Academy of Management Review 20 (1995): 43–64.
12.
J. A. Parnell and E. B. Dent, “Philosophy, Ethics, and Capitalism: An Interview with BB&T Chairman
John Allison,” Academy of Management Learning and Education 8 (2009): 587–96.
13.
Ibid.
14.
“Counting the Miles,” Newsweek, June 27, 2005, 40–42.
15.
Michael E. Porter, Mark R. Kramer, “Strategy and Society: The Link Between Competitive Advantage
and Corporate Social Responsibility,” December 1, 2006.
16.
Ibid.
17.
E. F. Kratz, “For FedEx It Was Time to Deliver,” Fortune, October 3, 2005, 83–84.
18.
A. B. Carroll, “The Pyramid of Corporate Social Responsibility: Toward the Moral Management of
Organizational Stakeholders,” Business Horizons 34, no. 4 (1991): 39–48.
19.
M. Friedman, “The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its Profits,” New York Times,
September 13, 1970, 122–26.
20.
C. Hess and K. Hey, “‘Good’ Doesn’t Always Mean ‘Right’.” Across the Board 38, no. 4 (2001): 61–65.
21.
J. A. Byrne, “The New Face of Philanthropy,” Business Week, December 2, 2002, 82–86.
22.
P. Sellers, “Melinda Gates Goes Public,” Fortune, January 21, 2008, 44–56.
23.
J. A. Byrne, “The New Face of Philanthropy,” Business Week, December 2, 2002, 82–86.
24.
H. Bruch and F. Walter, “The keys to rethinking corporate philanthropy,” MIT Sloan Management
Review, Fall, 2005, 49–55.
25.
C. Chandler, “A Wave of Corporate Charity,” Fortune, January 24, 2005, 21–22.
26.
M. Barbaro and J. Gillis, “Wal-Mart at Forefront of Hurricane Relief,” Washington Post, September 6,
2005.
27.
M. Lewis, “The Irresponsible Investor,” New York Times Magazine, June 6, 2004, 68–71.
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
347

28. 
J. D. Margolis and J. P. Walsh, “Misery Loves Companies: Rethinking Social Initiatives by Business?”
Administrative Science Quarterly 48, no. 2 (2003): 268.
29. 
Z. Karabell, “Green Really Means Business,” Newsweek, September 22, 2008, E6.
30. 
Brundtland Commission, Our Common Future: Report by the World Commission on Environment and
Development (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987).
31. 
M. Borden, J. Chu, C. Fishman, M. A. Prospero, and D. Sacks, “50 Ways to Green Your Business,” Fast
Company, November 2007, 90–99.
32. 
D. McGinn, “The Greenest Big Companies in America,” Newsweek, September 28, 2009, 35–56.
33. 
http://www.forbes.com/2011/04/18/americas-greenest-companies.html, and http://www.thedailybeast
.com/newsweek/galleries/2012/10/22/newsweek-green-rankings-2012-world-s-greenest-companies-
photos.html.
34. 
“Sustainability Index,” http://corporate.walmart.com/global-responsibility/environment-sustainabil-
ity/sustainability-index.
35. 
P.M. Barrett, “It’s global warming stupid,” Bloomberg Businessweek, November 5–11, 2012, 6–8.
36. 
Ibid.
37. 
A. A. Marcus and A. R. Fremeth, “Green Management Matters Regardless,” Academy of Management
Perspectives 23 (2009): 17–26.
38. 
Michael E. Porter, Mark R. Kramer, “Strategy and Society: The Link Between Competitive Advantage
and Corporate Social Responsibility,” December 1, 2006.
39. 
“Green Is Good,” Fortune, April 2, 2007, 43.
40. 
“It’s Easy and Cheap Being Green,” Fortune, October 16, 2006, 53.
41. 
R. C. Anderson, “Doing Everything Right the First Time, Every Time,” American Way, October 1,
2007, 53–56.
42. 
“Boston College MBA Students Compete to Propose Socially Responsible Business for Verizon,” The
Corporate Social Responsibility Newswire (January 6, 2010), at www.csrwire.com.
43. 
“Yes, Business and Ethics Do Go Together,” Business Week , February 15, 1988, 118.
44. 
C. Fombrun and M. Shanley, “What’s in a Name? Reputation Building and Corporate Strategy,”
Academy of Management Journal 333 (1990): 233–56.
45. 
M. Rhee and P. R. Haunschild, “The Liability of Good Reputation: A Study of Product Recalls,”
Organization Science 17 (2006): 101–20.
46. 
D. W. Greening and D. B. Turban, “Corporate Social Performance as a Competitive Advantage in
Attracting a Quality Workforce,” Business & Society 39, no. 3 (2000): 254–80.
47. 
D. B. Montgomery and C. A. Ramus, “MBA Graduates Want to Work for Caring and Ethical
Employers” (January 2004), at www.gsb.stanford.edu/news/research/hr_mbajobchoice.shtml.
48. 
L.K. Trevi~no, K. Butterfield, and D. McCabe, “The ethical context in organizations: Influences on
employee attitudes and behaviors,” Business Ethics Quarterly, 1998, 8 (3): 447–476.
49. 
S. Scherreik, “Following Your Conscience Is Just a Few Clicks Away,” Businessweek, May 13, 2002,
116–18.
50. 
J. Melton, “Responsible Investing: $639 Billion and Counting,” Co-Op America Quarterly, Spring
1996, 13.
51. 
Adapted from a speech given by attorney Steven Alan Reiss at the Conference Board meeting on
business ethics, New York, 1992.
52. 
A. R. Sorkin, “Ex-Tyco Executives Get 8 to 25 Years in Prison,” New York Times, September 20, 2005,
www.nytimes.com/2005/09/20/business/20tyco.html.
53.
G. Colvin, “White-Collar Crooks Have No Idea What They’re in For,” Fortune, July 26, 2004, 60.
54.
“Trader, Father, Veteran, Convict,” Fortune, June 9, 2008, 92–102.
55.
G. Burns, “White Collars, Prison Blues,” (State College, PA) Centre Daily Times, January 18, 2004, E1,
E6.
56.
J. L. Strachan, D. G. Smith, and W. L. Beedles, “The Price Reaction to (Alleged) Corporate Crime,”
Financial Review 18, no. 2 (1983): 121–32.
57.
M. S. Baucus and D. Baucus, “Paying the Piper: An Empirical Examination of Longer-Term Financial
Consequences of Illegal Corporate Behavior,” Academy of Management Journal 40 (1997): 129–51.
348
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

58.
J. M. Karpoff, D. S. Lee, and G. S. Martin, “The Cost to Firms of Cooking the Books,” Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, no. 3 (2008): 581–611.
59.
B. N. Sullivan, P. Haunschild, and K. Page, “Organizations Non Gratae? The Impact of Unethical
Corporate Acts on Interorganizational Networks,” Organization Science 18 (2007): 55–70.
60.
R. Kuttner, “Everything for Sale,” Fortune, March 17, 1997, 92–94.
61.
B. Nussbaum, “Can You Trust Anybody Anymore?” Business Week, January 28, 2002, 31–32.
62.
C. Murphy, “D.C. Gets It Right,” Fortune, September 2, 2002, 38.
63.
H. Fineman and M. Isikoff, “Laying Down the Law,” Newsweek, August 5, 2002, 20–25.
64.
“Sox and Stocks,” Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2005, A20.
65.
D. Henry and A. Borrus, “Governance: Death, Taxes & Sarbanes-Oxley?” Businessweek, January 17,
2005, 28–31.
66.
J. Weber, “SarbOx Isn’t Really Driving Stocks Away,” Businessweek, July 2, 2007, 87.
67.
K. Belson, “Why MCI Is Turning Up Its Nose at $1.3 Billion,” New York Times, April 10, 2005, 3.
68.
J. George, “Big Pharma Kills Doc Giveaways,” Philadelphia Business Journal 21, no. 19 (2002), 1.
69.
R. Pear, “Drug Industry Is Told to Stop Gifts to Doctors,” New York Times, October 1, 2002, A1.
70.
A. Prakash, “Responsible Care: An Assessment,” Business & Society 39, no. 2 (2000): 183–209.
71.
K. Labich, “The New Crisis in Business Ethics,” Fortune, April 20, 1992, 167–76.
72.
C. Verschoor and E. Murphy, “Best Corporate Citizens Have Better Financial Performance,” Strategic
Finance 83, no. 7 (2002): 20.
73.
S. J. Graves, S. Waddock, and M. Kelly, “Getting There: The Methodology Behind the Corporate
Citizenship Rankings,” Business Ethics 16, no. 2 (2000): 13.
74.
K. E. Aupperle, A. B. Carroll, and J. D. Hatfield, “An Empirical Examination of the Relationship
between Corporate Social Responsibility and Profitability,” Academy of Management Journal 28
(1985): 449–59; J. B. McGuire, A. Sundgren, and T. Scheeweis, “Corporate Social Responsibility and
Firm Financial Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 31 (1988): 854–87; A. H. Ullman,
“Data in Search of a Theory: A Critical Examination of the Relationships among Social Performance,
Social Disclosure, and Economic Performance of U.S. Firms,” Academy of Management Review 10
(1985): 3, 540–47; J. D. Margolis and J. P. Walsh, People and Profits? The Search for a Link between a
Company’s Social and Financial Performance (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2001); Margolis and Walsh,
“Misery Loves Companies.”
75.
M. Orlitzky and J. D. Benjamin, “Corporate Social Performance and Firm Risk: A Meta-analytic
Review,” Business & Society 40, no. 4 (2001): 369–96.
76.
P. J. Lim, “Gauging That Other Company Asset: Its Reputation,” New York Times, April 10, 2005, 6.
77.
J. D. Margolis and J.P. Walsh, “People and Profits?”; Margolis and Walsh, “Misery Loves Companies”;
M. Orlitzky, F. L. Schmidt, and S. L. Rynes, “Corporate Social and Financial Performance: A Meta-
analysis,” Organization Studies 24, no. 3 (2003): 403.
78.
S. A. Waddock and S. B. Graves, “The Corporate Social Performance—Financial Performance Link,”
Strategic Management Journal 18 (1997): 303–19.
79.
R. Jones and A. J. Murrell, “Signaling Positive Corporate Social Performance: An Event Study of
Family-Friendly Firms,” Business & Society 40, no. 1 (2001): 59–78.
80.
H. Wang, J. Choi, and J. Li, “Too Little or Too Much? Untangling the Relationship between Corporate
Philanthropy and Firm Financial Performance,” Organization Science 19 (2008): 143–59.
81.
Ibid.
82.
M. P. Sharfman and C. S. Fernando, “Environmental Risk Management and the Cost of Capital,”
Strategic Management Journal 29 (2008): 569–92.
83.
Ibid.
84.
J. Frooman, “Socially Irresponsible and Illegal Behavior and Shareholder Wealth,” Business & Society
36, no. 3 (1997): 221–49.
85.
A. Feuerstein, Presentation at the Academy of Management annual meeting, Boston, 1997.
86.
M. Ryan, “They Call Their Boss a Hero,” Parade, September 8, 1996, 4–5.
87.
T. Teal, “Not a Fool, Not a Saint,” Fortune, November 11, 1996, 201–4.
88.
Ibid.
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
349

89.
S. Malone, “Spillane: Malden’s Next Chapter,” New York Magazine, April 18, 2005, 24.
90.
J. Seglin, “The Right Thing: A Boss Saved Them. Should They Save Him?” New York Times,
January 20, 2002, Section 3, p. 4.
91.
L. Browning, “Fire Could Not Stop a Mill, but Debts May,” New York Times, November 28, 2001, C1,
C5.
92.
M. Porter and J. Rivkin, “What business should do to restore U.S. competitiveness,” Fortune,
October 29, 2012, 168–169.
350
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

C H A P T E R10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF
ORGANIZATIONS
INTRODUCTION
In August 2009, the International Monetary Fund estimated that the global financial
crisis of 2008–09 would cost the world an estimated $11.9 trillion—enough to provide
a gift of $2,880 to every man, woman, and child on the planet.1 It is, in a word,
staggering. (See the chart detailing the squandered wealth in Chapter 1.)
Long before this recent financial crisis or the collapse of Enron in 2001, a number
of business ethicists and business professionals watched with concern as Wall Street
analysts demanded increasingly strong corporate financial performance to support
rising corporate stock prices. At the same time, the gargantuan compensation packages
(including stock options) of the top executives running these companies became
inextricably linked to their companies’ stock prices. In 1973, average CEO pay at
major corporations was 27 times the pay of the average worker.2 By 2012, the average
CEO was earning 380 times what the average worker earned.3 Experts warned of a
bubble—even Alan Greenspan, head of the Federal Reserve, cautioned against
“irrational exuberance” in the markets.4 But few predicted how bad things would get.
In a June 2002 interview on PBS’s Frontline, Arthur Levitt, former head of the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), explained how stock prices influence
executives and their ethical decision making (or lack thereof): “There is an obsession
with short-term earnings and short-term results, and our stock markets reflect that
obsession. . . . We’ve developed a short-term culture in American business, where
executives have become obsessed with the selling price of their stock. They drive
earnings in whatever way they possibly can to meet the expectations of analysts, rather
than presenting a picture that is totally accurate.”5
In the second decade of the new century, with news of unfathomable greed and
misdeeds and just plain stupidity at the banks and other companies such as Enron,
Arthur Andersen, WorldCom, Adelphia, Citigroup, and Tyco, it’s easy to wonder if
any organization is doing the right thing. Well, wonder no more. As we’ve noted in
other chapters, thousands of organizations are working every day to uphold ethical
standards and train employees in what those standards mean. If you try to imagine the
hundreds of thousands of transactions that occur every day and then think about how
many you hear about as being illegal or unethical—even with all of the bad news in the
years since the turn of the new century—the real proportion of wrongdoers is probably
351

quite small. However, as small as the actual number of wrongdoers might be, they can
have an outsized effect on the economy—as we’ve seen with the financial crisis. As
these crises have made clear, the need for ethical behavior and managing for the long
term could not be more necessary.
In this chapter, we’ll look at a series of business ethics and social responsibility
cases within the framework of stakeholders—those individuals or groups who have a
stake in what the organization does or how it performs. Many of the cases you’ll read
about here are well known as major business disasters. You might wonder why we’re
focusing on disasters instead of typical ethical issues within corporations. Here’s why:
if you read these cases carefully, you’ll discover that many of them started as small
issues until mismanagement, denial, or other more malevolent motives caused these
seemingly minor situations to mushroom into huge legal, ethical, and public relations
nightmares. We also believe that there is much to be learned from studying others’
mistakes.
Some of the issues we look at in this chapter are similar to the issues we explored in
Chapters 4 and 8. But now we’re focused on the organizational level, where the stakes
are much higher and events can escalate into disaster much faster. In addition to the
business ethics nightmares, we’ll look at a few positive examples and at some
hypothetical cases that we hope will get you thinking.
MANAGING STAKEHOLDERS
Business wasn’t always as complex as it is today. At the end of the nineteenth century,
many of the country’s largest corporations were privately held; consequently, their
owners had very few constituencies to answer to. The magnates and robber barons of a
century ago ruled their companies with an iron hand. There were no unions or laws to
protect workers, and the sporadic media attention of the era left the public largely
unaware of most corporate abuses. Also, most average, middle-class citizens did not
invest in stocks and bonds. Investing in those days was largely a rich person’s game. Of
course, all of that has changed.
As we’ve explained in earlier chapters (especially Chapter 9), modern corpora-
tions have multiple stakeholders with myriad and often conflicting interests and
expectations. Few corporations today are run unilaterally by one individual, as they
well might have been 100 years ago. Even in the handful of companies where an
individual founder or owner has had a looming presence—like Bill Gates at Microsoft,
Steve Jobs at Apple, or Mark Zuckerberg at Facebook—there are boards of directors,
regulatory agencies, and consumer groups that dramatically influence how an organi-
zation is managed. Public corporations are traded on the various stock exchanges and
have numerous taskmasters—institutional and individual—in the investor community.
In addition, because individuals have invested in the stock market in numbers
unprecedented even a decade ago, the press is vigilant in its coverage of corporate
misdeeds or any other factor that could influence corporate earnings.
What do businesses owe their stakeholders? Once we have determined who the
stakeholders in a situation are, how do we determine our organization’s obligations to
352
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

them? And if those obligations conflict, how does an organization resolve those
conflicts? There is no simple answer to these questions, but it’s the task of senior
executives to resolve them. To a large extent, thinking through these obligations
requires use of the ethical decision-making frameworks studied in Chapter 2. It also
requires careful thinking about how one might balance multiple and often competing
stakeholder interests.
Perhaps the easiest way to think about multiple stakeholders is to divide them into
primary and secondary groups.6 Primary stakeholders are those groups or individuals
with whom the organization has a formal, contractual relationship. In most cases this
means customers, employees, shareholders or owners, suppliers, and perhaps even the
government. Secondary stakeholders are other individuals or groups to whom the
organization has obligations, but who are not formal, contractual partners. Obviously,
organizations should strive to satisfy their obligations to their primary stakeholders
while also trying to keep their secondary stakeholders satisfied. It’s a difficult
balancing act, but a helpful exercise if companies are to take into account and be
fair to the people and groups they can affect.
This approach is so useful that David Abrahams, a managing consultant with
Marsh Ltd. in London, designed a similar stakeholder model to help his corporate
clients identify and quantify risk to their brand. As one of the largest insurers in the
world, Marsh has great interest in developing tools to help companies mitigate
reputational and other types of risk. Abrahams’ model identifies three primary
stakeholders—business partners, customers, and employees—and three secondary
stakeholders—opinion formers, community, and authorities. He maintains that by
analyzing a company and its business using those six groups as a guide, one can begin
to identify how a variety of calamities might affect a company’s reputation and the
value of its brand, and how much those calamities might ultimately cost.7
The cases that follow are divided into categories representing four of the major
stakeholder groups in many business decisions: consumers or customers, employees,
shareholders, and the community. In all the cases, more than one stakeholder group is
affected; we have categorized the cases under headings that represent the stakeholder
group that we feel is most affected. However, as you read through the cases, we urge
you to identify all of the stakeholders in each case and try to discern each organ-
ization’s obligations to all of its various stakeholders.
ETHICS AND CONSUMERS
It might surprise many people to learn that there were few laws protecting consumers
before the 1960s. At the turn of the last century, consumers didn’t even have the right
to sue a manufacturer for a defective product. The first real consumer law took effect
early in the twentieth century when, in McPherson v. General Motors, a consumer was
given the right to sue the auto manufacturer for a defective vehicle. Until then, the only
recourse for the owner of an auto was to go after the dealer who sold the vehicle.
Another landmark law was the Pure Food and Drug Act, which was passed in 1906 to
prohibit adulteration in food and drugs.8
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
353

Although more consumer laws were passed in the first half of this century,
consumers had to wait until the early 1960s for any real protectionist legislation that
positioned consumers as a major stakeholder group. The framework of consumer
protection as we know it today was constructed during the Kennedy administration. In
his speech to Congress on consumers in 1962, President John F. Kennedy outlined four
consumer rights: the right to safety, the right to be heard, the right to choose, and the
right to be informed.9 This message and the legislation that resulted laid the ground-
work for today’s consumer movement.
Exactly what do companies and organizations owe their customers? According to
some observers, products and services should be produced and delivered according to
the “due care” theory.10 This theory stipulates that due care involves these elements:
& Design.
Products and services should meet all government regulations and
specifications and be safe under all foreseeable conditions, including misuse
by the consumer.
& Materials.
Materials should meet government regulations and be durable
enough to withstand reasonable use.
& Production.
Products should be made without defects.
& Quality control.
Products should be inspected regularly for quality.
& Packaging, labeling, and warnings.
Products should be safely packaged,
should include clear, easily understood directions for use, and should clearly
describe any hazards.
& Notification.
Manufacturers should have a system in place to recall products
that prove to be dangerous at some time after manufacture and distribution.
Although we’ve certainly alluded to some organizational responsibilities in
earlier chapters, we’re going to concentrate on three duties in this chapter: to respect
the customer and not engage in activities that conflict with the interests of an
established customer base, to produce a safe product that is free from any known
defects, and to honestly advertise a product or service.
Conﬂicts of Interest
Although we usually think of conflicts of interest as situations involving individuals,
they can also involve organizations. As we’ve seen over the last few years, conflicts
involving organizations are even more damaging than those that involve individuals.
Many people think the poster child for corporate conflicts is Arthur Andersen and
other large accounting firms that at one time offered both auditing and consulting
services to clients. It’s hard to believe that the company executives didn’t see how
gargantuan consulting fees might color the judgment of auditors. However damaging
those accounting firm conflicts were, they are dwarfed by what happened at Enron.
(Please note that although this case appears under “Ethics and Consumers,” it could
just as easily appear under “Ethics and Employees” or “Ethics and Shareholders”
354
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

because its effects were so far reaching. Evidence also clearly suggests that Enron’s
manipulation of the energy markets harmed energy consumers in California, so the
company could appear under “Ethics and the Community” as well. It seems that when
an ethical debacle is big enough, a range of stakeholders are affected.)
COMPANY: ENRON
INDUSTRY: ENERGY
SITUATION
In 2002, Fortune magazine still ranked Enron as the fifth-largest company in
the United States, although by the time the magazine was published, Enron
had already filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.11 It was quite a ride:
from a regional gas pipeline trader to the largest energy trader in the world, and
then back down the hill into bankruptcy and disgrace. With the help of its
investment bankers, accountants, and others, Enron constructed a series of off-
the-books partnerships that were used to hide the company’s massive debt and
inflate its stock price. These partnerships were managed by Enron execu-
tives—a clear conflict of interest—who stood to benefit financially from the
deals. Enron also used very aggressive accounting practices to bolster the
bottom line. A particularly sad aspect of this debacle was how much Enron
employees lost in their 401(k) plans as the stock price plummeted. In the fall of
2000, Enron changed administrators for its 401(k) plan and, as is typical, the
plan was “closed” while that transfer took place. When a plan is closed, no one
can buy, sell, or trade in his or her 401(k) until the moratorium is over. Sadly,
this moratorium began just as the company’s stock really began to tank, and by
the time Enron employees could once again make changes in their 401(k)
elections, the stock price had dramatically decreased and the retirement
savings of many average employees were wiped out.
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
Executives denied there was trouble for as long as they could, but the fall from
grace was swift and dramatic. Top executives resigned in disgrace, and one
committed suicide. The company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in Decem-
ber 2001 and later sold its primary energy-trading unit.12
RESULTS
Andrew Fastow, Enron’s former CFO, settled civil and criminal lawsuits in
2004. The complaint by the SEC charged that he “defrauded Enron’s share-
holders and enriched himself and others by, among other things, entering into
undisclosed side deals, manufacturing earnings for Enron through sham
transactions, and inflating the value of Enron’s investments.” Fastow agreed
to serve a six-year prison sentence, pay a fine of more than $23 million,
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
355

cooperate with the government’s ongoing investigation into Enron, and be
permanently barred from acting as a director or officer in a public company.13
In addition, Lea Fastow, Andrew Fastow’s wife and a former assistant
treasurer of Enron, was sentenced to serve a year in prison after pleading
guilty to charges relating to the Enron mess.14 In May 2006, former CEO
Kenneth Lay and former president Jeffrey Skilling were convicted of multiple
counts of fraud and conspiracy and were sentenced to 24 years in prison. Ken
Lay died of a massive heart attack in July 2006, before he began to serve his
sentence. Jeff Skilling is currently in jail, and has just won an appeal to reduce
his sentence to 14 years.15 He was also ordered to pay restitution of $45
million.16 Matthew Kopper, a former managing director, pleaded guilty to
money laundering and conspiracy to commit wire fraud, and he forfeited $8
million to settle an SEC civil fraud case. The accounting firm, Arthur Andersen,
was convicted in a federal court of obstruction of justice and relinquished its
license to practice public accountancy.17
The fines paid by various other players in the Enron collapse are startling.
Enron itself paid over $2 billion in fines, including $1.5 billion for manip-
ulating energy markets in California. Financial services corporations also paid
huge sums to settle investor lawsuits connected to Enron: Citigroup paid
$2.4 billion; JPMorgan Chase paid $2.2 billion; and other banks paid fines in
the hundreds of millions to settle similar suits.18
COMMENTS
Former SEC chairman Arthur Levitt aptly described the scope of the problems
at Enron:
I think the Enron story was a story, not just of the failure of the
firm but also the traditional gatekeepers: the board, the audit
committee, the lawyers, the investment bankers, the rating agen-
cies. All of them had a part in this.
Take the rating agencies, for instance. They deferred downgrading
Enron, pending a merger which they knew very well might never
have taken place.
Take the investment bankers, who developed the elaborate scheme
that Enron used to hide the obligations of the parent company in
subsidiaries. That didn’t come out of the blue; that was a scheme
concocted between the investment bankers and the chief financial
officer of Enron.
Take the accounting firm. . . . Enron was the most important audit
client that they had, and Enron was also the largest consulting
client that they had—a client that paid them over a million dollars
a week in fees. In my judgment, that accounting firm was
compromised. Their audit was compromised. Putting aside any
356
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

It appears that Enron had plenty of help in constructing its massive fraud from
professionals (such as auditors) who were supposed to be protecting the public
interest. Its true financial performance was shrouded in partnerships that hid debt
from its books and, as a result, from investors and from rank-and-file employees.
Enron was not alone, however, in its involvement in corporate conflicts of
interest. The investment banking community has also been embroiled in myriad
conflicts in recent years. In fact, investment banking firms—by their very nature—
face a huge potential conflict of interest. They are in the business of helping
corporations raise money in the markets and are consequently focused on keeping a
client company’s stock price as high as possible. Yet these same investment banks
also serve investors, who are interested in buying stocks at as low a price as they
can.20 Talk about tension! And that tension spilled over for several big firms in the
late 1990s and early 2000s. Merrill Lynch was fined $100 million when its
analysts—in e-mails to one another— privately trashed the stocks of the companies
they were publicly touting to investors.21 That case and others like it were later
parodied in a television commercial by investment firm Charles Schwab & Co. In
the commercial, a Wall Street manager is seen urging his brokers to push an
unfavorable stock. He tells them, “Let’s put some lipstick on this pig.” (Schwab does
not underwrite stocks and consequently does not face the same conflict that other
brokerage firms do.) James P. Gorman, a Merrill Lynch executive, called Schwab’s
commercial a “cheap shot” for “kicking someone when they’re down.”22 We wonder
whether investors thought Schwab’s commercial was a cheap shot or a pretty
accurate portrayal of some Wall Street bankers.
fraudulent activity that may have been part of this, they were
clearly compromised by the nexus of consulting with auditing.
Take the lawyers that were paid vast fees. I think here you have a
very interesting case where the American Bar Association pre-
vents lawyers from revealing financial fraud of clients to regula-
tors. And here we had a case in point where a major client of the
law firm was obviously involved in practices that may well prove
to have been fraudulent, and they didn’t blow the whistle.
And [take] the analysts, who were claiming that Enron was a buy
even after this story had broken and Enron had declared bank-
ruptcy. These are analysts that were being paid by investment
bankers that were receiving large fees from Enron for performing
a variety of services. How independent could their research have
been? And what could an investor have expected from an analyst
who was recommending the purchase of Enron, while at the same
time his employer was receiving millions of dollars in fees from
that company? How likely was it that the analysts would tell it as it
was? Very unlikely, in my judgment.19
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
357

Investment bankers were investigated for another major conflict—how much they
knew about the alleged frauds committed at Enron, WorldCom, Adelphia, and other
companies. At Enron, for example, banks such as Credit Suisse First Boston,
Citigroup, and JPMorgan Chase helped Enron structure the secret partnerships that
hid Enron’s debt and kept Enron’s stock price high. Then these investment banks not
only received fees for helping to structure debt but also made money from their
investments in Enron stock.23 And as we’ve seen, those firms paid enormous fines for
assisting Enron with its shenanigans.
But perhaps no conflict in investment banking is as egregious as what happened
during the housing bubble of the last decade. Investment banks were furiously creating
and selling bundled mortgage products, many of which represented subprime mort-
gages—in other words, the mortgages faced a higher risk of default and were riskier
than other mortgages. Firms like Goldman Sachs eagerly sold these funds to their
clients, all the while buying insurance on those same funds (in the form of credit
default swaps (CDSs). In other words, the investment banks felt that the mortgage
products they were selling to clients were so risky that they bet against the products at
the same time they were advising clients to buy the products. Also, while pushing these
products to their clients, the investment banks encouraged rating agencies to give the
products high ratings that would signal to investors that the mortgage products were
safe. And, of course, they were anything but safe investments and the banks knew that.
It’s a colossal conflict of interest and hopefully one of the things that new government
regulation will address.24
Here’s another very public conflict of interest involving Marsh & McLennan, the
insurance conglomerate that ran afoul of New York State’s former attorney general,
Eliot Spitzer.
COMPANY: MARSH & MCLENNAN (MARSH, INC.,
PUTNAM FUNDS, AND MERCER CONSULTING)
INDUSTRY:
INSURANCE
(MARSH,
INC.),
MUTUAL
FUNDS
(PUTNAM FUNDS), AND CONSULTING (MERCER)
SITUATION
Starting in late 2003, Marsh & McLennan (MMC), with a reputation as one
of the most staid and well-managed companies in the United States, became
embroiled in a series of ethical scandals. The first involved Putnam Funds, a
mutual fund company in Boston and traditionally the cash cow of MMC.
Putnam first lost huge bets on technology and growth stocks when the stock
market imploded in 2000. Then it was the first mutual fund company named
in the market-timing scandal that involved mutual fund companies across
the industry. (Market timing is shifting money in and out of mutual funds
based on the performance of one or more market indicators. In the recent
358
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

scandal, large investors were allowed to “time the market” by trading late—
after the markets had closed—which provided a clear advantage for the big
guys and a clear disadvantage for the little guys.) There is no doubt that of
all the mutual fund companies, Putnam took the biggest hit for the scandal,
and it continues to struggle to make its way back. Its assets under
management—the major measure of stability and heft in the industry—
fell from $370 billion in late 2000 to $194 billion during the first quarter of
2005.25 But Putnam was only the beginning of trouble at MMC.
In October 2004, New York State Attorney General Eliot Spitzer filed a
civil complaint against MMC, the parent company of Marsh, Inc., the world’s
largest insurance broker. In the suit, Spitzer charged that Marsh betrayed
clients by steering business to underwriters with whom it had cozy relation-
ships in exchange for millions in backdoor payoffs. As one Marsh executive
said, “We need to place our business in 2004 with those that have superior
financials, broad coverage, and pay us the most.” Spitzer’s complaint uncov-
ered a broad mosaic of industry-wide bid rigging for which Marsh served as
the chief architect. Other companies such as AIG, Hartford, and ACE were
involved, but Marsh was the big player in the arrangement.26 (At the time of
Spitzer’s suit, Jeffrey Greenberg was CEO of MMC; his brother, Evan
Greenberg, was CEO of ACE; and the legendary Maurice “Hank” Greenberg,
father of Jeffrey and Evan, was CEO of AIG and would later face enormous
troubles of his own.)
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
To stanch the bleeding at Putnam, MMC forced out Putnam’s CEO, the
imperious Lawrence Lasser, who took a $78 million severance payout and
left the company that he had captained for years.27 MMC quickly hired
squeaky-clean Charles “Ed” Haldeman as the new CEO to lead Putnam out
of the swamp. In April 2004, Putnam settled with the SEC and agreed to
accept new employee trading restrictions and to conduct and provide regular
compliance reviews. The company also paid $110 million in various fines.
(There were additional charges, settlements, and fines from a variety of
sources, including the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.)28 Haldeman
brought in a new management team and made other changes, but the
company continues to struggle to regain its former position as a leader
in the industry.
Its parent, MMC, had a more difficult time with its woes. In a highly
unusual move, Spitzer refused to negotiate with the company as long as its
executive team was in place. Soon after, CEO Jeffrey Greenberg and the top
company lawyer resigned and Michael Cherkasky took the helm. Cherkasky
was Spitzer’s former boss in Manhattan’s district attorney’s office and the
CEO of Kroll, Inc., a leading risk consulting company acquired by MMC
shortly before its legal woes began. Cherkasky’s relationship with Spitzer
proved very helpful for MMC—the company quickly agreed to a settlement of
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
359

$850 million and also agreed to lead the insurance industry in reforming
industry practices.29
A note: Mercer HR Consulting, the other third of the MMC business, also
had its own troubles. It disgorged more than $440,000 in fees from the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE) after admitting that it misled the NYSE board
of directors regarding the $140 million pay package of Richard Grasso, then
CEO of the NYSE.30
RESULTS
In 2004, MMC’s stock price fell from a 52-week high of $47.35 to a low of
$22.75—an incredible fall from grace for a company that had performed sowell
and so predictably for decades.31 In a mere four days of trading, the company
lost $11.5 billion in market value.32 That plunge hurt MMC employees more
than most investors because, until shortly before these problems, MMC employ-
eescouldinvesttheirMMCretirementsavingsonlyinMMCstock.Thethinking
among MMC senior executives was that people would be more motivated to
produce excellent results if their entire retirement savings were tied up in MMC
stock. In a real ethical lapse, senior executives had other investment options—it
was only rank-and-file employees who were restricted to MMC stock. MMC’s
strategy was particularly unfathomable when you consider that MMC’s Mercer
HR Consulting employed numerous retirement experts who routinely advised
their clients about the importance of providing employees with diversified
options for retirement investments. After years of listening to employees plead
to be allowed to diversify and after watching Enron’s employees lose their shirts
when their company’s stock plunged, MMC executives finally allowed for
limited diversification. Beginning in 2003, MMC employees could diversify
part of their retirement investments into a few Putnam funds—nowhere near the
number or range of options provided by other large corporations to their
employees. Many MMC employees who did not move quickly enough to
diversify lost much of their retirement investments after MMC stock plum-
meted. Note to students—diversify your investments, and never put all your
investments in company stock! (Also, in the interest of full disclosure, please
note that one of this book’s authors, Katherine Nelson, was employed as a
principal at Mercer HR Consulting from 1998 to 2001 and was an “employee
investor” of MMC.)
In addition to the substantial settlements, the financial losses, the pessi-
mism of financial analysts, and the enormous hit taken by MMC investors and
employees, 5,000 jobs were lost and the company’s reputation remained
damaged for a number of years.33
COMMENTS
One of the wisest comments about the crisis at MMC comes from the former
CEO of Putnam Funds, Charles Haldeman, who said, “What our parents told
360
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

The results of these very public conflicts of interest will be felt for years. Various
regulators and attorneys general from a number of states are still investigating the
banks and their business practices. As a result of the various debacles in the banking
industry, Citigroup has been fined more than $5.5 billion since 2003, and JPMorgan
Chase has been fined more than $4 billion.38 Other financial institutions have also been
fined sums totaling in the billions, and numerous corporate brands have been muddied.
However, all of that “justice” has not yet restored the faith of the public in the markets,
nor will it help the hundreds of thousands of individual investors who have lost their
shirts because of these shenanigans. In a 2002 Business Week poll of its readers,
93 percent said they had “only some” or “hardly any” trust in the executives who run
big companies, and 95 percent felt that way about big auditing companies.39 More
recently, a 2010 survey indicated that 70 percent of the public believes that businesses
and financial companies will go back to “business as usual” after the 2008–09
recession.40 In the same survey, only 29 percent of respondents in the United States
thought that they could trust banks “to do the right thing.” That’s down from 68 percent
in 2007.41 In a 2012 survey, Wall Street and Congress were in a dead heat as the least
trusted institutions in the U.S., and public confidence in them could be measured in
single digits.42 It is a sad commentary.
us about protecting our reputation is true. If you lose it, it’s hard to win it back
again.” Haldeman also talked about the isolation that existed in Putnam before
his arrival. Apparently, Putnam had a history of not cultivating relationships
with the press or the government, and when the scandal broke, it had no friends
to turn to. Haldeman also vowed to change that. “At the time of our problems,”
he said, “We didn’t have those relationships and it was difficult for us. At a
time of need we didn’t have too many friends or supporters. We don’t want to
be in that position again.”34 Haldeman served as CEO of Putnam from the time
the crisis broke in 2004 until 2008, when MMC sold Putnam to Power
Corporation and replaced Haldeman.35
The scandal that rocked MMC was an example of how former New York
State Attorney General Eliot Spitzer liked to turn an industry upside down.
Writer Peter Elkind wrote of Spitzer’s strategy in Fortune magazine: “The
strategy has been remarkably consistent. Step one: Wade broadly into a gray
area of odorous but long-accepted industry practices. Step two: Seize on
evidence of black-and-white outrageous conduct—typically in email form—
and use it to marshal public outrage. Step three: In the resulting tsunami of
scandal, swiftly exact reform of the whole industry, including gray-area
behavior.” Within two weeks of filing charges, Marsh and its largest competi-
tors had agreed to stop bid rigging. Similarly, industry-wide mutual fund
abuses stopped within weeks of Spitzer filing charges against Putnam.36
Please note that Eliot Spitzer has had his own ethical lapses. A little over a year
after being elected governor of New York State, he was caught up in a federal
wiretap of a prostitution ring (he was found to be a client) and resigned in
disgrace in early 2008.37
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
361

In Chapter 4, we defined a conflict of interest as occurring when someone could
think that your judgment might be clouded because of a relationship you have. The
definition is the same for organizations: if an organization’s customers or other
stakeholder group think that an organization’s judgment is biased because of a
relationship it has with another company or firm, a conflict could exist. Corporate
or organizational conflicts are just as risky as those that exist between individuals, and
they should be avoided at all costs.
Product Safety
Obviously, a major ethical obligation of any organization is to produce a quality
product or service. Just as obviously, nothing will put a company out of business faster
than offering a product that is dangerous, poorly produced, or of inferior quality.
Competition in the marketplace generally helps ensure that goods and services will be
of a quality that is acceptable to consumers. However, sometimes a company becomes
the victim of external sabotage (like Johnson & Johnson), and sometimes a company
makes a foolhardy decision, and the result is a product that is not safe. Let’s look at
these classic cases.
COMPANY: JOHNSON & JOHNSON
INDUSTRY: PHARMACEUTICALS
SITUATION
In September 1982, seven people in the Chicago area were killed when they
ingested Tylenol, a painkiller produced by McNeil Labs, a division of Johnson
& Johnson. The Tylenol in question was found to have been laced with
cyanide, and it was not known for several weeks whether the contamination
was the result of internal or external sabotage. A thorough investigation later
proved that the poisonings were the result of external sabotage, and the culprit
has never been found.
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
First, the company pulled all Tylenol from the shelves in the Chicago area.
That was quickly followed by a nationwide recall of all Tylenol—31 million
bottles with a retail value of over $100 million. Johnson & Johnson sent
Mailgram messages explaining the situation and the recall to over 500,000
doctors, hospitals, and distributors of Tylenol. It also established a toll-free
crisis phone line so that consumers could ask questions about the product. In
addition, its CEO, James Burke, and other executives were accessible to the
press and were interviewed by a variety of media.
362
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Before the poisoning, Tylenol had captured over a third of the painkiller
market, so Johnson & Johnson decided to rebuild the brand and its franchise.
That wasn’t going to be easy, since consumer fear ran high immediately after
the poisoning. In one survey conducted a month after the incident, 87 percent
of the respondents understood that Johnson & Johnson was not to blame for
the Tylenol deaths, yet 61 percent declared they would be unlikely to buy
Tylenol in the future. So even though most consumers knew the poisonings
were not the fault of Johnson & Johnson, most of them wouldn’t buy the
product again. Johnson & Johnson tackled this problem head-on by offering
coupons to entice consumers back to Tylenol and, ultimately, by redesigning
Tylenol’s packaging to be tamper-resistant.
RESULTS
Johnson & Johnson’s reaction to the Tylenol poisoning has been hailed as the
benchmark for how organizations should react to a crisis. As we’ve mentioned
in other chapters, the firm’s reaction to the Tylenol crisis proved that its
famous Credo, in which it outlines its responsibilities to its consumers,
employees, community, and stockholders, wasn’t hollow. It was that concern
for the customer—its primary stakeholder—that drove its response to the
crisis. By being accessible to the press, which is yet another important
stakeholder in a crisis, Johnson & Johnson’s executives displayed concern
for the consumer by refusing to dodge responsibility or blame any other party
for their difficulties.
The results of the crisis were far reaching. The tamper-resistant packaging
pioneered by Johnson & Johnson after the crisis has become commonplace in
a wide variety of products, from food to pharmaceuticals. Two decades after
the crisis, Johnson & Johnson’s reputation as a quality producer of pharma-
ceuticals and as a company that cares about its customers is still strong. Its
former CEO, James Burke, is renowned for his concern about ethical
issues and became a sought-after speaker on a wide variety of topics related
to ethics. Also, by the mid-1980s, Tylenol had regained almost all of its market
share.
COMMENTS
The background of former Johnson & Johnson CEO James Burke was
probably critical to the company’s behavior during the Tylenol crisis. Burke
was a marketing man who knew and understood the importance of public
perception and the value of timely, accurate communication. Not many
executives are comfortable with open communication, and their natural
reticence can be enormously harmful to their organizations when a crisis
strikes.43 Burke was open with the public, but he was also extremely open with
the press and created a relationship of trust with them. It came in handy when,
several weeks into the investigation, a small amount of cyanide was found in a
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
363

company plant. It was also learned that it could in no way have been involved
in the Tylenol contamination. The press was told and asked not to reveal the
information, and they didn’t! We know about this only because the story was
relayed by Lawrence Foster, then head of company communications, in a talk
with our students. Burke also took the long-term view, believing that a recall
would be costly in the short term but would help rebuild brand loyalty and trust
in the long term.
UPDATE
While Johnson & Johnson has long been admired for its handling of the
Tylenol crisis, in recent years it has stumbled. For example, J&J’s LifeScan
division pleaded guilty to criminal charges in 2000 and paid $60 million in
fines for selling defective glucose-monitoring devices to diabetics and for later
submitting false information about the problem to federal regulators. Lawyers
who filed the class-action suit against LifeScan estimated that at least three
diabetics had died because of the faulty readings they obtained from Life-
Scan’s SureStep monitoring device. LifeScan, in court documents, admitted
that it had not adequately described the product’s defects to the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), failed to disclose the problem to patients, and then
failed to notify the FDA once problems began to occur. It’s difficult to
reconcile this image of Johnson & Johnson with the Tylenol one. The
chairman of Johnson & Johnson, Ralph S. Larsen, wrote in a statement,
“Mistakes and misjudgments were made. We fully acknowledge those errors
and sincerely apologize for them. We are committed to learning from this
experience.”44 More recently, the company has experienced a series of
problems with the manufacture of its over-the-counter products. In 2008
and 2009, a recall of Tylenol products was prompted by consumer complaints
of nausea. In 2010, metal and wood particles where found in chewable
Rolaids. In 2011, J&J recalled 47 million units of cold medicine because
of safety issues concerning the cleaning of production equipment. This “drip,
drip, drip” of bad news and multiple recalls, while not posing serious illness or
death among consumers, has nonetheless eroded trust in the iconic brand.45 In
Barron’s annual “most respected companies” survey of money managers, J&J
fell from second place in 2010 to number 25 in 2011.46
COMPANY: TOYOTA
INDUSTRY: AUTOMOBILES AND TRUCKS
SITUATION
When Toyota first entered the U.S. market in 1957, the automotive landscape
was dominated by the Big Three American automakers—Chrysler, Ford, and
General Motors. In 1961, the Big Three sold 85 percent of the cars purchased
in the United States, and the remaining 15 percent were sold by a number of
364
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

smaller foreign (mostly European) companies such as Volkswagen, BMW,
and Mercedes Benz.47 Toyota, one of Japan’s leading auto companies, didn’t
gain a significant U.S. market share until the price of oil became an issue
for Americans in the 1970s. Toyota made small, fuel-efficient cars, and
Americans began to turn from large Detroit gas guzzlers to cars that got
higher gas mileage. Then, for several years in the late 1970s to mid-1980s, the
Big Three suffered severe quality issues. Consumers were frustrated and
turned even more attention to those fuel-efficient Toyota models with a
reputation for high quality. This shift revolutionized the nation’s car buying;
by 2008, Toyota had become the largest automaker in the United States.48
However, a problem loomed on the horizon. Beginning in 2002, consumer
complaints began pouring in to Toyota and to the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (NHTSA), the U.S. regulatory body overseeing auto
safety. More than 2,000 consumers reported that the accelerators in their
Toyotas were sticking. Suddenly and without warning, the cars would
accelerate, and drivers found it almost impossible to stop their cars.49
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
Although the complaints began in 2002, the company was slow to respond.
Toyota was so confident of its product quality that the firm repeatedly
underestimated the severity of the problem and reacted by either discounting
early problems altogether or announcing diagnoses and solutions that proved
to be insufficient. When the company did start to recognize the problem, its
engineers blamed floor mats. They believed that floor mats were bunching up
and creating a wedge under the accelerator, thus causing the car to speed up
inadvertently. In the fall of 2009, Toyota sent an advisory to millions of Toyota
owners to remove the floor mats on the driver’s side and stated that, “there is
no evidence to support” any other cause of the sudden acceleration. The
company added that the NHTSA agreed with this conclusion. The NHTSA, in
fact, did not agree and responded with a sharp rebuke to Toyota. The event that
truly altered the debate was a crash of a Toyota Lexus on a California highway
in August 2009. An off-duty California highway patrol officer (who should
know how to stop a speeding car) called 911 in a total panic. His Lexus was
hurtling down the highway with its accelerator stuck and with no brakes. The
911 system recorded the call and the subsequent crash, which killed the driver
and three passengers. Another crash—this one involving a Toyota Avalon
outside of Dallas, Texas—again resulted in four deaths. After that accident,
investigators found the floor mats in the trunk of the car.50 In January 2010,
Toyota ordered a massive recall of more than 7.7 million vehicles.51 The
company also suspended sales of eight of its most popular models (including
the Camry, the best-selling passenger car in the United States for the last 10
out of 11 years.) and even stopped making those models until the problem was
solved. It’s important to note that Toyota halted production because the
NHSTA ordered it to stop.52
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
365

RESULTS
According to some analysts, the accelerator problem is the result of Toyota
trying to grow too fast—so fast that its quality slipped, which is a particularly
thorny problem for the company.53 Toyota has made huge gains globally based
on its quality pledge. The entire Toyota brand is tied to quality; for example, its
corporate slogan is “The Relentless Pursuit of Perfection,” and its manufac-
turing methods have long been the envy of other automakers.54 As this book
goes to press, the Toyota story is still evolving. In 2010, Toyota settled the case
of the crash involving the off-duty California highway patrol officer for
$10 million, and more cases are being settled.55 In late 2012, the company
was fined a record $17.4 million for failing to quickly report the acceleration
problems to regulators in the U.S. and for delaying a recall.56 The company
also reached a $1 billion settlement in a class action lawsuit brought by Toyota
car owners who claimed the value of their automobiles decreased after the
millions of recalls for sudden acceleration.57 Toyota’s new CEO in the U.S.,
Jim Lentz, has focused on regaining market share by emphasizing manufac-
turing basics – always Toyota’s core strength – and in 2012, the company took
its title as the world’s top-selling automaker back from General Motors.58
COMMENTS
At the time, a number of media stories called this “Toyota’s Tylenol Moment,”
comparing the crisis directly to the famous Johnson & Johnson crisis
described earlier in this chapter.59 A number of analysts pointed to Toyota’s
cost cutting over the last few years as the likely culprit behind the crisis, and
some lawsuits claimed that this issue was larger than a faulty accelerator and
involved the electronics of the car, which would have been a much bigger
issue.60 It appears even now that the company has not completely identified
the problem or an adequate solution. One dealer called the current accelerator
fix “a Rube Goldberg solution that is hardly representative of the kind of work
usually done by Japanese engineers.”61 Erich Merkle, president of Autocon-
omy.com (an industry analysis company), predicted that Toyota would be hard
hit by this crisis because so much of its sales strength was rooted in an
untarnished reputation for quality and reliability. He speculated, “They’ll get
through this, but I don’t think it’s anything they’ll recover from quickly.”62
Frankly, Toyota’s decades-long reputation for quality has served as a powerful
counterweight to the negative publicity generated at the time over the sudden
acceleration issue. This is one more example of how a good reputation and a
trusted company brand can help an organization survive scandal. Toyota’s
“fix” for the problem may not have been perfect or complete, but if sales are an
indication, consumers appear to have regained trust in the company to do the
right thing.
366
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

As we saw in Chapters 2 and 3, one of the most common faults in ethical decision
making is to ignore the long-term consequences of a decision. Although most
organizations try hard to produce a product or service of high quality (to stay in
business, if for no other reason), many don’t take the time to identify all stakeholders
and think long term about the consequences of their decisions. In issues that involve
product safety and possible harm to consumers, thinking long term is critical. Is this
product going to harm someone? How serious is the potential harm? Even if it might
harm only one person, is there a way that can be avoided? Is there a way we can warn
against possible harm? What can we do to ensure this product’s safety? Other
cognitive barriers to good ethical decision making may also have affected the thinking
of Toyota’s managers. For example, consider the possible effects of confirmation bias,
the consideration of too few consequences, or an illusion of superiority,
How quickly do you think companies need to initiate a recall? If the product is
sabotaged by angry insiders or outsiders, or if problems with this product or service are
discovered at a later date, how can a company protect the public, consumers, and itself?
Does the company have a crisis management plan? How closely do you think the
companies involved in the classic cases adhered to the due care theory described earlier?
Advertising
The subject of ethics in advertising is a murky one, simply because there are varying
opinions of exactly what truth is, and furthermore, what responsible is. Does a certain
moisturizer really make skin look younger, or is it the 20-year-old model who has a
young, dewy complexion? How would that moisturizer work for a 50-year-old? Do
automakers and beer makers really need young women in skimpy bathing suits to sell
their products? Do companies have a responsibility to respect all consumers? Are
certain segments of the population fair game when it comes to the art of selling?
Should we protect children from sugary cereal ads or teenagers from ads for expensive
athletic shoes? How truthful or responsible does advertising have to be to qualify as
ethical? Let’s take a look at a few cases that point out some ethical issues in the
marketing of pharmaceuticals to consumers.
INDUSTRY: PHARMACEUTICALS
SITUATION 1
Novartis, the large Swiss drug company, paid actress Lauren Bacall to mention
one of its products, Visudyne, during an interview with Matt Lauer on NBC’s
Today show. Visudyne is a drug used to treat macular degeneration, an eye
condition that strikes many people beginning in middle age. Bacall described
how macular degeneration had caused a friend to go blind, urged viewers to
get tested for the condition, and then plugged Visudyne.63 What’s the
problem? Remember, this was not a commercial but an interview. The viewing
public had no idea that Bacall was a paid Novartis spokesperson. Bacall is not
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
367

alone, nor is Novartis. Actors Kathleen Turner and Rob Lowe have also
pitched drugs, and other drugs have been mentioned by name on shows such as
Law and Order, The West Wing, ER, and on the other morning shows such as
Good Morning America by drug firms such as Amgen, Schering Plough, and
Pfizer. Is marketing drugs the same as marketing breakfast cereal or deodor-
ant? Should there be a higher standard for healthcare products in general?
Should television viewers be informed when a celebrity or a sitcom is being
paid by a drug company to talk about or display its products?
SITUATION 2
A few years ago, investigators for the U.S. government’s General Accounting
Office (GAO) claimed that several drug companies had repeatedly made
misleading claims about prescription drugs in their advertising on TV and in
print, even after being cited for violations. The reason is not surprising:
advertising results in significant increases in the use of prescription drugs
and in higher drug spending. The GAO study estimates that 8.5 million
Americans each year ask their doctors for specific drugs that they have seen
advertised, and their doctors prescribe the desired drugs.64 The numbers
continue to increase. In 2012, a study in the British Medical Journal described
how pharmaceutical companies spend 19 times more on self-promotion and
advertising than they do on research and development. In other words, for every
dollar they spend on R&D, they spend $19 on advertising.65 The cost and use of
prescription drugs is one of the engines that has driven the astronomical
increases in healthcare costs in recent years. Why have pharmaceutical compa-
nies spent so much money marketing to patients as well as to physicians? What
are the advantages of direct marketing to consumers? What are the disadvan-
tages? Do pharmaceutical companies have any ethical obligation to create a
better balance between advertising and research and development?
SITUATION 3
In 2002, the drugstore chain Walgreens and the pharmaceutical company Eli
Lilly were sued after a Florida consumer received an unsolicited free sample
of the antidepressant drug Prozac Weekly in the mail. The recipient had kept
her depression secret for many years—from her family, friends, and employers
—fearing that she would suffer repercussions if her mental condition was
known. Imagine her surprise when she received Prozac Weekly in the mail,
along with a letter from Walgreens and her doctors. The sample itself was
supplied free by the manufacturer, Eli Lilly. She filed a class action suit
alleging invasion of privacy, unfair trade practices, and commercial exploi-
tation of confidential medical information by all parties.66 Is it acceptable for
drug makers to market products directly to drugstore customers, using past
patient records as indicators of the drugs they might need? Are patients helped
368
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

by this practice? Are they harmed? What about their rights to privacy? What
are the dangers of drug companies being closely aligned with drugstore
chains?
SITUATION 4
Beginning in 2002, prescription Prilosec (a drug approved to combat acid reflux
disease) lost patent protection and was marketed over the counter as Prilosec
OTC to consumers. This was great news to consumers because a monthly supply
of Prilosec OTC cost only 7 cents per pill versus several dollars a pill for similar
prescription medications. Imagine consumers’ surprise, however, when they
couldn’t find Prilosec OTC on their pharmacy shelves for more than a year in
2004. Procter & Gamble (the maker of Prilosec OTC) and its partner, the huge
drug company AstraZeneca, claimed that they underestimated demand for the
drug and were working hard to ramp up production. The shortage was so acute
thatan executive fora large drugdistributor inthe Northeastcontacted Procter&
Gamble every day to ask for more Prilosec OTC, but rarely received any. The
dearth of Prilosec OTC was a good thing for AstraZeneca, however, because the
shortage vastly increased sales of Nexium, its prescription medication for acid
reflux. While AstraZeneca and Procter & Gamble maintained that they did not
manufacture the shortage, Wall Street analysts, academic researchers, and
consumer advocates all argued that the companies could meet demand for
thecheaperover-the-countermedicationiftheywantedto.67Docompanieshave
an obligation to keep supplies of less-expensive medications available to
consumers? Do you think it is reasonable to imagine that huge companies
would create a shortage of a particular product in an effort to steer consumers
toward a more costly alternative?
SITUATION 5
The off-label marketing of drugs is an area where a number of pharmaceutical
companies have run afoul of the regulators and have been fined hundreds of
millions and, in at least one case, billions of dollars. British drugmaker
GlaxoSmithKline was fined $3 billion for aggressively promoting its family of
antidepressant medications (such as Avandia, Wellbutrin, and Paxil) to treat
conditions other than depression or to consumers for whom the drugs had not
been tested (such as children). The problem with this seemingly widespread
practice of off-labeling is that drugs are approved for sale only after they have
been tested for particular conditions or with a particular segment of the
population. Using drugs for something for which they have not been tested can
be dangerous and even life-threatening. For example, Glaxo salespeople
pushed the use of Paxil among children, although it had been approved
only for adult use. To encourage doctors to prescribe it for children, Glaxo paid
doctors for trips to Bermuda and Jamaica, and paid for spa treatments and
hunting excursions—practices that most feel are highly unethical. After the
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
369

widespread, off-label use of Paxil among adolescents to treat depression, the
drug was found to increase the likelihood of suicidal thoughts and actual
suicide among young people. A warning was later added to the label.68
In another recent case, Amgen, the giant biotech company, paid
$762 million in criminal and civil penalties for off-label use of the anemia
drug, Aranesp. Not only did Amgen continue to market the drug for
unapproved uses after the FDA explicitly forbade it, a subsequent study by
Amgen found that off-label use of the drug increased the risk of death among
patients using it.69 Another even more egregious case of off-label marketing is
described at the end of Chapter 5. In that case, medical device company
Synthes marketed Norvin for unapproved conditions and people died as a
result.70 Why do drug makers think they can flout the regulations? How do
doctors rationalize being wined and dined by drug company representatives?
Describe the conflicts of interest in these situations.
HOW THE COMPANIES HANDLED IT
The pharmaceutical companies argue persuasively that their marketing tactics
do nothing but help educate the consumer. No doubt many consumers now are
much more aware of prescription medications than they were before the
advertising of such medications became common. But we also have to wonder
how the cost of these drugs have driven up the cost of healthcare as a whole
and how the relationships among doctors, patients, and the pharmaceutical
companies have changed as a result of the pharmaceutical industry’s adver-
tising and marketing tactics.
RESULTS
If you look at the lawsuits that have been filed against drug companies over the
last 20 years, many deal with advertising and marketing issues. It’s clear that
the system for advertising drugs and bringing them to market poses huge
ethical issues for the drug companies, many of which have been admired for
their ethical reputations. Lawsuits centering on the marketing tactics of the
drug companies continue to pile up, and they have tarnished some of the most
sterling corporate reputations in the world. How big is the problem? Between
2009 and 2012, fines against six drugmakers (Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Merck,
GlaxoSmithKline, Abbott, and Astra Zeneca) in six different cases of
inappropriate or illegal marketing of prescription drugs totaled almost $10
billion.71 The Op-Ed page of the Wall Street Journal—not exactly a bastion of
company-bashing—featured an article a few years ago profiling the pharma-
ceutical industry and entitled, “The Companies Everyone Loves to Hate.” The
writer described how a movie (The Constant Gardener) portrayed the drug
industry as rigging drug trials and as being no better than the illegal arms trade.
The writer also described how in a recent poll, only the oil and gas industry
370
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

In advertising, there’s a thin line between enthusiasm for a product and high-
pressure sales tactics, between optimism and truth, and between focusing on a target
market and perhaps tempting that market into unfortunate activities. A classic example
of a company tempting consumers into unhealthy activities is, of course, the tobacco
industry. Although the hazards of smoking have been well documented for many
decades, tobacco companies spent most of that time denying the health risks of
ranked lower than the pharmaceutical companies. According to the poll, the
percentage of adults who say they can trust what drug companies say in
advertising dropped by almost half in the last seven years.72 It is also
interesting to note that this drop of consumer confidence in the pharmaceutical
industry corresponds exactly with the deregulation that allowed the industry to
advertise directly to consumers in 1997. It seems as if direct advertising has
harmed the companies’ reputations. Of course, none of this is good news for
the industry.
However, some drug companies are beginning to rethink how they
advertise to consumers. For example, Johnson & Johnson began a new
advertising approach in 2005 that devoted as much space to describing
drug risks as drug benefits. They also challenged their competitors to follow
its lead in being more forthright and direct about the risks of prescription
drugs.73 Pfizer, in its 2004 annual report to shareholders, included a 36-page
booklet, “Ten Questions: An Open Dialogue,” that answered consumer
questions head-on. Here are some of the questions Pfizer tackled: “Why
does a little pill cost me so much?” “If Pfizer medicines are cheaper overseas,
why not have them shipped in from outside the U.S.? And just why are they
cheaper overseas?” And “I can’t write my own prescriptions. Why spend any
money advertising to me?”74 These recent moves by Pfizer and Johnson &
Johnson are important signals that the pharmaceutical may be indeed pursuing
a new marketing direction. In addition, the pharmaceutical industry group
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA, discussed
in Chapter 9) has established guidelines that if followed should eliminate
many of the industry’s questionable practices in the future. Companies are
joining forces because they recognize that bad press about practices in the
industry can harm all of them.
Yet, despite all the attempts to clean up the practice of off-label market-
ing, drug companies keep doing it because the fines are tiny compared to the
potential profits from a successful drug. For example, Eliot Spitzer, former
attorney general of New York, sued Glaxo over Paxil in 2004, which didn’t get
the company to stop the practice. After Glaxo’s $3 billion fine in 2012, Spitzer
said, “What we’re learning is that money doesn’t deter corporate malfeasance.
The only thing that will work in my view is CEOs and officials being forced to
resign and individual culpability being enforced.”75 Executives going to jail
might be the most powerful tactic for persuading these companies to obey the
regulations.
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
371

smoking and used “benign” advertising devices, such as Joe Camel, to market their
very dangerous products. Another example is gambling casinos, where consumers
are urged to have a good time playing roulette, blackjack, or slot machines. Are there
ethical obligations for casinos, which know that they may be tempting compulsive
gamblers into a binge? Who are the stakeholders for the tobacco industry and
the casino industry? And what are the companies’ ethical responsibilities? Does
the fact that tobacco is physically addictive and the knowledge that most people begin
smoking as children change our expectations of the tobacco industry and make our
assessment of its obligations different?
Another case involves various brands of bottled water, which most consumers
believe come from freshwater springs in Maine, Minnesota, or some other location
with a reputation for a clean environment. In fact, despite the picture of the
mountain on the label, some bottlers package filtered water from the municipal
water supplies of several American cities. Is it up to consumers to read labels
closely, or are companies obligated to represent their products honestly on all labels
and in advertisements?
Can you think of any products for which outrageous claims have been made? Is it
fair to appeal to the emotions of a particular market segment? Why not? Can you think
of particular advertising devices or symbols that are used to appeal to a specific group
of consumers? How far is “too far” in advertising?
ETHICS AND EMPLOYEES
Certainly, one of the key stakeholder groups in any corporate situation should be the
employees of the organizations involved in the case. Organizations have myriad
ethical obligations to their employees. Some of these could include the right to
privacy, the right not to be fired without just cause, the right to a safe workplace, the
right to due process and fair treatment, the right to freedom of speech (e.g.,
whistleblowing), and the right to work in an environment that is free of bias.76
We’ve addressed a number of these rights in other chapters. In this section, we focus
on two specific rights: a safe workplace and the right to keep a job unless just cause
can be found for a firing.
Employee Safety
The most basic of employee rights is the right to work without being maimed or even
killed on the job. In 1970, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
was created in an attempt to protect workers from hazards in the workplace. OSHA’s
mission is not only to protect workers against possible harm but also to ensure that
employees are informed of the hazards of their particular industry and job. Let’s look
at a classic employee safety case.
372
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

COMPANY: JOHNS MANVILLE77
INDUSTRY: ASBESTOS
SITUATION
For decades, asbestos was the favored insulator in myriad construction
products. Some estimate that over 3,000 products contained one or more
asbestos components. Millions of homes, schools, workplaces and other
buildings contained asbestos insulation; thousands of ship workers in World
War II installed asbestos in battleships and other watercraft; and thousands of
auto mechanics had fixed innumerable automobile brakes lined with asbestos.
The danger of inhaling even minute amounts of asbestos was not publicly
known until the 1970s, mainly because the incubation period for many of the
asbestos-related lung diseases and cancers is anywhere from 10 to 40 years.
However, by the mid-1970s tens of thousands of people who worked with
asbestos were beginning to suffer from the fatal diseases we now know are
characteristic of asbestos exposure.
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
Johns Manville was the largest manufacturer of products containing asbestos
in the US for much of the twentieth century. According to company docu-
ments, the management tier of Johns Manville became aware of the adverse
health effects of asbestos exposure as early as the mid-1930s. (In fact,
Prudential Insurance stopped insuring asbestos workers’ lives in 1928.)
Although some executives were disturbed by the connection between their
products and workers’ illnesses, the sentiments of the stonewallers prevailed.
Warning labels were not placed on asbestos packaging until 1964. In addition,
company doctors lied to asbestos workers at Manville facilities and told them
they had no health problems. Johns Manville executives hid scientific data;
lied to the public, the government, and their employees; and kept quiet about
the danger to which tens of thousands of workers were being exposed. The
only stakeholder groups considered by Johns Manville during this period seem
to have been the senior executives and the shareholders. The company
appeared to totally ignore the obligations it had to other stakeholder groups.
RESULTS
By 1982, more than 17,000 lawsuits had been filed against Johns Manville.
That was the tip of the iceberg. Many more thousands are expected to be filed
as more workers develop fatal diseases that were the result of exposure during
World War II. Many of these deaths are lingering ones in which the quality of
life diminishes greatly over many years. As a result of the massive litigation,
Johns Manville established a fund containing hundreds of millions of dollars
to settle claims. The company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
373

Let’s look at another particularly egregious case that was profiled in the New York
Times and on public television in January 2003.
1982, has been reorganized, and has been renamed the Manville Corporation.
The new corporation has a strong commitment to funding the costs of the
claims filed against its former self, and Manville executives have voiced what
appears to be a real commitment to ethics within the corporation in an effort to
prevent what happened from happening again.78
COMMENTS
One of the real mysteries surrounding this case is how so many senior executives
over so many years could manage to live with themselves while keeping the
awful secret ofasbestos-related illness. It’s onethingto hide something fora few
years. But to keep this devastating secret for more than 40 years, throughout
many changes in management, is a staggering notion to contemplate. Bill Sells,
a manager with Johns Manville and the Manville Corporation for more than 30
years, wrote a Harvard Business Review article in which he analyzed what
happened.79 He contends that management was in denial. “Manville managers
at every level were unwilling or unable to believe in the long-term consequences
of these known hazards . . . Had the company responded to the dangers of
asbestosis and lung cancer with extensive medical research, assiduous com-
munication, insistent warnings, and a rigorous dust-reduction program, it could
have saved lives and would probably have saved the stockholders, the industry,
and, for that matter, the product . . . But Manville and the rest of the asbestos
industry did almost nothing of significance—some medical studies but no
follow-through, safety bulletins and dust-abatement policies but no enforce-
ment, acknowledgment of hazards but no direct warnings to downstream
customers—and their collective inaction was ruinous.”80
AccordingtoSells, the denialwasfedbytheconvictionthatasbestos was an
essential product that the world couldn’t get along without. Managers also
believed they were doing enough because Manville’s air quality standards were
higher than the allowable limit set by the American Conference of Governmen-
tal Industrial Hygienists. But how did the company know whether the standard
wasreallysafe?They didlittletofindout. And whatabouttheneed forstandards
to protect those working with asbestos products, such as brake shoe installers?
Nothing was being done to protect them. Another factor feeding the denial was
the fact that asbestos workers who were also smokers were much more likely to
get sick. Managers could blame the tobacco industry and avoid self-blame. In
addition, short-term financial consequences took precedence in managerial
decision making. And, finally, managers sent a “don’t tell me what I don’t want
to hear” message. Top managers actually may have been unaware of some of the
problems. As Sells points out, however, juries convict companies based on what
they “should have known,”81 not necessarily what they did know.
374
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

COMPANY: MCWANE, INC.
INDUSTRY: MANUFACTURER OF WATER AND SEWER PIPES
SITUATION
McWane, Inc., in Birmingham, Alabama, is a privately held pipe manufacturer
that has expanded aggressively over the last 30 years—mainly by purchasing
antiquated plants and increasing profitability through what the company calls
“disciplined management practices.” Although the industry—melting metal and
casting pipe—is inherently dangerous, McWane’s drive for profits was so
relentlessthatworkersafetywassacrificedinthe nameofprofitsfor the McWane
family, who own the company and answer to no shareholders. For a number of
years after 1995,McWane accumulatedfourtimes moresafety violationsthanits
six major competitors combined! From 1995 to 2002, nine McWane workers
were killed on the job and more than 4,600 workers were injured (out of a total of
5,000), many in particularly gruesome, maiming accidents. At one acquisition—
TylerPipe Company inTyler, Texas—McWane reduced theworkforcebyalmost
two-thirds and demanded increased productivity from the remaining workforce.
An inspector from OSHA, the federal regulator charged with guarding worker
safety, described what was found at Tyler Pipe: “Many workers have scars or
disfigurations which are noticeable from several feet away. Burns and ampu-
tations are frequent. Throughout the plant, in supervisors’ offices and on bulletin
boards, next to production charts and union memos, is posted in big orange
letters: “REDUCE MAN HOURS PER TON.”82
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
After the New York Times and Frontline (a production of PBS) investigated and
producedashockingseries—inthenewspaperandonPBSstations—thatexposed
the horrific conditions at McWane, the company responded with a written
statement denying allegations about its safety record. “We do not put production
concernsaheadofsafetyandenvironmentalcompliance,” saidcompanyofficials
inawrittenstatementtotheNewYorkTimesandFrontline.Thatpublicityprompted
aseriesoffederalinvestigations,whichledtomyriadindictmentsinseveralstates
(includingAlabama,NewYork,NewJersey,Texas,andUtah).Amongthemwasa
25-count indictment charging the company with illegal dumping and other
environmental crimes; other counts charged the company with conspiring to
violate workplace safety and environmental laws and obstructing government
investigations by lying, intimidating workers, and altering accident sites.83
RESULTS
In March 2005, McWane pleaded guilty to environmental crimes committed at
its Tyler Pipe operation in Texas and was fined $4.5 million. In June 2005,
McWane was found guilty of 20 environmental crimes at one of its factories in
Alabama. In August 2005, the company pleaded guilty to federal safety and
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
375

Can you think of examples in other industrie s whe re employee safety and health
are major iss ues? Ar e there heal th and safety issues in service (nonmanu facturing)
industrie s? Ar e emp loyers respon sible for conditions such as carpal tunne l syndr ome,
in which the wrist is injured as a result o f repe ated moveme nts such as ente ring data
into a compute r? What recourse do employers have in situatio ns where the perf orm-
ance of a job, in itsel f, can cause inj ury? If a com pany disc overs that its employees are
at ris k for injury, is it under any obligat ion to inform the public?
envir onmenta l crime s in one of its Alabam a plants. In that inciden t, McWane
admitte d that it willfull y violated federal safe ty rules by failing to install a
require d safety guard on a conveyor belt and that a young worker was crus hed
to death. A McWane employee in Texas had been killed two months earlier by
another u nguarded conveyor belt. 84 Th e New York Tim es and PBS won the
2004 Goldsmi th Priz e for Investigative Re porting for their series of article s
and progr ams on McWane. 85
COMM ENTS
Few investigations have yielded more gruesome or tragic stories than the New
York Times/PBS series on McWane. If the company was concerned with safety
and the environment before this series, its concern certainly was not evident.
Would this company have been more responsible if there had been shareholders
to report to? As this book went to press, the McWane website (www.mcwane.
com) contained various statements regarding safety and the environment. “Do It
Safely or Not At All” is the slogan displayed in a section devoted to health and
safety. And in a section devoted to the environment, McWane states that its goal
is “Protecting the Environment for Generations to Come.” Press releases on the
site describe various awards for safety that the company has received from
organizations in various states. So it appears that McWane is cleaning up its
act—literally and figuratively. That said, on the PBS Frontline website (www.
pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/workplace/mcwane) for “The McWane
Story,” there is a section entitled “Two Companies, Two Visions.” It describes
the McWanevision of driving profitability regardless of safety or environmental
concerns and contrasts it with the vision of another pipe company in Birming-
ham called American Cast Iron Pipe Company (ACIPCO). At the time of the
series, McWane had employee turnover rates of almost 100 percent. ACIPCO
had turnover rates of less than 1 percent, and its rate of injuries at the time was a
fraction of McWane’s. While McWane rationed ice cubes to its employees,
ACIPCO provided individual air conditioners to its workers. At the time of the
series, ACIPCO ranked sixth on Fortune magazine’s “100 Best Companies to
Work For.” The interesting irony of the story is that when John Eagan founded
ACIPCO in 1905, he promised to run the business based on the Golden Rule.
Only one employee dissented—the president of ACIPCO, who would soon
leave and cross town to start his own pipe business, J. R. McWane.86
376
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Employee Downsizings
Employee downsizings or layoffs can result from many business conditions, including
economic depressions, the desire to consolidate operations and decrease labor costs,
and increased competition and unmet corporate objectives, to list just a few. However
justifiable the reason may be, the result always involves human misery. Organizations
may not have an ethical obligation to keep labor forces at a specific number. They do,
however, have an obligation to hire and fire responsibly.
One of the most contentious downsizing cases in recent years involved a major
employer in the Northeast.
COMPANY: SCOTT PAPER COMPANY
INDUSTRY: CONSUMER PAPER PRODUCTS
SITUATION
In late 1993, Scott Paper had tired product lines, some extraneous business
ventures, and a lagging revenue stream and stock price. Scott’s board of
directors wanted to breathe some life into the slumbering giant. In April 1994,
Albert J. Dunlap, a self-proclaimed “Rambo in pinstripes,” was named CEO of
Scott Paper. Dunlap immediately created his very own crisis to get the
company moving. It was as if he’d lobbed a fire bomb through the doors
of corporate headquarters.
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
Dunlap began by quickly selling off $2 billion worth of nonessential busi-
nesses.87 He also quickly terminated one-third of the total workforce of Scott—
over 11,000 workers lost their jobs. But perhaps the most painful blow to the
Philadelphia areawasDunlap’sdecision tomoveScott’scorporate headquarters
out of the city where it had been founded 116 years earlier to Boca Raton,
Florida, where Dunlap had a home. According to some sources, the move was
prompted by Philadelphia’s climate, which Dunlap didn’t like.
RESULTS
Scott’s stock price increased 146 percent in 14 months, and its profits doubled
after one year of Dunlap’s management. The company was sold in mid-1995
to Kimberly-Clark Corporation for $6.8 billion in stock.88 Some stakeholders
were delirious. Scott shareholders made out like bandits. Wall Street financial
types did a jig. But no one was more gleeful than Dunlap, who pocketed
$100 million in salary, stock profits, and other perks. Not bad for 15 months of
his time.
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
377

Contrast what happened to Scott Paper with the philosophy of Lincoln Electric
Company in Cleveland, Ohio.
COMMENTS
Many people thought of Dunlap as a hero, including Dunlap himself. Many
others, however, considered him to be the worst kind of villain—“Chainsaw
Al,” as some of his detractors called him. Though downsizing and restructur-
ing measures are painful, many people can understand why they might be
necessary to turn around a company that can no longer compete. What
infuriated everyone in the Philadelphia area, however, was Dunlap’s moving
Scott’s corporate headquarters because he didn’t like the weather in Philadel-
phia. Certainly, it is a capricious reason to move an organization that was an
institution in the area for over a century. Scott was not just some company.
Rather, it had been an exemplary corporate citizen, providing talent and
financing for local cultural and civic organizations. In addition, Dunlap’s
manner was arrogant, and he showed little or no sympathy toward the long-
term employees who had been axed and to the area he gutted.
UPDATE
After selling Scott Paper Company, Al Dunlap went on to become CEO of
Sunbeam (maker of electric blankets and outdoor grills) in 1996. In typical
Al Dunlap fashion, he quickly announced the closing or sale of two-thirds
of the company’s factories and the firing of half of its 12,000 employees. The
stock rose and Wall Street applauded. In March of 1997, Sunbeam bought
three companies: Coleman (camping equipment), First Alert (smoke alarms),
and Signature Brands (Mr. Coffee). Ayear later, it became clear to Sunbeam’s
board that the acquisitions had not been well managed and that the company
was in financial trouble. The board also discovered that the company was
using highly aggressive sales tactics and accounting practices that inflated
revenues and profits.89 In June 1998, Chainsaw Al got the ax himself. In 2002,
Dunlap settled charges with the SEC, paid a fine of $500,000, neither admitt-
ing nor denying that he presided over accounting practices that resulted in
Sunbeam overstating its profits in 1997 and 1998. And his legal woes did not
end there. The Justice Department began an investigation of Sunbeam for
the period it was managed by Dunlap.90 Even more interesting was the dis-
closure that, early in his career, Dunlap was fired twice—once when the
company’s board accused him of overseeing a huge accounting fraud. Dunlap
erased these two firings from his official employment history, and news of
them surfaced only recently. Another interesting tidbit: in one of those com-
panies that fired him, his relationships with his colleagues were so fractured
that the entire senior team below Dunlap threatened to resign as a group unless
he was canned.91
378
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

COMPANY: LINCOLN ELECTRIC COMPANY
INDUSTRY: ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS
SITUATION
Lincoln Electric has had an unusual relationship with its employees since it
was founded by John C. Lincoln in 1895.92 The company has been on the
cutting edge of worker-friendly efforts. In 1923, it was among the first firms to
offer company-paid vacation; in 1925, it was among the first to offer employee
stock ownership plans; the first employee suggestion program was imple-
mented in 1929, and Lincoln employees received incentive bonuses beginning
in 1934. Perhaps the most controversial of its programs, however, is its
guaranteed employment plan: after three years of continuous employment
with Lincoln Electric, workers are guaranteed their jobs. In the early 1980s,
however, the company experienced tremendous hardship. As a result of
inflation, higher energy costs, and a recession in the United States, Lincoln’s
sales plummeted 40 percent. Company managers didn’t know if they would be
able to keep their promise of guaranteed employment.
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
The company was severely tested. However, not one Lincoln employee was
laid off for lack of work. The company’s loyalty to its employees was returned
in 1993, when Lincoln urged its employees to attain record levels of sales and
production. Employees voluntarily postponed 614 weeks of vacation in order
to meet customer demands. Even after the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009,
Lincoln seemed to be able to spread the pain across all ranks in an effort to
survive the horrible economic conditions. Although austerity measures were
needed, Lincoln still did not lay off anyone, and hasn’t since 1948. In fact, here
are some impressive facts from author Frank Koller, who wrote a book about
Lincoln called Spark: How Old-Fashioned Values Drive a Twenty-First
Century Corporation:
& 2011 is the 78th straight year that Lincoln has made a profit.
& The total bonus pool distributed to employees in 2011 equaled
32 percent of pre-tax profit of $84 million.
& The average employee bonus was more than $30,000.
& The average total compensation of a Lincoln Electric employee was
$79,000.93
RESULTS
Incentive management is a cornerstone of Lincoln’s culture. Having devel-
oped one of the first pay-for-performance systems in the country, this company
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
379

As we mentioned in Chapte r 8, emp loyees have the right to be treated fairly,
without bias, and on the basis of their abili ty to perform a specific job. If a layoff or
downsizing is neces sary—if it involves one pers on or many—the layo ff shoul d be
done with respect, dignit y, and compass ion. In the two case s we just outlin ed, wha t do
you imagin e are the key differ ences in philosop hy? How coul d com panies becom e
more like Linco ln Elec tric? What are the pitfalls of Linco ln’s approach? What are the
pitfalls of Dunlap’s? If you had to lay off employees, wha t factors would you consider
in structuring a p lan that would be as fair as p ossible to all involved?
Suppose the country ex periences a recession. Should companies begi n to lay
off e mployees in or der t o m aintain expected growt h rates? To satisfy Wall Street’s
profit and growt h expectat ions? W hat other stakeholder groups are affected? Are
companies in business only to make a profit for sha reholders? Are employee
stakeholder groups more expendable than customer s takeholders? H ow can a
company r econcile long-term obligations to al l s take holders w ith short-t erm
fi n a n c i a l c r i s e s ?
ETHICS AND SHAREH OLDERS
Organi zations also have a clear ethica l obligatio n to sharehol ders and other “owners.”
This ethical obligatio n include s serving the intere sts of owne rs and try ing to perform
well in the short term as well as the long term. It also means not engagi ng in activitie s
that could put the organization out of busin ess and not mak ing short-t erm decisi ons
that might jeop ardize the com pany’s health in the future. As Kotter and Heskett say in
their book, Cor porate Culture and Performance (1992), “only when manager s care
about the legitimat e intere sts of stockholder s do they strive to perform well economi -
cally over time, and in a compet itive industr y that is only possibl e whe n they take care
of their custo mers, and in a com petitive labor market, that is only possibl e when they
take care of those who serve custom ers—em ployees. ” 94 Th us taking care of shar e-
holders also mean s ultimat ely taking care of other key sta keholder groups . Let’ s
examine how the ethics of the investment banking giant Salomon Brothers affected its
shareholders.
is frequently a subject of research by academics and other companies. Lincoln
also has an elected employee advisory board for direct and open communica-
tions between employees and senior managers. The board was established
in 1914 and has met every two weeks ever since. So, loyalty at Lincoln is
nothing new. Lincoln’s website (www. lincolnelect ric.com) clearl y describ es
the company’s commitment to integrity: “More than 100 years ago, the
founders of Lincoln Electric adopted a policy of absolute integrity—doing
the right thing rather than what was expedient, popular or in vogue at the time.
Today, that solid ethical heritage remains the foundation of Lincoln Electric’s
corporate governance practices.”
380
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

COMPANY: SALOMON BROTHERS
INDUSTRY: INVESTMENT BANKING
SITUATION
In December 1990, the head of Salomon’s government bond trading desk, Paul
Mozer, decided to test the regulatory resolve of the U.S. Treasury. Annoyed by
the federal limits on the percentage of Treasury bonds any one firm could bid for
in Treasury auctions—the ceiling was 35 percent—Mozer devised a plan to
evadetheregulation.Hesubmittedabid for SalomonBrothers,andhesubmitted
an unauthorized bid in the name of one of his customers. The two bids combined
represented 46 percent of the auction—a clear violation of the rules. Mozer got
his bonds and repeated this maneuver in February, April, and May 1991.
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
In April 1991, Mozer described the tactic to four Salomon executives: Chairman
John Gutfreund, President Thomas W. Strauss, Vice Chairman John W.
Meriwether, and General Counsel Donald M. Feuerstein. These executives
told Mozer to stop his scheme but did not report Mozer’s activities to the
Securities and Exchange Commission at that time. (In May, Mozer rigged the
bidding again.) In June, the SEC subpoenaed Salomon for its auction records. In
August, Salomon finally alerted the SEC to Mozer’s activities. Immediately
following the disclosure to the SEC, Mozer was suspended from his job; shortly
afterward, the board of directors asked the four Salomon executives to resign
from the firm and fired Salomon’s outside law firm. The board named one of its
own members, Warren Buffett, as interim chairman.95
RESULTS
ThepublicitygeneratedbytheSalomonscandalwasdevastatingtothefirmandits
shareholders. Its market value dropped by over one-third—$1.5 billion—in the
week following the disclosure. Its debt was downgraded by various rating
agencies, and major banks reevaluated Salomon’s loan terms. Because of the
firm’sdecreasedliquidity,itsabilitytotradewasdramaticallyreduced.Inaddition
totheimmediatefinancialdebacle,teamsofSalomonBrotherspersonnelleftthe
firm. For a year after the crisis, the financial press was awash in reports of high-
level Salomon employees joining other firms. The defections no doubt damaged
thefirmformanyyears.Inaddition,atatimewhentheprofitsofotherinvestment
banks were soaring by as much as 50 percent over previous years, Salomon’s
underwriting revenues were down 26 percent—a huge and humbling disparity.
Their profits were off substantially, customers left, and they were barred from
sometypesoftransactionsorwererenderedineffectivebecauseoftheirweakened
financial position. It took years for the firm to recover.96
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
381

COMMENTS
In the investment banking industry, reputation is everything. It’s the yardstick
customers use to evaluate quality and a firm’s ability to do business. Nothing is
more devastating for a financial services firm than the loss of reputation.
Salomon is lucky it survived. It very well could have gone the way of E. F.
Hutton and Drexel Burnham Lambert. E. F. Hutton was acquired by another
financial firm after it could not survive pleading guilty to 2,000 felony counts
of fraud in a check-kiting case. (Check kiting is a type of fraud that involves
moving money in and out of accounts with insufficient funds to cover the
withdrawals. This usually involves multiple accounts.) Drexel closed its doors
after charges of wrongdoing in the high-yield market effectively crippled its
ability to do business. In all cases, the firms put their own interests ahead of the
interests of their primary stakeholders: their customers.
UPDATE
Salomon Brothers remained independent until 1998, when it was acquired by
the Travelers Group, and eventually became part of Citigroup. For more than
adecadeitwasknownasSalomonSmithBarney,whichwastheinvestmentbank-
ing arm of Citigroup. Former New York State Attorney General Eliot Spitzer
investigatedthecompanyanditsformerstartelecomanalyst,JackGrubman,who
were named in approximately 62 class action lawsuits.97 The plaintiffs accused
Salomon and Grubman ofissuing unreasonable research reports and offailing to
disclose conflicts of interest with companies profiled in those research reports,
including WorldCom, AT&T, Global Crossing, Winstar, and others.98
It turns out that this was an industry-wide practice. In late 2002, the Spitzer
probe was resolved when Wall Street investment banks agreed to change their
research practices to eliminate conflicts of interests like the ones exhibited by
Grubman. Conflicts of interest were so rampant at the time that in a truly
outrageous move, Sanford Weill (then CEO of Citigroup) asked Grubman to
review his rating of AT&T in order to help win favor with Michael Armstrong,
who at the time was CEO of AT&Tand a board member of Citigroup. The point
wastopersuade Armstrongto sidewith Weillina boardroom struggle.Weilllater
denied the charge. However, Weill, Citigroup, and other investment firms agreed
to settle the conflict-of-interest suits and pay $1.44 billion in fines as well as to
reform their practices. Citigroup paid $300 million of the fine, and the rest of it
was divided among nine other banks, including Credit Suisse First Boston,
Morgan Stanley, and Merrill Lynch.99 Salomon Smith Barney also admitted to
failing to manage conflicts of interest, publishing fraudulent and misleading
research, ignoring internal warnings, and engaging in improper spinning and
public offering stock distribution practices. In addition to the fines imposed,
Salomon Smith Barney was ordered to report regularly on its compliance
activities to Citigroup’s board of directors; Citigroup was ordered to make a
public statement ofcontritionforfailingto address conflictsofinterest, andit was
ordered to prohibit the senior executives who function as investment bankers
382
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

COMPANY: AIG (AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP)
INDUSTRY: INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
SITUATION
For many years, AIG was the picture of financial stability. Before the
financial crisis of 2008–09, AIG held 81 million life insurance policies
worth almost $2 trillion. It insured approximately 180,000 businesses
around the world, which employed around 106 million people. It owned
fleets of jet planes that it leased to airlines and other businesses, provided
insurance to U.S. cities and municipalities and pension funds, and guaran-
teed investment contracts and products that protected 401(k) participants.
Before the crisis, AIG was the largest health and life insurer in the U.S. and
the second-largest property and casualty insurer. However, it was a classic
“too-big-to-fail” company because its operations touched so many individ-
uals, companies, and governments worldwide.106 Letting AIG fail would be
like pulling the rug out from under the global economy; its effects would
reverberate throughout the world. AIG unwittingly began a downward spiral
from communicating directly with the analysts who cover those companies. In
addition, Grubman was fined $15 million and received a lifetime ban on
functioning as a broker, dealer, investment advisor, or an employee of an
investment company or municipal securities dealer.100 The good news for
Citigroup is that after an incredible spate of ethical lapses, high-profile investi-
gations, horrendous publicity, almost $6 billion in fines, and truly mortifying
behavior by a host of employees (including some at the very highest levels), the
“take-no-prisoners” CEO SandyWeill finallyhanded overthereinsoftheday-to-
day management of the company to Charles Prince, former corporate counsel, in
July 2003. (In March 2006, Prince became chairman and CEO of Citigroup.)101
It appears, however, that the seeds of unethical behavior had been sown and even
though Prince, a lawyer, headed the firm from 2006 to 2008, he could do little to
change the culture of the giant company. The risk-taking culture that had been
encouragedbyWeillcontinuedunabated.AfterPrinceleft,thenewCEO,Vikram
Pandit, struggled to right the huge ship102 by shrinking Citigroup into a global
bank modeled after the original Citicorp. He told the Congressional Oversight
Panel in early 2010 that he was trying to “break it up” in order to return the
organization to profitability, and Salomon Smith Barney was among the many
businessessold.103 It is now Morgan Stanley Smith Barney. Citigroup,along with
BankofAmerica,receivedmoregovernmentassistanceduringthe2008financial
crisis than any other institution—$45 billion.104
While the money has been paid back, Citigroup remains fragile. Pandit
was forced out by the board in late 2012 and Michael Corbat was named
CEO—the first time in almost ten years that the bank will be led by a banker
(not a lawyer like Prince or a hedge fund executive like Pandit).105
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
383

by getting deeply into the business of selling credit default swaps (CDSs)
and collaterized debt obligations (CDOs). Nearly all of the company’s
losses stem from one very small business unit—a 400-employee business
with offices in London and Greenwich (Connecticut) called AIG Financial
Products (AIGFP). The current chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben
Bernanke, said that AIGFP was in essence a hedge fund, completely
unregulated, that was attached to a very large and stable insurance company.
AIGFP exploited a huge gap in the regulatory system and built up a $2.7
trillion portfolio of derivatives.107 (Famed investor Warren Buffett once
called derivatives “weapons of mass destruction.” Long before the crisis,
Buffett claimed that derivatives posed a “mega-catastrophic risk” for the
economy and stated that the products were designed by “madmen.”)108 AIG
got into trouble when financial companies bought increasingly risky invest-
ments (subprime mortgages) and went to AIG to insure that risk. When those
securities were downgraded in value during the financial crisis in 2008, the
firms that purchased the insurance demanded payment from AIG on their
policies. Suddenly AIG needed collateral that it didn’t have. It faced
bankruptcy—a catastrophe for the company and the economy.
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
Actually, the company didn’t handle it—it couldn’t handle it. The problem
was so enormous that the U.S. government had to step in and bail out AIG, to
the tune of $180 billion.109 U.S. taxpayer money kept the company in
business, although it is currently a shadow of its former self and the bleeding
is by no means over. It may need more bailouts in the future.
RESULTS
To stay afloat, AIG has desperately tried to raise capital and cut expenses.
Layoffs occurred in some of its businesses, and other businesses were sold to
raise capital. The financial mastermind of AIGFP, Joe Cassano, was paid
$280 million in the eight-year run-up of his hedge fund. He is now retired and
living in a London townhouse, trying to avoid the press who stalk him. A
subsequent scandal that has dogged the company involves the AIGFP traders
who had contractual bonus payments worth $165 million owed to them to
clean up the mess they created. Their bonuses—in some cases paid to the very
people who created the crisis for AIG—were the subject of endless press
speculation and resulted in public fury over the unfairness of paying people
millions to correct their mistakes.110
COMMENTS
At the time of the crisis, many experts questioned whether AIG would be able
to survive. The company received $182 billion in U.S. government loans and
commitments to prevent it from collapsing.111 As this book goes to press, AIG
384
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Shareholders—in particular, individual investors—have been abused in recent
years as numerous ethical lapses have driven a collapse in the stock market. Several of
the cases described earlier in “Ethics and Consumers” are also relevant here.
ETHICS AND THE COMMUNITY
As many people have discovered, companies don’t exist in a vacuum. Companies are
citizens in their communities, just as individuals are, and because of their size,
companies can have an outsized impact on their communities. Therefore a major
stakeholder in business must be the communities of which corporations and other
organizations are a part. Perhaps the most obvious way a company can affect its
community is through its approach to the environment.
The public’s concern with the effect of business on the environment began in
earnest with the publication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring (1962).113 In her book,
Carson outlined the hazards of pesticides, and DDT in particular, to the environment.
The resulting public outcry resulted in the Environmental Protection Act in 1969 and
the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970. The goal of both
the act and the agency is to protect the environment—air, water, earth—from the
activities of businesses and individuals. Of course, we all need to think long term about
the health of the planet and its environs for ourselves, our children, and other
generations to follow. Let’s look at a classic environmental case.
has repaid every cent to the U.S. government and is working hard to recover its
precrisis reputation. Its former CEO, Hank Greenberg, almost derailed AIG’s
recovery effort when he asked AIG’s board to join him in suing the U.S.
government for bailing out the company and supposedly harming share-
holders. When the lawsuit became public, the media and the public went
berserk with stories about the irony of a company essentially suing the
taxpayers who saved it from catastrophe. The AIG board met and quickly
decided not to join Greenberg in his suit. New AIG CEO Bob Benmosche said,
“It is not acceptable socially for AIG to have taken this money and to think we
can go back and sue the government.”112
COMPANY: EXXON
INDUSTRY: PETROLEUM
SITUATION
In 1989, the Exxon Valdez, an oil tanker bound for Long Beach, California
from the Port of Valdez in Alaska, ran aground in Prince William Sound.
The Valdez contained 52 million gallons of crude oil, 10 million gallons of
which quickly began to leak into the pristine Alaskan waters. The captain of
the tanker, Joseph Hazelwood, was later tested for alcohol consumption
and showed an increased blood alcohol level. Although it was never proven
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
385

that Hazelwood was drunk at the time of the accident, he did violate
company regulations by not being on the bridge of the tanker when
navigating in those waters.
In addition, Alyeska, the consortium of seven oil companies that origi-
nally established Alaska as an oil capital with the construction of the Trans
Alaska pipeline, was charged with safeguarding Alaska from just such an
accident and with providing immediate help should such a catastrophe occur.
HOW THE COMPANY HANDLED IT
Although Exxon immediately began efforts to clean up the oil spill—the
largest spill ever at the time—critical equipment was either damaged and in
the process of being repaired, or not on the scene. CEO Lawrence Rawls did
place full-page apology ads in various newspapers one week after the
accident, but he did not visit Alaska and was roundly criticized for that
seeming insensitivity. In addition, Exxon appeared to blame everyone but
itself for its problem. And Alyeska was not much help. Like Exxon, it was
unprepared for a crisis of the magnitude of the Exxon Valdez spill. As a
result, Exxon seemingly dropped the ball with this oil spill. It looked as if
the firm denied responsibility.
RESULTS
Although over 800 miles of Alaskan beaches were initially covered with oil,
85 percent had been cleaned by 1990. Wildlife in the area was not so lucky—
more than 30,000 birds and at least 2,000 sea otters died, and the fish
population was contaminated. Exxon spent more than $2 billion on the
cleanup and paid additional hundreds of millions to the city of Valdez and
Alaskan fishermen. Captain Joseph Hazelwood was fired for not following the
regulation about being on the bridge of the tanker.114
What really took a beating, however, was Exxon’s image. Environmen-
talists publicly hammered the company, and some 40,000 consumers
destroyed their Exxon credit cards in protest.
COMMENTS
The difference between the personalities of Exxon CEO Lawrence Rawls and
Johnson & Johnson CEO James Burke could be why Exxon received such poor
marks on its handling of the Valdez crisis. Rawls was an engineer and
uncomfortable with the media. His reaction appeared slow and seemingly
dispassionate, and the lemon he was handed remained a lemon. Burke, on the
other hand, knew how to make lemonade.
The Exxon Valdez spill pales beside the 2010 BP oil spill in the Gulf of
Mexico, when the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig killed 11 workers,
injured many more, and spilled two hundred million gallons of oil into the Gulf.
In early 2013, the company, which has already paid more than $24 billion in
386
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

In addition to environmental concerns, another issue that affects all of us as a
society is relatively new: Internet privacy. For example, many people around the world
are concerned about Google’s privacy policies and practices. With the advent of
Google Street View, anyone around the world with access to a computer can check out
where you live. But Google’s Street View cars have been collecting a lot more than
photographs of private homes. They have also been collecting snippets of emails,
passwords, chat messages, photographs, and postings on social networks and websites.
German regulators forced the company to admit that it engaged in such practices, but
when the FCC tried to investigate Google, the company stonewalled and basically said
“Trust us.” The FCC fined them for obstructing the investigation.119 In another case,
Google agreed to pay $22.5 million to settle charges that it surreptitiously tricked
Apple iPhone software into letting Google track users who had specifically blocked
that kind of monitoring. It was a particularly brazen invasion of privacy, but once
penalties and cleanup efforts, pleaded guilty to 14 criminal charges and paid
$4 billion more in penalties. In addition, it faces significantly higher civil
penalties for the explosion and significant fines for the pollution that resulted
from the blowout. Plus, three BP employees have been charged with multiple
crimes, including manslaughter and obstruction of justice. The magnitude of
the environmental disaster for the Gulf and the financial bath for BP is
unprecedented.115 Interestingly, this accident served to point out how far Exxon
has come since the Valdez incident. Exxon used the Valdez accident as a wake-
up call to transform how it does business. As a result of a company-wide,
comprehensive effort, it has not had a serious accident in the more than two
decades since the Valdez. On the other hand, BP experienced a series of deadly
and dangerous incidents leading up to the Deepwater Horizon disaster and
apparently did not take the steps necessary to prevent accidents and ensure the
safety of its workers and the public. In 2005, a BP refinery exploded in Texas
City, Texas, killing 15 workers and injuring hundreds more. In 2006, a BP
pipelinebeganleakingthousandsofgallonsofcrudeoil intothepristineAlaskan
wilderness in Prudhoe Bay. Unlike Exxon, which learned from its mistakes, BP
did not. The company talked a lot about safety, but its executives never made
safety a priority and cut costs wherever possible, seemingly putting safety
concerns dead last.116 It appears now that the company has a renewed focus on
safety. Time will tell.
UPDATE
In 2004, after years of civil litigation, the U.S. District Court of Alaska ordered
Exxon to pay $4.5 billion in punitive damages to those affected by the 1989 oil
spill.117 In 2006, Representative Dave Reichert asked Congress to pressure
Exxon to pay the $4.5 billion in punitive damages that it owed Alaskan
citizens. After further legal wrangling and countless appeals, in 2008 the U.S.
Supreme Court reduced Exxon’s fine of $5 billion to $500 million.118
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
387

again, Google claimed it was inadvertent and did no harm.120 Meanwhile, Facebook is
facing a class action lawsuit by subscribers in 10 states who accuse the technology
giant of secretly tracking users’ Internet activity after they have logged off of
Facebook. Like Google, Facebook has asked for the lawsuit to be dismissed because
plaintiffs cannot prove how they were harmed.121 The reality is that many people never
think much about what they share online and how companies, marketers, hackers, etc.,
can access information about what they buy, write, think, share, and post, for example.
Many people don’t realize that much of what they think they are privately posting
online or purchasing online is actually public. There is tremendous money to be made
by capturing personal information about users and selling it to third parties—some of
whom just want to target users for marketing purposes. But others may have far from
benevolent purposes. It’s an issue that is fraught with ethical concerns, and it is only
going to get bigger as the world continues to embrace technology.
WHY ARE THESE ETHICAL ISSUES?
The situations described above are all ethical issues because they involve obligations
to primary or key stakeholder groups. Consumers, shareholders, employees, and the
community are probably the major constituencies of any organization that is not
operating in a vacuum. What groups are more important to a company than the people
who pay for their goods or services, the people who make or provide them, the people
who buy them, and the place where the goods and services are made or performed?
These ethical obligations all involve fairness, safety, and honesty to the four main
stakeholders of most organizations.
COSTS
As we’ve seen in the classic cases described in this chapter, the costs of bungling an
ethical obligation to any of the four primary stakeholder groups can be not only
crippling, but fatal. Just as individuals who cross the line can short-circuit their careers
or end up fired or prosecuted, organizations pay the same kind of price: Their ability to
function can be severely limited, and they can even be forced out of business. At the
very least, if a company’s misdeeds are discovered, they will most certainly be
excoriated by the press and the public. Their reputation can suffer long-term damage
that may be difficult to repair. The organizational costs are horrific, but the personal
tragedies are particularly sad because they were so preventable. Just think of the
individuals who’ve received lengthy jail sentences and of how they and their families
have suffered because of ethical misjudgments (or worse).
It’s impossible to list here all of the regulatory bodies that watch over the rights of
these four stakeholder groups. Certainly, as you enter a particular industry or company,
you will need to learn what laws and which bodies govern compliance. In the United
States, there are federal, state, and local government agencies that are charged with
protecting the rights of stakeholder groups. Regulatory bodies such as the Securities
and Exchange Commission, the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Reserve
388
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Board guard the rights of shar eholders . Th e Food and Dr ug Admi nistration, the
Federal Trade Comm ission, and the Federal Comm unications Commis sion are federal
watch dog agenc ies for consumer rights . Employee rights are prot ected by a wide range
of agenc ies including the Eq ual Employment and Opportu nity Comm ission, the Labor
Board, and the Occ upationa l Safety and Health Admi nistration. The Environm ental
Protection Age ncy is the pri mary prot ector of the environm ent.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter we’ve descr ibed a few o f the more memorabl e business ethics cases. No
industry, and really no com pany, h as been immune from ethica l problem s and
unethical employees. Even Johnso n & Johnson has taken its licks in rece nt year s
because of the LifeScan lawsu its as well as other alleged wrongdoi ng. Th e point of
exami ning these case s is that truly smart manager s should lea rn from the mistakes of
others.
We hope it’s obv ious that all stake holders a re connected a nd that their interests
f r e q u e n t l y ove r l a p . I n a r e c e n t s t u d y, 5 2 p e r c e n t o f r e s p o n d e n t s b e l i eved t h a t a l l
stakeholders—investors, employees, customers, the gove rnment, and society at
large —are equall y import ant. 122 For example, the Enron and AIG debacles harmed
not onl y consumers but also employees, shareholders, and the c ommunities where
t h o s e c o m p a n i e s h a d fa c i l i t i e s . I t ’s a l s o o bv i o u s t h a t s o m e s e n i o r exe c u t ives n e e d a
he fty i nj ection of morality. The lack of trust has become so acute that only 26
pe rcent of respondents in a recent study believed t h a t C E O s w e r e c r e d i b l e . 12 3 A
shocking reminder of t ha t is c ontained in the book What Went Wrong at Enron
(2002) by Peter Fusaro a nd Ross Mill er. These authors c laim that whil e a t Harvard
Business School, Jeff Skilling, l ater president of Enron, was asked how he would
ha ndle a situation where his company was producing a product that might harm or
eve n kill t he c onsumers who used it. He al leg edly replied, “I’d ke ep m aking and
selli ng the product. M y job as a busi n essm an i s to be a p rofit ce nte r a n d to m axim iz e
return to the s ha reholders. I t’s the gove rnment’s job to step in if a product is
da n ge r ou s . ”124
It’s also clear that at the turn of the twenty-first century, busin esspeopl e are at a
crossroads. We need to decide wha t k ind of prof essionals we are going to be. Ar e we
going to be honest and fair and deservi ng of the public’ s trust? Or are we going to push
our own agendas and expect the government to make us behave a la Jeff Skilling, or
bail us out like Citigroup and AIG or clean up after us like BP? A recent study
identified the top three factors in corporate reputation with the public as being
(1) transparent and honest practices, (2) a company I can trust, and (3) high-quality
products and services.125 If businesspeople are going to regain the public’s trust, they
will need to focus on integrity, openness, and quality. They also have to understand that
this trust effort will take a very long time.
One company that understands the importance of trust and has taken bold steps
to i n corpora te tr us t into it s bus ines s model i s s al es for ce . com, a l ea der in ente rpr is e
cloud computing. Several years ago, it was growing rapidly and experiencing
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
389

g r owi n g p a i n s a s a r e s u l t . C u s t o m e r s w e r e ex periencing service i nt erruptions and
salesforce.com wa s desperately trying t o g r ow fa s t e n o u g h t o p r ov i d e s e a m l e s s
service. To monitor the outages and other system glitches, the company had an
internal tracking system that showed where problems were and what caused them.
When a company team advised Chairman and CEO Marc Benioff to post this system
on the company website so customers could see what was happening in real time, he
hesitated. No one else was being this transparent. Would customers or the press use
this to sabotage the company?
It took a weekend for Benioff to agree with his team’s idea to post the monitoring
system on its website. It was an instant hit. Not only did the press do positive stories
about the effort to be open with customers, other technology companies such as
Amazon and Google noticed and started their own efforts to be more transparent.
Benioff is now a complete convert to the transparency movement and urges business
everywhere to incorporate openness and transparency into their business models
because of the trust it engenders and the tremendous reputational benefits that follow
as a result.126
The last decade has been painful to endure for businesspeople, and you’ve read
about many of the most embarrassing episodes in this chapter—bad news always gets
lots of publicity. The good news is that the vast majority of companies are committed
to doing business in an honorable way, and most of them have long histories of doing
just that. More and more companies are finding more and better ways to weave their
values throughout their cultures, inspiring managers and employees alike to innova-
tion, excellent service, and integrity.
SHORT CASES
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Big Company is a large manufacturer of healthcare products, and it is under fire
from the government to lower costs. Big Company has an excellent reputation and is
widely acknowledged as one of the best-managed companies in the country. Despite
the firm’s reputation, however, Wall Street has reacted negatively to government
efforts to reform the healthcare industry as a whole, and Big Company’s stock price
has lost 30 percent of its value in the last year. To counter the effect of possible
government intervention, Big Company has just purchased Little Company, a
discount healthcare supplier. Wall Street has greeted the acquisition with enthusi-
asm, and Big Company’s stock price has rebounded by more than 10 percent since
news of the acquisition was made public.
While this acquisition could give Big Company a foothold in a growing part of the
healthcare industry, a real problem lies in the mission of Little Company. Little has
made its reputation by providing objective healthcare advice to its customers. Now
that it’s owned by Big Company, Little Company’s customers have expressed doubts
about how objective it can be in recommending healthcare products if it’s owned by a
390
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

healthcare giant. Will Little Company be pressured to recommend the products offered
by Big Company, its parent? Or will Little Company’s advice remain objective?
As the senior executive charged with bringing Little Company into the corporate
fold, how do you proceed? What are your obligations to Big Company, Little
Company, and the customers of both? What do you owe to shareholders and the
financial community? Are there other stakeholders, and what do you owe to them?
What provisions would you include in an ethics code for Little Company?
PRODUCT SAFETY
As a brand manager at a large food manufacturer, you’re positioning a new product for
entry into the highly competitive snack food market. This product is low in fat and
calories, and it should be unusually successful, especially against the rapidly growing
pretzel market. You know that one of your leading competitors is preparing to launch a
similar product at about the same time. Since market research suggests that the two
products will be perceived as identical, the first product to be released should gain
significant market share.
A research report from a small, independent lab—Green Lab—indicates that your
product causes dizziness in a small group of individuals. Green has an impressive
reputation, and its research has always been reliable in the past. However, the research
reports from two other independent labs don’t support Green’s conclusion. Your
director of research assures you that any claims of adverse effects are unfounded and
that the indication of dizziness is either extremely rare or the result of faulty research
by Green Lab. Since your division has been losing revenue because of its emphasis on
potato chips and other high-fat snack foods, it desperately needs a low-fat money-
maker. You were brought in to turn the division around, so your career at the company
could depend on the success of this product.
What are your alternatives? What is your obligation to consumers? Who are your
other stakeholders, and what do you owe them? What is your obligation to your
employer and to other employees at your company? What should your course of action
be? How can you apply the due care theory to this case?
ADVERTISING
At your company, a bottler of natural spring water, the advertising department has
recently launched a campaign that emphasizes the purity of your product. The
industry is highly competitive, and your organization has been badly hurt by a
lengthy strike of unionized employees. The strike seriously disrupted production
and distribution, and it caused your company to lose significant revenues and market
share. Now that the strike is over, your company will have to struggle to recoup lost
customers and will have to pay for the increased wages and benefits called for in the
new union contract. The company’s financial situation is precarious to say the least.
You and the entire senior management team have high hopes for the new ad
campaign, and initial consumer response has been positive. You are shocked, then,
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
391

when your head of operations reports to you that an angry worker has sabotaged one of
your bottling plants. The worker introduced a chemical into one of the machines,
which in turn contaminated 120,000 bottles of the spring water. Fortunately, the
chemical is present in extremely minute amounts—no consumer could possibly suffer
harm unless he or she drank in excess of 10 gallons of the water per day over a long
period of time. Since the machine has already been sterilized, any risk of long-term
exposure has beenvirtually eliminated. But, of course, the claims made by your new ad
campaign could not be more false.
List all of the stakeholders involved in this situation. Do any stakeholder groups
have more to gain or lose than others? Develop a strategy for dealing with the
contamination. How much does a company’s financial situation determine how ethical
dilemmas are handled?
PRODUCT SAFETY AND ADVERTISING
For years, arthritis sufferers have risked intestinal bleeding from the long-term
consumption of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as Advil, which
are used to ease chronic joint pain. Your company, Big Pharma, introduced a new type
of painkiller, a COX-2 inhibitor that addresses the pain without the intestinal effects.
To get the word out to consumers, Big Pharma decided to market the new painkiller
directly to consumers so that they could ask their doctors about it. The marketing was
extraordinarily successful, ultimately creating a multibillion-dollar market. Over 100
million prescriptions were written in just five years, and the drug was a big contributor
to your company’s bottom line. Patients and doctors seemed grateful for the alterna-
tive, and doctors began using it to treat all kinds of pain. Then, complaints began
coming in about cardiovascular events (heart attacks) associated with taking the new
drug. Early scientific studies suggested that there might be a problem, but the science
remained inconclusive. It appeared that many of these patients had other health
problems that may have caused their heart attacks. So your company undertook a more
definitive double-blind placebo-controlled study (the only kind that can truly demon-
strate cause and effect), which eventually showed a link between your drug and an
increased risk of cardiovascular events if the drug is taken consistently for more than
18 months. The Food and Drug Administration suggested a stronger black-box
warning on the drug packaging to warn of potential cardiovascular side effects
from prolonged use. Your senior management team met to discuss what to do. Should
you follow the FDA’s suggestion or do something else? The discussion included
reference to your company’s values and strong commitment to integrity and human
welfare. You also referred to the famous Johnson & Johnson Tylenol incident and the
success of that recall effort. After much discussion, you decided to recall the drug and
cease manufacturing it.
The negative reactions were instantaneous. In stinging press reports and congres-
sional hearings at which your CEO had to appear, your company was criticized for not
recalling sooner based on the earlier evidence. And then the lawsuits began. It seemed
392
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

that anyone who had ever taken your company’s drug and then had a heart attack was
bringing suit. Ironically, on the other side, patients and doctors who had been using
the drug successfully also complained. They thought you should return the drug to
the market with a stronger warning, so that they could do their own risk assessment.
Nothing else worked for some patients, and they were suffering. But, after careful
deliberation, you decided to stick to the recall decision and fight (rather than settle) the
lawsuits. Early in the fight, your company won some lawsuits and lost some, but
vowed to continue fighting them all because you were convinced that you had done
nothing wrong. The fight was costly in dollars and reputation. Eventually, after several
years and winning more lawsuits than you lost, you decided to settle all remaining
lawsuits and move on, a decision that was considered to be wise in the business
community. Your company’s financial performance took a big hit, but it is now
rebounding and the future looks more hopeful as some promising new treatments
appear on the horizon.
Who are the stakeholders in this situation? Experts claim there’s always a risk
when people take prescription drugs. How much risk is too much? How widely do
drug companies need to publicize the risks of prescription medications? Or, is that
the doctor’s responsibility? Do consumers really understand these risks? Do drug
companies have an obligation to ensure that doctors don’t overprescribe their drugs?
Is that a reasonable expectation? Was direct-to-consumer marketing appropriate for
this type of drug? When is it appropriate, and when is it not? Do drug companies
have a bigger obligation to explain the risks of the drugs that they heavily market
directly to consumers because such consumers are more likely to ask their doctors for
these drugs? Why do you think the reaction to the decision to recall in this case was
so different compared to the Tylenol situation? Should senior management have
expected the reactions they got? Was there anything they could have done to change
the reactions?
SHAREHOLDERS
You work for an investment bank that provides advice to corporate clients. The deal
team you work with includes Pat, a marketing manager, Joe, the credit manager for
the team, and several other professionals. Just before your team is scheduled to
present the details of a new deal to senior management, Pat suggests to Joe that the
deal would have a better chance of being approved if he withheld certain financials.
“If you can’t leave out this information,” Pat says, “at least put a positive spin on it
so they don’t trash the whole deal.”
The other team members agree that the deal has tremendous potential, not only for
the two clients but also for your company. The financial information Pat objects to—
though disturbing at first glance—would most likely not seriously jeopardize the
interest of any party involved. Joe objects and says that full disclosure is the right way
to proceed, but he adds that if all team members agree to the “positive spin,” he’ll go
along with the decision. Team members vote and all agree to go along with Pat’s
suggestion—you have the last vote. What do you do?
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
393

In this hypothetical case, what is your obligation to the shareholders of your
organization and to the shareholders of the two organizations that are considering
a deal? Are shareholders a consideration in this case? Are customers? Are employ-
ees? Could the survival of any of the three companies be at stake in this case?
In a situation like this one, how could you best protect the interests of key
stakeholder groups?
COMMUNITY
You have just been named CEO of a small chemical refinery in the Northeast. Shortly
after assuming your new position, you discover that your three predecessors have kept
a horrifying secret. Your headquarters location sits atop thirty 5,000-gallon tanks that
have held a variety of chemicals—from simple oil to highly toxic chemicals. Although
the tanks were drained over 20 years ago, there’s ample evidence that the tanks
themselves have begun to rust and leach sludge from the various chemicals into the
ground. Because your company is located in an area that supplies water to a large city
over 100 miles away, the leaching sludge could already be causing major problems.
The costs involved in a cleanup are estimated to be astronomical. Because the tanks are
under the four-story headquarters building, the structure will have to be demolished
before cleanup can begin. Then, all 30 tanks will have to be dug up and disposed of,
and all of the soil around the area cleaned.
You’re frankly appalled that the last three CEOs didn’t try to correct this
situation when they were in charge. If the problem had been corrected 15 years ago
before the building had been erected, the costs would be substantially less than they
will be now. However, as frustrated as you are, you’re also committed to rectifying
the situation.
After lengthy discussions with your technical and financial people, you decide
that a cleanup can begin in two years. Obviously, the longer you wait to begin a
cleanup, the riskier it becomes to the water supply. Before you begin the cleanup, it’s
imperative that you raise capital, and a stock offering seems to be the best way to do it.
However, if you disclose news of the dump problem now, the offering will likely be
jeopardized. But the prospect of holding a news conference and explaining your role in
keeping the dump a secret keeps you up at night.
Who are the stakeholders in this situation? What strategy would you develop for
dealing with the dump and its disclosure? Are you morally obligated to disclose the
dump right away? How will Wall Street react to this news? Does your desire to correct
the situation justify keeping it a secret for another two years?
Think about the due care theory presented earlier in this chapter. Can we draw
parallels between due care for the consumer and due care for the environment? What if
the dump for abandoned oil tanks mentioned in the hypothetical case was located in a
foreign subsidiary of a U.S. company, and the country where it was located had no laws
against such a dump? Would the CEO be under any obligation to clean it up? Should
American companies uphold U.S. laws concerning the environment in non-U.S.
locations? How much protection is enough?
394
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.
What factors contributed to Johns Manville’s long silence on the dangers of
asbestos?
2.
What role do you think the personality and other characteristics of a CEO play in
the handling of an ethical problem?
3.
When other firms in your industry are behaving unethically, how can you buck the
trend and position your company to value ethical behavior? Why is that impor-
tant? Will it damage your company’s competitiveness?
4.
Imagine that you’re the CEO of a large firm like any of the ones described in this
chapter. What concrete steps would you take to restore your company’s reputation
if it’s been sullied?
5.
How much testing is enough when launching a new product?
6.
How can the interests of multiple stakeholders be balanced?
7.
Do you think long prison sentences will help deter corporate criminals?
8.
Do you trust technology giants such as Google and Facebook to safeguard your
personal data? Is posting online any safer than posting your personal information
on a billboard along a busy highway? What kind of personal information would be
OK to share with the world? What are the potential pitfalls for you personally of
sharing sensitive information online?
9.
How does a company’s reputation play a role in your purchasing decisions?
NOTES
1. E. Conway, “IMF Puts Total Cost of Crisis at £7.1 Trillion,” Telegraph, August 8, 2009, at www
.telegraph.co.uk.
2. L. Mishel, The State of Working America 2008/2009, Economic Policy Institute (2009), at www
.stateofworkingamerica.org.
3. J. Liberto, CEO Pay is 380 Times Average Worker’s – AFL-CIO, CNN Money, April 19, 2012, at www
.money.cnn.com
4. A. Greenspan, “Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan at the Annual Dinner and Francis Boyer
Lecture of the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy,” Washington, D.C. (December 5,
1996), at www.federalreserve.gov.
5. A. Levitt, “Bigger than Enron,” PBS Frontline, June 20, 2002, at www.pbs.org.
6. R. E. Freeman, Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach (Boston: Pitman, 1984).
7. Investing in Social Responsibility, Risks and Opportunities (London: Association of British Insurers,
2001), 41.
8. O. C. Ferrell and J. Fraedrich, Business Ethics: Ethical Decision Making and Cases (New York:
Houghton Mifflin, 1994), 76.
9. R. D. Hay, E. R. Gary, and P. H. Smith, Business and Society: Perspectives on Ethics and Social
Responsibility (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western Publishing, 1989), 288.
10. J. R. Boatright, Ethics and the Conduct of Business (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1993),
332–35.
11. “Fortune 500 List,” Fortune online (2002), at www.fortune.com.
12. “Enron Corporate Profile” (2002), at www.hoovers.com.
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
395

13. “Andrew S. Fastow, Former Enron Chief Financial Officer, Pleads Guilty, Settles Fraud Charges and
Agrees to Cooperate with Ongoing Investigation,” U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2004),
at www.sec.gov.
14. “Lea Fastow Arrives Early for Prison,” USA Today, July 12, 2004, at www.usatoday.com/money/
industries/energy/2004-07-12-lea-fastow_x.htm.
15. J. Carney, “The Truth About Why Jeff Skilling’s Jail Sentence Got Downsized,” CNBC, June 21,
2013, at www.cnbc.com.
16. A. Barrionuevo, “Judge Sentences Former Enron Chief to 24 Years in Prison,” New York Times,
October 23, 2006, at www.nytimes.com.
17. “Called to Account: The Enron Saga. Scandal Scorecard,” Wall Street Journal (2002), at www
.wsj.com.
18. G. Draffan, “Multimillion Dollar Fines & Settlements Paid by Corporations” (2005), at www
.endgame.org.
19. A. Levitt, “Bigger than Enron,” PBS Frontline, June 20, 2002, at www.pbs.org.
20. “Who Dropped the Ball?” PBS Frontline, June 20, 2002, at www.pbs.org.
21. G. Morgenson, “Settlement Is a Good Deal for Merrill. How about Investors?” New York Times,
May 22, 2002, at www.nytimes.com.
22. P. McGeehan, “Washington Insider, but Wall Street Pariah,” New York Times, November 24, 2002, at
www.nytimes.com.
23. A. R. Sorkin, “What the Financial Crisis Commission Should Ask,” New York Times, January 10,
2010, at www.nytimes.com.
24. Ibid.
25. E. Mason, “Putnam Chief Holds Out Hope for Solid, If Slow, Recovery,” Boston Business Journal,
June 17, 2005, at www.bizjournals.com/boston.
26. P. Elkind, “Spitzer’s Crusade: Inside the Muckraker-in-Chief’s Campaign against Insurance Compa-
nies and Why—Surprise, Surprise—This Investigation Is Just Getting Started,” Fortune, November 1,
2004, at www.fortune.com.
27. M. Goldstein, “Putnam’s Lasser Gets $78 million Good-Bye Kiss,” June 10, 2004, at www.thestreet.
com.
28. Marsh & McLennan, 2004 Annual Report, 62.
29. P. Elkind, “Spitzer’s Crusade: Inside the Muckraker-in-Chief’s Campaign against Insurance Compa-
nies and Why—Surprise, Surprise—This Investigation Is Just Getting Started,” Fortune, November 1,
2004, at www.fortune.com.
30. Ibid.
31. Argus Analyst Report (Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc., Argus Research Company, 2005).
32. P. Elkind, “Spitzer’s Crusade: Inside the Muckraker-in-Chief’s Campaign against Insurance Compa-
nies and Why—Surprise, Surprise—This Investigation Is Just Getting Started,” Fortune, November 1,
2004, at www.fortune.com.
33. “Sentencing in Spitzer Insurance Probe Delayed,” September 29, 2005, at www.reuters.com.
34. E. Mason, “Putnam Chief Holds Out Hope for Solid, If Slow, Recovery,” Boston Business Journal,
June 17, 2005, at www.bizjournals.com/boston.
35. “Ex-Fidelity Head Reynolds Becomes New Putnam CEO, ” Boston Business Journal, June 12, 2008,
http://boston.bizjournals.com.
36. P. Elkind, “Spitzer’s Crusade: Inside the Muckraker-in-Chief’s Campaign against Insurance Compa-
nies and Why—Surprise, Surprise—This Investigation Is Just Getting Started,” Fortune, November 1,
2004, at www.fortune.com.
37. D. Hakim and W. Rashbaum, “Spitzer Is Linked to Prostitution Ring,” New York Times, March 8,
2008, at www.nytimes.com.
38. G. Draffan, “Multimillion Dollar Fines & Settlements Paid by Corporations” (2005), at www
.endgame.org.
39. “Do You Trust Corporate America?” Businessweek online, June 21, 2002, at www.businessweek
.com.
396
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

40. 2010 Edelman Trust Barometer, Edelman Public Relations (2010), at www.edelman.com/trust.
41. Ibid.
42. Harris Interactive, “Current Confidence in Leaders of Institutions (2012), May 21, 2012, www
.harrisinteractive.com
43. T. Donaldson and P. H. Werhane, Ethical Issues in Business: A Philosophical Approach (Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1988), 89–100, 414–24; R. R. Hartley, Business Ethics: Violations of the
Public Trust (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1993), 295–305.
44. M. Petersen, “Guilty Plea by Division of Drug Giant,” New York Times, December 12, 2000, C1.
45. N. Singer and R Abelson, “Can Johnson & Johnson Get Its Act Together?” New York Times,
January 15, 2011, at www.nyt.com
46. M. Santoli, “ The World’s Most Respected Companies,” Barron’s, June 25, 2012, at www.online.
barrons.com
47. “U.S. Vehicle Sales Market Share by Company, 1961–2009,” Ward’s Auto Data (2010), at http://
wardsauto.com/keydata.
48. “World Ranking of Motor Vehicles 2008 by Manufacturers, ” OICA (July 2009), www.oica.net.
49. B. Vlasic, “Toyota’s Slow Awakening to a Deadly Problem,” New York Times, February 1, 2010, at
www.nytimes.com.
50. Ibid.
51. M. Chrysler, “Toyota Down but Not Out, Japan Analysts Say,” Ward’s Auto Data, January 29, 2010, at
www.wardsauto.com.
52. B. Vlasic, “Toyota’s Slow Awakening to a Deadly Problem,” New York Times, February 1, 2010, at
www.nytimes.com.
53. P. Ingrassia, “Toyota: Too Big, Too Fast,” Wall Street Journal, January 28, 2010, at www.wsj.com.
54. “Toyota History,” Official Toyota website (2010), at www.toyota.com.
55. Associated Press, Toyota Settles Bellwether Wrongful Death Lawsuit, National Public Radio, January
18, 2013, at www.npr.org
56. G. Risling, Toyota Settlement May Signal Future Legal Strategy, ABC News, January 18, 2013, at
abcnews.go.com
57. Ibid.
58. A. Ohnsman, “Toyota as No. 1 Again Means Style Overhaul to Help Shares,” The Washington Post,
January 14, 2013, at http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-01-13/toyota-as-no-1-again-means-
style-overhaul-to-help-shares.html
59. B. Vlasic, “Toyota’s Slow Awakening to a Deadly Problem,” New York Times, February 1, 2010, at
www.nytimes.com.
60. A. Taylor, “Toyota’s Tylenol Moment,” CNN Money, January 28, 2010, at www.cnnmoney.com.
61. B. Vlasic, “Toyota’s Slow Awakening to a Deadly Problem,” New York Times, February 1, 2010, at
www.nytimes.com.
62. C. Isidore, “Toyota’s Reputation Takes a Huge Hit,” CNN Money, January 27, 2010, at www
.cnnmoney.com.
63. M. Petersen, “Heartfelt Advice, Hefty Fees,” New York Times, August 11, 2002, at www.nytimes.com.
64. R. Pear, “Investigators Find Repeated Deception in Ads for Drugs,” New York Times, December 4,
2002, at www.nytimes.com.
65. A. Eichler, “Pharmaceutical Companies Spent 19 Times More on Self-Promotion Than Basic
Research: Report,” Huffington Post, August 9, 2012, at www.huffingtonpost.com
66. V. S. Elliott, “Patient-Focused Drug Campaigns May Exploit Data, Invade Privacy,” Amednews
(American Medical News), July 29, 2002, at www.amednews.com.
67. A. Berenson, “Where Has All the Prilosec Gone?” New York Times, March 2, 2005, at www.nytimes.
com.
68. K. Thomas and M. Schmidt, “Glaxo Agrees to $3 Billion Fraud Settlement,” New York Times, July 2,
2012, at www.nytimes.com
69. A. Pollack and M. Secret, “Amgen Agrees to Pay $762 Million for Marketing Anemia Drug for Off-
Label Use,” New York Times, December 18, 2012, at www.nytimes.com
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
397

70. M. Kimes. “Bad to the Bone,” Fortune, October 8, 2012, at www.fortune.cnn.com
71. L. Groeger, “Big Pharma’s Big Fines, Pro Publica, July 3, 2012, at www.propublica.org
72. R. Bate, “The Companies Everyone Loves to Hate,” Wall Street Journal, September 16, 2005, at http://
online.wsj.com.
73. S. Hensley, “In Switch, J&J Gives Straight Talk on Drug Risks in New Ads,” Wall Street Journal,
March 21, 2005, B1.
74. “Ten Questions: An Open Dialogue,” Pfizer 2004 Annual Review, 2005: 4, 8, 28.
75. K. Thomas and M. Schmidt, “Glaxo Agrees to $3 Billion Fraud Settlement,” New York Times, July 2,
2012, at www.nytimes.com.
76. Carroll, Business and Society.
77. Donaldson and Werhane, “Ethical Issues in Business.”
78. B. Sells, “What Asbestos Taught Me about Risk,” Harvard Business Review (March–April 1994):
76–90.
79. Ibid.
80. Ibid., 76.
81. Ibid., 84.
82. “A Dangerous Business: Two Companies, Two Visions,” PBS Frontline (2003), at www.pbs.org.
83. D. Barstow, “U.S. Brings New Set of Charges against Pipe Manufacturer,” May 26, 2004, at www
.nytimes.com.
84. D. Barstow, “Pipe Maker Will Admit to Violations of Safety Law,” New York Times, August 30, 2005,
at www.nytimes.com.
85. “Times and PBS Win a Reporting Prize,” New York Times, March 19, 2004, at www.nytimes.com.
86. “A Dangerous Business: Two Companies, Two Visions,” PBS Frontline (2003), at www.pbs.org.
87. A. Knox, “What Will Albert Dunlap Do Next at Scott?” Philadelphia Inquirer, May 16, 1995, E4.
88. N. Gorenstein and C. Mayer, “Scott, Kimberly-Clark to Merge,” Philadelphia Inquirer, July 18, 1995,
C1.
89. J. A. Byrne, “How Al Dunlap Self-Destructed,” Businessweek, July 6, 1998, 58–65.
90. F. Norris, “Justice Department Starts Inquiry at Sunbeam,” New York Times, September 9, 2002, at
www.nytimes.com.
91. F. Norris, “An Executive’s Missing Years: Papering over Past Problems,” New York Times, July 16,
2001, at www.nytimes.com.
92. Lincoln Electric Company, at www.lincolnelectric.com.
93. B. Richards (from The Motley Fool), “For the 63rd Straight Year (at Least), This Remarkable
Company Says ‘No’ to Layoffs,” Daily Finance, December 13, 2011, at www.dailyfinance.com
94. J. P. Kotter and J. L. Heskett, Corporate Culture and Performance (New York: Free Press, 1992), 46.
95. R. Charan and M Useem, “Why Companies Fail: Company CEOs Offer Every Excuse But the Right
One—Their Own Errors,” Fortune, May 27, 2002, at www.money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune
96. C. W. Smith, Ethics and Markets: Restructuring Japan’s Financial Markets (Homewood, IL: Business
One Irwin, 1993), 335–45.
97. M. Gimein, “The Enforcer,” Fortune, September 2, 2002, 77–78.
98. “Citigroup: Salomon, Grubman Face 62 Suits over Research,” Dow Jones Newswire, Wall Street
Journal, November 13, 2002, at www.wsj.com.
99. A. Geller, “Wall Street Firms Agree to Pay $1.44 Billion to Settle Conflicts of Interest,” Detroit News
Business, December 21, 2002, at www.detnews.com.
100. “Conflict Probes Resolved at Citigroup and Morgan Stanley,” New York State Office of the Attorney
General, April 28, 2003, at www.oag.state.ny.us.
101. M. Der Hovanesian, P. Dwyer, and S. Reed, “Can Chuck Prince Clean Up Citi?” Businessweek,
October 4, 2004, 35.
102. K. Booker, “Citi’s Creator—Alone with His Regrets,” New York Times, January 2, 2010, at www
.nytimes.com.
103. E. Dash, “Citigroup’s Chief Shrinks Company, Eyeing Growth,” New York Times, April 5, 2010, at
www.nytimes.com.
398
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

104. P. Kiel, “The Bailout: By the Actual Numbers,” ProPublica, September 6, 2012, at www.propublica.
org
105. G. Morgenson, “Citi’s Torch Has Passed. Now Find a Knife.,” New York Times, October 20, 2012,
at www.nytimes.com
106. B. Saporito, “How AIG Became Too Big to Fail,” Time, March 19, 2009, at www.time.com.
107. Ibid.
108. “Buffett Warns on Investment ‘Time Bomb, ’” BBC Business News , March 4, 2003, at http://news.bbc
.co.uk.
109. L. Laughlin and R. Beales, “AIG’s Big Debt to U.S. Taxpayers,” New York Times, January 27, 2010, at
www.nytimes.com.
110. B. Saporito, “How AIG Became Too Big to Fail,” Time, March 19, 2009, at www.time.com.
111. T.G. Massad. “Overall $182 Billion Committed to Stabilize AIG During the Financial Crisis Is Now
Fully Recovered.” U.S. Department of the Treasury, September 11, 2012, at www.treasury.gov.
112. B. Berkowitz, “As Public Fumes, AIG Says Will Not Sue U.S. Over Bailout,” Reuters, January 9,
2013. At www.reuters.com.
113. D.J. Wood, Business and Society (New York; HarperCollins), 664.
114. R. F. Hartley, Business Ethics: Violations of the Public Trust (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1993),
220–29.
115. C. Krauss “Judge Accepts BP’s $4 Billion Criminal Settlement Over Gulf Oil Spill,” New York Times,
January 29, 2013, at www.nytimes.com.
116. J. Nocera, “BP Ignored the Omens of Disaster,” New York Times, June 18, 2010, at www.nytimes.com.
117. “Re: the Exxon Valdez,”#A89-0095CV, U.S. District Court for the District of Alaska, January 28,
2004, at www.seattleclassaction.com.
118. A. Liptak, “Damages Cut Against Exxon in Valdez Case,” New York Times, June 26, 2008, at www
.nytimes.com.
119. D. Streietfeld and K. O’Brien, “Google Privacy Inquiries Get Little Cooperation,” New York Times,
May 22, 2012, at www.nytimes.com.
120. J. Angwin, “Google, FTC Near Settlement on Privacy,” Wall Street Journal, July 9, 2012, at www.wsj.
com.
121. J. Rosenblatt, “Facebook Seeks Dismissal of $15 Billion Privacy Suit,” Bloomberg News, October 5,
2012, at www.bloomberg.com.
122. 2010 Edelman Trust Barometer, Edelman Public Relations (2010), at www.edelman.com/trust.
123. Ibid.
124. J. Plender, “Inside Track: Morals Pay Dividends, ” Financial Times, September 18, 2002, at www
.ft.com.
125. 2010 Edelman Trust Barometer, Edelman Public Relations (2010), at www.edelman.com/trust.
126. M. Benioff, “ATrust: A New Era of Business Values,” Ethisphere, October 17, 2011, at www
.ethisphere.com.
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL PROBLEMS OF ORGANIZATIONS
399

C H A P T E R11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS
AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
IN A GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT
INTRODUCTION
With the increasing globalization of business, more managers are finding themselves
in an international environment full of ethical challenges. If managing for ethics and
social responsibility is a challenge in one’s own culture, the difficulties only multiply
when the culture and language are foreign, the manager is under increased stress, and
the number of stakeholders grows enormously. The major stakeholders include
multiple governments with their differing laws, regulations, and policies; business
partners that may be incorporated in the United States or elsewhere; employees and
customers from different cultures; and civil society, a large umbrella term that includes
the media, academic institutions, not-for-profit organizations, and religious, political,
and other groups with an interest in global business ethics. The simple fact that
managers have to deal with so many different stakeholders makes decision making
extremely complex. And the issues global managers face may be completely new to
them. These include corruption and money laundering, human rights under totalitarian
regimes, workplace conditions, environmental issues, respect for local customs and
cultures, and more.
Particularly in developing nations, businesspeople face conditions, cultures,
customs, and norms that may conflict with their own ethical standards and challenge
them to consider which values they’ll uphold no matter what the locale. In this
chapter, we address the difficulties of foreign assignments in general terms. We also
focus on the specific challenges of dealing with key ethical issues that arise in the
context of international business. These issues include individual decision making
about the conduct of business in different cultures, and organizational decision
making about ethical and social responsibility issues such as whether and how to
conduct business in foreign nations and how to guide employees working in a global
business environment.
400

FOCUS ON THE INDIVIDUAL EXPATRIATE MANAGER
We begin by focusing on the individual expatriate manager, the difficulties inherent in
foreign business assignments, and the importance of cultural understanding, sensitiv-
ity, and openness.
The Difﬁculties of Foreign Business Assignments
The globalization of business has contributed to a huge increase in interactions between
people from different cultural backgrounds. These interactions may occur during brief
business trips or in lengthy overseas assignments that last for years. Unfortunately, many
overseas assignments end early and unsuccessfully because of the expatriate manager’s
(and his or her family’s) inability to adjust to the foreign work environment. Recent
research has demonstrated that the expatriate manager’s adjustment impacts satisfac-
tion, willingness to stay in the assignment, and job performance.1
The Need for Structure, Training, and Guidance
Studies show that American businesses often don’t provide adequate support and
cross-cultural training to their managers who are assigned to work overseas. Research
has found that expatriates need clear guidance about goals and the expectations
associated with their jobs2 as well as a realistic preview of the living conditions in the
new location.3 Guidance and support should extend to the ethical issues that are likely
to arise, because these contribute to ambiguity and confusion about appropriate
behavior. Studies have also found that cross-cultural training can be highly effective.
For example, training contributes to:
& Greater feelings of well-being and self-confidence for the American manager
& Improvement in relationships with host nationals
& The development of correct perceptions of host culture members
& Better adjustment to the new culture
& Higher performance4
In addition to training for the expatriate manager, recent studies have suggested
the critical importance of providing training and support for the manager’s spouse
because families generally accompany the expatriate. The well-being of the spouse
and family seriously affects the expatriate’s adjustment and willingness to stick with
an overseas assignment.5 Also, the higher the level of the manager, the more likely it is
that the spouse will serve in a corporate “ambassador” role.6 So, the spouse’s
successful adaptation to the new environment is critical.
Research suggests that some people adapt to other cultures more successfully than
others. The term cultural intelligence (CQ) has been used to describe an individual’s
ability to be effective in cross-cultural situations.7 CQ involves a knowledge
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
401

component (what the person knows about the new culture and his or her approach to
learning), a motivational component (the person’s confidence and motivation to adapt
to the new culture), and an action component (the ability to translate knowledge and
motivation into action). The rare individuals who are high on all three components are
referred to as “cultural chameleons” because of their unique ability to adapt easily to
new cultural environments.8 Certainly, companies can help with the first part by
providing information about the new culture. Research has found that employees who
are higher on the motivational aspect of CQ, who are more motivated to explore
different cultures and more confident in their ability to adapt to new environments,
adjust better to the demands of foreign assignments.9 So, before sending them
overseas, companies should assess employees for their CQ level.
Foreign Language Proﬁciency
One kind of training that can improve one’s international business experience is
foreign language training. Language is an essential part of cultural learning that can
contribute to productive international business relationships. Interestingly, this is
particularly important for non-English speakers doing business in English-speaking
countries. Other countries seem to be more accommodating of native English speakers
who do not learn their language than the reverse. Nevertheless, the expatriate
manager’s effort to learn the language is generally taken as a symbol of his or her
interest and commitment to understanding. Yet Americans speak fewer foreign
languages than their trading partners do,10 and some have argued that Americans
pay a high price for this “monolingual arrogance.”11
Language fluency isn’t a matter of just knowing the words, but knowing how they
are used within the particular cultural context. For example, an old story goes that a
Scottish visitor to Japan had worked hard to develop a good relationship with his
Japanese host. After several weeks, the Japanese host asked (in Japanese), “Can I sleep
with you?” Luckily, the Scot was sophisticated in cross-cultural communication and
didn’t react negatively or dismiss the question while his mind raced to attempt to
understand its meaning. Despite his confusion, he agreed to the apparently odd
request. The Japanese host had a second mattress brought to the visitor’s room, and the
two slept through the night, comfortably and without incident. He later discovered that
his Japanese host had paid him the highest compliment. The Japanese believe that an
individual can easily be killed in his sleep. Therefore the request indicated a
relationship of total trust.12 A note of caution—you might not want to try this one
today. Our students tell us that “Can I sleep with you?” now carries the same meaning
in Japan as it does in the United States.
Learning about the Culture
Earlier in the book, we talked about organizational culture. Here, we focus on national
culture—defined as “collective mental programming.”13 This definition of culture
suggests that patterns of believing differ across national cultures and that individuals
402
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

use these patterns to interpret the world and to guide action. If an individual operating
in a foreign culture doesn’t understand its particular patterns of believing and
behaving, the individual will interpret experience purely in terms of his or her
own culture and will thus inevitably misinterpret and misunderstand.
To understand how this collective mental programming can lead to misunder-
standing, we’ll focus on two cultural dimensions, developed by Geert Hofstede,14 that
are relevant for understanding international business ethics.15 Readers who are
heading overseas are encouraged to learn about the additional cultural dimensions
that are more relevant for other aspects of the overseas business experience.
INDIVIDUALISM/COLLECTIVISM
Individualism represents the extent to which
people in a society think of themselves as autonomous individuals who are responsible
primarily to themselves and their immediate families. This contrasts with collectivism,
which emphasizes collective purposes over personal goals and group harmony over
individual achievement. Americans, Canadians, Australians, and most Northern
Europeans are individualists. They define themselves in terms of personal character-
istics and achievements, and they generally value personal welfare over group
harmony. For example, Americans are quick to praise individual accomplishment
and individuals’ ability to make good decisions independently. They aim to hire people
with the highest educational and professional achievements.
Most Asian and Latin American countries represent collectivist societies. They
value conformity to the group and define themselves in terms of their group member-
ships and their contributions to the success of those groups. A common Japanese
saying reflects this collectivist orientation—the nail that sticks out will be pounded
down. Hiring in collectivist cultures is certainly based on qualifications, but a person’s
ability to work well with coworkers and to make collaborative decisions is as important
as individual technical proficiency. Knowing an applicant or his or her family is
considered an important “qualification,” and the hiring of family members is common
and expected. An American without cultural knowledge would probably consider this
approach to hiring to be wrong—biased and discriminatory. Indeed, many American
firms have rules against nepotism. But a collectivist would consider the Americans’
individualistic approach to hiring to be wrong—disloyal to friends and family as well
as ineffective. To a collectivist, knowing someone is the best way to ensure that the
person is trustworthy and will work well with others in the group. Furthermore, in a
collectivist culture such as Japan, giving gifts is considered to be an important part of
relationship building. Giving a gift can also be an important step toward acceptance
and becoming a member of the group.16 In individualistic cultures, gift giving is more
likely to be considered to be a bribe—an attempt to influence an individual’s business
decisions.
Consider how the differences between individualism and collectivism might
influence ethics management. In their attempts to manage ethics and legal compliance,
many companies have formal reporting systems (hotlines or help lines) that encourage
employees to report misconduct they observe. Such a system is likely to be distasteful
to collectivists, who may see it as too impersonal and too focused on singling out and
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
403

blaming a single individual who would be shamed as a result. A more informal system
that aims to help the rule breaker mend his or her ways and return as a productive
member of the group may work better in a collectivist culture.17
POWER DISTANCE
Power distance represents the extent to which people in the
society accept a hierarchical or unequal distribution of power in their organizations
and in society. High power distance in a culture reflects acceptance of inequality and
respect for social status or class boundaries. In these cultures, employees are more
likely to accept the idea that the boss has power simply because she or he is the boss,
and bypassing the boss is considered insubordination. Titles, status, and formality are
important in these societies, and those with high status are given much leeway in their
behavior. For example, when U.S. President Richard Nixon was forced to resign,
members of cultures with high power distance found it hard to understand. They
focused on the fact that he was president—which, after all, is a high-status position.18
Americans, on the other hand, were more likely to focus on Nixon’s misconduct
associated with Watergate, regardless of his position or title. Some countries having
the highest power distance are India, the Philippines, Mexico, and Venezuela.
Cultures with low power distance are more likely to deemphasize status and class
distinctions. The United States, Israel, and most Northern European countries (with the
exception of France and Belgium) are lower on power distance. In these cultures,
employeesacceptaboss’spower because heorshehasknowledge, notjustbecause heor
she isthe boss.Thereforeworkers inacultureoflow powerdistancemay bemorewilling
to question the boss’s authority or even blow the whistle on an unethical manager.
Recognizing the Power of Selective Perception
Human beings are constantly bombarded with information. They must therefore
perceive selectively, or they would be totally overwhelmed. This selective perception
process is influenced by culture. For example, in collectivist cultures, people pay more
attention to social relationships than to behavior. And in Confucian philosophy,
putting family first is praised above all. So what should one do if a close relative
commits a crime? A federal prison camp inmate spoke with Penn State students about
the reason for his imprisonment. The man, who was well-educated and well-spoken,
had been a successful New York executive. He and his wife had helped the wife’s
nephew by providing a place for him to stay when he was having difficulties in his life,
including drug use. But it turned out that the nephew was using their telephone to sell
drugs right out of their home! The couple was accused of knowing about and
supporting the drug dealing, and they were charged with conspiracy. Both were
convicted and sentenced to many years in prison. Asian students in the audience were
horrified that this man landed in prison for helping his nephew. To them, the familial
relationship was more important than the crime, and that influenced how they
perceived his story. So, it is essential to recognize that the visitor to another culture
will notice things that are important at home but may not be important in the target
culture. The visitor is also likely to overlook important behaviors, roles, and values
404
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

because of selective perception. These aren’t important at home, so they aren’t even
noticed. Furthermore, members of the target culture are equally selective, perhaps not
noticing things that seem crucial to the visitor.19
With effective cross-cultural training, managers can be prepared to be on the
lookout for things that would otherwise be ignored, and they will be more able to
interpret their international business experiences in light of the belief patterns of the
particular culture. These interpretations are extremely important because actions are
likely to vary depending on the interpretation.20
Assumption of Behavioral Consistency
Understanding culture doesn’t guarantee success, however. Much of the theory
and research on international business conduct is grounded in an inaccurate key
assumption—that if we understand cultural behavior (how people think and behave in
their native environment), we’ll understand how members of a particular group will
behave in relation to cultural outsiders. In other words, if I understand the Japanese
culture better, I can predict how my Japanese counterparts will behave toward me,
what their expectations will be, and so on. And if I understand all of that, I’ll know how
to behave with them.
But people are amazingly adaptable, and just when you think you have them
figured out, they change their behavior. Individuals from a different culture are likely
trying to figure out how to behave with you as much as you’re trying to figure out how
to behave with them, and they may change their behavior as a result. A colleague
related a story about a meeting between business and philosophy professors on his
campus. Recognizing the cultural differences between the two departments, the
philosophy professors decided to leave their khakis at home and dress up for the
occasion—sporting crisp shirts and ties. The business professors all showed up in
jeans. The moral of this story is that behavior is difficult to predict because people
adapt their behaviors to what they believe others expect of them.
What can we glean from these studies? Don’t assume that simply learning about
another culture is enough. The foreign nationals you deal with in business interactions
may behave differently with you than they would with individuals from their own
culture, so understanding their cultural norms and behaviors is only a starting point.
The foreign individuals you deal with may adapt their behavior based on what they
expect you to do. Therefore you must be flexible and open to learning from the
situation at hand. Perhaps one of the most important things to learn in preparation for a
cross-cultural experience is that you can’t be fully prepared—there will be surprises
and daily opportunities for further learning and understanding.21 The successful
international businessperson will be open, flexible, and tolerant of ambiguity.
Assumption of Cultural Homogeneity
We should also not assume homogeneity within a culture—that individuals within a
culture are all the same. Imagine if someone assumed that all Americans were like the
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
405

characters in American films. Obviously, this kind of simplistic thinking and stereo-
typing leads to grossly inaccurate expectations. Individual personalities and experi-
ences vary widely within any culture, leading to behavioral differences. For example, a
Japanese businessperson with an American MBA may behave quite differently from a
Japanese businessperson who has never left the country.22 Be open to learning as much
as possible about the individuals you are going to be dealing with. The most effective
international managers are those who modify stereotypes or discard them completely
in the light of contradictory evidence.
Assumption of Similarity
Another problematic assumption is the assumption of cultural similarity. Many
companies begin the internationalization process in countries that they believe to
be more similar to their own because they believe that success will come easier in a
more familiar culture. But research suggests that this perceived similarity can cause
performance failures because managers are less likely to prepare for the cultural
differences that do exist.23 Researchers call this the psychic distance paradox. It may
actually be quite difficult to do business in a country that is “psychically close.” A
study of Canadian retailers entering the American retail market found that familiarity
often led to carelessness. Decision makers at Canadian retail companies had precon-
ceived notions that the U.S. market was quite similar to the Canadian market and that
what had worked for them in Canada would work in the United States. Therefore they
didn’t work as hard at understanding the American retail culture, and they tended to
misinterpret information. So, if you’re being sent to a country that you perceive to be
similar to your own, don’t assume similarity. Find out as much as you can about doing
business in that country, just as you would for countries that you perceive to be
more different.
ETHICS-RELATED TRAINING AND GUIDANCE
International business assignments
require training that is more specifically related to ethics. Training should cover such
topics as how to recognize the ethical issues likely to arise in a particular environment,
how to negotiate in a particular culture, how to handle requests for payoffs and bribes,
and anything else relevant to doing business ethically in that culture.
RECOGNIZING AND DEALING WITH ETHICAL ISSUES
Beyond general training in
the culture, training with respect to business ethics beliefs and practices is essential.
First, the expatriate manager must be prepared to recognize the ethical issues likely to
arise in a particular business and cultural setting. Just as ethical issues at home vary
somewhat from industry to industry (e.g., manufacturing vs. banking vs. defense) and
profession to profession (e.g., marketing vs. accounting vs. procurement), the ethical
issues that are likely to arise vary from culture to culture. The treatment of employees
(e.g., child labor, worker safety) may be more of a problem in one culture, whereas the
disposal of toxic wastes may be more likely to arise in another, and bribes may be more
problematic in yet another culture.
406
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Second, the expatriate manager needs help making ethical decisions in the more
ambiguous international business context. At home, where we are familiar with
community standards, it’s easier to rely on simple guidelines such as the
New York Times test (remember the disclosure rule from Chapter 2?). But simple
guidelines often fall short when norms of the home culture conflict with those of the
host country.24 Individual expatriate managers shouldn’t be left to fend for themselves
in these unfamiliar circumstances. The organization owes it to them to provide
guidance and help them navigate these unknown ethical waters.
NEGOTIATING ACROSS CULTURES
The frequency of business negotiations is
increasing with growth in foreign trade, joint ventures, and other interorganizational
agreements. When working within one’s own language and culture, being an effective
negotiator requires the utmost in sensitivity, understanding, and communications skills.
These requirementsmultiplywhen negotiatinginan internationalbusinessenvironment.
Cultural differences can influence the perceived purpose of the negotiation, negoti-
ating styles, and preferences for conflict resolution approaches. For example, in collec-
tivist cultures, people may see the purpose of the negotiation as the creation of a
relationship. And in collectivist cultures, negotiators may avoid direct manifestations
of conflict. So to avoid even the appearance of conflict, a negotiator in Japan who finds a
request unacceptable might say, “I’ll give your request careful consideration.” Another
collectivist is likely to recognize such a statement as meaning “no,” while an American
might interpret it to mean that we should return to discussing the issue later. When the
Americanbringsituplaterandfindsoutthatthenegotiationpartnerreallymeant“no,”the
American is likely to perceive the negotiation tactic to be unfair. Similarly, when conflicts
arise, preferences differ regarding how those conflicts should be resolved. For example,
collectivists tend to prefer methods such as mediation, which involves compromise,
because these approaches are more likely to result in harmonious relationships. Individu-
alists like Americans prefer adjudication because they perceive it to be more fair.25
A number of research studies detail differences in negotiation styles and tactics
across cultures.26 Most relevant, given our focus on ethics, is an understanding of the
use of “dirty tricks” and “psychological warfare” negotiation “tactics designed to
pressure opponents into undesirable concessions and agreements.”27
The use of dirty tricks is possible in any negotiation, but it becomes more complex
in an international negotiation because of possible misinterpretation. For example,
Brazilians generally expect deception among negotiators who are not well acquainted,
so they may be more likely to use deception during early negotiation stages than are
Americans.28 Consequently, it may be wise for an American negotiator to expect
deception to be a part of the initial negotiation stage with a Brazilian counterpart.
It’s also important to recognize that what seems like deliberate deception may not
be. Eastern Europeans are generally expected to check with their superiors about any
changes. However, Americans often have wide authority to make important decisions
at the negotiation table. Without this cultural knowledge, an American might interpret
an Eastern European’s claims about limited authority to be an attempt at deception
when it isn’t.
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
407

Psychological warfare—“tactics designed to make the other person feel
uncomfortable”29 and want to conclude the negotiation quickly—also has different
meanings in different cultures. For example, too much touching or too much eye contact
may make Americans extremely uncomfortable. Again, it’s important to be able to
distinguish real attempts at psychological warfare from the expression of typical cultural
behavior. For example, Latins tend to touch more than Americans or Canadians, who
touchmorethanScandinavians.ArabsmaintaingreatereyecontactthanAmericans,who
use eye contact more than the Japanese. An understanding of the culture one is dealing
with can help prepare the negotiator to correctly interpret these types of behaviors. The
more knowledge each side has of the other’s culture, the more options are available in
terms of negotiation styles and strategies. But if negotiators are totally unfamiliar with
each other’s cultures, it is likely best to hire agents to represent each side.30
DEALING WITH PAYOFFS AND BRIBES
Probably the most frequent source of
anxiety for American businesspersons operating abroad is the expectation of payoffs
and bribes. A bribe is a payment to someone to secure a sale or to obtain approval or
assistance from an individual or organization (often a government bureaucrat).
Although bribing is routine during commercial transactions in many Asian, African,
Latin American, and Middle Eastern cultures, it’s important to note that this practice is
usually against the law in these very same countries.
On arrival in a foreign airport, many a businessperson has faced a government
official’s extended hand and the suggestion that payment was needed to facilitate the
delivery of product samples to the hotel—no payment, no product. Without previous
preparation, the expatriate is at a loss to know what to do. What is the meaning of this
request in the context of the culture? Is making the payoff against U.S. or local law?
What exactly is local custom? How much is expected? What’s likely to happen if I do
pay? And what if I don’t pay? Will payment really expedite matters? Will it mean that
I’m just contributing to a bigger request the next time? Is it legal to hire an
intermediary to handle this (the answer is generally no)? What are my options?
How will my company respond if my work is delayed?
In the 1970s, the practice of bribing foreign officials with huge payoffs was found
to be rampant among U.S. multinational corporations. For example, in the mid-1960s,
a major Korean political party asked Gulf Oil for a $10 million donation. The CEO
personally negotiated it down to $4 million—still a huge sum.31 As a response to the
scandals, the U.S. Congress passed the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) in
1977.32 The act prohibits representatives of U.S. corporations from offering or
providing “corrupt payments” to foreign political parties, candidates, or government
officials for the purpose of inducing the recipient(s) to misuse their powerful positions
to assist the company to obtain, maintain, or retain business.33
The law does allow for small payments to lower-level figures. These so-called
facilitating payments might be needed to persuade officials to perform their normal
clerical or ministerial duties faster or better. Americans might think of these facilitat-
ing payments as tips, a little extra for the individual involved, to assure courteous or
efficient service. To be classified as a facilitating payment, the offer must not
408
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

significantly change the final decision or result. But, it is also important to know
whether such payments are illegal in the country where you are doing business because
that is often the case. It is against the FCPA and considered subversion of the free-
market system if the money is paid to sway high-level people to make decisions they
would not otherwise make. Companies are required to keep records of all such
transactions, and these transactions are not tax deductible. Note that the law also
applies to any intermediary who might make a payment for you. So you can’t just hire
an agent to make these payments. An exception is made for extortion payments, which
are not prohibited under the law. For example, if a company official is abducted by
Somali pirates and held for ransom, a company can legally pay the ransom.34
Enforcement of the FCPA has increased in recent years. Most corporations work
hard to avoid even the appearance of impropriety, because Justice Department
investigations are costly and time-consuming. A guilty verdict is usually devastating.
For example, in 1995 Lockheed Corporation pleaded guilty to conspiring to pay a
$1 million bribe to a member of the Egyptian parliament. Fines and penalties to the
company totaled $24.8 million. In addition, a former Lockheed executive was
sentenced to 18 months in prison.35
In a recent example, Wal-Mart’s name has been in the news because of an alleged
widespread bribery scheme in its Mexican operation where bribes are alleged to have
been used for years to gain access to store building sites that would otherwise have
been legally off limits. According to a searing New York Times report, “Wal-Mart de
Mexico was an aggressive and creative corrupter, offering large payoffs to get what the
law otherwise prohibited.” (Perhaps if the manager involved had used the New York
Times test, he wouldn’t have engaged in these practices!) The New York Times reports
that Wal-Mart “used bribes to subvert democratic governance—public votes, open
debates, transparent procedures. It used bribes to circumvent regulatory safeguards
that protect Mexican citizens from unsafe construction. It used bribes to outflank
rivals.” The newspaper also alleges that Wal-Mart executives attempted to cover up the
bribery scandal when they learned about it rather than report it to authorities as they are
expected to do. The Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. Justice
Department are investigating. Wal-Mart has acknowledged the problem and is
conducting its own extensive investigation, which it says may unearth bribery in
other locations.36 The company is also cooperating with government investigators and
is beefing up its training, auditing, and internal controls including hiring staff devoted
to insuring that the company is abiding by the FCPA.37
Companies with generally good corporate reputations arenotimmuneto the bribery
problem. In an attempt to avoid prosecution, more of them are self-reporting to the
authorities when they learn of a problem. For example, in 2007 Johnson & Johnson
voluntarily notified the U.S. Department of Justice of payments made to foreign officials
in its medical device business, and a senior executive was forced to step down.38
American businesspeople generally prefer to conduct business in a way that’s
consistent with U.S. and local law and not to make illegal payments to anyone. But
despite local laws, the centuries-old custom of bribes and payoffs continues in many
cultures.39 American businesspeople thus often feel that they are at a competitive
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
409

disadvanta ge if they don’t make such payment s, especia lly if com petitors make them.
Some have argued that U.S. firms cannot compete effectively whe n they are
constraine d by the FCPA while comp anies in othe r count ries are not. 40 For example,
one study found that U.S. direct investment and exports decline d in so-called corrupt
countries after the FCPA was passed, wherea s investments and exports in these sam e
countries increas ed for non-U.S . compet itor compani es. 41 After lobbying by U.S.
multinati onal compani es, the FCPA was ame nded in 198 8 to include a prov ision
requiring U.S. preside nts to seek intern ational cooper ation in reducing corrupt ion. As
a resu lt, a numb er of intern ational efforts have been undertaken to level the playing
field (these will b e discusse d below).
In November 2012 , the Justice Dep artment and the SEC released a 130-pa ge
report on the FCPA to provide guidance to companies about FCPA enforcement
practices (see http://www.justice.gov/criminal /fraud/fcp a/guide.pdf for a copy o f the
report). The report includes many examples that illustrate what is and is not allowable
under the current act. Anyone doing business abroad would be wise to read it carefully.
Other countries, especially in Europe, are passing anticorruption laws. For
example, Great Britain has made it a crime to pay incentives to win overseas contracts.
The Anti-Terrorism, Crime, and Security Act makes it unlawful to bribe foreign
officials, including government officials. The more expansive UK Bribery Act,
enacted in 2010, has gained the attention of corporate lawyers around the world
because it is even more restrictive than the FCPA. It’s a complex law but here are a few
highlights. It applies to anyone doing business in any part of the United Kingdom
(that’s most companies), and it prohibits bribery, not just of government officials, but
in commercial transactions as well. It also does not allow facilitating payments as the
FCPA does. Finally, receiving or accepting a bribe is also outlawed.42
In 1999, Germany joined the international convention banning bribery. In
addition, both France and Germany now prohibit tax deductions for “commissions”
paid to foreign officials or executives to win business, a formerly legal and common
practice. Despite changes to these laws, some companies didn’t change their ways. In
2008, Germany’s Siemens paid $1.6 billion, the largest fine ever for corporate bribery.
A high-level executive testified that he oversaw an annual bribery budget of $40 to
$50 million from 2002 to 2006. The case was pursued by both German prosecutors and
American authorities because the company trades on the New York Stock Exchange.
The total cost to Siemens is estimated at $2.6 billion to account for the costs of internal
investigations and reforms in addition to the fine.43
Where governments have been slow to respond, multinational companies often take
matters into their own hands, creating strong codes of conduct, compliance programs to
guide their employees, and strong internal financial controls. The companies do this
largely because they recognize the potential damage bribery scandals can bring to their
company’s brand image and reputation in today’s highly transparent world.44
The Conference Board (a NY-based member organization of business leaders that
conducts independent research) released a report that recommends that companies
wishing to successfully avoid problems with corruption adopt a strategy to do the
following: clearly prohibit bribery, assign senior executives responsibility for oversight,
410
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

train employees in legal requirements, establish a safe reporting system for suspected
violations, discipline violators, conduct due diligence to ensure that joint venture
partners, consultants, or any other agents employed by the company are following
the rules, include such rules in contracts with partners, and make it clear that business
partners are not to employ subcontractors without the company’s permission.45
Some America n comp anies have actually cont ended that the FCPA helps them
because if they come under p ressure for kickbacks or bri bes, they can cite the law. And
more companies have been working to convinc e loca ls of the benefits of play ing by the
rules. One cle ar benefit is that busin ess flows to places that have cont rolled corrupt ion.
For example, a study by the International Monet ary Fund found that the highe r the
level of corrup tion, the lower the level of dir ect fore ign investment.46 Hong Kong
became a leading intern ational financia l center largely becau se of its reputat ion for
rules and integrity. Corrup tion has been kept in check by a powerful local law
enforcemen t agency calle d the Independen t Commis sion Against Corrup tion (ICAC)
that was given broad powers to control corr uption and white -collar crime. The ICAC
establish ed the nonpro fit Hong Kong Ethics Development Ce nter in 1995 . The center
provide s a numb er of service s to busin esses, includi ng consul tation on developing
codes of conduc t, training for staff, and semina rs on ethics (see http:// www.ica c.org
.hk/en/h ome/index.html for mor e inform ation). 47
The World Ba nk reported in 2004 that more than $1 trillion dollar s is actual ly paid
in bribes annual ly, worldwide. But they noted that count ries that reduce corrupt ion
(Botswana, Chile, Costa Rica, and Slovenia are rece nt examples) significantly
increase per capita income (see www.worldbank.org). Corrup tion can add huge cost s
to an intern ational project. In a survey conduc ted by a Lon don intern ational busin ess
risk consult ancy, almost 10 percent of resp ondents sai d that corrupt ion could accou nt
for betwee n 25 and 50 perc ent of the total cost o f a project, and some said that figur e
could be even higher! 48
Increasing attention has been focused on corruption by Transparency International
(TI), a nongovernmental international organization founded in 1993 (see www
.transparency.org). TI aims to “support global integrity systems both nationally and
on the international level.” Since 1995, the organization has published an annual
Corruption Perception Index (CPI), based on multiple international surveys of business-
people, political analysts, and the general public, that measures perceptions of corrup-
tion in the public sector.49 The 2012 index includes 176 countries for which data were
available. Countries are ranked from 0 to 100 with those closest to 100 being the least
corrupt and those closest to 0 being the most corrupt (Table 11.1 is a selected list of the
least and most corrupt countries in the 2012 survey). Before considering doing business
in any country, it would be wise to check its status on the corruption index.
Publication of the CPI has often had a profound political impact in countries listed
as highly corrupt, because government leaders react strongly to the results. These
leaders are aware of the relationship between perceived corruption and direct foreign
investment. They know that investors are less likely to invest in countries with poor
governance and high corruption. Imagine trying to do business in a country where
bribery is required to get goods off the dock, contracts are not honored, and intellectual
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
411

property is routine ly stolen. Some of thes e leaders are taking action, wo rking with
national chapters of Transpare ncy Int ernational to reduc e corru ption levels.50
Some reall y interesting initiatives have emerged in som e of the most corrupt
countries. Indone sia has traditional ly not fared well on the CPI, and it has under taken a
number of anticorrup tion initiatives. For example, it has op ened thous ands of cashier-
free “honesty cafes” in school s and government offices, and more are plan ned for the
private sector. These cafes work on the honor system wi th the goal of motivating
honesty in participants . Customer s take drink s and foods from the shel ves and deposit
money into a clear box. Th e cafes are reporte dly wo rking qu ite well in most loca tions.
Teachers are even repor ting les s cheati ng in cla sses at the schools involved.51
In response to the CPI, observers noted that “it takes two partie s for bribes to
occur,” sugges ting that thos e who pay b ribes should be consider ed corrupt as well . As
a result, Transpare ncy Int ernational began to publish the Bribe Payers Index (BP I) that
ranks 28 leading exporting countri es by the percept ion that their firms engage in
bribery when doing business overse as. In its BPI 201 1, TI cited partic ularly h igh levels
of perceived bribery by compani es from Russi a, China, Mexico, and Indone sia. Th e
United Stat es was tenth among those lea st likely to bri be (www.transpa rency.org).
Importantly, bri be paying was seen as mos t probl ematic in certain industrie s such as
public works contrac ts and const ruction.
Transparency International also now publishes a report called the Global Corruption
Barometer (also on its website), which is a public opinion survey of respondents across
Table 11.1 Transparency International Corruption Index, 2012. The least and most
corrupt countries (see www.transparency.org for complete list)
Least Corrupt
Most Corrupt
Country
2012 Score
Country
2012 Score
Denmark
90
Somalia
8
Finland
90
Korea (North)
8
New Zealand
90
Afghanistan
8
Sweden
88
Sudan
13
Singapore
87
Myanmar
15
Switzerland
86
Uzbekistan
17
Australia
85
Turkmenistan
17
Norway
85
Iraq
18
Canada
84
Venezuela
19
Netherlands
84
Haiti
19
Iceland
82
Chad
19
Luxembourg
80
Burundi
19
Germany
79
Zimbabwe
20
Hong Kong
77
Equatorial Guinea
20
Barbados
76
Libya
21
Belgium
75
Laos
21
412
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

100 countries and their perceptions about whether the private sector uses bribes to
influencepublicsector decisionmaking.Overhalf ofthe more than 100,000 respondents
in 2011 perceived that private sector corruption was increasing. In addition, many see
government efforts to reduce corruption as ineffective.
How Different Are Ethical Standards in Different
Cultures—Really?
As we’ve just seen from our discussion of bribery, business “practices” certainly differ
from culture to culture. There’s no denying that bribery is more rampant in some
places than others. But that doesn’t mean ethical values and standards differ. Even in
the most corrupt environments, if you ask people what they value, they’ll say that they
value honesty and would prefer to live in a less corrupt environment. The honesty cafes
discussed earlier are a good example of that. Our international MBA students have also
told us about strong ethical cultures that exist in the midst of corrupt surroundings.
These individuals talk with pride about having worked in a corporate environment that
supported honest business dealings. So we think it’s important to distinguish between
common practices and values because if you, as a manager, understand that most
people share such values as honesty, respect, and fairness, you can appeal to those
values and aspirations in managing business ethics overseas.
Certain ethical standards and values are accepted in all human societies. For
example, the prescriptions “thou shalt not kill” and “thou shalt not steal” are universal.
Furthermore, the Golden Rule, “do unto others as you would have them do unto you,”
appears in the teachings of every major religion from Judaism to Buddhism.
Buddhism: “Hurt not others in ways that you yourself would find hurtful.”
Christianity: “Whatsoever you wish that men would do to you, do so to them, for
this is the law of the prophets.”
Confucianism: Tsze-Kung asked, saying, “Is there one word which may serve as a
rule of practice for all one’s life?” The Master said: “Is not reciprocity such a
word? What you do not want done to yourself, do not do to others.”
Hinduism: “This is the sum of duty: Do naught to others which would cause pain
if done to you.”
Islam: “No one of you is a believer until he desires for his brother that which he
desires for himself.”
Judaism: “What is hateful to you, do not to your fellow man. This is the entire
Law: all the rest is commentary.”52
These commonalities suggest a basis for common understanding across cultures.
But it’s important to recognize that values mayalsobe interpreted differently in different
cultures. For example, most cultures value honesty, but its meaning may differ from
culture to culture. The notion of caveat emptor (“buyer beware”) is considered dishonest
and therefore wrong in the United States, but it may simply be considered good business
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
413

in other cultures. Justice and fairness are also universal human values. But specific
beliefs and preferences about what is fair vary widely. For example, people in some
cultures follow an equity rule (outcomes should depend on performance inputs), while
others prefer an equality rule (equal shares should be distributed). Still others believe
resources should be distributed based on need. So it is essential to understand the
meaning of values and how they are interpreted within the culture.53
In 1992, David Vogel a rgued that a substantial “ethics gap” existed and that U .S.
companies were m ore interested in ethics than firms from the rest of t he deve loped
wo r l d . 54 R e c e n t d eve l o p m e n t s , h owever, s u g g e s t i n c r e a s i n g i n t e r e s t i n bus i n e s s
ethics in many ot her countries and increasing s im ilari ties a cros s c ount rie s i n te rm s
of enacting anti-bribery, environmental, and sex ual harassment leg islation and
pr osecuting illegal conduct. For examp le, in Great Britain, r eport s on Briti sh
business p ract ice i dentify business e thics a s i mportant, and a number of orga ni za-
tions and interest groups are r aising and inve st igat ing business e thics issues. 55 In
Europe and Scandinavia, many companies are regularly repor ting on their environ-
mental and sustain abil ity practi ces. 56 In addition, the European Business Ethics
Network (EBEN, www.eben-net.org), established i n 1987, now has mult iple chap-
ters in diff erent a reas of Europe and members representing 44 c ount ries. EBEN
mem b er s fo c us on pr o m o tin g e th ic a l awa r e ness and bus iness e thics e ducat ion and
training as well as improv ing bus iness practice. In 1999, the Business Ethics
Net work o f A fri ca (BEN -Af ri ca , w ww. bena fr ic a.org) wa s la u nche d a nd now h a s
a number of national chapters and members in different African countries. The
organization is committed to sharing information and expertise on business ethics
among its members.
European firms also tend to take social responsibility, and especially sustain-
ability, very seriously. But concern for the environment has increased in Asia as well.
Because of its huge environmental problems and their increasingly negative impact,
China has become particularly interested in environmental issues in recent years. It is
investing in solar energy, wind turbines, and fuel cell technology and has adopted
stringent fuel economy standards for automobiles. Companies selling cars there are
figuring out how to profit from producing and selling fuel-efficient vehicles. Other
companies are counting on China as a huge new customer for technologies such as
clean coal technology and energy-saving building materials.57 As interest in business
ethics and social responsibility increases internationally, the message seems to be that
those involved in international business need to stay informed about the rapidly
changing sociopolitical, legal, and ethical landscapes in the countries where they work
and do business.
Development of Corporate Guidelines and Policies for
Global Business Ethics
Given the wide diversity of legal requirements and the continued existence of cultural
differences and corruption, firms doing business abroad have a responsibility to
develop guidelines and policies to guide their employees’ ethical conduct.
414
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

ETHICAL IMPERIALISM OR ETHICAL RELATIVISM
We learned in Chapter 7 about
our “multiple ethical selves”—the idea that people are frequently willing to accept
different rules for different contexts. When applied to the international business ethics
environment, the concept becomes ethical relativism. “When in Rome, do as the
Romans do” is the guiding slogan of ethical relativists, who claim that “no culture has
a better ethics than any other”58 and we shouldn’t impose our standards on others. Tom
Donaldson, a leading business ethicist and an expert in international business ethics,
argues convincingly that ethical relativism must be rejected because, at the extreme,
relativists would have to honor any practice that is accepted within another culture.59
A pure ethical relativist would have to accept slave labor, the dumping of toxic wastes,
and even murder if local customs called for those practices.
But Donaldson also rejects the opposite of ethical relativism—ethical imperial-
ism.60 Ethical imperialism assumes absolute truths that would require exactly the same
standards and behavior in every culture. An absolutist would have to choose a single
standard as the best for all situations. However, how would one choose between the
American belief that individual liberty is a more important value than loyalty to a
community and the Japanese belief that loyalty comes before liberty? Donaldson also
points out that ethical imperialism can lead to disastrous mistakes. He offers the
example of a large U.S. firm operating in China. When an employee was caught
stealing, the manager followed company policy and turned the employee over to
provincial authorities, who immediately executed the employee.
So how can companies help their employees to balance these extremes of ethical
relativism and absolutism? First, Donaldson proposes that firms develop an “ethical
threshold” for corporate behavior abroad based on a few core values—for example, the
Golden Rule, respect for human dignity, respect for basic human rights, and good
citizenship—that will guide its behavior everywhere.61 These generalities then must
be translated into more specific guidelines. For example, companies can respect
human dignity by treating employees, customers, and suppliers as persons with
intrinsic value and by creating safe products and a safe workplace. They can respect
human rights by protecting employees’ and customers’ rights. And they can be good
citizens by avoiding corruption and protecting the natural environment.
Some activities would not be allowed, because they cross the ethical threshold.
Levi Strauss’s global sourcing guidelines are a good example. They were adopted in
1992 to ensure that products were being produced in a manner consistent with the
corporation’s values. The first guideline bans the use of child labor. Others limit
working hours and mandate safe working conditions and environmental responsibility.
Implementing a company’s standards, such as a ban on child labor, can be quite
complicated, however. For example, Levi Strauss found that two contractors in
Bangladesh used workers who appeared to be under the age of 14, the age set as
reasonable by international standards. In analyzing the situation, the firm realized that
there was no proof of age for these children and that the children contributed
substantially to their families’ income. Firing them might push them into more
inhumane work such as begging or prostitution and create hardship for their families.
To comply with Levi’s standards, the contractor hired a physician who used growth
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
415

charts to identify the underage children, and they were removed from the factory. The
contractor continued to pay these children wages as if they were still working, and Levi
Strauss paid for uniforms, tuition, and books so that they could attend school. At the
age of 14, they would be rehired. The contractor also agreed not to hire additional
underage workers. The contractor was willing to comply with Levi Strauss’s standards
in order to continue doing business with the firm.
But, adhering to standards higher than those of competitors increases costs.
Contractors have to add emergency exits and staircases, improve ventilation or
bathroom facilities, and install water treatment systems. These costs are passed along
to the firm and, ultimately, to consumers. Management therefore must believe that
decisions focused only on costs will not serve the company’s long-term interests.62
Also, once a company decides which values it is going to uphold in an overseas
environment, it has to decide how to actually make that happen. As an example, a
number of European and American companies are learning the hard way about the
potential damage to their brand images as they deal with the aftermath of the 2013
Rana Plaza building collapse in Bangladesh that killed more than 1,000 people in a
factory that produced clothing for some well-known brands. The factory was located
on floors that were added illegally (perhaps due to bribery) and workers were ordered
to work despite their fears about cracks in the building. The minimum wage in
Bangladesh is $38 per month, much less than in China and other countries. So,
financial costs are low. But, in this case, the human cost was huge and one would think
that a responsible company would want to avoid any unnecessary loss of human life.
As a pragmatic minimum, companies should assess whether the reputational risk of
using factories in a particular locale is worth the savings. And, even if the cost-benefit
analysis is favorable, where would an ethical analysis lead? It would certainly require
that the firm know whattheworking conditions are. Itwould also require decisions about
the company’s responsibilities if it is going to do business there. In the aftermath of the
Bangladesh factory collapse, some companies are joining with their competitors to set
up systems designed to insure worker safety while others are deciding to go it alone.
These are very complex issues requiring much deliberation. In other kinds of ethical
situations, values may be in conflict, but cultural traditions do not violate any of the core
human values. In those situations, Donaldson proposes that managers respect cultural
traditions and take the context into account when deciding what is right and wrong.63
For example, gift giving is an important part of the Japanese culture. An absolutist
might judge gift giving to be wrong. However, a corporate ethics code that respects
local traditions would likely allow some forms of gift giving and receiving and would
provide managers with specific guidance to help them differentiate between accept-
able and unacceptable gift-giving situations. Gift giving does not violate a core value
as long as there are limits on its scope and intention, and it remains within legal
guidelines. For example, many firms allow employees to receive gifts of nominal value
but require them to explain that the gift will be accepted on behalf of the organization
and will be displayed for all employees to see or perhaps given to charity.
Similarly, many U.S. firms have rules against nepotism because they believe that
the act of hiring and supervising one’s family members presents an inappropriate
416
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

conflict of interest. However, in cultures that have a deeper tradition of extended
family and clan loyalty (collectivistic cultures), nepotism is not only approved, but
expected. Companies are expected to hire employees’ children, for example. Donald-
son argues that although nepotism conflicts with Western concepts of equal employ-
ment opportunity, it is not necessarily wrong when viewed from the perspective of a
culture that values family relationships and has high unemployment. Therefore it may
be appropriate to hire family members as long as they are not in supervisory
relationships with each other that would generate conflicts of interest.
Companies struggle to create codes and ethics management systems that are truly
global or adaptable to the cultures in which they operate. In managing ethics across
cultures, one area of challenge concerns hotlines for reporting misconduct. U.S.
employees are often reluctant to report misconduct using such a reporting system
because they fear negative consequences such as retaliation, but overseas employees
are often even more reluctant to report. We suggested earlier that collectivists may find
such systems too impersonal. In addition, in a number of countries (China, Germany,
France, South Africa), whistleblowers are associated with historical horrors such as
informants turning in their friends or family members. This has led individuals in these
countries to resist the introduction of corporate reporting systems. And in countries
with little job mobility, employees are likely to fear retaliation for questioning
management decisions.
Beyond protecting employees from retaliation (as important in the United States
as it is overseas), international business ethics experts recommend introducing help
lines that are oriented more toward providing guidance (rather than reporting
misconduct) so that employees can develop trust in the system and the people who
run it. They also recommend tailoring the message about reporting to the particular
culture and history, providing local resources for training, guidance, and reporting
rather than a single headquarters system. Finally, they recommend involving senior
international managers in the design of these systems so that they can be designed to fit
the culture and local needs.64
Perhaps most important, organizations must take care to match their performance
appraisal and reward systems for overseas employees to ethical goals. If ethical
conduct is the goal, the organization must make it clear that the expatriate manager
will not be punished, either explicitly or implicitly, for upholding the organization’s
ethical standards—even if it costs the organization business. Because it’s difficult, if
not impossible, to monitor expatriate managers or representatives’ behavior from afar,
organizations tend to focus on outcomes (the bottom line) to evaluate the expatriate’s
performance. For example, they set sales or production goals and evaluate perform-
ance in light of goal achievement. However, if the organization focuses only on
outcomes and pays no attention to how those outcomes are achieved, the expatriate
manager is likely to do the same, and ethical goals are more likely to be compromised.
A study found that individuals are more likely to report that their firm is involved
in bribery when they perceive financial constraints and an intensely competitive
business environment.65 In such environments, it is even more important for the
organization to recognize the ethical dilemmas employees are likely to face, openly
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
417

acknowledge that lost business is a possibility if the employee rejects bribery requests,
and reward employees for conducting business within ethical guidelines (or at least not
punish them for doing so). Such a message was sent loudly and clearly in the case of
the Lockheed Martin manager who received the first annual Chairman’s Award for
exemplary integrity. You may recall from Chapter 6, a manager who received an
inappropriate “request for payment” from a foreign official not only rejected the
request, but removed Lockheed Martin from the bidding process (walking away from
an important contract), reported the problem to senior officials, and worked with both
U.S. government officials and the foreign government to have the foreign official
removed from the decision-making process. Instead of being punished for potentially
losing an important contract, this manager was rewarded publicly by the chairman of
the board.
By talking about aligning global codes and reward systems, we are essentially
recommending that companies develop a global ethical culture that will guide
employee behavior. They should first establish their core values and then take cultural
differences into account in prescribing specific behavior in areas of cultural difference
such as gift giving and nepotism.
In addition to providing guidance to employees through a code, a help line, and
performance management, one U.S. executive who talked with us about these issues
emphasized the importance of explaining to overseas business partners why you’re
required to behave in a particular way. Make itclear that this behavior is required by your
home culture andlawsand your company’s values and code of conduct, and request your
business partners’ respect and cooperation. You are more likely to succeed if you are a
large company with products that are particularly desirable. If so, you are in more of a
position to dictate the terms of doing business. But, if you represent a small company
with little leverage, you can expect to have more difficulty and you may want to think
long and hard before getting involved if the culture is particularly corrupt.
THE ORGANIZATION IN A GLOBAL BUSINESS
ENVIRONMENT
Although more small businesses are venturing into the global marketplace, large
multinational corporations still represent much of international business, and the
ethical expectations of them are often greater because of their size and visibility. These
corporations face complex business ethics environments that vary widely from country
to country. In addition to the stakeholders normally considered in any ethical business
decision, the number of stakeholders grows to include host governments, foreign
suppliers, agents, and other organizations. International law is often not particularly
helpful in guiding business conduct, and it is often unclear whether a particular
country’s legal system has regulatory authority over global transactions.66 Therefore a
firm’s own ethical standards become an important guide for its workers. Multinational
corporations also face questions of legitimacy that may cause them to consider
whether they should even involve themselves in a foreign culture. If they do decide
to do business in a particular foreign environment, what are their responsibilities?
418
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Deciding to Do Business in a Foreign Country
American businesses are aggressively pursuing foreign markets. They face increased
competition in the global marketplace, thus requiring them to become cost effective in
a variety of ways that include manufacturing goods abroad or buying from foreign
suppliers who can often produce goods more cheaply.
THE CHALLENGE TO LEGITIMACY
Numerous ethical challenges accompany these
forays into the international business environment. For example, in some environ-
ments, the very legitimacy of a company may be challenged by deciding to do business
in a certain country. Particularly in developing countries, the company’s motives may
be questioned. For example, managerial lifestyles may be perceived as overly
materialistic, paying local market wages may be viewed as exploitation, and expand-
ing locally may be perceived as furthering control and dependence.67
Sometimes companies with good intentions get tripped up doing business over-
seas because they simply don’t understand the perceptions and concerns of their
overseas stakeholders. Consider the case of Monsanto and its promotion of genetically
modified foods in Europe. The company developed these foods believing that they
were good for the environment—they reduce pesticide use, increase crop yields, and
promote efficient land use. Although the seeds are more expensive, yields are greater
and farmers save on insecticides and herbicides. The company had experienced great
success in the United States, easily winning regulatory approval for these products and
increasing sales. Science was supportive, showing that genetically modified food was
safe, and the World Health Organization agreed. Taking the products to Europe
seemed the obvious thing to do.
However, the introduction of genetically modified foods in Europe was initially a
disaster, and the company paid dearly for its failure to anticipate stakeholder reactions
abroad. Fears about possible long-term health effects drew strong negative reactions and
protests from a variety of vocal activist nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) such as
Greenpeace, as well as individual critics including Prince Charles and Paul McCartney,
who told the world to “say no to GMO” (genetically modified organisms). The European
public supported the environmental movement’s call to prohibit these products. Super-
markets banned the resulting products, and the European Union issued a moratorium on
plantingtheseeds.Foryears,hugefinanciallossesandafallingstockpricewereattributed
to this negative stakeholder reactionand thecompany’sfailure torespond effectively. The
situation has since turned around, in part because the company began to soften its stance
and engage its critics more, including publishing formerly secret research in peer-
reviewed journals where scientists could evaluate the work. Like other smart companies,
Monsanto is now working with its critics, finding common ground and more acceptance
of its products overseas. It also helped that the company began to focus on commodity
products (corn, soybeans, cotton, canola) that are sold to other businesses rather than
directly to the consumer and that none of the feared health disasters has yet occurred.68
What happened? First, Monsanto didn’t understand the European environment
and the fact that Europeans don’t trust their regulators the way Americans do (or did).
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
419

Europe had recently experienced the “mad cow dise ase” crisi s that raised questio ns
about the adequa cy of food safety regulation. Second, Monsa nto didn’t educate the
European public or consult with activists in advance. Europe ans heard about geneti-
cally modi fied foods first from Greenpe ace, an enviro nmental organizat ion that
opposed thes e products . The Europe ans reacted with anger, believing that these
products wer e bein g imposed upon them by a powerful Am erican corpo ration .69
Monsanto was initially tone deaf to these conce rns, relying o n the science rather than
understand ing and taking serious ly Europe ans’ fears and concerns.
Difference s in sociopol itical environm ents also raise a host of ethical questio ns.
Should Amer ican com panies invest in, or do business in, countri es with corrupt public
officials or com panies that prac tice racial discriminat ion, allow gender discrimin ation,
pollute the environm ent, or violat e the huma n rig hts of their citizens through slave or
child labo r or inhuman e working conditions? Does doing busin ess in these countries or
with thes e organizat ions tarnis h a com pany’s ethical reputat ion simply by associa tion?
Is it all rig ht to do busin ess in the country as long as the company avoids engaging in
the unethic al practices itself? Furthermor e, is it all right to do busin ess in a count ry if
the com pany create s and sticks to its own sta ndards regarding issues such as
discriminat ion, pollution, or safety?
For example, shoul d a company that man ufactures childr en’s sleepwear meet U.S.
safety (fire hazar d) sta ndards whe n selling this produc t in countri es that d o not have
such strict sta ndards? So me firms routinely g o beyond required local sta ndards. But
other firms take the absen ce of standar ds as licens e to behave unethic ally. For example,
most developing countri es require no health warnings on packa ges of cigarett es. As
more and mor e restrictio ns have been plac ed on toba cco compani es in the United
States and othe r developed count ries, firms such as Ph ilip Morris have increased their
marketing efforts in the developing world, often targeting women and young people in
these efforts. This has been especially true since Philip Morris International (PMI) was
spun off from its U.S. parent, Altria.
Companies should also consider consumers’ concerns. Concerned citizens and
organizations have put the plight of farmers in developing countries on the radar screen
(see http:// transfairusa.org). For example, they are prom oting coffee that has earn ed
the “fair trade” label, meaning that farmers who produced the beans were fairly
compensated. Sales of fair trade coffee such as the Green Mountain brand have grown
substantially in the last few years but remain a small percentage of the overall market.
Increasingly, consumers say that corporate citizenship influences their buying habits.
But the fair trade movement depends on people being willing to pay more for a product
in order to feel good about not contributing to the misery of other human beings. The
jury is still out on the long-term impact of such movements, but they do appear to be
growing.70
Many firms are moved to reconsider their overseas ethical standards when media
attention turns their way. For example, media attention to sweatshop conditions in
overseas factories raised legitimacy questions about a number of large corporations.
As globalization continues to expand and the world continues to shrink, companies
that ignore working conditions in their own factories or in suppliers’ factories risk their
420
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

valuable reputations. In fact, one of the biggest changes in this arena involves
companies’ attention to ethical issues in their extended supply chains. Companies
know they can no longer get away with saying that they didn’t know what was going on
or that they aren’t responsible for what suppliers do.71 Video cameras take consumers
inside factories that for many years were out of sight and out of mind. And the Internet
quickly spreads the news that often is then picked up by activist groups and media
organizations.
In early 2013, Wal-Mart warned its global suppliers that they will be dropped if
they are found to have subcontracted to factories that Wal-Mart has not authorized.
This zero tolerance move came after a deadly fire at a factory in Bangladesh that was
found to be manufacturing clothing for Wal-Mart without being authorized to do so.
The fire brought increased public scrutiny on Wal-Mart and pressure to monitor supply
chains much more closely and increase safety measures at suppliers’ factories.72
When consumers learn about the working conditions, they demand change. But
deciding how to handle issues such as labor conditions in foreign facilities, especially
those that a company doesn’t own, is not a simple matter. For example, consider the
question of wages. Many well-intentioned protestors argue that U.S. firms should pay
“first world” wages to employees in developing countries. But the developing
countries themselves often oppose this stance because they know that their competi-
tive advantage depends on the lower costs multinational companies can achieve by
hiring their workers. So extending U.S. or European pay levels to these settings could
result in shutting down factories, and that would hurt people rather than help them.
Similarly, migrant workers in China have complained about codes that don’t allow
them to work as many hours as they would like. They want to work more so that they
can save enough money to return to their villages.73 Finally, child labor is an important
source of income for many families in developing countries and can help keep families
together as well as keep children from begging or resorting to prostitution. We are
certainly not endorsing child labor or slave wages. But we do want to make clear that
there are no easy answers.
Companies are increasingly aware that they need to evaluate ethical issues and
risks before deciding to do business in a country or linking with a supplier or agent.
Some companies, such as Hewlett-Packard, are developing supplier codes of con-
duct.74 Other companies are combining forces with others in their industry to address
common problems and reduce the cost of doing so. For example, Nike, Gap,
Patagonia, and other companies and nonprofits have worked together to develop
safety standards and an inspection system, and companies in the electronics industry
have joined together to create an Electronic Industry Code of conduct.75
HISTORICAL EXAMPLE: DOING BUSINESS IN SOUTH AFRICA
Before South
Africa dismantled its long-standing policies of strict racial segregation (apartheid)
about two decades ago, the question of whether to do business in that country was a
prominent ethical issue for multinational businesses. Some U.S. firms chose to stay out
of South Africa completely during the apartheid years. Many companies felt pressured
to do so by institutional investors, such as pension funds, that prohibited investment in
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
421

companies doing business in South Africa. Others elected to do business there while
adhering to the Sullivan Principles, a list of standards for U.S. multinationals doing
business in South Africa that was drafted by Leon Sullivan, an African American
minister. These principles called for integration of the races in work facilities, equal
and fair employment practices, equal pay for equal work, training programs to prepare
nonwhites for higher-level jobs, the movement of nonwhites into those jobs, and
contribution to the quality of employees’ life outside of work.76
Levi Strauss, as part of global training on ethics, taught managers how to use a
decision tool called the principled reasoning approach. A cross-functional and
multinational task force that met over several months used the approach to decide
whether to enter the South African marketplace. Members conducted research on the
history of apartheid, identified stakeholders, visited South Africa, and interviewed
members of the government and community organizations. The task force recom-
mended that it would be appropriate to enter the South African marketplace under
certain conditions, including free elections.77
Such decisions can have long-term implications, however. In 2002, long after
apartheid was dismantled, apartheid victims in South Africa began suing U.S.-based
banks and other companies that conducted business in South Africa under the
apartheid system. The lawsuits charge that the companies helped the South African
government commit crimes against South African citizens. The lawsuits are based on a
precedent established by lawsuits brought on behalf of Holocaust victims against
Swiss companies, resulting in a $1.25 billion settlement. Similar lawsuits charge
companies with liability for a number of human rights abuses in the developing world.
For example, victim advocates claim that Unocal was aware that peasants were forced
at gunpoint to help build a pipeline in Burma and that those who resisted were tortured
or killed. Unocal denies the claim.78 Whether or not the companies are “guilty,” they
are likely to be expending significant resources fighting such lawsuits for years.
HISTORICAL EXAMPLE: MARKETING INFANT FORMULA IN THE DEVELOPING
WORLD
Once engaged in business in a foreign country, companies must also
consider whether practices that are perfectly acceptable at home are appropriate in
the foreign environment. This is perhaps best exemplified in the now classic case of
marketing infant formula in developing countries, particularly in the 1970s and early
1980s. The Swiss conglomerate Nestle was singled out among companies that were
engaging in practices that encouraged new mothers in these countries to give up
breastfeeding and switch to formula.79
In addition to more routine advertising that inaccurately suggested that bottle-fed
babies would be healthier, companies used so-called milk nurses to promote their
products in maternity wards. These women, though dressed as nurses, were actually
sales representatives who received a commission for selling formula.
Unfortunately, the switch to formula posed a serious health risk to the infants—for
three reasons. First, the formula must be mixed with water, which is contaminated in
many of these areas. Infants fed the formula were thus at high risk for infections and
diarrhea. Second, mothers in these areas often cannot afford to continue buying
422
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

formula. Therefore, they dilute it or substitute cheaper products that contribute to
health problems such as malnourishment for their babies. Finally, and perhaps most
important, women who give up breastfeeding cannot simply change their minds and
return to it. After a short time, their own milk production diminishes, and they are no
longer able to feed their babies themselves. They are forced to rely on formula. In
response to organized protests and boycotts from numerous activist groups, the
company finally agreed to alter its marketing practices.
Although some might argue that the marketing practices just described would be
questionable even at home (given the known health benefits of breast milk), they
would not as seriously compromise babies’ health here as they would in a developing
country because of the availability of clean water. Thus the very same practice could
be considered ethical in one setting (assuming that consumers had solid information to
inform their choice) but highly unethical in another.
CURRENT EXAMPLES: WHAT TO DO ABOUT HUMAN RIGHTS
Once a firm
decides to do business in a developing country, human rights issues should be on the
radar screen. Worldwide, companies seem to be converging to prohibit forced or child
labor (especially bonded labor, in which small children are required to work to pay off
family debts) and to address other issues such as worker safety. But a company that
decides to hold itself accountable for protecting human rights in its overseas opera-
tions (including those of its suppliers) is taking on a tough task with no easy answers.
Nike has about 44,000 employees globally and many more who are employed by
its suppliers in multiple countries to create sports and fitness footwear, apparel,
equipment, and accessories for worldwide distribution. In the 1990s, the firm was the
target of Internet and media campaigns, boycotts on college campuses, and protests
outside its stores because of sweatshop conditions in suppliers’ overseas factories. In
1998, the founder and CEO, Phil Knight, acknowledged the problem and decided to
take it on. The company published its first corporate responsibility report in October
2001. In its discussion of the efforts it was taking to ameliorate current working
conditions, the company criticized itself, acknowledging that work in its factories was
hard, workers were sometimes harassed, and the company’s monitoring system
needed improvement.
The company continued to work at it, sending auditors to evaluate conditions and
enforce the company code. In 2005, in the interest of full transparency, Nike released
factory names and locations—and was the first in its industry to do so. It also brought
in an MIT professor to assess its audit data. The results were disappointing. Most
suppliers’ factories had not improved, and some had even gotten worse. So, by itself,
monitoring wasn’t working. Along the same lines, a 2008 report in Fortune magazine
highlighted a Malaysian T-shirt factory where, it seemed, little had changed. Migrant
workers were housed in crowded, dirty conditions and had been required to turn over
their passports until recruiting fees (subtracted from their wages) were paid off. But
this time Nike responded quickly, admitting publicly that a serious breach of its
conduct code had occurred. It reimbursed workers and paid to relocate them. It then
held a meeting with representatives from 30 Malaysian contract factories to engage in
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
423

tough talk about enfor cing its sta ndards. When the com pany drops a supplie r, it
recognizes that local jobs are lost, perha ps h arming emp loyees even mor e. The current
CEO, Mark Parker, said “I’m proud of what we’ve accompl ished, but we’re still not
where we need to be. Th is is a never-ending challe nge.” Accordi ng to Fortune , Nike’s
slogan, “Just Do It, ” applies .80
In its ongoi ng attem pts to address the labor problem, Nike has its social
responsibil ity staff going beyond surface issues to search for the root causes of
problems. In d oing so, Nike learned that it had more leverage with long- term suppl iers
and suppl iers that depended largely on Nike for their revenue. This mea nt that leverage
was highe r in the shoe busin ess than in the appar el business, whe re the com pany tend s
to have short er-term cont racts. Nike is try ing some unique approache s that comple tely
change its outs ourcing mode l. One goal is to convert supplie rs to team-base d, lean
manufacturing that require s a higher-skilled labo r force that the supplie r will want to
care for. Anot her is to avoid last-mi nute desig n changes that pressure supplie rs toward
violation s like requiri ng excessive overtime. The company goal was to eliminate all
excessive overtime in its supplie rs’ factories by 2011. Ni ke also aims to partn er mor e
with other brands to addre ss these issues. In addition to efforts to fight labor abuses,
Fortu ne repor ts that Nike has mad e big stride s in sust ainabili ty, enlistin g its shoe
designers and challe nging them to reduc e wast e and use greener mater ials. You can
learn muc h more about Nike’s efforts by reading its corpo rate social resp onsibility
report online at ww w.nikebiz.com.
Research has highli ghted mode l programs that com panies have p ut into plac e over
the past few years to resp ond to the challe nges they recogniz e as resulting from the
globalizati on proce ss. For example, Re ebok (now part of the Adidas group) imple -
mented a program to ensur e that Pakis tani childr en are not involved in the man ufacture
of its soccer balls in Sialkot, Pakis tan. Inst ead o f having the panels stitc hed in villa ges
(where children were often invo lved), the com pany set up fact ories whe re production
could be monitored. The company also created a program that works toward placing
children in school s so that they are kept out o f the labo r pool (see www.adidas- group
.com). Sounds good, rig ht? It is. But consider the com plexitie s. These families have
now lost the income that the children would have generated by working. Many firms
are recognizing this challenge and are requiring suppliers who hire children not only to
place them in educational programs but also to continue paying the youths their
average daily wage while they are in school. Adidas has also been successful in doing
this with its suppliers in Vietnam.81
Companies concerned about workplace conditions in their manufacturing facili-
ties realize that they cannot solve these problems alone. For help, they can refer to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and can get assistance from a number of
organizations including the Fair Labor Association and Social Accountability Inter-
national (SAI). A number of high-profile companies are members of the Fair Labor
Association (FLA), including Adidas, American Eagle, H&M, New Balance, Pata-
gonia, and Nike. By joining the association, companies subscribe to its code of conduct
and commit to compliance with international labor standards in their supply chains. A
large number of colleges and universities have also signed on with the FLA to promote
424
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

fair worki ng conditi ons in the produc tion of collegiate appar el that bear s their logo.
They do this to ensur e that their appar el is not being produced under sweatshop
conditions. If you’re a college stud ent, check to see if your college or university is
listed (w ww.fairlabo r.org) and explore what is require d of licensees.
Social Acc ountabili ty Internati onal (see www.sa- intl.org was founde d in 1997 to
help organizations be socially accountable in the arena of workplace conditions (e.g.,
child labor, forced labor, health and safety, discrimination, etc.). The organization
developed a standard called Social Accountability 8000 (SA8000) and a social
auditing system for verifying compliance with these objective standards. The system,
modeled after the well-known ISO 9000 quality initiative, was developed with input
from an international advisory board that included experts from multiple sectors of
society, including unions, businesses, and nongovernmental organizations. Its stan-
dards are based on shared norms regarding international human rights. Facilities can
be “certified” as being in compliance with SA8000, meaning that the facility has been
audited and found to conform to the standards.
CURRENT EXAMPLE: CLEANING UP THE JEWELRY BUSINESS
Tiffany’s, the
upscale jewelry retailer, had been concerned about its supply chain since the late
1990s, when human rights groups accused the company of selling “blood diamonds”
thought to be traded by African rebel groups to finance their civil wars. Turning its
attention to gold, the company learned that attempting to ferret out where gold comes
from is extremely difficult. It is mined in more than 60 countries in a very fragmented
industry. Suppliers were simply unable to tell Tiffany where the gold was coming
from, so the company decided to purchase all of its gold from a single mine. Tiffany’s
CEO didn’t stop there. He has worked to bring activists and jewelers together,
supported studies of mining practices, and expressed opposition to new mines in
environmentally sensitive places. Two new organizations have emerged to help
jewelers deal with the issue: the Responsible Jewelry Council and the Initiative for
Responsible Mining Assurance.
The problem is more challenging for companies that don’t produce their own
jewelry. But they’re getting on board too. For example, Wal-Mart is pressuring miners
to follow strict environmental and social standards that can be verified, and the firm is
tracking its gold through the supply chain with the help of a British company that
specializes in supply chain traceability. Wal-Mart is beginning with modest goals but,
according to Pam Mortensen, who is in charge of jewelry buying at Wal-Mart, “if we
don’t start somewhere, we won’t get anywhere.”82
Whatever the ethics or corporate social responsibility issue, companies large and
small are finding that they must take responsibility for their extended supply chains
and engage more with the links in the chain, including those they never would have
interacted with before. In the last few years, safety of imported products (especially
from China) has become a huge issue. In the United States, we’ve experienced pet food
with deadly melamine, lead and cadmium-tainted toys, unsafe tires, contaminated
seafood, antifreeze-laced toothpaste, and drywall that made houses inhabitable. The
list goes on. Mattel was forced to recall almost a million lead-tainted toys in 2007.
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
425

Importer s that care about their reputatio ns can no longe r afford to think about these as
arms-len gth relations hips. They certainly can’t wait for someone to die befor e they act .
They mus t be increas ingly vigila nt, including drawing up detailed cont racts, mon-
itoring supplie rs (and their suppl iers), and conduc ting testing on produc ts befor e
selling them. 83
CURRENT EXAMPLE: HELP FOR THE DEVELOPING WORLD 
The World Bank
estimates that near ly half the world’s popul ation survives (bar ely) on $2 per day or
less. These peopl e live at wha t is calle d “the bottom of the wealth pyramid,” and their
plight has proven difficult to overcome . Muhamm ad Yun us, a Bangla deshi and an
economics professo r, won the Nobe l Peace Prize in 2006 for inventing the idea of
using micro credit to spur econom ic development in a way that helps those at the base
of the pyrami d become self-sufficient . He also rece ived the Presiden tial Medal of
Freedom from Ba rack Obama in 2009 for being an internationa l agent o f change . Th e
idea is to give small loans to entrepr eneurs, espec ially the po orest women, for the
purpose of sta rting small businesse s. Yunus founde d Gram een Bank in 1976 and got
the idea start ed by lend ing $27 of h is own money. The idea has been extraordinarily
successful. There are now over 2 ,500 Gr ameen Ba nk branc hes in rural Bangla desh,
over 8 milli on b orrowers (96 percent of them women), a loan repayme nt rate of
90 percent (and that’s witho ut collateral ), and a profitable bank that act ually pays
divide nds. Bor rowers join a five-member group that overse es the loan (altho ugh there
is no joint liability). The idea has spread to many other developing countries.
Companies such as Citigroup and organizations such as the Gates Foundation have
gotten involved, and microlending is now a multibillion-dollar industry. For more
information , go to www.gram een-info.org.
Building on his original idea, Yunus developed the notion of social business
enterprise, an idea that combines corporate interests with microfinance and economic
development. He enlisted Danone, the yogurt maker, to give it a try in Bangladesh. The
company created a yogurt that was fortified to guard against malnutrition and was
affordably priced (only 7 cents each). The factory depends on Grameen micro-
borrowers, who buy cows to sell the factory milk and sell the yogurt door-to-door.
Danone agreed to reinvest revenue and take only its initial cost of capital after three
years. The enterprise employs many people, thus contributing enormously to the local
economy. Organizations such as UNICEF see this as a wonderful way to improve
nutrition in the developing world. Danone sees it as an opportunity to do good while
exploring a sustainable business model for the future and a way to integrate social
responsibility into the global business.84
Development of a Transcultural Corporate Ethic
Many businesspeople hope for the day when there will be wide agreement about
appropriate business conduct in the global arena. Progress has been made in that
direction through the efforts of government organizations, multinational companies,
and private organizations interested in international business ethics. But the
426
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

proliferation of these efforts just increas es the complexity and the difficult y of
deciding where to turn one’s attention .
Movement toward “a transcu ltural corporat e ethic” 85 has occurred as a result of a
number of intergovernm ental agreem ents reached during the last 50 years. These
agreement s set out normat ive guide lines for the busin ess conduc t of multinati onal
corporatio ns. The guidelines that emerge from thes e agreem ents cover the area s of
employment practices and policies, consumer protectio n, environment al prot ection,
political payment s and involvement, and basic huma n rig hts and fundame ntal free-
doms. They are based on four pri nciples:
1. 
The inviolabi lity of nation al sovereignt y. 
Mul tinationa ls are expected to
resp ect the “host count ry’s econom ic and social developme nt and its cultur al
and histor ical traditi ons.”86
2. 
So cial equity. 
Pay scales are expected to ensur e equity between gender s as
well as racial and ethn ic g roups.
3. 
Market integri ty in busine ss trans actions. 
Restriction s on politica l
paym ents and bribes assum e that thes e “injec t non-mar ket consider ations
into busin ess transac tions.” 87
4. 
Hum an right s and fun damental freedom s. 
This principle is b ased on
belief in the inherent worth and dignit y of every individual and the equality of
rig hts of all human beings. However, this pri nciple often com petes with othe r
pri nciples, especia lly the first— nationa l sovereignty. For example, South
Af rica’s apar theid system was based on the denial of h uman rights to its black
citi zens, and women continue to be deni ed rig hts in many cultur es and
government system s.
As noted earlier, a number of efforts have also been under way to battle bribery and
corruption on a global scale. Perhaps the most important is the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Anti-Bribery Convention. Negotia-
tors from 33 countries worked together to pass the convention in late 1997. Participating
countries included members of the OECD (including nations of North America, Western
Europe, and the industrialized democracies of the Pacific) plus Argentina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, and the Slovak Republic. The convention requires signatories to make it
a crime to bribe foreign public officials, and it includes the application of criminal
penalties. In October, 2002, the OECD reported that 34 countries had already filed their
“instrument of ratification” with the secretary-general of the OECD. By 2005, 36
countries had passed anti-bribery laws that make it a crime to bribe a foreign public
official. Information about each country’s efforts is available on the OECD website
(www.oecd.org). An OECD report, also available on the website, cites the convention as
“one of the most effective tools against foreign bribery.” But the report recognizes that
the credibilityof the conventiondepends on rigorousmonitoring of thelegislation across
countries to ensure that it is “adequate and effectively applied.” Some argue that the
treaty is weak because it does not require minimum penalties, does not ban gifts to
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
427

political parties, and does not outlaw tax deductibility for bribes. However, it is clearly a
step in the right direction.88 The trend in many multinational companies is to prohibit all
types of bribery, especially because laws are becoming more stringent (e.g., the UK
Bribery Act). For example, British-based BP’s policy exceeds the U.S. Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act standard. The company considers small facilitating payments to be bribes
and has a policy against paying them.89 This approach certainly makes the rules clearer
for employees and those seeking bribes.
The Organization of America n States (OAS) has 35 membe rs, which include all
the inde penden t repub lics of the Americas except Cub a. Most of these members sign ed
the Int er-American Convention Agains t Corruption , which took force in 1997 (see
www.oas.org). This binding treat y does not outlaw bri bery, but it does require
members to develo p polici es and prac tices that aim to reduc e corrupt ion. 90
An imp ortant questio n remai ns: do these agre ements influe nce multinati onals to
behave differently? Mul tinational corpo ration s are not directly bound by these
interg overnmental agreem ents. However, they are indirectly affected to the extent
that countri es enact laws requiring compani es to com ply. The agre ements may also be
contributing to a mor e informal type of complianc e as they contribute to the
developme nt of acce pted cros s-cultura l moral standar ds. The more multinat ionals
become aware of thes e standar ds, the mor e likely they will be to comply.
Busine ss leaders have also been working to develop their own worldwide
corporate resp onsibility standar ds. The Ca ux Rou nd Table , a group repr esenting
American, Europe an, and Japan ese multinati onals, began meeting in Caux, Swi tzer-
land, in 1986. The group’ s missio n was to focus attent ion on globa l corporate
responsibil ity. They developed a set o f standards for global busin ess behavior that
is based on two principle s: human dignit y and the Japan ese conce pt of kyosei , “the
ideal of living and working togethe r for the com mon good to enable mutual prosp er-
ity.” Altho ugh, agai n, the standar ds are not binding, it is hop ed that businesse s
around the world will rely on them to develop their own standard s.91 (See www
.cauxroundt able.org for more inf ormation about the group).
In an early 1999 speec h at the World Economic Forum, UN Secreta ry-
General Kofi Annan propos ed the United Nations Global Compa ct (see www
.unglobal compact.org). He asked the leaders of mul tinationa l corporatio ns to join
this intern ational initiat ive, alon g with UN agenc ies and other organization s interest ed
in promot ing global, values-b ased managem ent. Annan suggeste d that an int ernational
framework that was built on int ernationally accepte d principle s coul d assist compani es
in their desire to practice voluntary corporate citi zenship in a global economy. Th e
initiative was formal ly launched in July 2000 in a meeting of senior executives from
about 50 large corpo ration s and other leaders from government s and civil societ y. Th e
United Nati ons play s the role of convener and facilitator of dialogu e and inform ation
sharing among these organi zations. Mem bership is open to any organizat ion that is
serious about its com mitment to the principle s. In early 2013, the web site (ungl o-
balcompact.org) said that participants from over 7,000 businesses in 145 countries
were involved (see www.un globalcomp act.org). 92 Intere stingly, toba cco compani es
are discouraged from participation because of the negative health effects of tobacco.
428
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

The primary objective of the compact is to embed good corporate citizenship into
corporate-management strategy and decision making and to complement regulatory
approaches. The compact uses the power of transparency and dialogue to identify and
disseminate good business practices based on ten shared principles in human rights,
labor, the environment, and anti-corruption:
Human Rights:
1. Protection of internationally proclaimed human rights
2. Noncomplicity in human rights abuses
3. Support for freedom of association
Labor:
4. Elimination of forced and compulsory labor
5. Effective abolition of child labor
6. Elimination of employment and workplace discrimination
Environment:
7. Support for a precautionary approach to environmental challenges
8. Initiatives to promote greater environmental responsibility
9. Development and diffusion of environmentally friendly technologies
Anti-corruption:
10. Work against corruption
To participate in the compact, company CEOs send a letter of commitment to the
United Nations secretary-general and agree to (1) take concrete steps within their
organization to act on these principles, (2) share their experiences on the Global
Compact website, and (3) advocate publicly for the Global Compact.
Another United Nations initiative, the United Nations Convention against Cor-
ruption, was signed in Mexico in December 2003 and took force in December 2005.
Preventing corruption is an important goal of the convention. Countries that sign must
work to increase transparency in elections and in public service. Public servants must
be governed by codes of conduct and must be disciplined for misconduct. Countries
also must criminalize various types of corruption, including bribery, money launder-
ing, and embezzlement of public funds. Signatories also agree to cooperate with each
other in anticorruption activities and to provide legal assistance on the return of assets.
Companies are taking these international agreements into account in designing
codes of conduct for the twenty-first century. A group of Harvard researchers studied
the business codes of multinational organizations (i.e., company codes and multi-
national efforts such as the Caux principles, the OECD guidelines, the UN Global
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
429

Compact, and the Global Reporting Initiative, among others) in an attempt to
determine what it takes for these codes to meet what they called world-class standards.
The researchers found that these codes address eight principles:
1.
Fiduciary principle.
This principle addresses managers’ responsibility to
act in the best interest of shareholders rather than themselves. Accordingly,
codes prohibit behaviors such as conflicts of interest and self-dealing at the
organization’s expense.
2.
Property principle.
This principle addresses respect for property. Accord-
ingly, codes prohibit behaviors such as theft (including theft of intellectual
property) and waste.
3.
Reliability principle.
This principle addresses trust and promise-keeping
behaviors that are required for cooperation to occur. Codes call for employees
to abide by contracts, and they prohibit breaches of contract and trust.
4.
Transparency principle.
This principle addresses the importance of
honesty and respect for truth and openness. Codes call for the accurate
representation of information and prohibit behaviors such as misleading
stakeholders (e.g., customers, suppliers, etc.).
5.
Dignity principle.
This principle addresses respect for people. Codes call
for protection of people’s health, safety, and privacy and prohibit human
rights abuses.
6.
Fairness principle.
This principle addresses the fair distribution of rewards
and burdens. Codes call for fair treatment (including ideas such as equal pay
for equal work) and prohibit discrimination.
7.
Citizenship principle.
This principle addresses respect for the law, respect
for “the commons” (shared resources, such as the natural environment), and
contribution to society overall. Codes call for law-abiding behavior and
contributions to society through behaviors such as care for the environment
and philanthropy. Prohibited behaviors include bribery, despoiling the natural
environment, and improper political activity.
8.
Responsiveness principle.
This principle calls for the organization’s
responsiveness to its stakeholders that are affected by a company’s actions.
This includes such behaviors as responding to stakeholder concerns and
engaging with stakeholders such as suppliers.
The authors see these principles as representing an emerging consensus about a
“core of global standards of conduct” being used by modern corporations to address
concerns that arise when doing business in today’s global business environment.
They recommend that companies use the principles as a starting point for assessing
their current code or for developing a new one. They also encourage firms to
supplement these principles with material that has its source in the company’s own
unique values.93
430
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

CONCLUSION
From the individual’s perspective, a foreign assignment is full of ethical challenges.
Training and guidance, along with openness and flexibility, can go a long way toward
preparing the expatriate manager to survive with integrity and sanity intact—and
hopefully to enjoy the richness of the international business experience. Organizations
can help their expatriate employees by developing a set of broad core values, as well as
specific guidelines and support systems for ethical business practice at home and
abroad. Multinational companies are gaining experience in managing these complex
issues in a complex, transparent, but shrinking world. The expanding interest in
business ethics and social responsibility and the development of international guide-
lines to guide business behavior across cultural boundaries will help level the playing
field and contribute to making the international business experience richer and more
satisfying. In the meantime, keeping up with all of the changes can be daunting. That’s
why we have provided information about a number of useful websites that can help
you stay abreast of the complex and dynamic global business ethics environment.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.
If you were going on your first overseas business assignment, what would you do
to ensure that you were prepared to deal with ethical dilemmas you would face?
What questions would you ask your superiors in preparation for the trip?
2.
Your firm is expanding globally and is sending executives overseas for the first
time. What will you do to be sure these individuals are prepared to deal with the
ethical dilemmas they will face?
3.
Imagine that someone from another culture asked you to provide information about
business ethics when dealing with American managers. What would you say?
4.
Talk with someone from another culture. Ask for information that would be
helpful to you if you had to do business in their culture. What did you learn that
you didn’t know before? How might you behave differently because of what you
know?
5.
If you were planning to do business in a culture that was opposite from your own
on
the
cultural
dimensions
of
“power
distance”
and
“individualism/
collectivism,” what challenges would you expect to face? How would you
prepare?
6.
Imagine yourself in a situation where you had to bribe someone or lose the deal.
How would you think about it? What do you think you would do? Why? What
would you hope for from your employer?
7.
Assume the role of corporate decision maker in a decision about whether to do
business in a particular foreign country in the developing world. What criteria
will you establish for making the decision from an ethics and social responsi-
bility perspective? Why are these the most important criteria? What information
will you use to help you make the decision?
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
431

8.
What are the costs and benefits of developing a transcultural corporate ethic?
Whose responsibility should it be to develop such an ethic—governments,
corporations, intergovernmental organizations, all of these?
9.
Choose a multinational company. Study its website to see what you can learn
about its approach to global business ethics and social responsibility.
10.
If you had to create a global code of conduct for your company, what would you
include? Which core values would you state? How would you treat behaviors
such as gift giving and nepotism?
Case Questions
1.
What kind of an ethical issue is this?
2.
Why would it be against corporate policy to accept such a gift? Do you agree
with the policy? Why or why not?
3.
Put yourself in the “shoes” of each of the parties. How might they think about the
issue?
4.
Imagine that you are the corporate vice president in charge of business ethics and
conductforyourfirm.Wouldyoubewillingtochangethispolicy?Whyorwhynot?
SHORT CASE
THE GIFT
You’re an account executive with a multinational financial firm, and one of your
biggest accounts is that of a shipping magnate in Greece. Several months after you’ve
arranged very complex financing to build a new fleet of oil tankers for this customer,
he asks if you and your wife would attend the christening of the first tanker. You, of
course, agree to attend—it would be an insult to him if you didn’t. When you arrive, he
asks your wife to break the traditional champagne bottle over the bow of the tanker.
Two weeks after the christening, your wife receives a package from your customer. In
it is a gold bracelet with her initials and the date of the christening set in diamonds. To
return the gift would insult your customer, but accepting it would clearly violate your
company’s policy. What should you do?
CASE
SELLING MEDICAL ULTRASOUND TECHNOLOGY IN ASIA
by Linda Trevi~no and Alessandro Gubbini
A surprising ethical dilemma arose for a young engineer during his first business trip to
Asia to work with customers of his company’s ultrasound imaging technology. On the
long airplane ride, Pat was dutifully reading a travel book to learn more about Korean
432
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

and Chinese cultures when he was shocked to learn how ultrasound technologies were
being used in these countries. A technology that he had always considered to be a way
to help people by diagnosing disease was being commonly used to intentionally
identify and terminate pregnancies when the fetus was female. As an engineer, Pat had
been trained to be passionate about innovation and problem solving. He was used to
thinking about these technologies as innovative high-tech solutions to serious health
problems. He was also committed to developing higher-quality, more efficient,
affordable devices so that they could be used more widely. It had never occurred
to him that in some Asian cultures, where overpopulation combined with a strong
patriarchal culture led to a preference for sons over daughters, this technology that he
considered to be innovative, helpful, and supportive of people’s well-being might be
used to eliminate female lives.
As ultrasound technology has advanced and become more available, it has been
used more widely in decisions to abort female fetuses in favor of sons. After some
more research, Pat learned that this practice has become quite common in China,
which controls population growth by allowing families to have only one child. In
India, female children are more costly to families because the culture requires the
family to bear the expenses of their daughters’ weddings and dowries. By comparison,
an ultrasound exam is a small expense even for these poor families. Pat was further
surprised to learn that using ultrasound technology to identify fetus gender and abort
the fetus based upon gender information is unlawful in most of these countries (for
example, in India doctors are forbidden from disclosing the gender of fetuses).
However, the enforcement of such laws is difficult and spotty, especially in clinics
that are far away from cities and regulators. The problem is being exacerbated because
many ultrasound machines are being sold on the second-hand market, thus making
ultrasound more available and more affordable to these clinics. The increasing use of
the technology to abort female fetuses is beginning to create a huge societal problem
because males are outnumbering females, distorting nature’s careful gender balance.
There are estimates that more than 150 million women are “missing” from the world as
a result of sex-selective abortions and female infanticide. That’s equivalent to missing
every woman in America! The 2001 Indian census demonstrated a huge drop in the
number of young girls relative to boys (927 girls for every 1,000 boys compared to 945
to 1,000 a decade earlier), and the problem continues to worsen as the use of ultrasound
technology increases. According to UNICEF, China now has only 832 girls for every
1,000 boys aged 0–4. Looking to the future as these children grow up, some have
predicted increasing trafficking of women for prostitution and violent crime as young
males compete for the smaller number of available females.
In thinking through what he had learned, Pat found himself considering the
patients, the healthcare practitioners, and the healthcare industry as well as his
company, other technology developers, and the broader cultures involved. Patients
benefit from access to life-saving technologies that can identify diseases at an early
stage so that they can be treated more successfully. But patients can also be harmed if,
due to early identification of their child’s gender, mothers feel forced into abortions
against their will. In these cultures, many mothers apparently do feel compelled by
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
433

cultural or family pressures to abort female fetuses. Medical practitioners benefit from
the ability to do faster and more accurate diagnoses, but they too can be pressured to
use these systems for unethical purposes. The industry and the developers (including
Pat’s company) certainly profit from the production and sale of more of these products.
But the company and industry risk sullying their reputations if they are found
responsible for selling these systems to unauthorized users for unlawful purposes.
Imagine what the media could make of that story. According to a prestigious British
medical journal, The Lancet (2006), the unlawful use of diagnostic ultrasound
technologies is contributing to an estimated 1 million abortions of female fetuses
every year. Yet, these diagnostic technologies still greatly benefit society worldwide in
saving and improving the lives of many millions of patients.
How should Pat think about this? Do the benefits to society of the technology
outweigh the harms? Even if they do, does the company want to be connected to a
practice that many people find immoral and that is illegal in many countries? Pat found
this practice particularly distasteful when looking at it from the perspective of the
females who would not be born simply because of their gender. Pat wondered, “Is this
practice fair to them? And aren’t we all facilitating the practice by looking the other
way? What would happen if such gender discrimination were globally accepted as
normal practice? Could that ever be the right thing to do?” What would international
health organizations such as the World Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine and
Biology (WFUMB), which provides training and education to doctors worldwide,
have to say about such practices? Pat wondered what his wife would think if she knew
that his work involved this unexpected result? Would she expect him to do something?
What is his individual responsibility here? What is his company’s responsibility?
Because Pat felt so confused by what he had read, and he didn’t fully understand
the legal or cultural environment, he never mentioned the subject to his Asian clients.
But it remained in the back of his mind. When he returned home, he kept thinking
about it. There was no formal structure for him to surface the issue within the company,
so he decided to discuss the subject with some trusted colleagues. He wondered
whether they were aware of the issue and what they might think about it. Were they as
bothered as he was? It turns out that they were as unaware of these practices as he had
been. It also seemed more distant to them because they had not traveled to Asia as he
had, and there was no agreement about what to do. Engineers tend to think about
products only in technical terms—the potential for technical flaws and dangers that
might harm patients. They rarely encounter the ultimate end users, and they’re not
trained to think about cultural implications.
As a Westerner, all of this was particularly hard for Pat to deal with. He was caught
completely off guard. He asked himself: “What do I need to do, if anything? I’m
scheduled to return to these countries to support our clients’ use of our technology, so I
won’t be able to avoid the issue for long. It seems almost ridiculous that I became
aware of this issue through a travel book. If it hadn’t been for that book, I probably
never would have thought about the issue at all. My company had not prepared me. It
offered no special training on cultural or ethical issues for employees they send to
work overseas. It seemed like the company’s values of providing people with the
434
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Case Questions
1.
Should Pat raise this issue with management? If so, what should he say?
2.
What if he does raise the issue and the company does nothing? What should he
do then, if anything?
3.
Does this use of our technology breach a core value? Or is this a case where we
should respect local cultural practice? Is there some compromise position in
between?
4.
Should the company be anticipating additional government regulation?
5.
What is the risk to the company’s reputation of doing nothing? Of doing
something?
6.
How might the company think about our responsibility from a supply-chain
perspective? Might they learn anything from companies in other industries that
have had to deal with this issue? For example, would it be appropriate to initiate a
policy to engage with customers who certify that they will sell exclusively to
authorized users? Even if the company did that, how could they be sure
customers were complying?
7.
Should the company also be educating and training employees and clients on
ethical uses of our products? Or, would that be seen as ethical imperialism?
8.
What should a sales representative do if he or she suspects that a client will be
using the ultrasound equipment for sex-selective purposes?
9.
The company provides service for these machines. Might that be a way to
monitor use?
10.
Can the company do anything to better understand the root cause of the problem
and tackle that?
opportunity for earlier diagnoses prevented us from exploring the potential misuse of
our product. The company and industry focus on how to develop technologies to
identify life-threatening conditions earlier, better, and faster. We like to think of
ourselves and our technologies as saving lives, not risking them. The company’s stated
value is to provide healthcare solutions to patients worldwide. But, in this case, our
technology was being used to both save and end lives. Do our values need to change? I
think of our company as being good and ethical, but we were obviously unprepared in
this case. We had not done our homework.”
Even if the company wanted to do something, Pat wondered what they could do.
The company is an original equipment manufacturer (OEM), meaning that it doesn’t
sell directly to the end users. Therefore the responsibility for putting these technol-
ogies into the wrong hands is widely dispersed across different manufacturers,
distributors and local institutions. Pat also wondered whether and how the company
could influence these different parties to take action even if it decided it was right to do
so. On top of that, the company is in the United States, and these end users are halfway
across the world.
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
435

CASE
GOOGLE GOES TO CHINA
by Renee Flemish and Linda Trevi~no
Gu Ge (roughly translated as “harvesting song”) is the name Google gave to the mainland
Chinese version of its Internet search service. Mainland China boasts a huge and growing
market of Internet users (the biggest in the world and now ahead of the United States). But
China also has arguably the most sophisticated government censorship in the world. The
same Chinese government that censors films and bans television programs and rock bands
sanitizes search pages by systematically filtering out keywords, pictures, and news
accounts. The government also records every keystroke, records sites that individuals
surf, and searches for any material that government authorities find offensive. Guards are
also posted at Internet cafes to ensure that no one is looking at banned content.
In2006,Google decidedthat toretainaccessto China’s huge andgrowing marketof
internet users (it then had 26 percent of the market, compared to 60 percent for Beijing-
based rival Baidu.com), the company would cooperate with the Chinese government’s
demand to block Chinese customers’ access to Internet sites that include information
about topics the government deems off limits to its citizens—such as democracy, human
rights, Tibet, Taiwanese independence, the meditation technique Falun Gong, or
information about the Dalai Lama.94 Searches either turn up “acceptable” information
or no information and a message saying, “operation timed out.”
Here are a few examples of “scrubbed” searches on Gu Ge:
Searches of “Tiananmen Square” produce some 400 photos, all depicting an empty
square or one filled with tourists—whereas the same search on Google in the United
States produces 22,000 photos, many of them of bloody protests. In 1989 Tiananmen
Square was the site of student-led demonstrations against government corruption that
culminated in a bloody standoff. Protestors defied orders to disperse, and tanks and
infantry were sent in, subsequently killing 2,600 civilians and injuring another 7,000–
10,000. Widespread arrests followed and press coverage was strictly controlled.
Searches of “Falun Dafa” (also known as Falun Gong) find only a series of websites
that condemn the practice—search on Google U.S., and you will learn that Falun Dafa
is a system of New Age style meditation practiced by some 100 million members. It has
been suppressed in China since 1999, when 10,000 members staged a peaceful
meditational protest outside China’s Central Appeal Office.
The Dalai Lama, often called “his Holiness,” is considered by Tibetan Buddhists to be the
current incarnation of Buddha, the latest in a lineage that dates back to 1391. However,
searches of “Dalai Lama” produce only pictures of a young man that were taken before
1959 when China invaded and took over Tibet and the Dalai Lama was forced to flee to
India, where he continues to lead the Tibetan government in exile. The Dalai Lama has
been credited with preserving Tibetan culture and education and was awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1989 for his leadership of the global movement for a Free Tibet.
436
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

Google was criticized for its decision by U.S. Congress members, who accused
the company of “decapitating the voice of dissidents in China,” “enabling evil,” and
facilitating the oppression of Chinese citizens via “sickening collaboration” with
Beijing. Google was also said to be violating the UN Declaration of Human Rights,
which says, “Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference” and
“Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include
freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds. . . . ” Some
critics even introduced legislation that would require U.S. companies to locate their
computer hardware outside China, create a code for all U.S. Internet companies doing
business in repressive countries, curtail technology exports to countries with censor-
ship policies, and create a State Department office of internet freedom.
Bloggers argued that Google had a “moral duty not to bow to China’s wishes.”95
The Reporters Without Borders group said that Google’s decision to “collaborate”
with the Chinese government was a “real shame,” and Amnesty International
condemned Google’s self-censorship policy. The Electronic Frontier Foundation
argued that if companies are going to negotiate away users’ rights, the companies
should at least work together to form a code of practice.
On the other hand, the Chinese allege that they are no different from Western
countries, like France and Germany, that restrict Nazi-related content. And company
defenders say that these companies are helping to open up Chinese society in the
long run.
GOOGLE’S POSITION IN 2006
& Despite admitting to compromising its values, Google maintained that the
company would serve a more useful role in China through participation.
Withdrawing the service would be “a greater evil,” the company said.96
Although the decision to go into China “involved a lot of hand-wringing and
weighing the consequences of censoring results . . . providing some infor-
mation to Chinese users is better than none at all.”97 The CEO called the
choice a “difficult but principled decision.”98
& Google’s chief executive, Eric Schmidt, said that Google had a responsibility
to abide by the law in every country where it does business.99 “We had a choice
to enter the country and follow the law, or we had a choice not to enter the
country . . . I think it’s arrogant for us to walk into a country where we are
just beginning operations and tell that country how to run itself.”
& The company decided to disclose censorship at the bottom of Web pages by
saying, “In order to follow local laws, some search results are not dis-
played.”100 In addition, Google chat, e-mail, and blogs were not included
in the company’s service offering in China. Google did not wish to find itself
in a position of having to turn over e-mail files to the government. (The
company recently resisted U.S. government requests for data on what people
were searching for).
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
437

GOOGLE’S STATED GOALS AND VALUES
“Never settle for the best.” The perfect search engine would understand exactly what
you mean and give back exactly what you want. . . .
Google’s goal is to provide a much higher level of service to all those who seek
information, whether they’re at a desk in Boston, driving through Bonn, or strolling in
Bangkok.
Following is a list of Google’s stated goals and values:
1. Focus on the user and all else will follow. Google has refused to make any change
that does not offer a benefit to the users who come to the site . . .
2. It’s best to do one thing really, really well.
3. Fast is better than slow.
4. Democracy on the web works. Google works because it relies on the millions of
individuals posting websites to determine which other sites offer content of value.
5. You don’t need to be at your desk to need an answer. The world is increasingly
mobile and unwilling to be constrained to a fixed location.
6. You can make money without doing evil.
7. There’s always more information out there.
8. The need for information crosses all borders...Our mission is to facilitate access to
information for the entire world.
9. You can be serious without a suit. Google’s founders have often stated that the
company is not serious about anything but search . . .
10. Great just isn’t good enough. Always deliver more than expected.
HOW DO OTHER TECH COMPANIES COMPARE?
Here are a few examples of how other tech companies have handled similar issues:
& Yahoo! handed over e-mail files to the Chinese government to aid in the arrest
of two “dissident” journalists who were using their e-mail system to spread
news. The reporters are in a Chinese jail.
& MSN, acting on Chinese government orders, shut down a blog critical of local
politicians. MSN has a clear policy (now) of taking down websites only when
served with a legal order to do so, and of publicly stating why the site was
taken down rather than merely deleting it.
& Cisco has been accused of helping the Chinese government build its censor-
ship-heavy Internet system by providing the hardware to block Internet sites.
& MSN, Yahoo!, Cisco, and Google made a statement asking the U.S. govern-
ment to pressure the Chinese to abandon its efforts to censor expression on the
Internet.
438
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

& Skype simi larly agreed to fil ter phrases such as “Falun Gong ” and “Da lai
Lama.”
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
In January 2010 , G oogle t hreatened to end its bu sin ess in China. T his was a po ten tially
expens ive dec ision to pull out of th e world’ s largest an d most rapidly growing Internet
marketp lace. Althoug h G oogle has lost market share and remains a distant second to
Baidu.c om (China’ s own In ternet search s erv ice , wh ich is n ow estimated to have ab out
70 percent market share), estimates at the time said that a decision to leave China would
meanpassingupbetween$250millionand$600millioninrevenuein2010.That’sasmall
chunk of the firm’s $22 billion in total revenue. But Internet users in China were projected
to grow rapidly and actually numbered over 500 million in early 2013 (and growing
rapidly). The company would thus be deciding to forgo an enormous future market.
Google’s decision was precipitated by the actions of sophisticated hackers,
originating in China, when they broke into the e-mail accounts of Chinese human
rights activists. At least 20 large companies in multiple sectors were affected. Google
released a statement that linked the cyberattacks with government censorship, saying,
“These attacks and the surveillance they have uncovered—combined with attempts of
the past year to limit free speech on the Web—have led us to conclude that we should
review the feasibility of our business operations in China.”
The topic immediately increased traffic on Twitter. China began blocking Twitter
in June 2009 along with Flickr (the photo editing site) and Microsoft’s Bing (Internet
search).101
Google said it would try to work with the Chinese government in arranging to
conduct censorship-free searches, but that it was no longer willing to continue censoring
results on Google.cn. If an agreement could not be reached, it would end Google.cn.
Given the financial loss to shareholders, some wondered whether the executives
had the right to make this decision. Sergey Brin and Larry Page, Google’s founders,
have that right because Google has two classes of stock—and Page and Brin, who hold
58 percent of the stock, have veto power over everyone, including the company’s CEO.
A National Public Radio report suggested that for Brin, misgivings about the
company’s original 2006 decision trace back to his family history. He was born in
Russia, under Communist rule, and has strong negative reactions to governments with
oppressive policies.102
In an interview with NPR on January 14, 2010, the firm’s chief legal officer, David
Drummond, defended Google’s initial decision to accept some censorship. He said the
companyfeltaresponsibilitytoservetheChinesemarketandfeltthatitcouldbeaforcefor
opening up that market. He noted that the company has been “a thorn in the government’s
side” since entering the market and has “pushed back at every opportunity.”
Experts suggested that the company’s response was a way of saying, “enough is
enough.” The company decided it could no longer protect the security of its users in
China. The firm’s new stance has been praised by human rights activists and Internet
civil liberties specialists, one of whom said, “It helps realign Google’s business with
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
439

Case Questions
1.
Why do you think so many American citizens and lawmakers reacted negatively
to Google’s decision in 2006?
2.
Does the fact that Google is an Internet company change societal expectations of
it regarding information openness?
3.
Was Google facing an ethical dilemma (values in conflict) in 2006?
4.
Analyze the dilemma from consequentialist, deontological, and virtue ethics
perspectives (see Chapter 2). Based on your analysis, what do you think is the
right thing to do? Do you agree with Google’s CEO that the company made “a
principled decision”? Why or why not?
5.
Google’s motto is “Don’t Be Evil.” What does that mean? And how does it apply
in this situation? Is the company living up to its motto? Is it a good motto or
would a more positive statement be better?
6.
Consider Google’s other values related to democracy, not doing evil, focusing on
the user, providing information, and so on. Can Google do business in China and
maintain these ideals? If so, how? If not, why not?
7.
In defense of its 2006 decision, Google said that it complies with the law in
countries where it does business. But the author of a book on IBM and the
Holocaust says that IBM used the same defense in the 1930s when it provided
Adolf Hitler with the tools to keep “the wheels of the Holocaust running on
time.” The author says, “[they] want to be good Americans in the U.S. and good
collaborators in China. They want it both ways but there are certain things we
must not do.”106 Do you agree with the company’s stance? If so, what changed in
2010?
its ethos.”103 Another said, “No company should be forced to operate under govern-
ment threat to its core values or to the rights and safety of its users.”104
China’s response was that firms doing business in China must obey its laws and it
did not back down. In March 2010, while maintaining R&D work in China and a sales
force, Google decided to close Google.cn and direct its Chinese users to its uncensored
Hong Kong website, hoping to make uncensored information more available. When
Hong Kong was set up by international treaty, China agreed to allow it to operate free
from most Chinese laws. But Chinese users quickly reported that searches for
politically sensitive information on the Hong Kong website produced blank pages.
In May 2012, Google began to inform users that certain search terms were being
censored. The government responded by blocking Google for 24 hours and by
increasing the censorship of gmail, Google’s email service. This is in addition to
the normal slowness of Google searches in China. The reason isn’t clear, but in
December 2012, Google stopped informing users about censorship. Every time
Google has tried to fight censorship, the government has responded quickly and
overwhelmingly, and it appears that Google may have given up trying.105
440
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

8.
Google and other companies routinely comply with government rules to censor
other types of material—especially pornography, but also hate speech and other
moral matters such as sexual images in Islamic countries. Are some forms of
censorship acceptable? If so, where and how would you draw the line?
9.
Tom Donaldson rejects ethical relativism (“when in Rome”) and ethical
absolutism (insisting on exactly the same standards everywhere for every
situation). Instead, he recommends that companies operating overseas adopt
an ethical threshold based upon core values such as the Golden Rule and respect
for human rights. Those must then be translated into specific guidelines. Do you
think Google’s 2006 operating standards were consistent or inconsistent with
Donaldson’s recommendations? If you were going to recommend a set of
standards for Google, what would they say and why?
10.
Every transcultural set of ethics standards for global business practice includes
the principle of human rights. For example, the UN Global Compact says that
companies should protect internationally proclaimed human rights and not be
complicit in human rights abuses. The Caux Roundtable Principles state that
businesses should contribute to human rights in the countries where they operate.
Is Google’s behavior consistent with these expectations? Do you agree that the
company “negotiated away users’ human rights” in 2006?
11.
What about the company’s decision to pull out of China in 2010? Do you agree
with it? How might it affect other companies doing business in China? Does it
change how you think about the company’s original decision?
NOTES
1.
P. Bhaskar-Shrinivas, D. Harrison, M. A. Shaffer, and D. M. Luk, “Input-Based and Time-Based
Models of International Adjustment: Meta-analytic Evidence and Theoretical Extensions,” Academy
of Management Journal 48 (2005): 257.
2.
Ibid.
3.
K. J. Templer, C. Tay, and N. A. Chandrasekar, “Motivational Cultural Intelligence, Realistic Job
Preview, Realistic Living Conditions Preview, and Cross-Cultural Adjustment,” Group and Organi-
zation Management 31 (2006): 154–73.
4.
J. S. Black and M. Mendenhall, “Cross-Cultural Training Effectiveness: A Review and a Theoretical
Framework for Future Research,” Academy of Management Review 15, no. 1 (1990): 113–36.
5.
M. A. Shaffer and D. Harrison, “Expatriates’ Psychological Withdrawal from International Assign-
ments: Work, Nonwork, and Family Influences,” Personnel Psychology 51 (1998): 87–118.
6.
M. A. Shaffer, D. A. Harrison, K. M. Gilley, and D. M. Luk, “Struggling for Balance and Turbulence
on International Assignments: Work-Family Conflict, Support, and Commitment,” Journal of
Management 27, no. 1 (2001): 99–121.
7.
P. C. Earley, and S. Ang, Cultural Intelligence: Individual Interactions across Cultures (Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2003).
8.
P. C. Earley and E. Mosakowski, “Toward Cultural Intelligence: Turning Cultural Differences into a
Workplace Advantage,” Academy of Management Executive 18 (2004): 151–57.
9.
K. J. Templer, C. Tay, and N. A. Chandrasekar, “Motivational Cultural Intelligence, Realistic Job
Preview, Realistic Living Conditions Preview, and Cross-Cultural Adjustment,” Group and Organi-
zation Management 31 (2006): 154–73.
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
441

10. 
N. Adler, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior (Boston: PWS Kent, 1992).
11. 
P. Simon, The Tongue-Tied American: Confronting the Foreign Language Crisis (New York:
Continuum Publishing, 1980).
12. 
H. C. Triandis, R. Brislin, and C. H. Hui, “Cross-Cultural Training across the Individualism-
Collectivism Divide,” International Journal of Intercultural Relations 12 (1988): 269–89.
13. 
G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-Related Values (Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage, 1980).
14. 
Ibid.
15. 
N. Adler, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western
College Publishing, 1997); S. J. Carroll and M. J. Gannon, Ethical Dimensions of International
Management (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1997).
16. 
H. C. Triandis, R. Brislin, and C. H. Hui, “Cross-Cultural Training across the Individualism-
Collectivism Divide,” International Journal of Intercultural Relations 12 (1988): 269–89.
17. 
G. Weaver, “Ethics Management in Multinational Firms: Culture-Structure Contingencies,” Paper
presented at the Academy of Management meeting, Atlanta, Georgia, 1993.
18. 
H. C. Triandis, “A Theoretical Framework for the More Efficient Construction of Culture Assim-
ilators,” International Journal of Intercultural Relations 8 (1984): 301–30.
19. 
R. D. Albert, “Conceptual Framework for the Development and Evaluation of Cross-Cultural
Orientation Programs,” International Journal of Intercultural Relations 10 (1986): 197–213.
20. 
Ibid.
21. 
Ibid.
22. 
Ibid.
23. 
S. O. O’Grady and H. W. Lane, “The Psychic Distance Paradox,” Journal of International Business
Studies 27 (1996): 309–33.
24. 
T. Donaldson, “When in Rome, Do . . . What? International Business and Cultural Relativism,” in
The Ethics of Business in a Global Economy, ed. P. M. Minus (Boston: Kluwer, 1992), 67–78.
25. 
R. Cropanzano (ed.), Justice in the Workplace: From Theory to Practice (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum,
2001); K. Leung, “Some Determinants of Reaction to Procedural Models for Conflict Resolution: A
Crossnational Study,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53 (1987): 898–908.
26. 
N. Adler, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western
College Publishing, 1997)
27. 
Ibid., p. 219.
28. 
Ibid.
29. 
Ibid.
30. 
Ibid.
31. 
H. M. Tong and P. Welling, “What American Business Managers Should Know and Do about
International Bribery,” Baylor Business Review, November–December 1981, 8.
32. 
Report to Congress: Impact of Foreign Corrupt Practices Act on U.S. Business, March 4, 1981
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Accounting Office, 1981).
33. 
J. Behrman, Essays on Ethics in Business and the Professions (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1988); R. Grosse and D. Kujawa, International Business (Boston: Irwin, 1992); A. W. Singer, “Ethics:
Are Standards Lower Overseas?” Across the Board, September 1991, 31–34 and Criminal Division of
the U.S. Department of Justice and the Enforcement Division of the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission. 2012. FCPA A Resource Guide to the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
www.justice.gov/criminal/fraud/fcpa and www.sec.gov/spotlight/fcpa.shtml.
34.
J. Nelson, “29 Countries Commit to Pact against Bribery,” Los Angeles Times, November 21, 1997, 1.
35.
A. Carroll, Business and Society: Ethics and Stakeholder Management (Cincinnati, OH: South-
Western Publishing, 1989).
36. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/18/business/wal-mart-concedes-bribery-case-may-widen.html?
pagewanted¼all
37. 
A. Martin, “Wal-Mart Vows to Fix Its Controls,” April 24, 2012, at http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/
25/business/wal-mart-says-it-is-tightening-internal-controls.html
442
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

38. 
C. Bowe, S. Davoudi, and S. Kirchgaesner, “J&J Acts to Push Its Reputation Back into Joint,”
Financial Times, February 15, 2007, 22.
39. 
J. A. Fadiman, “A Traveler’s Guide to Gifts and Bribes,” Harvard Business Review, July–August
1986, 122–34.
40. 
G. Koretz, “Bribes Can Cost the U.S. an Edge,” Businessweek, April 15, 1996, 30.
41. 
Ibid.
42. 
M. Weinstein, R. Meyer, J. Clark, “The UK Bribery Act vs. the U.S. FCPA,” April 22, 2011, at http://
anticorruption.ethisphere.com/the-uk-bribery-act-vs-the-u-s-fcpa/
43. 
S. Schubert and T. C. Miller, “At Siemens, Bribery Was Just a Line Item,” New York Times, December
21, 2008, www.nytimes.com.
44.
N. Clark, “In Europe, Sharper Scrutiny of Ethical Standards,” New York Times, May 7, 2008, C8.
45.
R. Berenbeim, Company Programs for Resisting Corrupt Practices: A Global Study, Research Report
1279-00-RR (New York: The Conference Board, 2000).
46.
J. G. Kaikat, G. M. Sullivan, J. M. Virgo, and K. S. Virgo, “The Price of International Business
Morality: Twenty Years under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act,” Journal of Business Ethics 26
(2000): 213–22.
47.
K. Schoenberger, “Hong Kong’s Secret Weapon,” Fortune, November 25, 1997, 141–42.
48.
“The High Cost of International Bribery,” Business Finance, January 7–8, 2007.
49.
Transparency International, “Corruption Perception Index,” Press Release, Berlin, July 31, 1997.
50.
Ibid.
51.
N. Onishi, “Making Honesty a Customer Policy in Indonesia Cafes,” New York Times, June 16, 2009,
A6.
52.
J. A. Barach, “The Ethics of Hardball,” California Management Review 27 (1985): 2.
53.
K. Leung and K. Tong, “Justice across Cultures: AThree-Stage Model for Intercultural Negotiation,”
in The Handbook of Negotiation and Culture (Chap. 15), eds. M. J. Gelfand and J. M. Brett (Stanford,
CA: Stanford Business Books, 2004).
54.
D. Vogel, “The Globalization of Business Ethics: Why America Remains Distinctive,” California
Management Review (Fall 1992): 30–48.
55.
J. Mahoney, “An International Look at Business Ethics: Britain,” Journal of Business Ethics 9 (1990):
545–50.
56.
L. Nash, “The New Realities of International Business Ethics,” in The Accountable Corporation, eds.
M. J. Epstein and K. O. Hanson (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2006).
57.
M. Gunther, “Cops of the Global Village,” Fortune, June 27, 2005, 158–66.
58.
T. Donaldson, “When in Rome, Do . . . What? International Business and Cultural Relativism,” in
The Ethics of Business in a Global Economy, ed. P. M. Minus (Boston: Kluwer, 1992), 67–78.
59.
T. Donaldson, “Values in Tension: Ethics Away from Home,” Harvard Business Review (September–
October 1996): 48–62.
60.
Ibid.
61.
Ibid.
62.
R. Haas, “Ethics in the Trenches,” Across the Board, May 1994, 12–13.
63.
T. Donaldson, “Values in Tension: Ethics Away from Home,” Harvard Business Review (September–
October 1996): 48–62.
64.
L. T. Martens and A. Kelleher, “A Global Perspective on Whistleblowing,” International Business
Ethics Review 7, no. 2 (2004); L. P. Hartman, D. R. Elm, T. J. Radin, and K. R. Pope, “Translating
Corporate Culture around the World: A Cross-Cultural Analysis of Whistleblowing as an Example of
How to Say and Do the Right Thing,” Politeiia 25, no. 93 (2009): 255–72.
65.
K. D. Martin, J. B. Cullen, J. L. Johnson, and K. P. Parboteeah, “Deciding to Bribe: A Cross-Level
Analysis of Firm and Home Country Influences on Bribery Activity,” Academy of Management
Journal 50 (2007): 1401–22.
66.
T. Dunfee and R. C. Holland, “Viable Ethical Standards for Global Corporations: A Glimpse of What
Might Emerge,” Unpublished paper (Philadelphia: Wharton School, 1993).
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
443

67. 
A. Carroll, Business and Society: Ethics and Stakeholder Management (Cincinnati, OH: South-
Western Publishing, 1989).
68. 
B. Hindo, “Monsanto: Winning the Ground War,” Businessweek, December 17, 2007, 35–41.
69. 
M. Skapinker, “How Monsanto Got Bruised in a Food Fight,” Financial Times, March 8, 2002, 13.
70. 
R. Walker, “Brewed Awakening? Coffee Beans, Globalization and the Branding of Ethics,” New York
Times Magazine, June 6, 2004, 38.
71. 
D. Neef, The Supply Chain Imperative: How to Ensure Ethical Behavior in Your Global Suppliers
(New York: AMACOM, 2004), http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/globalcitizenship/environment/pdf/sup-
code.pdf
72. 
A. D’Ionnocenzio, “Wal-Mart warns suppliers on measures,” Centre Daily Times, January 23, 2013,
B9.
73. 
M. Gunther, “Cops of the Global Village,” Fortune, June 27, 2005, 158–66.
74. 
D. Neef, The Supply Chain Imperative: How to Ensure Ethical Behavior in Your Global Suppliers
(New York: AMACOM, 2004), http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/globalcitizenship/environment/pdf/sup-
code.pdf
75. 
HP Electronic Industry Code of Conduct, Version 4.01, June 12, 2012, at http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/
globalcitizenship/environment/pdf/supcode.pdf
76. 
A. Carroll, Business and Society: Ethics and Stakeholder Management (Cincinnati, OH: South-
Western Publishing, 1989).
77. 
C. M. Solomon, “Put Your Ethics to a Global Test,” Personnel Journal, January 1996, 66–74.
78. 
P. Magnusson, “Making a Federal Case Out of Overseas Abuses,” Businessweek, November 25, 2002,
78.
79. 
J. E. Post, “Assessing the Nestle Boycott: Corporate Accountability and Human Rights,” California
Management Review (Winter 1985): 115–16.
80. 
E. Levenson, “Citizen Nike,” Fortune, November 24, 2008, 165–70.
81. 
L. Hartman, “Innovative Solutions to the Global Labor Challenge,” Presentation at the Ethics Officers
Association meeting, Boston, October 2002, and personal communication.
82. 
M. Gunther, “Green Gold?” Fortune, September 15, 2008, 106–112.
83. 
J. Quittner, “The China Code,” Businessweek SmallBiz, August–September 2007, 40–46.
84. 
S. Prasso, “Saving the World One Cup of Yogurt at a Time,” Fortune, February 19, 2007, 97–101; C.
Seelos and J. Mair, “Social Entrepreneurship: Creating New Business Models to Serve the Poor,”
Business Horizons, May–June 2005, 241–46.
85. 
W. C. Frederick, “The Moral Authority of Transnational Corporate Codes,” Journal of Business
Ethics 10 (1991): 165–77.
86. 
Ibid.
87. 
Ibid., p. 168.
88. 
“Report by the Committee on International Investment and Multinational Enterprise: Implementation
of the Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
Transactions and the 1997 Recommendation” (Paris: OECD, 2002).
89. 
A. B. Baker, “Are Standards Becoming Standard Operating Procedures?” International Business
Ethics Review 8, no. 1 (2005): 1, 3–7.
90. 
F. Coleman, “World Leaders Try to Ban Business Bribery,” USA Today, November 24, 1997, 23B.
91. 
K. A. Getz, “International Instruments on Bribery and Corruption,” Unpublished paper presented at
the Conference on Global Codes of Conduct: An Idea Whose Time Has Come, South Bend, Indiana,
University of Notre Dame, 1997.
92. 
“UN Global Compact Participants,” United Nations Global Compact website: http://www.unglo-
balcompact.org/ParticipantsAndStakeholders/index.html
93.
L. Paine, R. Deshpande, J. Margolis, and K. E. Bettcher, “Up to Code: Does Your Company’s Conduct
Meet World-Class Standards?” Harvard Business Review (December 2005): 1–12.
94.
C. Chandler, “Inside the Great Firewall of China,” Fortune, March 20, 2006, 149–58.
95.
H. Bray, “Google China Censorship Fuels Calls for U.S. Boycott,” Knight Ridder Tribune Business
News, January 28, 2006, 1.
444
SECTION IV
ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

96. 
“Internet Giants Try to Find a Way to Live and Grow in China,” South China Morning Post, February
7, 2006.
97. 
V. Kopytoff, “Google Defends Its China Policy: Decision to Comply with Government Censorship
Was ‘the Right One’ says CEO,” San Francisco Chronicle, April 13, 2006, C1.
98. 
J. Yardley, “Google Chief Rejects Putting Pressure on China,” New York Times, April 13, 2006.
99. 
K. Chien, “Update 2: Google Sees Substantial Revenue Growth in China,” New York Times, April 12,
2006.
100. 
H. W. French, “Google’s China Problem,” New York Times Upfront, April 3, 2006, 10–11.
101. 
B. Acohido and J. Swartz, “Censorship May Spur Google to Exit China,” USA Today, January 13,
2010, B1.
102. 
“Google’s Decision on China Traces Back to Founders,” NPR.org (January 14, 2010), www.npr.org.
103. 
A. Jacobs, and M. Helft, “Google May End China Operation over Censorship,” New York Times,
January 13, 2010, 1, 3.
104. 
B. Acohido and J. Swartz, “Censorship May Spur Google to Exit China,” USA Today, January 13,
2010, B1.
105. 
“Google in China. Mr. Kim, tear down that wall; Mr Xi, carry on,” The Economist. January 11, 2013,
at http://www.economist.com/blogs/analects/2013/01/google-china
106.
Black. E. 2001 IBM and the Holocaust. Crown.
CHAPTER 11
MANAGING FOR ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
445


INDEX
Abbott Laboratories, 198, 370
ABC Insurance Company, 124
Abelson, R., 397n45
Abrahams, David, 353
Abu Ghraib prison scandal, 270
Ackerman, J. M., 107n34
Acohido, B., 445nn101, 104
Action, ethical, 84, 96–104
Pinto Fires case, 96–100
Adams, Scott, 235
Adelphia Communications, 28, 91,
207, 226, 351
Adidas group, 424
Adler, N., 442nn10, 15, 26
Adults’ ethics, 16–19
Advantageous comparison, 85
Advertising, 367–372
1967 Age Discrimination in
Employment Act, 117
Agle, B., 204n54
A.H. Robbins company, 226–228
AIDS epidemic, 54, 175, 305, 328–329
AIG Financial Products (AIGFP), 384
Akers, J. F., 25, 36n40
Albert, R. D., 442n19
Alcoa, 160–161
Alcohol abuse, 305
Alderson, Jim, 142–143
Alignment of ethical culture
systems, 154–156
All the President’s Men, 41
Allison, John, 321
Altruism, 22
Ambrose, M. L., 107nn25, 30
American Cast Iron Pipe Company
(ACIPCO), 376
American Conference of Governmen-
tal Industrial Hygienists, 374
American Eagle, 424
American Express, 172–174
American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants (AICPA), 49–51,
271
American International Group
(AIG), 383–385
American Precision Components
Inc., 208
American Psychological Association
(APA), 47
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
of 1990, 117
Amgen, biotech company, 370
Andersen, Arthur, 15, 91, 129,
186–187
Andersen, Ray, 332
Anderson, Gavin, 340
Anderson, Jenny, 147n8
Anderson, R. C., 348n41
Andreiuolo, P. A., 106n2
Andres, K. R., 69nn17, 19
Ang, S., 441n7
Angwin, J., 399n120
Annan, Kofi, 428
Anti-Bribery Convention (OECD), 427
Anti-Terrorism, Crime, and Security
Act, 410
Apple Computer, 151, 320–321, 333,
352
iphone, 387
Arthur Andersen LLP, 28, 91, 129,
186–187, 208, 253, 319, 351,
354–356
Aspen Institute study, 11
2008 Aspen Institute study, 11
Assigned roles, 268–272
Astra Zeneca, 369–370
Attanuci, J., 107n22
Attitude of students, 10–11
Audience, analyzing, 217
good soldiers, 217
grenades, 217–218
loose cannons, 217
Audit of ethical culture, 190
questions for formal systems, 192
questions for informal systems, 193
Auditing
formal system, 192
informal systems, 192
Augustine, Norman, 235, 334
Aupperle, K. E., 349n74
Austin, N. K., 249n12
Authority, 174
Authority, legitimate, 174, 275
Auto Center scandal, 281–284
Automatic ethical decision
making, 92–93
Autonomous decision making, 82
Autonomous principled thinking and
action, 81–83
Awareness, ethical, psychological
approach to, 70–74
euphemistic language use, 73
language use, 72
peers guidance in, 72
Bad apple theory, 14–15
Bad publicity, 26–27, 188, 306
Baker, A. B., 444n89
Bakker, Jim, 162
Ball, G. A., 286n22
Ball, G., 286n21, 315n7
Bandura, A., 108n38, 285n14
Bank of America, 9, 12, 29
Bank of England, 9
Banks, C., 286n28
Barach, J. A., 443n52
Barbaro, M., 347n26
Barboza, D., 347n9
Bardes, M., 203n40
Barnett, T., 106n13
Barrett, P.M., 348n35
Barrett, R. A., 202nn1, 8, 205nn91, 97,
206n99, 285n2
Barrionuevo, A., 396n16
Barry, J., 286n30
Barsky, A., 285nn10, 12
Barstow, D., 398nn83–84
Bass, K., 106n13
Bate, R., 398n72
Bateman, T. S., 35n16
Batista, J., 206n104
Baucus, D., 348n57
Baucus, M. S., 348n57
Baxter Healthcare, 152
Bay of Pigs fiasco, 276
Bazelon, E., 68n6
Bazerman, B., 69n21
Bazerman, M., 108nn41, 44, 47, 50
Bazerman, M. H., 108nn40, 43
Beales, R., 399n109
Bear Stearns, 7
Bebeau, M., 69n16
Becke, H., 68n3
Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation, 178
Beedles, W. L., 348n56
Behavior, ethical, 251–252
managers rewarding, 262
practical advice for managers, 252
psychological approach to, 70–74
Behavioral consistency, 405
assumption of, 405
economics experiment, 22
Behrman, J., 442n33
Bell, Alexander Graham, 194
Belson, K., 349n67
Benevolence climate, 184–185
Benioff, M., 399n126
Benjamin, J. D., 349n75
Ben & Jerry’s, 325
Berenbeim, R., 443n45
Berenson, A., 397n67
Berkeley Business school, 329
Berkowitz, B., 399n112
Berkshire Hathaway, 25, 138
Berney, K., 205n82
447

Bernstein, Carl, 41
Best Buy, 221
Best Practices Forum, 26
Bettcher, K. E., 444n93
Beyer, J. M., 205n75
Beyond Petroleum campaign, 163
Bhaskar-Shrinivas, P., 441n1
Bhopal disaster, 339
Big Company, 127, 216, 390–391
Big Pharma, 392
Big Oil Ltd, 314
Bing, Microsoft’s, 439
Bird, F. B., 205nn81, 83
Black, E., 445n106
Black, J. S., 441n4
Blakeslee, S., 35n30
BMW, 365
Boatright, J. R., 395n10
Bonamici, K., 69n26
Booker, K., 398n102
Booklets, 222
Borden, M., 348n31
Borrowing cost reduction, 4
Borrus, A., 349n65
Boston’s Bain & Company, 328
Bowe, C., 443n38
Bower, B., 108n55
Bowers, W. J., 204n49
Bowman, F. D., 106n1
Brady, F. N, 286n32
Bramati, I. E., 106n2
Braungart, Michael, 332
Bray, H., 444n95
Bribes
Bribe Payers Index (BPI), 412
dealing with, 408–413
overt bribes, 123
subtle bribes, 123–124
BRIC nations (Brazil, Russia, India,
China), 10
Brislin, R., 442nn12, 16
Brochures, as communication
channels, 221
Brockner, J., 315n9
Brooker, K., 35n18, 203nn16, 41, 37
Brown, G., 106n13
Brown, M., 203nn22, 24
Browne, John, 162
Browning, L., 350n91
Bruch, H., 347n24
Buck stops with managers, 307–309
continually communicating
standards, 308–309
standards, 307–308
Buckingham, M., 315n1
Buffett, Warren, 25, 36n41
Built to Last: Successful Habits of
Visionary Companies, 167
Burden of proof, 178
Bureaucracy, 174
Burger, J. M., 286n39
Burger, Jerry, 273
Burke, James, 160, 240
Burns, G., 348n55
Bush, George W., 4
Business ethics management, 2–36.
See also Ethics
future, 2–36. See also Cynicism
MBA oath, 13
Business Ethics Network of Africa
(BEN-Africa), 414
Business practices officers
(BPOs), 244
Butterfield, K., 106n3, 205n80,
348n48
Byham, W. C., 204n42
Byrne, J. A., 36n48, 148n15, 203n27,
205n95, 249n4, 347nn21, 23,
398n89
Byrne, John, 161
CalPERS, 335
Campus recruiting, 221–222
Caremark decision, 210
Carnegie, Andrew, 327
Carney, D., 148nn27, 32
Carney, J., 396n15
Carroll, A. B., 347n18, 349n74,
442n35, 444nn67, 76
‘Carrot and stick’ approach, 208
Cascading, 233
Cases, 198–200, 345–346
advertising, 391–393
Bad to the Bone, 200–202
clarifying your values, 62
community, 394
conflict of interest, 146, 390–391
culture change at Texaco, 196–198
customer confidence issue, 146–147
employment basics, 314
The Gift, 432
Google goes to China, 436–441
managing a diverse workforce, 314
managing up and across, 314–315
Merck and river blindness, 345
Merck’s ethical quandary, 345–346
people issue, 146
Pinto Fires case, 63–67, 96–100
product safety, 391–393
river blindness, 345
Sears, Roebuck, and Co.: The Auto
Center Scandal, 281–284
selling medical ultrasound technol-
ogy in Asia, 432–435
shareholders, 393–394
unethical culture in need of change,
TAP pharmaceuticals, 198–199
use of corporate resources issue, 147
voicing your values, 145–146
what’s wrong with this
picture?, 246–247
Casino industry, 372
Caterpillar, 333
Caux round table principles for
business, 428–430
general principles, 429, 441
preamble, 440
stakeholder principles, 442–444
communities, 385
competitors, 444
customers, 442
employees, 442–443
owners/investors, 443
suppliers, 443
Caveat emptor notion, 413
Celebrity endorsements, 228–229
Celgene, 55
CEO ethics, 25
Challenger space shuttle, 89–90,
178–179, 275
Champy, J., 250n25
Chandler, C., 347n25, 444n94
Chandrasekar, N. A., 441nn3, 9
Channon, J., 36n32, 205n76
Character, 47, 56–57
Charles Schwab & Co., 357
Charan, R., 398n95
Cheating
perception of peers and, 170
pervasiveness of, 11
Cheevers, Owen, 265
Chemical dependencies, 305
Chemical Manufacturers
Association, 339
Cherkasky, Michael, 359
Chevron, 320
Chien, K., 445n99
Child labor, 406, 415, 420–421, 423,
425
Child, J., 36n44
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 331
Choi, J., 349n80
Chrysler, M., 397n51
Chu, J., 348n31
Cisco Systems, 330, 438
Citicorp, 8, 151–152, 164, 235
Citigroup, 7–9, 22, 152, 163–165,
320, 336, 351–352, 356, 361,
382–383
Citizenship principle, 430
Citrin, J. M., 160, 203n23
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 116–117, 120
Clare, David, 241
Clark, Dick, 229
Clark, J., 443n42
Clark, N., 443n44
Clinical trials, 200–201
Clinton, W. J., 106n6
Club Fed, 336
Cochran, P. L., 204nn46, 52, 249nn1, 9
Codes of conduct, 20, 28, 108n46, 156,
168–170, 227–229, 410–411,
429
in communicating ethics, 229–235
Codes of ethics, 194
Codes, 168–170
Cognitive barriers, 83–91, 367
consequences and, 88–89
fact gathering and, 87–88
gut reactions and, 92–93
integrity and, 63, 72, 90–92
Cognitive moral development, 76–83
autonomous principled thinking and
action, 81
Kohlberg’s theory, 76–77
conventional (level II), 78–79
postconventional or principled, 78
preconventional (level I), 77
women and men difference,
question of, 80
looking up around, 81
moral reasoning, principled levels
of, 82
Cohen, J. D., 108n59
Coleman, A., 285n12
Coleman, F., 444n90
Coleman, Glen, 223
448
INDEX

Coleman (camping equipment), 378
Collaterized debt obligations
(CDOs), 384
Collective mental programming, 402
Collectivism, 403–404
Collins, James, 36n37, 167
Colvin, G., 34n1, 204n44, 348n53
Communicating ethics, 215–238.
See also Multiple communica-
tion channels
audience,
analyzing, 217
basic principles, 215–218
codes of conduct, 227–229
current status,
evaluating, 218–220
communication channels
existence, 219–220
ethical dilemmas of employ-
ees, 218–219
policies communication, 219
ethics communication, interactive
approaches to, 222–224
formal and informal communica-
tions, aligning, 215
formal ethics communication
channels, 220–222
formal systems to resolve questions
and report ethical con-
cerns, 235–238
informal systems to resolve
questions and report ethical
concerns, 235–238
mission or values statements,
225–226
organizational policy, 226–227
prioritize policy, 227
relevant rules communication to
people who need them, 227
reward system to reinforce ethics
message, 238–239
Communicating senior management
commitment to ethics, 229–235
ethics training programs, 231–232
local management in training,
233–234
training existing employees,
232–233
training new recruits, 232
Community, 394
ethics and, 385–388
Exxon, 385–388
Community ethics, 385–387
Compliance approaches, 241–242
Compliance officers, 211–212
Compliance programs, 156, 207–208,
242
Computer Associates (CA), 188
Conduct, ethical, 18, 251–287.
See also Managing for
ethical conduct
Confidentiality, 127–128
Confirmation traps, 87–88
Conflicting roles, 271
Conflicts of interest, 122–126,
354–367
costs, 125–126
description, 122–124
Enron, 358, 360
as an ethical problem, 125
fiduciary responsibilities, 129–130
friendship, 123
influence, 124
Johnson & Johnson, 362–364
kickbacks, 123
Marsh & McLennan (MMC),
358–360
overt bribes, 123
pharmaceuticals, 367–372
privileged information, 124
subtle bribes, 123–124
Toyota, 364–367
ConocoPhillips, 333
Consequences, 88–89
consequences over time, 90
identifying, 54–55
long-term versus short-term
consequences, 55
symbolic consequences, 55
reduced number of, 88
as risk, 89–90
for the self versus for others, 88
Consequentialist theories, 40
challenges in, 41–42
focus on duties, obligations, and
principles, 42–46. See also
Deontological theories
and principles approach, 45
Consumer ethics, 353–372. See also
‘Due care’ theory
advertising, 367–372
conflicts of interest, 354–362
product safety, 362–367
Consumer Financial Protection Agency
(CFPA), 341
Consumer Protection Act, 338
Consumers
ethics and, 353–372
conflicts of interest, 354–355
Enron, 355–358
Johnson & Johnson, 362–364
Marsh & McLennan
(MMC), 358–362
Pharmaceuticals, 367–372
Toyota, 364–367
Continuous evaluation
importance, 293
Control
of behavior, 18–19
illusion of, 89
Conway, E., 395n1
Cookie-cutter approach to
ethics, 189
Cooking the books, 336
Cooper, Cynthia, 144
Corning, Dow, 155
Corporate Culture and Performance,
229, 380
Corporate ethics committee, 214–215
Corporate ethics office, 211
Corporate guidelines development,
414–418
Corporate resources use, 131–136
corporate reputation, 131
costs, 136
as an ethical problem, 136
financial resources, 134
providing honest information, 135
Corporate social responsibility
(CSR), 26–27, 318–350
environmental sustainability,
330–334
ethical reason for, 321
goodness, question of, 334–344
benefit of a good reputation,
334–335
cost of government regulation,
337–339
cost of illegal conduct, 335–337
investors reward, 335
and performance, research
about, 339–342
financial performance, 341
‘virtuous circle’, 341
pragmatic approach to, 320
reason for, 318–325
ethical reason for, 321
pragmatic reason, 319–320
strategic reason for, 322
value chain activities, 323
socially responsible is the right thing
to do, 342–344
stakeholder perspective on the
firm, 319
strategic approach to, 322–323
triple bottom line, 330–334
types of, 325–329
economic responsibilities,
325–326
ethical responsibilities, 326–327
legal responsibilities, 326
philanthropic responsibilities,
327–329
Corporate soul-searching, 171
Corruption Perception Index
(CPI), 411
Cost-benefit analysis, 102–102
Costco, 151
Costs, 299–300, 306
conflicts of interest, 125–126
of customer confidence issues,
130–131
of discrimination, 116–117
of sexual harassment, 120–121
Covey, S. R, 36n43
Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way
We Make Things, 332
Craig, S., 148n14
Credit default swaps (CDSs), 7, 358,
384
Credit opinion, 7
Credo, 241
Criminal liability costs, 27
Cropanzano, R., 108n62, 442n25
Cross-cultural training. See Foreign
business assignments; Global
business environment
Cullen, J. B., 205n86, 443n65
Cultural approach to changing organi-
zational ethics, 189–194
assumptions about people, 191
auditing formal system, 192
cultural systems view, 190–191
diagnosis, ethical culture audit,
191–193
long-term view, 191
Cultural chameleons, 402
INDEX
449

Cultural homogeneity, assumption
of, 405–406
Cultural intelligence (CQ), 401
Cultural persistence, 187
Cultural systems approach, 189–194
Culture, 151
ethical standards in different
cultures, 413–414
influencing behavior, 152–153
internalization, 152–153
socialization, 152–153
negotiating across cultures, 407–408
strong versus weak cultures,
151–152
Cummins Engine Company, 57
Customer confidence issues, 126–131
confidentiality, 127–128
costs, 130–131
description, 126–130
as an ethical problem, 130
personal responsibility, 128
special fiduciary responsibilities,
129–130
telling the truth, 128–129
Cynicism, 9–14
danger of, 10
media fueling, 11–12
moving beyond, 9–14
September 11, 2001, 12
students’ cynical attitude towards
business, 11
D’Ionnocenzio, A., 444n72
Danone, 426
Darley, J. M., 108n59, 287n43
Darlin, D., 106n7
Darnton, J., 106n5
Dash, E., 398n103
Davis, J., 249n16
Davis, K., 347n8
Davis, S. M., 204n66
Davoudi, S., 443n38
Deal, T. E., 202nn2, 4, 6, 205n73
DeAngelis, T., 249n14
Decision making, 20, 38–69, 177–178,
194. See also Individual ethical
decision making
Decision making, psychological
approach, 70–109
ethical awareness and ethical
judgment, 70–74
Pinto Fires case, 96–100
cost-benefit analysis, 102–104
script processing, 101–102
recognizing ethical nature of an
issue, 72
ethical/neutral language use,
72–73
guidance from social
environment, 72
situations leading to harming
others, 73
toward ethical action, 96–104
Decision making, steps to, 51–58
actions, creative thinking about
(step 7), 57
character and integrity, considering
(step 6), 56–57
consequences, identifying (step 4),
54–55
consequences of secrecy, 55
long-term versus short-term
consequences, 55
symbolic consequences, 55
ethical issues, defining (step 2),
52–53
fact gathering (step 1), 51–52
obligations, identifying (step 5),
56–57
self gut, checking (step 8),
57–58
stakeholders, identifying
(step 3), 53–54
‘Deep Throat’, 41
Defense Industry Initiative (DII) on
Business Ethics and Conduct
(DII), 26, 240–241, 228
Deferred prosecution agreement
(DPA), 188
Defining ethics, 18
Dehghanpisheh, B., 286n30
Dehumanization, 86
Deindividuation, 268
Dell, 321
Denning, S., 203n38
Dent, E. B., 347n12
DeOliveira-Souza, R., 106n2
Deontological theories, 42–46
challenge to, 45
focus on duties, obligations, and
principles, 42–46
moral rules, 43–44
veil of ignorance, 44, 53
Der Hovanesian, M., 398n101
Derry, R., 107n23
Descriptive approach, in decision
making, 38
Deshpande, R., 444n93
Detert, J. R., 108nn39, 63
Developing world, marketing infant
formula in, 422–423
Diagnosis of culture, 191–193
DIALOG coordinators, 243
Diffusing responsibility in organiza-
tions, 276–277. See also
Organizations, responsibility
diffused in
Dignity principle, 430
Dilbert cartoons, 235
Dilemmas, ethical, 38–39
layoff, 39
loyalty, 39
truthfulness, 39
Dirty tricks, 407
Disciplinary procedures, 242
Discipline, 295–297
effective ways to discipline
employees, 296
and rewards, 256–266
Disclosure rule, 55–56
Discrimination problem, 114–118
costs, 116–117
definition, 115
as an ethical issue, 116
lawsuits, 117
valuing diversity, 117
Displacement of responsibility, 85
Distorting consequences, 85
Diverse workforce management,
300–306
diversity, 301
family and personal issues,
304–306
harassment, 302–304
Dividing responsibility, diffusing
responsibility by, 277–278
Division of responsibility, 277
Dodd-Frank Financial Regulation
Legislation, 9
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform, 143,
338
Domini Social Index 400, 335
Donaldson, T., 397n43, 398n77,
442n24, 443nn58–59, 63
Dow Corning, 155–156
Dow Jones, 335
Dowie, M., 69n27
Downsizings, 298
Draffan, G., 396nn18, 38
Dreilinger, C., 315nn8, 11
Drug abuse, 305
Druyvesteyn, Kent, 19–20, 179, 183
Dryer, P., 148nn27, 32
‘Due care’ theory, 354, 367,
391, 394
design, 354
labeling, 354
materials, 354
notification, 354
packaging, 354
production, 354
quality control, 354
warnings, 354
Due diligence, 209, 411
Dugan, I. J., 148n16
Duhigg, C., 347n9
Duke Energy, 333
Dukerich, J., 107n29
Duncan, David, 129
Dunfee, T., 443n66
Dunkin, A., 148n22
Dunn, Patricia, 73
DuPont, 331–332
Durham, C. C., 285n11
Dwyer, P., 398n101
Earley, P. C., 441nn7–8
Ecology of Commerce, The, 332
Economic crisis, 126
Economic responsibilities, 325–326
Edelman Trust Barometer survey, 10
Eden, D., 285n13
Edmond, Kathleen, 221, 249n17
Edmondson, A., 108n63
Egoistic climates, 335
Eichenwald, K., 205n90
Eichler, A., 397n65
Eisenberg, N., 108nn56, 61
Elber, L., 35n14
Eli Lilly, 368–370
Elkind, P., 109n67, 286n23, 396nn26,
29, 32, 36
Elliott, V. S., 397n66
Elm, D. R., 107n29
450
INDEX

Emotions in ethical decision
making, 94–96
anger and, 96
philosophical dilemmas, 94
Employee engagement, 288–291
drivers of, 290
information sharing, 290
involvement, 290
line of sight, 290
rewards and recognition, 290
managers and, 288–291
and productivity, 289
Employees and ethics, 372–380
employee safety, 372
Johns Manville company, 373
Lincoln Electric company, 379–380
Mcwane, Inc., 375–377
Scott Paper company, 377–378
Employees awareness about right and
wrong, 15–16
Employees care about ethics, 23–24
Enron, 28, 91, 49, 91, 253, 264, 351,
354–358
Enron’s collapse in 2001, 2–3
Enron: The Smartest Guys in the
Room, 15
Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), 16, 385
Environmental sustainability,
330–334
Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC), 117, 300
Escalation of commitment, 90
Eslinger, P. J., 106n2
Ethical awareness, 70–74
Ethical behavior
reward for, 262
roles supporting, 271–272
Ethical conduct management, 251–287
behavior, 251–252
Dennis Levine example, 255
Kenneth Lay example, 253–256
multiple ethical selves, 252–256
obedience to authority, 272–275
people fulfill assigned roles,
268–272
Abu Ghraib prison scandal, 270
conflicting roles leading to
unethical behavior, 271
roles at work, 270–271
Zimbardo prison experi-
ment, 269–270
responsibility diffused in organiza-
tions, 275–280. See also
individual entry
rewards and discipline, 256–266
Ethical culture, 153–156, 174. See also
Multisystem ethical culture
framework
audit of, 190
becoming, 187–189
change, evaluation, 194
change, intervention, 193–194
developing and changing, 185–189
Ethical decision making, emotions
in, 94–96
Ethical dilemmas, 38–39, 218–219
Ethical imperialism, 415–418
Ethical issues, recognizing and dealing
with, 406–407
Ethical judgment, 70–74, 87–96
cognitive biases getting on the
way, 90–91
solutions, 91
facilitators of and barriers to, 87–96
consequences, 88–89
fact gathering, 87–88
gut, 92–93
unconscious biases, 93
Ethical leadership, 156–165
ethically neutral or ‘silent’
leadership, 163–164
executive leaders create culture,
156–157
hypocritical leadership, 162–163
moral person/moral manager
approach, 160
unethical leadership, 161–162
Ethical problems of managers,
288–315. See also Diverse
workforce management;
Manager as lens
costs, 299–300, 306
managers and employee engage-
ment, 288–291. See also under
Employee engagement
managing the ‘basics’, 291–300
discipline, 295–297
hiring and work assign-
ments, 291–292
performance evaluation, 292–295.
See also individual entry
terminations, 297–299
reasons for, 299, 306
Ethical problems of organizations,
351–399
costs, 388–389
ethics and consumers, 353–372.
See also under Consumers
managing stakeholders, 352–353
reasons for, 388
Ethical reason for CSR, 321
Ethical relativism, 415–418
Ethical responsibilities, 326–327
Ethics, 38–60, 372–380. See also
Communicating ethics;
Employees and ethics; Organi-
zational culture, ethics as;
Trust; Virtue ethics
character and, 17
and compliance officers, 211–213
Ethics and Compliance Officer
Association (ECOA), 211
ethics infrastructure, 213–214
ethics officer background, 213
insiders versus outsiders,
212–213
Society for Corporate Compliance
and Ethics (SCCE), 212
‘controlling’ by organizations, 19
defining, 18
employees care about, 23–24
ethical decision-making process, 20
ethics game, 234
ethics-related training and
guidance, 406
executive leaders care about, 25
importance of being ethical, 3,
21–27
behavioral economics
experiment, 22
motivation to be ethical, 22–23
neuroscience, 23
new imaging technologies, 23
and the individual. See Individual
ethical decision making
industries care about, 26
infrastructure, 213–214
and law, relationship between, 21
and legal compliance manage-
ment, 207–250
structuring, 208–215. See also
under United States
managers care about, 24–25
program
evaluating, 239–241
globalizing, 242–244
surveys, 240–241
society cares about, 26–27
supply chain and, 228–229
teaching, question of, 14–19
adults’ ethics, 16–19
bad apple theory, 14–15
employees awareness about right
and wrong, 15–16
training business students in,
importance, 17
values or compliance
approaches, 241–242
values, importance of, 29–30
Ethics and Business Conduct Steering
Committee, 214
Ethics and Compliance Officer
Association (ECOA), 211
‘Ethics Be A Star’ contest, 233
Ethics game, 234–235
Ethics officers, 211–213
backgrounds of, 213
insiders vs. outsiders, 212–213
Ethics Resource Center’s 2011
National Business Ethics
Survey, 12
Ethics training programs, 231–232
Etzioni, Amitai, 22, 35n28
Euphemistic language, 72–73
European Business Ethics Network
(EBEN), 414
Evaluation
ethical culture changing, 194
ethics program, 239–241
Johnson & Johnson’s Credo
survey, 240
surveys, 240–241
‘Everyone’s doing it’, 266
people follow group norms,
266–268
pressure to go along, 267
unethical behavior,
rationalizing, 271
Excessive philanthropy, 341
Executive leaders
care about ethics, 25
create culture, 156–157
Existing employees, training, 232–233
INDEX
451

Expatriate manager. See Foreign
business assignments
External locus of control, 83–84
Externalities, 337
Exelon, 333
Exxon company, 385–388
Exxon Valdez oil spill, 334,
385–387
Facebook, 352
Fact gathering, 51–52, 87–88
Fadiman, J. A., 443n39
Fair Labor Association (FLA), 424
Fairness principle, 113, 430
human resources issues and, 299
measure, 114
reciprocity, 115
in organizational climate, 184–185
Fairness, 113–114, 184–185
False Claims Act, 142
Family issues, 304–306
Family, managing, 304–306
Farzad, R., 249n18
Father, Son & Co.; My Life at IBM and
Beyond, 264
Federal Acquisition Regulation
(FAR), 228
FedEx, 328
Felt, Mark, 41, 46–47
Fernando, C. S., 349n82
Ferrell, O. C., 395n8
Feuerstein, A., 342–343, 349n85
Fidelity Investments, 126
Fiduciary responsibilities, 125,
129–130
Film festivals, 233
Final Accounting:Ambition, Greed,
and the Fall of Arthur
Andersen, 186
Financial disaster of 2008, 4–9
reasons for, 4–9
borrowing cost reduced, 4
credit-default swaps (CDS), 7
‘liar loans’, 5–6
mortgages, ‘slicing and dicing’
of, 6
protection against financial
calamity, failure in, 7–9
real estate investment becoming a
choice, 5
Financial resources, corporate, 134
Fine determination, under U.S.
Sentencing Guidelines, 209,
247–249
Fineman, H., 349n63
Fionda, A. J., 107n34
Firing, 298
First Alert (smoke alarms), 378
First Boston Corporation, 6
First corporate ethics game, 234
Fisher, S., 205n79
Fishman, C., 348n31
Fiske, S. T., 106n4
Flickr, 439
Flirtations, 121
Flynn, J., 287n58
Focus on consequences. See Conse-
quentialist theories
Focus on integrity. See Virtue ethics
Folger, R. G., 106n10, 108nn54, 57,
62, 64
Fombrun, C., 348n44
Ford Motor Company, 64–67, 100–101
Foreign business assignments. See also
Global business environment
behavioral consistency and, 405
corporate guidelines and, 414–418
cultural homogeneity and, 405–406
difficulties of, 401
ethical standard differences,
413–414
ethics-related training, 406–413
foreign language proficiency, 402
individualism/collectivism,
403–404
learning the culture, 402–404
need for structure, training,
guidance, 401–402
negotiating across cultures, 407–408
payoffs and bribes, 408–413
power distance, 404
recognizing ethical issues, 406–407
selective perception and, 404–405
similarity assumptions and, 406
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
(FCPA), 168, 408–411
Foreign country, doing business
in, 419–426
developing world, 422–423
human rights issues, 423–425
jewelry business, 425–426
legitimacy challenge, 419–421
South Africa, 421–422
Foreign language proficiency, 402
Forgery, 298
Formal and informal communications,
aligning, 215
Formal cultural systems, 165–178.
See also Informal cultural
systems
burden of proof, 178
decision-making processes,
177–178
new organizational structures,
175–176
organizational authority structure,
174–177
authority, 174
responsibility, 174
orientation and training programs,
170–171
over-reliance on quantitative
analysis, 177–178
performance management systems,
171–174
policies and codes, 168–170
selection systems, 165–167
structures to support reporting of
problems, 176–177
values and mission statements,
167–168
Formal ethics communication, multiple
channels for, 220–222. See also
under Communicating ethics
Formal ethics policies, 168
Formal system, auditing, 192
Forsyth, D. R., 106nn11–12
Foxconn, 320
Fraedrich, J., 395n8
Fragmentation of conscience, 278
Frank, H., 107n34
Frederick, W. C., 444n85
Freeman, E., 36n42, 347n2
Freeman, R. E., 395n6
Fremeth, A. R., 348n37
French, H. W., 445n100
Frieden, T., 35n4
Friedman, M., 347n19
Friendship, 123
Fritsche, D. J., 68n3
Frooman, J., 349n84
Fudging numbers, 135
Fujita, M., 35n16
Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), 23, 70
Fusaro, Peter, 389
Game jargon, in business dealings, 253
Gap, 421
Gary, E. R., 395n9
Gates, Bill, 36n41, 327
Gates Foundation, 426
Gee, J. O., 108n64
Gellene, D., 287n55
Geller, A., 398n99
Gellerman, S., 204n68
Gelman, D., 315n15
Gender differences and cognitive moral
development, 80–81
General Accounting Office (GAO),
U.S. government’s, 368
General Dynamics Corporation, 19,
183, 179, 211
General Electric, 25, 157, 331–333,
337
General Motors, 12, 95, 181, 353, 364
Genetically modified organisms
(GMO), 419
Gentile, M. C., 35n25, 147n1
George, B., 147n2, 203n26
George, J., 349n68
Gesalman, A. B., 285n8
Getz, K. A., 444n91
Giacalone, R. A., 106n14
Gibson, D. G., 203nn30, 39, 204nn47,
58, 205nn70, 85
Gift giving, 413
Gilkey, R. 106n1
Gilley, K. M., 441n6
Gilligan, C., 107nn21–22, 80
Gillis, J., 347n26
Gimein, M., 398n97
Gioia, D., 100, 103, 109n71
Giving Voice to Values: How to Speak
Your Mind When You Know
What’s Right, 232
‘Giving Voice to Values’ program,
111–116
Glass-Steagall Act, 8, 165
Glater, J. D., 147n12
GlaxoSmithKline, 143, 339,
369–371
Glazer, M. P., 204n63
Glazer, P. M., 204n63
452
INDEX

Global business environment. See also
Foreign business assignments;
Transcultural corporate ethic,
development
challenge to legitimacy, 419–421
decision to globalize, 400
globalization, 400
human rights example, 423–425
marketing in developing world
example, 422–423
organization in, 418–430
South Africa example, 421–422
transcultural corporate ethics
development, 426–430
Global business ethics, 414–418
corporate guidelines and policies
development for, 414–418
ethical imperialism, 415–418
ethical relativism, 415–418
policies, development, 414–418
Global Compact, 428–429
Global Crossing, 382
Global environment
ethics and social responsibility
management in, 400–445.
See also Individual expatriate
manager
organization in a, 418–431
Global Reporting Initiative, 430
Globalizing an ethics program,
242–244
Ombudsman/DIALOG program,
243–244
Globalizing ethics program,
242–244
Goals, 258–259
goal setting, 257
reward systems and, 417
Gogus, C., 285n12
Goldberg, J., 109n75
Golden Rule, 43, 413
Goldman Sachs, 29, 358
Goldman, B., 108n62
Goldstein, M., 396n27
Goldstone, Steven F., 105
Good soldiers, 217–218
Goodman, E., 285n15
Goodman, Peter, S., 203n36
Google goes to China, 436–437
Google’s privacy policies and
practices, 387–388
Gopal, A., 315n2
Gorenstein, N., 398n88
GovernanceMetrics International,
340
Government regulation, cost of,
337–339
Grameen Bank, 426
Grapevines, 216–217
Graves, S. B., 349n78
Graves, S. J., 349n73
Grease payments, 23
Green Company, 146, 246
Green Lab, 391
Greenbaum, R., 203n40
Greenberg, A. C., 204n65
Greenberg, J., 315n13
Greene, J. D., 108n59
Greening, D. W., 348n46
Greenspan, A., 4, 395n4
Grenades, 217–218
Groeger, L., 398n71
Groups
diffusing responsibility in, 276–277
norms, people following, 266–268
pressure to go along, 267
rationalizing unethical behavior,
266–267
Groupthink, 276–277
Grover, S., 286n33
Guinto, J., 203n17
Gunther, M., 203n20, 347n6, 443n57,
444nn73, 82
Gut, 92–93
Haas, R., 443n62
Hager, B., 36n38
Haidt, J., 108n53
Hakim, D., 396n37
Halper, J., 315n6
Hamilton, V. L., 204n61, 205n84,
286nn36, 38, 41, 287n49
Hammer, M., 250n25
Haney, C., 286n28
Harassment, 118–121, 302–304.
See also Sexual harassment
hostile work environment, 118
Quid pro quo harassment, 118
Harenski, K., 106n1
Harned, P., 148nn28, 30
Harris Interactive company, 28
Harrison, D. A., 106n15, 204n48,
441nn5–6
Hartley, R. F., 399n114
Hartman, L. P., 203n24, 444n81
Hatfield, J. D., 349n74
Haunschild, P. R., 348n45, P., 349n59
Hawken, Paul, 332
Hay, R. D., 395n9
HealthSouth, 135
Hechinger, J., 148n14
Helft, M., 445n103
Help lines, 403, 417
Henle, C. A., 106n14
Henry, D., 349n65
Hensley, S., 398n73
Herman Miller, Inc. (HMI), 175
Heroes, 179–180
Heskett, J. L., 229, 249n19, 380,
398n94
Hess, C., 347n20
Hewlett- Packard (HP), 73, 332, 421
Hey, K., 347n20
Hindo, B., 444n68
Hippocratic Oath for Managers, A,
48–49
accurate and transparent
reporting, 49
acting with integrity in the
enterprise’s interest, 48
adherence to the law, 49
balance multiple stakeholders’
interests, 48
professional development, 49
respectful and unbiased decision
making, 49
responsibility to protect the
profession, 49
service to the public and society, 48
‘Hippocratic Oath for Managers, A’
article, 48. See also under
Virtue ethics
Hiring, 291–292
Hirschfeld, S. J., 147n11
Hoffman W. M., 148n23
Hofstede, G., 442n13
Holland, R. C., 443n66
Home Depot, 320
Homogeneity within a culture,
405–406
Honda, 322
Honesty, importance, 311–312
Hong Kong Ethics Development
Center, 411
Horatio Alger Award, 253
Hosenball, M., 286n30
Hostile work environment, 118
Hotz, R. L., 108n60
Housing investments, 5
Hui, C. H., 442nn12, 16
Human resources issues, 110, 131, 299
Human rights, 400, 415, 423–425, 427,
429, 441
Hurricane Katrina, 323, 338–329
Hypocritical leadership, 162–163
Iacocca, Lee, 257
IBM Corporation, 25, 151, 182, 188,
240, 264–265, 330, 340
Idealism, 75
Illusion of control, 89
Illusion of morality, 90
Illusion of optimism, 89
Illusion of superiority, 90
Immelt, Jeff, 158
Immelt, Jeffrey, 25
Imperialism, ethical, 415–418
Implicit Association Test (IAT), 93
In a Different Voice, 80
In Search of Excellence, 230
Incentives, 257
Inconvenient Truth, An, 334
Independent Commission Against
Corruption (ICAC), 411
Indirect rewards and punishments,
260–262
Individual differences influencing
ethical judgment and
action, 74–86. See also
Cognitive moral development
decision-making style, 75–76
idealism, 75
relativism, 75
ethical judgment and action
relationship, 84
locus of control, 83–84
Machiavellianism, 84–85
moral disengagement, 85–86
universal ethical principles, 75
Individual ethical decision making,
38–60
ethical dilemmas, 38–39
practical preventive medicine,
58–59
INDEX
453

Individual ethical decision making
(Continued)
doing homework, 58
snap decision, 59
prescriptive approaches to, 39–51
focus on consequences (conse-
quentialist theories), 40
steps to, 51–58
character and integrity, consider-
ing (step six), 56–57
consequences, identifying
(step four), 54–55
creative thinking about potential
actions (step seven), 57
ethical issues, defining (step
two), 52–53
fact gathering (step one), 51–52
gut, checking (step eight),
57–58
obligations, identifying (step
five), 56
stakeholders, identifying
(step three), 53–54
veil of ignorance, 44
Individual expatriate manager,
401–418
behavioral consistency, assumption
of, 405
cultural homogeneity, assumption
of, 405–406
culture, learning about, 402–404
individualism/collectivism,
403–404
power distance, 404
foreign business assignments,
difficulties of, 401
foreign language proficiency, 402
power of selective perception,
recognizing, 404–405
similarity, assumption of, 406–413
ethical issues, recognizing and
dealing with, 406–407
ethical standards in different
cultures, 413–414
ethics-related training and
guidance, 406
negotiating across cultures,
407–408
payoffs and bribes, dealing
with, 408–413
structure, training, and guidance,
need for, 401–402
Individual responsibility, 174, 176
Individualism/collectivism, 403–404
Individuals care about ethics, 22–23
Individuals’ common ethical
problems, 110–148
addressing, 110–148
blowing the whistle, 136–144
how to, 140–144
when to, 139–140
conflicts of interest, 122–126.
See also individual entry
corporate resources use, 131–136.
See also individual entry
customer confidence issues,
126–131. See also individual
entry
harassment, sexual and otherwise,
118–121
office romance, 121
people issues, 113–121
discrimination, 114–118
values, identifying and voicing,
111–113
Industries care about ethics, 26
Industries focus on ethics, 26–27
Influence, 124
Informal communications, 178–184,
215
language, 182–184
myths and stories, 181–182
norms, 180–181
rituals, 181
role models and heroes, 179–180
Informal cultural systems, 178–184
heroes, 179–180
heroes and role models, 179–180
language and, 182–184
mentoring, 179
myths, 181–182
norms, 180–181
rituals, 181
role models, 179–180
stories, 181–182
Informal systems, auditing, 192
Information processing, 101
Infrastructure, ethics, 213–214
Ingrassia, P., 397n53
Initial public offerings (IPOs), 163
Insiders versus outsiders, 212–213
‘Instant experience’ system, 222–224
Instructions, people following, 272–275
Milgram experiments, 273–274
Integrity, 56–57, 90–92
‘The Integrity Minute’, 233
Intellectual property, 71
Intentions, 46
Intentions, importance, 46
Inter-American Convention Against
Corruption, 428
Internal locus of control, 83–84
Internalization, 152–153
Internals, 84
Intervention and cultural change,
193–194
Investors, social responsibility
and, 335
Iran-Contra affair, 272
Isidore, C., 397n62
Isikoff, M., 349n63
Jackall, R., 204n59
Jacobs, A., 445n103
Janis, I., 287n44
Jefferson, Thomas, 56, 179
Jewelry business, 425–426
Johns Manville, 177, 373–374
asbestos products manufacturer, 374
renaming as Manville
Corporation, 374
Johnson & Johnson, 27, 160, 167, 226,
240, 340, 362–364, 366, 371,
392, 409
Tylenol poisoning, 362–363
LifeScan division, 364
Johnson, J. L., 443n65
Johnson, R. C., 107n34
Jones, R., 349n79
Jones, T. M., 106n8
JPMorgan Chase, 8–9, 29, 361
Judgment, ethical, 84
barriers to, 87–96
consequences, 88–89
as risk, 89–90
for self versus others, 88–89
facilitators of, 87–96
fact gathering, 87–88
psychological approach to, 70–74
reduced number of
consequences, 88
Jurkiewicz, C. L., 106n14
Kahn, R., 286n31
Kaikat, J. G., 443n46
Kant, Emmanuel, 43
Kanter, R. M., 204n60
Kaplan, J. M., 249n5
Karabell, Z., 348n29
Karpoff, J. M., 349n58
Katz, D., 286n31
Keillor, Garrison, 91
Kelleher, A., 443n64
Kelleher, Herb, 156–157
Kelly, K., 287nn52, 54
Kelly, M., 349n73
Kelman, H. C., 204n61, 205n84,
286nn36, 38, 41, 287n49
Kennedy, A. A., 202nn2, 4, 6,
205n73
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC), 320
Khurana, R., 69nn12–13, 25
Kickbacks, 123
Kidder, Rushworth M., 3, 34n2
Kiel, P., 399n104
Kilham, W., 287n48
Kilmann, R. H., 205n77
Kimberly-Clark Corporation, 377
Kimes, M., 206n109, 398n70
Kinder, Lydenberg, Domini
(KLD), 340
Kirchgaesner, S., 443n38
Kish-Gephart, J., 106n15, 107n37,
108n63, 204n48
Kleiman, C., 36n35
Knight, D., 285n11
Knox, A., 398n87
Kohlberg, L., 53, 107n16
Kohl’s Department Stores, 330
Kopper, Matthew, 356
Kopytoff, V., 445n97
Koretz, G., 443n40
Kotter, J. P., 229, 249n19, 380, 398n94
Kramer, Mark R., 347n15, 348n38
Kratz, E. F., 347n17
Krauss, C., 399n115
Krell, Eric, 148n29
Kroll, Inc., 359
Kuenzi, M., 203n40
Kuttner, R., 349n60
Kyosei concept, 428
Labich, K., 36n39, 206n106, 349n71
Lane, H. W., 442n23
454
INDEX

Language, 182–184, 400
foreign language proficiency, 402
and informal cultural systems,
178–184
decision-making using, 186
Larson, D. E., 69n18
Latane, B., 287n43
Laughlin, L., 399n109
Lavelle, J. J., 108n64
Lavery, John, 178
Law and ethics, relationship
between, 21
Lawsuits, 117–118, 311, 327,
355–356, 393, 422
Lay, Kenneth, 82, 253–256, 264
Layoffs, 12, 93, 127, 298–299, 377,
384
Leadership, 156–165. See also Ethical
leadership
Lederer, R., 285n7
Lee, D. S., 349n58
Legal compliance management,
207–250. See also Communi-
cating ethics
Legal responsibilities, 326
Legal standards, 21
Legislators role in financial calamity, 8
Legitimacy, challenge to, 419–421
Legitimate authority, 174–175, 275
Lehrer, J., 35n31, 108n58
Leo, J., 315n14
Leung, K., 443n53
Levenson, E., 444n80
Lever, J., 147n11
Levi Strauss, 327, 342, 415–416–422
Levine, D. B., 255, 285n9,
286n20
Levitt, A., 395n5, 396n19
Lewicki, R., 147n5
Lewis, M., 347n27
Li, J., 349n80
‘Liar loans’, 5–6, 73
Liberto, J., 395n3
LIBOR, 9
LiCari, Jerome, 178
Lim, P. J., 349n76
Lincoln Electric company, 379–380
Lind, E. A., 147n4
Liptak, A., 399n118
Little Company, 216, 390–391
LMCommit, 238
Local management in training,
233–234
Locke, E. A., 285n11
Lockheed Martin, 212–213, 231
ethics program, 222
Mission Systems and Training
(MST), 213
Lockheed Martin Corporation (global
security), 181, 207, 212–214,
222, 228–229, 231–233, 236,
238, 241, 334, 418
Locus of control, 83–84
Loewenstein, G., 108nn46, 52
Logsdon, J. M., 286n32
Long-term consequences, 55
Long-term view, organizational
culture, 191
Loomis, C., 203nn31–34
Loose cannons, 82, 217
Loyalty, 174
Ludington, John, 155
Luk, D. M., 441nn1, 6
Luthans, F., 206n101
Mac, Freddie, 5
Machiavelli, Niccolo, 84
Machiavellianism, 84–85
Madoff, Bernard L., 8
Mae, Fannie, 5
Magazines, 222
Magnusson, P., 444n78
Mahoney, J., 443n55
Malden Mills, 342–343
Malone, S., 350n89
Management focus on ethics, 18
Managers
care about ethics, 24–25
and employee engagement, 288–291.
See also under Employee
engagement
are role models, 309–310
Manager as lens, 306–310. See also
Ethical problems of managers
buck stops with managers, 307–309
continually communicating
standards, 308–309
managing up and across, 310–312
honesty is rule one, 311–312
standards go both ways,
312
standards, maintaining, 307–308
Managing ethics, 2–36, 207–250
compliance officers, 211–213
ethics officer background, 213
insiders versus outsiders,
212–213
corporate ethics office, 211
directions, 2–36
ethics infrastructure, 213–214
globalizing ethics program,
242–244
making ethics comprehensive and
holistic, 211
structuring, 208–215
compliance program, 209
corporate ethics programs
in U.S., 208
due diligence, 209
U.S. Sentencing Commission
in, 208–210
values or compliance
approaches, 242
Managing for ethical conduct,
251–287
advice for managers, 259–260
discipline, 259–260, 265–266
goals, 259–260
group norms, 267–268
obedience to authority, 275
personal responsibility, 279–280
rewards, 259–260
behavior, 252
Dennis Levine example, 255
discipline, 256–266
‘everyone’s doing it’, 266
goals combined with rewards
encouraging unethical
behavior, 258–259
electronics appliance sales
example, 258–259
indirect rewards, 260–262
instructions, people following,
272–275
Kenneth Lay example, 253–255
managers rewarding ethical
behavior, 262
multiple ethical selves, 252–256
obedience to authority at work, 275
punishments, 260–262
rewards, 256–266
Tailhook example, 260–262
Zimbardo prison experiment,
269–270
Mann, L., 287n48
Manville, Johns, 326
Marcus, A. A., 348n37
Margolis, J. D., 348n28, 349n77,
444n93
Marketing infant formula in developing
world, 422–423
Markopolos, Harry, 8
Marsh & McLennan (MMC), 358–361
Mercer HR Consulting, 360
Putnam Funds, 359–361
Marshall, A., 286n17
Martens, L. T., 443n64
Martin, A., 442n37
Martin, G. S., 349n58
Martin, J., 205n78
Martin, K. D., 205n86, 443n65
Mason, E., 396nn25, 34
Massad, T. G., 399n111
Mayer, C., 398n88
Mayer, D., 147n2, 203n40
MBA oath, 13
McCabe, D. L., 35nn23–24, 204n50,
348n48
McDonough, William, 332
McGeehan, P., 396n22
McGinn, D., 348n32
McGrane, V., 35n6
McGregor, J., 109n65
McLean, A. N., 147n2
McLean, B., 286n23
McNeil, D. G., 347n3
3M Corporation, 30
McPherson v. General Motors, 353
McWane, Inc., 375–377
McWhinney, W., 206n104
Media-fueled cynicism, 12
Media portrayal of business, 11–12
Medtronic, 161, 182
Melton, J., 348n50
Mendenhall, M., 441n4
Mentoring, 179
Mercedes Benz, 365
Mercer HR Consulting, 360
Merck & Co., Inc., 198, 225–226, 242,
339, 345, 370
Merrill Lynch, 7, 22, 117, 336, 357,
382
Messick, D. M., 69n21, 108nn41, 44,
47, 50
INDEX
455

Meyer, R., 443n42
Miceli, M. P., 206n102, 286n34
Microsoft, 352
Midlarski, E., 107n33
Milgram, S., 204n57, 286n37,
287n50
Milgram experiments, 273–275
Miller, Ross, 389
Miller, S. S., 250n27
Miller, T. C., 443n43
Milliken, Michael, 253
Millman, N., 147n10
Mills, Malden, 342–343
Minton, J. W., 147n5
Misalignment of rewards, 173
Mishel, L., 395n2
Misleading claims, 368
Mission or values statements, 225–226
Mitroff, I., 205n77
Mitsubishi Motor’s, 121
Moll, J., 106n2
Monsanto case, 419–420
Montgomery, D. B., 348n47
Moore, J. M., 148n23
Moral Dimension, The, 22
Moral disengagement, 85–86
advantageous comparison, 85
categories, 85
dehumanization, 86
displacement of responsibility, 85
moral justification, 85
mechanisms, 85
Moral justification, 85
Moral muteness, 183
Moral person/moral manager
approach, 160
Moral psychology research, 92
Moral reasoning, principled levels
of, 82. See also Cognitive
moral development
Moral rules, 43–44
‘Moral sentiments’, 3
Morgan Stanley, 9, 124
Morgenson, G., 286n25, 396n21,
399n105
Morris, B., 202n5, 205n71
Mortgages, ‘slicing and dicing’
of, 6
Mosakowski, E., 441n8
Motivations, 46
to be ethical, 22–23
Mourao-Miranda, J., 106n2
Mozer, Paul, 381
MSN tech company, 438
Multiple communication channels,
220–222
for formal ethics communication,
220–222
booklets, 222
brochures, 221
campus recruiting, 221–222
magazines, 222
newsletters, 222
orientation meetings and
materials, 222
social media, 220–221
websites, 220
Multiple ethical selves, 252–256
Multiple stakeholders, 352–353
primary, 353
secondary, 353
Multisystem ethical culture frame-
work, 153–156
alignment of ethical culture
systems, 154–156
Dow Corning, 155–156
formal systems, 153
informal systems, 153
Munich Re, German reinsurance
company, 331
Murphy, C., 69n26, 349n62
Murphy, E., 349n72
Murphy, P., 202n9, 203nn10, 12
Murr, A., 285n3
Murrell, A. J., 349n79
My Lai massacre 1968, 277–278
Myths and stories, 181–182
Nash, L., 69nn17, 19, 443n56
National Association of Securities
Dealers (NASD), 126
National Business Ethics Survey, 12
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA), 65
National Whistleblower’s Center, 144
‘Natural rights’, 43
Nature/Nurture debate, 15
Nazi war crimes, 272
Near, J. P., 206n102, 286n34
Neef, D., 444nn71, 74
Neff, T. J., 160, 203n23
‘Negative rights’, 43
Negotiating across cultures, 407–408
Nel, D., 204n51
Nelson, J., 204n62, 442n34
Nelson, Katherine, 151, 234
Nepotism, 418
Nestle, 422
Neubaum, D. O., 107n30
Neuroscience, 23, 92
Neutral language use, 72–73
Neutral leadership, 163–164
New Balance, 424
New recruits, training, 232
Newsletters, 222
Nichols, J., 285n5
Nichols, M. L., 107n29
Nike, 170, 421, 423–424
Nixon, Richard, 404
Nocera, J., 399n116
Nohria, N., 69nn13, 25
Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), 419
Nonprofit organizations, 132
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), 392
Nord, W. R., 205n98
Norian, 200–201
Norian XR, 201
Norms, informal cultural systems,
180–181
Norris, F., 398nn90–91
NOVA Award for Ethics, 231
Novartis, 330, 367
Nussbaum, B., 28, 36n45, 349n61
Nystrom, L. E., 108n59
O’Brien, K., 399n119
O’Connor, Kevin J., 244
O’Grady, S. O., 442n23
O’Neill, P., 160–161, 203n25
Obedience to authority, 272–275
Milgram experiments, 273–274
at work, 275
Obligations, identifying, 56
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA),
372
Off the record conversations, 133
Office Depot, 320
Office romance, 121
Officer background, in ethics
management, 213
Off-label marketing, 200–201
Ohnsman, A., 397n58
Ombudsman/DIALOG program,
243–244
Ones, D. S., 249n14
Onishi, N., 443n51
Optimism, illusion of, 89
Organization for Economic Coopera-
tion and Development
(OECD), 427
Organization in a global business
environment, 418–431
business in a foreign country,
deciding on, 419–426
challenge to legitimacy,
419–421
help for the developing
world, 426
human rights, 423–425
jewelry business, 425–426
marketing infant formula in
developing world, 422–423
transcultural corporate ethic,
development of, 426–430
Organization of American States
(OAS), 428
Organizational authority structure,
174–177
authority, 174–175
ethical culture, 174–175
legitimate authority, 174
new organizational structures,
175–176
reporting problems, structures to
support, 176–177
responsibility, 174–175
Organizational climates, 184–185
benevolence, 184–185
fairness, 184–185
principles, 184–185
rule-based climate, 185
self-interest, 184–185
Organizational culture, ethics as,
150–206. See also Ethical
leadership; Formal cultural
systems; Informal cultural
systems
organizational climates, 184–185
benevolence, 184–185
fairness, 184–185
principles, 184–185
self-interest, 184–185
456
INDEX

Organizational ethics
as culture, 151–153
management, ethics of, 195
Organizational ethics, cultural
approach to changing, 189–194
assumptions about people, 191
audit of ethical culture, 190
changing evaluation, 194
changing intervention, 193–194
cultural systems view, 190–191
ethical culture audit, 191–193
long-term view, 191
managing, 198
Organizational policy, in communicat-
ing ethics, 226–227
Organizational structure, 175–176
Organizations, ethical problems
in, 14–15, 351–399. See also
Conflicts of interest
bad apples causing, question of,
14–15
consumers and ethics, 353–372.
See also under Consumer ethics
controlling employees, 19
costs, 388–389
managing stakeholders, 352–353
Organizations, responsibility diffused
in, 85, 275–280
by dividing responsibility, 277–278
in groups, 276–277
by psychological distance cre-
ation, 278–279
Orientation programs, 194
meetings and materials, 222
and training programs, 170–171
Original equipment manufacturer
(OEM), 435
Orlitzky, M., 349n75
Otis Elevator Company, 238–240
Ousley, O., 106n1
Overt bribes, 123
Page, K., 349n59
Paine, L., 444n93
Pandit, Vikram, 165
Parboteeah, K. P., 443n65
Parks, S. D., 35n25
Parnell, J. A., 347n12
Patagonia, 325, 421, 424
Paxil, 370–371
Payoffs, dealing with, 408–413
Peach, L., 68n2
Pear, R., 349n69, 397n64
Peck, M. S., 287n45
Peck, Scott, 277–278
Pellegrini, F., 148n24
People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals, 320
People issues, 113–121
discrimination, 114–118
harassment, sexual and otherwise,
118–121. See also Sexual
harassment
Performance evaluation, 292–295
continuous evaluation
importance, 293
informal process of, 293
practical problem with, 293
regular evaluations, 294
terminations for poor
performance, 298
written assessment, 293
Performance management systems,
171–174
designing, 171–174
dishonest or disrespectful
behavior, 173
rewards, 173
that supports ethical conduct,
designing, 171
Personal illnesses, 305
Personal issues, managing, 304–306
Personal responsibility, 128, 279–280
Peters, T. J., 206n103, 230, 250nn24
Petersen, M., 397nn44, 63
Pfizer, 210, 370–371
Pharmaceutical industry, 370–371
Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America
(PhRMA), 339, 371
Pharmaceuticals, 367–371, See also
Johnson & Johnson; Novartis
Eli Lilly, 368
Prilosec, 369
Visudyne, 367–368
Philanthropic responsibilities, 327–329
Philip Morris International (PMI), 420
Pincus-Hartman, L., 203n22
Pinto fires case, 63–67, 96–102
Corporate Milieu, 98–99
cost-benefit analysis, 100–102
personal aspect, 97–98
script processing, 101–102
Torch Passes to You, 99–100
Piper, T. R., 35n25
Pitt, L., 204n51
Plagiarism, 71
Playing field, 253
Plender, J., 399n124
PNM Resources, 333
PPG Industries, 138
Polartec products, 342–344
Policies, communication of, 219
Policy manuals, 58, 168, 226
Pollack, A., 397n69
Ponzi scheme, 8
Portable document format (PDF), 220
Porter, Eduardo, 147n6
Porter, M., 350n92
Porter, Michael E., 347n15, 348n38
Post, J. E., 444n79
Potential actions, thinking creatively
about, 57
Powell, J. M., 250n26
Power distance, 404
‘The Power of Dreams’, 322
Power of selective perception, recog-
nizing, 404–405
Practical preventive medicine, 58–60
learning, 58
snap decision, 59–60
Pragmatic reason for CSR, 319–320
Praise the Lord (PTL) ministry, 162
Prakash, A., 349n70
Prasso, S., 444n84
Pratt & Whitney jet engines, 207
Pregnancy Discrimination Act of
1978, 117
Prejudice, 114, 291
Prentice, R. A., 108n51
Prescription drug risk, 371
Prescriptive approach
in decision making, 38
to ethical decision making, 39–51.
See also under Decision
making
Prevention, 132
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), 126
Prilosec, 369
Primary stakeholders, 353
Prince, Chuck, 164–165
Prince, The, 84
Principle-based decisions, 81
Principles approach and consequences
approach, 45
Principles, climate for, 184–185
Privacy, 127–128
Privileged information, 124
Procter & Gamble, 369
Product safety, 362–367
‘Protect yourself’ approach, 242
Property principle, 430
Propst, L. R., 107n35
Prospero, M. A., 348n31
Prozac Weekly, 368
Psychic distance paradox, 406
Psychological approach to decision
making, 70–109
cost-benefit analysis, 102–104
emotions in, 94–96
ethical awareness, 70–74
ethical behavior, 74–86
ethical judgment, 70–74
individual differences, 74–86.
See also individual entry
integrity, thinking about, 90–92
self gut, 92–93
unconscious biases, 93
Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill
in War and Society, The, 283
Psychological distance, responsibility
diffused by creating, 278–279
Psychological warfare, 407
Punishments, 260–262
administration of, 254
indirect, 260–262
indirect effects of, 263–264
practical advice on, 265–266
Pure Food and Drug Act, 353
Putnam Funds, 359–361
Pygmalion effect, 260, 267
Quantitative analysis, over-reliance
on, 177–178
Quid pro quo harassment, 118
Quittner, J., 444n83
Quorum Health Group, 142
Qwest, 338
Rachels, J., 68nn1, 5
Rainforest Action Network
(RAN), 320–321
Ramus, C. A., 348n47
Rashbaum, W., 396n37
INDEX
457

Rawls, J., 44, 68n4
Real estate investment, and financial
disaster of 2008, 5
Reardon, K., 137, 148n18
Recruiting brochures, 221
Red Co, 147
Reebok Corporation, 424
Reed, John, 164–165
Reed, S., 398n101
Regulatory agencies role in financial
calamity, 8
Regulatory backlash, 337
1973 Rehabilitation Act, 117
Reiss, S. A., 249n2
Relativism, ethical, 75
Relevant moral community, 47
Reliability principle, 430
Ren, L., 285n12
Reporting ethical concern systems,
234
Reputation, corporate, 131–134
Resolution of questions systems,
235–238
Resources, corporate, 131–136
Responsibility, 174–177
diffused in organizations, 275–280.
See also under Organizations
Responsive CSR, 323
Responsiveness principle, 430
Rest, J. R., 16, 35nn21–22, 107n28
Rest, M., 107nn17, 24
Reward system to reinforce ethics
message, 238–239
Full Spectrum Leadership, 238
LMCommit, 238
Model Personal Excellence,
Integrity & Accountability,
238
Rewards and discipline, 256–266.
See also Indirect rewards and
punishments
discipline role, 263–265
goals, rewards, and discipline,
258–260
importance, 256–257
peoples’ efforts, 257
Rhee, M., 348n45
Rice, D., 315nn8, 11
Richards, B., 398n93
Ricklees, R., 205n93
Rigas, John, 226
Rights concept, 43
‘natural rights’, 43
‘negative rights’, 43
Risk, consequences as, 89–90
Risling, G., 397n56
Rituals, in informal cultural
systems, 181
Rivkin, J., 350n92
Road Less Traveled, The, 277
Robertson, D., 106n1
Role models, 179–180
Role-playing, 53
Roles, 268–272
advice for managers, 272
assigned, 268–272
conflicting, 271
practical advice on, 272
role readiness, 270
supporting ethical behavior, 271–272
at work, 270–271
Rommel, S., 106n10, 108nn54, 57
Rosenblatt, J., 399n121
Ross, I., 108n49
Rothracker, R., 148n25
Rotter, J. B., 107n32
Rule-based climate, 185
Ryan, M., 349n86
Ryan, O., 35n26
Sacks, D., 348n31
Safety, employee, 372–376
Sakano, T., 35n16
Salomon Brothers, 138, 381–383
Salvador, R., 203n40
Samuel, A., 148n17
Sandler O’Neill & Partners, 12
Sandroff, R., 36n34
Santoli, M., 397n46
Santoro, M. A., 287nn51, 53, 57
Saporito, B., 399nn106, 110
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), 143, 170,
337–338
Schawble, D., 147n9
Schein, E. H., 202n7, 203nn14, 19
Scherreik, S., 348n49
Schmidt, F., 249n14
Schmidt, M., 148n26, 397n68,
398n75
Schminke, M., 107nn25, 30
Schoenberger, K., 443n47
Schubert, S., 443n43
Schwartz, H., 204n66
Schwartz, N. D., 69n26
Schwartz, S. H., 286n42
Scott Paper company, 377–378
Script processing, 101–102
Sears, Roebuck, and Co., 281–284
Sears’s wage policy, 283
Secondary stakeholders, 353
Secrecy, consequences of, 55
Secret, M., 397n69
Secure Bank, 314
Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), 143, 351, 381
See, K., 285nn10, 12
Seglin, J. L., 204n43, 350n90
Selection systems, formal cultural
systems, 165–167
Selective perception, recognizing,
404–405
Self gut, 92–93
automatic ethical decision
making, 92
Self-interest climate, 184–185
Self-interest, 184–185
Self-love, 3
Sellers, P., 347n22
Sells, B., 398n78
Senior management
communicating commitment to
ethics, 229–235
involvement in training, 233–234
Sentencing guidelinesin managing
ethics, 208–209
September 11, 2001 event, 12
Sewer, A., 203n18
Sexual harassment, 118–121
costs, 120–121
as an ethical issue, 120
types, 118–119
hostile work environment,
118–119
Quid pro quo harassment,
118–119
Shaffer, J., 290, 315n3
Shaffer, M. A., 441nn1, 5–6
Shambora, J., 204n44
Shanley, M., 348n44
Shareholders, 393–394
ethics and, 380–385
American international group
(AIG), 383–385
Salomon Brothers, 381–383
Sharfman, M. P., 349n82
Sheppard, B., 147n5
Short-term consequences, in decision
making, 54
Siehl, C., 205n78
Siemens, 410
Signature Brands (Mr. Coffee), 378
Sikorsky helicopters, 207
Silent leadership, 163–164
Silent Spring, 385
Silver-Greenberg, J., 35n5
Similarity, assumptions of, 406–413
Simmons, D. G., 249n13
Simon, P., 442n10
Sims, H. P. Jr., 286n21, 315n7
Sims, P., 147n2
Singer, N., 397n45
Siwek, S. E., 106n9
Sjoberg, G., 204n56
Skapinker, M., 444n69
Skinner, B. F., 19, 35n27
Skooglund, C., 24, 69n23, 223
Skype, 439
Sloan, A., 285n6
Smircich, L., 202n3
Smith, A. L., 249nn20, 23
Smith, Adam, 3, 34n3
Smith, C. W., 398n96
Smith, D. G., 348n56
Smith, P. H., 395n9
Snap decisions, 59
Snarey, J., 106n1
Social Accountability 8000
(SA8000), 425
Social Accountability International
(SAI), 424
Social Investment Forum, 335
Social media, as communication
channels, 220–221
Social responsibility, business and,
26–27
Socialization, 152–153
Socially responsible business, 334–344.
See also Corporate social
responsibility (CSR)
excessive philanthropy, 341
goodness of, 334–344
benefit of a good reputation,
334–335
investors, 335
458
INDEX

government regulation, cost of,
337–339
illegal conduct, cost of, 335–337
research results, 339–342
as the right thing, 342–344
Society care about ethics, 26–27
Society for Corporate Compliance and
Ethics (SCCE), 212
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (SPCA), 132
Soeken, D. R., 148n31
Soeken, K. L., 148n31
Solomon, C. M., 444n77
Solomon, R. C., 68n8
Sommerville, R. B., 108n59
Sonnenfeld, J., 203n29
Sorkin, A. R., 348n52, 396n23
South Africa, doing business in,
421–422
Southwest Airlines, 156, 165, 180
Special fiduciary responsibilities,
129–130
Spillane, Michael, 343
‘Spray and pray’ program, 189
Stakeholders, 27, 40
identifying, 53–54
managing, 352–353
perspective on the firm, 319
primary stakeholders, 353
secondary stakeholders, 353
Standard & Poor rating agency, 7, 122
Standards
go both ways, 312
continually communicating
standards, 308–309
maintaining, 307–308
Starbucks, 292, 320, 330
Staw, B. M., 108n49
Steiger, B., 69nn22, 24
Stewart, P., 286n19
Stolberg, S. G., 69n20
Stories, in informal cultural systems,
181–182
Strachan, J. L., 348n56
Strategic CSR analysis, 322–324
Strategic reason for CSR, 322
Streietfeld, D., 399n119
Structuring ethics management,
208–215
in United States, 208–215. See also
under United States
Students’ cynical attitude towards
business, 11
Substance abuse, 305
Subtle bribes, 123–124
Sullivan, B. N., 349n59
Sullivan, G. M., 443n46
Sullivan, Paul, 148n13
Sunbeam, 378
Superiority, illusion of, 90
Supply chain, ethics and, 228–229
Surveys, 240–241
Johnson & Johnson’s Credo
survey, 240
Sustainability, environmental, 330–334
Sustainability Group Index, 335
Sustainable development, 330
Swainson, J. A., 205n94
Swanson, D., 347nn1, 11
Swartz, J., 445nn101, 104
Sweitzer, V. L., 108n39
Symbolic consequences, in decision
making, 55
Synthes, 200–202
Syracuse, 213
Taco Bell, 320
Taibbi, M., 35n8
Tailhook scandal, 260–262
TAP Pharmaceuticals, 143, 198–199,
210
Task goal, 261
Tay, C., 441nn9, 93
Taylor, A., 397n60
Taylor, S. E., 106n4
Teaching business ethics, 14–19
bad apple theory, 14–15
controlling, 18–19
possibility of, 14–19
Teaching ethics, 18
Teal, T., 349n87
Templer, K. J., 441nn3, 9
Terminations, 297–299
Terminations, 297–299–303
Texas Instruments (TI), 25, 222
Thalidomide cases, 54–55
Theory of Moral Sentiments, The, 3
Thoma, S. J., 35n21, 107n28
Thomas, E., 285n3
Thomas, K., 148n26, 397n68, 398n75
Three hundred sixty degree
(360x0030A;) feedback, 310
Tichy, N., 205n96
Tidwell, G., 203n28
Tiffany, 425
Tiger, L., 204n67
Tobacco industry, 372
Toffler, B. L., 186–187, 203nn30, 39,
204nn47, 58, 205nn70, 85, 87,
89, 285n1
Tommy Hilfiger, 343
Tong, H. M., 442n31
Tong, K., 443n53
Top management involvement in
training, 233
Toshiba, 330
Touryalai, H., 35n7
Toyota, 364–367
Training
existing employees, 232–233
local management in, 233–234
model, ethics game, 234
new recruits, 232
Training and guidance, ethics-
related, 406–413
American businesspeople, 409
bribes, 408
dealing with ethical issues, 406–407
Independent Commission Against
Corruption (ICAC), 411
negotiating across cultures, 407–408
payoffs, 408
recognizing ethical issues, 406–407
Training programs, 170–171, 231–233
creating a dialogue, 232
existing employees, 232–233
local management in, 233–234
new recruits, 232
top management in, 233
training model, ethics game,
234–235
Transcultural corporate ethic,
426–430
development of, 426–430
principles, 427–430
Transcultural corporate ethic,
development, 426–430
citizenship principle, 430
dignity principle, 430
fairness principle, 430
fiduciary principle, 430
Google, 436–441
human rights and fundamental
freedoms, 427
inviolability of national
sovereignty, 427
Japan, 428
Kyosei concept, 428
market integrity in, 427
principles, 428
property principle, 430
reliability principle, 430
responsiveness principle, 430
social equity, 427
transparency principle, 430
Transmitters and executants, 278
Transparency International (TI),
411–412
Treo, L., 315n7
Trevi~no, L. K., 35nn19, 23–24,
106nn3, 15, 107nn18, 27, 31,
108nn39, 63, 203nn22, 24, 30,
39, 204nn46–48, 50, 52, 54, 58,
205nn70, 80, 85, 249nn1, 9,
286nn21–22, 26, 35, 348n48
Triandis, H. C., 442nn12, 16, 18
Trice, H. M., 205n75
Triple bottom line, 330–334
Trust, 27–29. See also Ethics
Trust professions, 125
Truth in advertising, 126
Tsunami, 361, 328
Turban, D. B., 348n46
Turillo, C. J., 108n64
Twitter, 439
Tyco, 28, 336, 351
Tylenol poisoning, 160, 362–363
Tyler, T. R., 147n4
Type Co., 60
Ultimatum game, 23
Umphress, E. E., 108n64, 285nn10, 12
Unconscious biases, 93
Unethical behavior
conflicting roles leading to, 271
goals combined with rewards
encouraging, 258–259
rationalizing, 266–267
Unethical culture, 186–187
Unethical leadership, 161–162
Union Carbide, 339
United Kingdom (UK), 410,
428
UK Bribery Act, 410, 428
INDEX
459

United Nations Global Compact, 428
United States (U.S.)
financial disaster of 2008, 4–9.
See also individual entry
structuring ethics management
in, 208–215
corporate ethics office, 211
due diligence and effective
compliance program,
requirements for, 209
ethics and compliance
officers, 211–213
making ethics comprehensive and
holistic, 211
U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964,
327
U.S. Federal Sentencing Guide-
lines, 208–211, 247–249
U.S. Green Building Council, 332
U.S. Sentencing Commission,
155–156, 170, 208–211
United States v. Booker, 210
United Technologies (Otis elevators,
Carrier air conditioners, Pratt &
Whitney engines, Sikorsky
helicopters), 207
United Technologies Corporation
(UTC), 207, 220, 230, 238,
240–244, 337
United Way, 253
Unsolicited mail, 368
Useem, J., 36n49, 69n26
Useem, M., 398n95
Utilitarianism, 40
Valdez, Exxon Valdez spill,
385–387
Value chain activities, 323
Values, 29–30, 241–242
definition, 29
disciplinary procedures, 242
importance of, 29–30
and mission statements,
167–168
at organizational level, 30
statements, 225–226
Valuing diversity, 117
Van Maanen, J., 202n7
Vaughan, T. R., 204n56
Veil of ignorance, 44, 53
Verizon, 167, 338
Versa Capital Management, 343
Verschoor, C., 349n72
Vickers, M., 203n35
Victor, B., 286nn26, 35
Virgo, J. M., 443n46
Virgo, K. S., 443n46
Virtue ethics, 46–51, 91
character and, 47
‘A Hippocratic Oath for Managers’
article, 48–49
accurate and transparent
reporting, 49
acting with integrity in the enter-
prise’s interest, 48
adherence to the law, 49
balance multiple stakeholders’
interests, 48
professional development, 49
respectful and unbiased decision
making, 49
responsibility to protect the
profession, 49
service to the public and
society, 48
intentions, 46
in legal profession, 47
motivations, 46
Vistica, G. L., 286n18
Visudyne, 367–368
Vlasic, B., 397nn49, 52, 61
Vogel, D., 414, 443n54
Voicing personal values, 111–113
Volkswagen, 95, 365
Vollrath, D. A., 107n29
Wachovia, 7
Waddock, S. A., 349
Walker, R., 444n70
Waller, D. C., 286n16
Wall Street traders, 7–8, 161
Wal-Mart, 26, 151, 170, 274, 282,
328–332, 409, 421, 425
Walsh, J. P., 348n28, 349n77
Walter, F., 347n24
Wang, H., 349n80
Warren, E., 147n10
1972 Watergate break-in, 41, 46, 272
Waterman, R. H. Jr., 230, 250n24
Waters, J. A., 205nn72, 81, 83, 286n40
Watkins, Sherron, 81
Watson, R., 204n51
Watson, Thomas J., Jr., 264, 286n24
Wealth of Nations, 3
Weaver, G. R., 68n9, 69n15, 106n3,
203nn30, 39, 204nn46–47, 52,
54, 58, 205nn70, 80, 85,
249nn1, 9, 442n17
Webber, R., 148n20
Weber, J., 107n19, 349n66
Weber, James, 77
Weber, M., 204n55
Websites, as communication
channels, 220
Wee, H., 148n19
Weill, Sandy, 163
Weinstein, M., 443n42
Welch, Jack, 157
Welles, C., 204n69
Welling, P., 442n31
Werhane, P. H., 397n43, 398n77
Wesslund, P., 203n11
What Went Wrong at Enron, 389
Whistle-blowing activity, 136–144
company’s ethics officer or
ombudsman, contacting, 141
going outside the chain of com-
mand, 141–142
going outside the company, 142–144
how to, 140–144
approaching immediate
manager, 140
discussing with family, 140
leaving the company, 144
taking it to next level, 140
when to, 139–140
Wilkins, A. L., 206n100
Williams, N., 204n56
Wilson, J. Q., 147n3
Winstar, 382
Women and men difference, question
of, 80
Wood, D. J., 399n113
Wood, J. A., 35n11
Woodward, Bob, 41
Work assignments, 291–292
‘TheWork Ethic: An Exercise in
Integrity’ ethic game, 234
World Federation for Ultrasound in
Medicine and Biology
(WFUMB), 434
WorldCom, 28, 49, 135, 337, 351, 358,
382
Wyeth Ayerst, 339
Xerox, 333
XYZ Drug Company, 127, 132
Yahoo! tech company, 438
Yardley, J., 445n98
Yavitz, Boris, 307
Youngblood, A., 35n19
Youngblood, S. A., 51, 107n18
Yum Brands company, 320
Zakariah, F., 35n9
Zellman, G., 147n11
Zemke, R., 36n36
Zimbardo prison experiment, 269–270
Zimbardo, P. G., 286nn27–29
Ziswesvaran, C., 249n14
460
INDEX

